The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cabinet Portrait Gallery of British Worthies, by
Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Cabinet Portrait Gallery of British Worthies
       Volume I

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: March 11, 2011 [EBook #35544]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PORTRAIT GALLERY--BRITISH WORTHIES ***




Produced by Marcia Brooks, Donna M. Ritchey and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)









THE

CABINET PORTRAIT GALLERY

OF

BRITISH WORTHIES.


VOLUME I.



LONDON: CHARLES KNIGHT & CO., LUDGATE STREET.

1845.



LONDON: WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET.



Transcriber's Note: Footnotes and Errata are placed at the end of this
file.




  CONTENTS.


                          Page

  HENRY II.                  5

  ROGER BACON               38

  EDWARD III.               58

  WICLIFFE                  94

  CHAUCER                  120

  WILLIAM OF WYKEHAM       145




CABINET PORTRAIT GALLERY

OF

BRITISH WORTHIES.




HENRY II.


Among the histories of eminent kings, that of our Henry II. is one of
the most remarkable both in its beginning and its end, both in the
character of the man and in his fortunes; and, mostly tragic as the
annals of human ambition are, there are few such histories that
exemplify more impressively the instability and vanity of all earthly
greatness.

Nature and fortune joined to make him great. The son of Matilda,
daughter of the English king Henry I., he was through that descent,
after the death of his grandfather, the undoubted male representative of
William the Conqueror, the founder of the reigning English dynasty, and
as such the legitimate heir, at least after his mother, both of the
crown of England and of the dukedom of Normandy, the older acquisition
of his heroic race. His grandmother, the wife of Henry I., was Matilda,
daughter of Queen Margaret of Scotland, herself the daughter of Edward
the Outlaw, in the veins of whose descendants now flowed the main stream
of the blood of Egbert and Alfred and the old Saxon royal line. His
father, whom his mother had married in 1127, two years after the death
of her first husband, the Emperor Henry V., by whom she had no issue,
was Geoffrey Earl of Anjou, surnamed Plantagenet, from his assuming as
his ensign, and wearing on the crest of his helmet, a sprig of broom (in
French _plante genet_); whose father, Earl Fulk, had immediately before
this marriage resigned to him all his French possessions and honours,
upon being himself elected to the throne of Jerusalem, in which he was
succeeded, on his death in 1143, by Baldwin III., his son by a second
marriage. Henry was the eldest son of Geoffrey and the empress, and was
born at Le Mans, the capital of his father's county of Maine, in March
1133, about two years and nine months before the death of his
grandfather King Henry.

Yet it is remarkable that each of these several advantages of descent
which were thus united in his person was accompanied by some defect or
drawback, as if in order that there might remain as much for him to do
for himself as had been done for him by the accident of his birth. His
Saxon lineage gave him no claim to call himself the heir of the old race
of English kings while there existed male descendants of his
great-grandmother, Queen Margaret of Scotland, whose son David the First
was now seated on the throne of that country, and was undoubtedly the
true representative of King Edmund Ironside and the Saxon royal line.
Even between him and his legal right by inheritance to the English
sceptre of the Conqueror there stood his mother, to whom and not to her
son it was that Henry I. had made his barons swear fealty as his
successor. Nor did he on the death of his father obtain more than a
qualified right to the earldom of Anjou, Geoffrey having directed in his
will that he should resign it to his next brother Geoffrey if he should
ever come into the possession of the English crown, and having also made
his bishops and barons take an oath that they would not suffer his body
to be buried till Henry should have sworn to perform whatever the will
might be found to enjoin; which, accordingly, though with much
reluctance, he did. Geoffrey died on the 10th of September, 1151, in his
forty-first year, being younger than his wife the empress, who had long
ceased to be an object of his affections, by seven or eight years.

Ere this, however, his son, styled by the French, Henry Fitz-Empress
(that is, son of the empress), had passed through other changes of
position and fortune. On the death of his grandfather, in December 1135,
the English throne had been usurped by Stephen of Blois, whose mother
Adela was a daughter of the Conqueror: she had been married to the Earl
of Blois, by whom she had four sons, of whom Stephen was the third. In
the course of the contest that ensued between Stephen and Matilda, young
Henry was in the latter part of the year 1142 entrusted by his father to
Robert, Earl of Glocester, his mother's illegitimate brother and
faithful partisan, and was by him brought over to England. They landed,
the boy and his uncle, about the middle of November, at Wareham in
Dorsetshire, a town and castle belonging to the earl, but now held by
the king's troops. The garrison, however, agreed to surrender to
Glocester, who had brought with him from the continent a force of three
or four hundred knights, if they should not be relieved within three
weeks; and soon after, upon being informed from Stephen that he had no
intention of relieving them, they gave up the place. Matilda had never,
since she landed in England three years before, been in such peril as
she was in at this moment--not even when, in the summer of the preceding
year, she was surprised in London by Stephen's queen, and only saved
herself by springing into her saddle from the table at which she was
dining--nor a few weeks after when flying from Winchester, early on a
Sunday morning, she and her escort were overtaken by the enemy at
Stourbridge, and, while the Earl of Glocester and all the rest were
either taken prisoners or slain, she made her way, attended by a single
follower, to Luggershall, and thence, after a rest of a few hours, by
getting again upon horseback and continuing her rapid flight, to the
castle of Devizes. She was now shut up in the castle of Oxford, which
Stephen besieged with his whole army, disregarding in the meantime every
other object, and determined to effect its reduction either by force or
famine. All hope seemed to be gone; but, after she had endured the
greatest privations, on the night of the 20th of December, she left the
castle by a postern gate, with four knights, crossed the Thames, which
was frozen over, and reached Abingdon on foot, having walked all the way
through a deep snow, and having been enabled to escape the notice of the
enemy, some accounts say, in part by herself and her attendants having
clothed themselves in white linen. At Abingdon she took horse, and rode
to Wallingford Castle. Hither a few days after the Earl of Glocester,
having started as soon as he heard the news, brought her her son. The
sight of the boy, says an old chronicler, made her forget all her toils
and dangers, and think all she had suffered nothing. Matilda, with all
her haughtiness of temper, was not without other good qualities, besides
her share in the intrepidity and tough invincible spirit of her race; if
prosperity made her insolent and tyrannical, she bore adversity
admirably; and to her son she was from the first to the last the best of
mothers, not only in the affection she bore him, but in all other
respects. Henry was soon after this carried to Bristol, and "continued
there four years," says Lord Lyttelton, "under the care of his uncle,
who trained him up in such exercises as were most proper to form his
body for war, and in those studies which might embellish and strengthen
his mind. The Earl of Glocester himself had no inconsiderable tincture
of learning, and was the patron of all who excelled in it; qualities
rare at all times in a nobleman of his high rank, but particularly in an
age when knowledge and valour were thought incompatible, and not to be
able to read was a mark of nobility. This truly great man broke through
that cloud of barbarous ignorance, and, after the example of his father
King Henry, enlarged his understanding and humanized his mind by a
commerce with the muses, which he assiduously cultivated, even in courts
and camps, showing by his conduct how useful it was both to the
statesman and general. The same love of science and literature he
likewise infused into his nephew, who under his influence began to
acquire what he never afterwards lost, an ardour for study and a
knowledge of books not to be found in any other prince of those times.
Indeed the four years he now passed in England laid the foundation of
all that was afterwards most excellent in him; for his earliest
impressions were taken from his uncle, who, not only in learning but in
all other perfections--in magnanimity, valour, prudence, and all moral
virtues,--was the best example that could be proposed to his
imitation."[1] Henry's father, who after a long contest had now acquired
complete possession of Normandy, recalled his son from England in the
latter part of the year 1146; and in the beginning of November of that
year, very soon after he had parted with his nephew, the Earl of
Glocester was carried off by a fever. This was to his sister the empress
the loss of her right hand. "Courage and resentment," we quote again
Lord Lyttelton's account, "still combated in her heart with despair; nor
was it without the greatest and most painful reluctance that she gave
way to the necessity of leaving a country over which she had so long
expected to reign. But, in less than four months after the death of her
brother, seeing no possibility of supporting her party, and fearing to
fall into the hands of her enemy, she was constrained to abandon England
and go into Normandy, to live with a husband whom she never had loved,
and who did not love her, but was generous or prudent enough to receive
her with kindness in this decline of her fortune, when her pride was
humbled by her sorrow. Nevertheless, he retained to himself the dominion
of that duchy, as he had held it in her absence; that is, without any
dependence upon her. Instead of submitting to this, she would perhaps
have stayed in England, and buried herself under the ruins of her own
greatness, if the anguish of her mind had not been soothed by the hope
that Prince Henry, her son, might, when he should attain to an age of
maturity, be able to revenge her on Stephen, and recover the crown which
she had lost. Her whole care was therefore employed upon his education.
She laboured to inspire him with thoughts as high as her own; to give
him an ardour for glory, an ambition for empire, and a spirit of
conquest. His genius was very suitable for such instructions; but the
fire he drew from her was happily tempered with the lessons of prudence
and humanity which he had been taught in England by his uncle; and which
his father, a prince of great discretion and judgment, continued to fix
in his mind."[2]

Henry remained in Normandy till the year 1149. Meanwhile his friends in
England had been gradually recovering heart and strength; and it was
arranged that the young prince, whom, although as yet only sixteen, they
now looked to as their head, should show himself among them. From this
time his mother may be regarded as having withdrawn her pretensions in
his favour; no express act of resignation ever took place, but both she
and her husband (for Geoffrey also gave up something in abandoning the
hope of a crown for his wife) were too much attached to their son, and
too sensible, besides, of the present state of circumstances, and of
what the exigency demanded, to stand in his way. He landed early in the
year at the head of a considerable force, probably at Wareham, marched
through the western counties, where he was joined by the Earl of
Chester, the Earl of Hereford, and other barons; and made his way to his
great-uncle King David of Scotland, who had been for some time in
possession of the three northern counties of Northumberland, Cumberland,
and Westmoreland, and whom he found at the head of an army in the town
of Carlisle. During the festivities of Whitsuntide, which were
distinguished on this occasion by extraordinary magnificence, Henry
received the honour of knighthood from his uncle; but he had no
opportunity of gaining his spurs, a disappointment which vexed him the
more that Stephen's son Eustace, who had been knighted about the same
time, had been already put by his father in command of a military force,
with which he was ravaging the lands of some of the very barons who were
now lying in idleness with their retainers at Carlisle.

It must apparently have been during this visit that Henry met with his
first mistress, so famous in song and story, the beautiful Rosamund de
Clifford. Of the two sons which she bore to him it is known that the
younger, Geoffrey, was older than Henry, his first-born by his queen,
and also that he was nearly twenty when he was made Bishop of Lincoln in
1173; he was therefore probably born in 1153; and his elder brother
William, surnamed Long-sword, who, having married the daughter and
heiress of the Earl of Salisbury, succeeded to the estates and title of
his father-in-law, may have been born in 1150. Both of them were
educated along with Henry's legitimate sons: William survived till 1226;
and Geoffrey, who resigned his bishopric in 1182, and was then made Lord
Chancellor by his father, to whom he steadily adhered in all fortunes,
became in the next reign Archbishop of York, but resigned that see also
in 1207, after holding it for about six years, and died in 1212. As for
their mother, who was daughter of Walter de Clifford, a baron of
Herefordshire, it is hardly necessary to say that there is no foundation
for the story of the labyrinth in which she was concealed by her royal
lover at Woodstock, and of her being discovered and forced to drink
poison by Queen Eleanor, which has made her so renowned in popular
romance. It is known that she spent her last years in the nunnery of
Godstow, near Oxford, which she was probably induced to select for her
retreat from her father having been a benefactor to that house: there
she is said to have lived a life of devotion and penitence; but all that
is known as to the time of her death is, that it took place before that
of her father, and he was still alive in 1165.

Henry, finding that nothing could be done at present in England,
returned, in the beginning of the year 1150, to Normandy; and soon after
that duchy was resigned to him by his father, the French king Louis VII.
(Le Jeune) having come thither in the autumn of this year, according to
an agreement among all the parties concerned, and as feudal sovereign
formally delivered it up to the young prince, reserving to himself, as
the price of his compliance, the border district called the Vexin, which
had always been a subject of contention between the dukes of Normandy
and the kings of France. Some months afterwards, indeed, Louis,
repenting of what he had thus done, made an attempt to wrest the fief
again out of the hands of the Angevin prince, with the view of
transferring it to Stephen's son, Eustace; but upon Henry showing a bold
front, and a determination to defend his own, he soon desisted, and the
quarrel was settled by his abandoning Eustace, and by Henry coming to
Paris and renewing his homage there. This then was Henry's first
acquisition. His next was that of the three earldoms of Anjou, Touraine,
and Maine, into which he came into possession by the death of his father
about a year after. This was not long in being followed by another, for
which he was still more directly or materially indebted to King Louis
than he had been for his duchy of Normandy. That well-meaning but
somewhat weak monarch had long been dissatisfied with his queen,
Eleanor, or, as she is more commonly called in the chronicles of the
time, Alienor or Aanor, daughter and heiress of William, Duke of Guienne
or Aquitaine and Earl of Poitou, countries extending along the whole of
the western coast of France, from the Loire to the Pyrenees, which her
marriage, celebrated immediately after her father's death, in the year
1137, when she was only sixteen, had annexed to the French crown. It
seems amazing that any considerations should have blinded Louis to the
impolicy of allowing possessions of such extent and importance,
constituting more than a third of his kingdom, to pass out of his hands
after he had once got hold of them; yet so it was; he had been tormented
by feelings of jealousy ever since Eleanor had been with him, in the
year 1148, in the Holy Land, where he imagined she had had a variety of
intrigues both with Christian and infidel lovers; she on her part had
come to look with contempt upon her husband, the character of whose mind
seemed in her eyes to make him fitter for being a monk than a king; and
the end was that in the beginning of the year 1152 she submitted to a
divorce, or rather their marriage was dissolved by mutual consent; for,
although at the council of bishops which assembled at
Beaujency-sur-Loire to take the matter into consideration, and before
which Eleanor made her appearance, Louis asked for a divorce on the plea
of his suspicions of her fidelity, the council pronounced no opinion
upon that point, but simply declared the marriage to have been null from
the beginning, on the common and convenient ground of the consanguinity
of the parties, who were fourth cousins, the canons of the Church
forbidding marriage, without a previous dispensation from the pope, even
between persons related within the seventh degree. The scandalous
chronicles of the time affirm that Eleanor had already, before her
separation from her husband, given way to a passion for young Henry
Plantagenet, whom indeed she had seen at the French court on two recent
occasions; first when he came, as just related, to renew his homage for
the duchy of Normandy, and again when he returned soon after to receive
investiture of the earldoms he inherited from his father. They at least
were not long in finding out one another after she was at liberty to
dispose of herself. The nullification of Eleanor's marriage with Louis
immediately produced two consequences; it bastardized two daughters that
she had borne to him, and, as we have already intimated, it severed from
the French crown the extensive dominions forming her inheritance. It was
natural that she should now return to her own country, and accordingly
she set out for Poitou as soon as the council had pronounced its
sentence. But there were several aspirants to the rich prize which Louis
had resigned or cast away, notwithstanding that he is said to have
assured himself that she would never get another husband, declaring that
her behaviour had made her too infamous for the poorest gentleman in his
dominions to be willing to marry her. When she reached Blois, she
received proposals from the young Thibaud, Earl of Blois, who had just
succeeded to that fief on the death of his father, the elder brother of
King Stephen; and, when she declined his suit, it is affirmed that he
formed a design of detaining her, and compelling her to marry him by
force, which she only escaped by being warned of it and taking her
departure in the middle of the night for Tours. Here another danger of
the same kind met her. Henry Plantagenet's younger brother Geoffrey had
been left by his father only the castles of Chinon and Loudon in
Touraine, and that of Mirabeau in Anjou, with their dependencies, and he
could hardly therefore, even with his dubious prospect of succeeding at
some future time to the chief possessions of his family, flatter himself
that if he should set about wooing the Duchess of Aquitaine in the
common fashion he would, in present circumstances, have much chance of
success. But either not being aware of or disregarding his brother's
pretensions, and thinking that such an opportunity of making his fortune
was not likely again to present itself, he also, like Thibaud of Blois,
resolved to try force, and posted himself at a port on the Loire, called
Le Port de Piles, by which he supposed that Eleanor would pass, for the
purpose of waylaying her and carrying her off. She received intelligence
of his scheme, however, and, changing her route, got safe to her own
town of Poitiers. From this she sent to Henry, then in Normandy, to tell
him of her arrival, and of the perils through which she had made her
way. He instantly set out to join her, taking with him only a few
attendants, and travelling so as to attract as little observation as
possible; and they were married on Whitsunday (May the 18th), not quite
six weeks after Eleanor's separation from Louis. Henry was not yet
twenty years of age, and his bride was full thirty; "but with a good
share of beauty," observes Lord Lyttelton, "and more of vivacity, she
had still youth enough to gain the heart of a young man, though not to
preserve it very long." His lordship nevertheless declines affirming
that Henry was really in love,--that his acceptance of Eleanor's offer
of her hand was prompted by any other passion than his ambition. There
were certainly some strong considerations to be got over, apart
altogether from their difference in age.

Thus was Henry already lord of nearly the half of France. From the
situation of his previous possessions, he was of all the vassals of the
French crown the one whom a union with Eleanor was fitted the most to
aggrandize. As the duchy of Normandy, which he derived from or through
his mother, was conterminous on the south with his three paternal
earldoms of Anjou, Touraine, and Maine, so his wife's states of Poitou
and Guienne lay immediately to the south of these last, the whole
forming an unbroken continuation of territory extending from the English
Channel to the Pyrenees. To these acquisitions, maternal, paternal, and
matrimonial, he soon added another much more splendid than any or all of
them, which he may be said to have mainly won for himself by his own
right hand. For a brief space he was detained on the continent by having
to take arms against a formidable confederacy organized by King Louis,
who had now at length opened his eyes, and turned them with amazement
and consternation upon his youthful vassal, suddenly become his rival
and almost his equal, and had got his own brother the Earl of Dreux,
Henry's brother Geoffrey, Eleanor's other disappointed suitor the Earl
of Blois, and King Stephen's son Eustace, to join him in an invasion of
Normandy. But this attack was repulsed in a campaign of less than six
weeks' duration; not only were the invaders driven out of the country to
the last man, and an insurrection which they had excited of some of the
Anjevin barons effectually crushed, but Henry, pursuing his enemies into
France, laid waste a part of that country without Louis daring to turn
round and give him battle. This work done, and a peace arranged with the
French king, he lost no time in setting about the great enterprise to
which all things now seemed to concur in calling him. He landed in
England on the 6th of January, 1153, at the head of a force of three
thousand foot and a hundred and forty knights. There was some fighting,
but no considerable action; and, after the principal impediment in the
way of an accommodation had been removed by the death of Stephen's son
Eustace by a fever, the effect in all probability of the agitation and
rage into which he was thrown by the pending negotiation in which he was
about to be sacrificed, an agreement was made on the 7th of November, by
which Stephen adopted Henry for his son and successor, giving the
kingdom of England, as it was expressed, after his own death, to him and
his heirs for ever. Stephen did not survive this treaty quite a year; he
died at Canterbury on the 25th of October, 1154; and Henry became king.
He was in Normandy when Stephen's death occurred; and he was detained at
Barfleur for some weeks by adverse weather; but he set sail at last
while the storm still raged with little abatement, and after a dangerous
passage he landed in the New Forest, not far from Hurst Castle, on the
7th of December. He was crowned, with his queen, at Westminster, on
Sunday the 19th; and the commencement of his reign, according to what
was then the custom, is reckoned from that day.

Of course, in the circumstances, Henry did not now think of resigning
Anjou to his brother Geoffrey, whose late confederacy with the French
king and attack upon Normandy, an act amounting to rebellion in him,
could not but be considered as depriving him of any claim he might have
under his father's will and Henry's forced engagement to fulfil its
provisions. To obviate all objections, however, Henry obtained from the
pope a dispensation releasing him from that compulsory oath. A few years
after this he recovered the ceded district of the Vexin for Normandy by
the arrangement of marriage between his eldest son and a daughter of
King Louis; and he subsequently acquired what amounted to the actual
possession of Bretagne by the negotiation of another marriage between
his third son, Geoffrey, and the Lady Constantia, or Constance, daughter
and heiress of Conan, prince of that country. The extent of territory
subject to the English king even in France was now greater than that
which acknowledged the sway of Louis. If a line had been drawn from
north to south only a few miles to the west of Paris, or nearly about
the meridian of Boulogne, all to west of it would have been found to
belong to Henry, from the English sea to the Spanish mountains; while
the dominion of Louis on the other side of Gaul scarcely extended
farther south than to the Loire, all the region beyond that river being
in possession of the Earls of Toulouse. Henry, besides, almost as soon
as he came to the throne, had recovered the three northern counties of
England from the Scottish king, and even compelled him to do homage for
the whole of Scotland to the south of the Forth; he soon after reduced
Wales; and finally, in 1172, he effected the conquest of Ireland. The
details of the valour and policy by which all this was done, of the
patience, the foresight, the vigilance, the incessant exertion, the
utter disregard of toil and danger, by which so many additions to his
original inheritance were won and preserved, and by which all his
states, old and new, were governed, and the authority of law and order
maintained in them, must be sought for in the records of history. Those
were the days in which a king of England, to hold his place, really
required to be, in all senses, about the ablest man in his dominions; if
he was not of such heroic mould, he was almost sure to be thrown down,
in that convulsive and stormy condition of things which had not yet
subsided since the breaking up of the Roman empire had thrown Europe
into a state of social chaos. Nothing, in fact, was fixed and stable;
nowhere was the ground firm beneath men's feet; hardly any political
arrangement or part of the mechanism of government was brought to such
working order as to go on in any degree of itself or as a matter of
course; all rights and claims were disputed and in conflict with one
another; the boundaries of states, public and private inheritances, the
provinces of the civil and ecclesiastical powers, the positions and
privileges of the different classes of the community, all remained as
yet in many respects unsettled and the subject of fierce contention both
by argument and occasionally by force. Of all this confusion the king
had to be, as far as possible, the ruler or moderator; and to hold his
own besides, often in harness and the battle-field, and when nothing
would stand him in much stead if he had not a strong arm and a stout
heart. Let us now see how Henry was furnished in body and mind, in
capacity and moral disposition, for this post in the front and at the
head of the community, according to the testimony of those who knew him
best and were the best qualified to understand and describe him.

He has been drawn at full length, and with much elaboration, by the
famous letter-writer of the twelfth century, Peter of Blois (so styled
from the place of his birth), who appears to have come over to England
about 1169 or 1170, and was afterwards for many years in habits of daily
and intimate intercourse with the king as his private secretary. The
account occurs in a letter from Peter to his friend Walter, Archbishop
of Palermo, who had requested from him a complete and exact picture of
the great English king, both in his outer and inner man, a theme which
his correspondent declares would, in his opinion, overtask the powers of
the Mantuan (that is, Virgil) himself, or, as he afterwards still more
strongly puts it, would be too much for either Maro or Tully. So far,
however, he adds, as the subject is within his capacity, he will speak
without envy or detraction. The letter has no date, but appears to have
been written about the year 1180. He begins by remarking that, as it is
related to the commendation of David that he was ruddy, so it might
still be seen that King Henry had in earlier life been in a moderate
degree of that complexion, although his colour was now somewhat gone,
and his hair also touched with grey, from his advanced years.[3] His
head was compact and round-shaped--"spherical" is the rhetorical
secretary's term--of fitting form and dimensions, according to the
craniological philosophy of that day, "to be the seat of great wisdom,
and the special sanctuary of deep counsel." Yet its size was perfectly
proportioned to that of the sustaining neck and the general frame. The
eyes also were round, and of soft expression--"dove-like and simple, or
single" (in the Scriptural sense), are the terms employed--while he was
unexcited; but under the emotion of anger or any other disturbing
passion they flashed fire, and, as it were, lightened. His hair as yet
showed no signs of becoming bald, but he prevented it from growing long
by clipping. The general form of the face was quadrangular, like that of
a lion. His nose was handsome and of suitable size, his chest broad, his
arms muscular, his legs of the proper shape for a good rider,[4] his
instep arched and high. Some deformity, however, had been produced in
one of his feet by the nail of a toe having grown into the flesh; and
his hands also, upon which he never wore a glove, except when he carried
a falcon, gave token of his neglect of them by a certain clumsiness or
grossness of appearance. He discarded all ornament alike in boots and
bonnet, and all his clothes were disencumbered of everything
superfluous.[5] A characteristic of his mother's race that he inherited
was a strong tendency to corpulency; but he appears to have succeeded in
keeping it down much more than his great-grandfather, the Conqueror,
both by frequent fastings and by a life of movement and activity almost
without example. His habit was scarcely ever to sit down, except while
he was upon horseback or at his meals. Whether at mass or at council, or
in whatever business he had to transact, he kept upon his feet from
morning to night. When engaged in war, he would, if necessary, get over
as much ground in one day as would take an ordinary commander four or
five; and in this way he often got the better of his enemies by coming
upon them when they did not look for him. Both in mounting his horse and
in riding he had still preserved to this, the latter part of his life,
all the alacrity of youth. During peace his favourite recreation was
hunting or hawking; and bows, swords, arrows, and hunting tackle were
almost constantly in his hands, except when he was reading and when he
was at council, or occupied with affairs of state. But both business and
books had their full share of his time. "For he does not," says his
secretary, "lie still, like other kings, in his palace, but, journeying
rapidly from province to province, inquires into the conduct of all his
officers, especially judging those whom he has constituted the judges of
others. No man is more sagacious in counsel, gifted with a greater flow
and rush of elocution, more firm in dangers, less confident in
prosperity, in adversity more constant.... As often as he can obtain a
breathing time from the cares and anxieties of state, he spends it
either in reading by himself, or in labouring to untie the knot of some
difficult question in converse with a circle of learned clerks." Such
literary assemblages and discussions, it is added, were held in the
palace every day. In the rest of the letter Henry is warmly praised,
though in general terms, for his moderation both in eating and drinking,
his liberality and charity, his magnificence in the construction, on the
one hand, of warlike defences and strongholds, on the other of palaces,
lakes for fish, and enclosures for wild animals, his kindness to the
afflicted and affability to the poor, although he bore himself with a
more lordly mien, it is subjoined, to the high and proud--always, with a
certain resemblance to the divinity, endeavouring to depress the haughty
and to raise up the depressed. A remarkable sentence follows, to the
effect that, although in conformity with the custom of his kingdom,
Henry exercised the most potent and effectual influence in elections
(_in electionibus faciendis potissimas et potentissimas habeat partes_),
yet he ever kept his hands pure and free from all venality. The
elections here referred to are of course elections to bishoprics and
other dignities or benefices in the church; for there were as yet no
elections to civil offices in England. The steadiness of the king both
in his likings and dislikings is also noted: if he had once loved
anyone, we are assured, he scarcely ever withdrew his regard; but he was
as rarely known to admit to his familiarity or favour anyone to whom he
had once conceived an aversion.

Peter of Blois was an ecclesiastic; he held, among other preferments
both in England and abroad, the archdeaconries both of London and Bath;
and he was, like the generality of his profession, firmly attached to
the great cause of the independence of the church, and the supremacy of
the spiritual over the temporal power. It might, and probably would,
have been different a few years before; but at the time when this letter
was written he had no quarrel with the English king even on such
questions; on the contrary, he lauds him warmly for his piety, and his
zealous maintenance of the rights of the clergy, and especially for the
reverence in which he held the memory of the blessed and glorious
martyr--the murdered and since canonized Becket, or St. Thomas--whom,
says the archdeacon, in all straits he looks up to as his chief patron.
In the position he occupied at court, also, he would of course be
disposed to take a favourable view of the character of his royal master.
The picture he has drawn, indeed, may be admitted to be somewhat
sparingly shaded; some features may be softened down, and others may be
altogether concealed. But, so far at least as his evidence is positive,
it may be safely received; and, in fact, it is confirmed in all the main
particulars by other contemporary testimony, or by what Henry's history
and conduct throughout his life show him to have been. It is true that
other writers of his own age,--Giraldus Cambrensis, for instance, and
Radulphus Niger--have delineated him in much darker colours; but their
animosity is at least as evident and as strong as Peter of Blois's
partiality; and they, and others who join them in the same strain, had
individually as much reason to dislike Henry, as the archdeacon had to
feel grateful and attached to him. His chief habitual defect appears to
have been a tendency to violent explosions of rage. It is several times
alluded to in the letters of Peter of Blois, from whose notices we learn
that there were times when his majesty was not to be spoken to without
considerable risk or great caution; but some of the exhibitions of his
fury, as reported by other authorities, almost go beyond credibility.
"When his wrath is fairly kindled," says Peter in one place, "he is a
lion, or something yet more truculent." Giraldus Cambrensis tells us,
that in the paroxysms of his passion, to quote his description as
translated by Lingard, "his eyes were spotted with blood, his
countenance seemed of flame, his tongue poured a torrent of abuse and
imprecation, and his hands were employed to inflict vengeance on
whatever came within his reach." On one occasion, we are told, the
learned modern historian proceeds, referring to a letter of Thomas of
Becket's, "When Humet, a favourite minister, had ventured to offer a
plea in justification of the king of Scots, Henry, in a burst of
passion, called Humet a traitor, threw down his cap, ungirt his sword,
tore off his clothes, pulled the silk coverlet from his couch, and,
unable to do more mischief, sate down, and gnawed the straw on the
floor." Another time, it is added, on the same authority, "when a page
presented a letter, the king attempted to tear out his eyes, nor did the
boy escape without severe scars." These were doubtless demonstrations,
supposing them not exaggerated in the recital, that had better have been
avoided; but Henry had often that to contend with which was enough to
make the wisest mad; such oubhreaks do not appear to have been frequent;
and, if the storm was sufficiently terrific while it lasted, it never
lasted long. Nor were the rash and furious words usually followed by any
corresponding ferocity of action. If Henry was passionate, he was
certainly neither vindictive nor cruel. He may have put little restraint
upon his passions in other respects as well as in giving way to excesses
of rage, and he had probably his share in the general licentiousness of
his time; but he nowhere revolts us by showing either want of heart or
any thing of coarseness or baseness of nature. It is probable, from all
that history and tradition tell us of him, that there was always as much
of sentiment as of sensuality in his licentiousness. His affection for
his children, so long as they would suffer him to love them, seems to
have been only too tender and indulgent; and even after their repeated
ingratitude he was always to the last ready to forgive them and to take
them again to his heart. Ambitious he was, indisputably, and fond of
power; and as such, he was necessarily unscrupulous, and in pursuing his
great and aspiring schemes, would at times break his way in a somewhat
reckless and startling fashion through restraints that checked more
timid spirits. Having also frequently to act by policy as well as by
force, and to contend with the one as much as with the other--for it was
an age of overreaching and trickery--he may have sometimes gone farther
in the way of artifice and deception than would now be thought correct.
But a fair consideration of his conduct as recorded does not at all bear
out the charge made against him by some hostile declaimers--principally
or exclusively ecclesiastics--during his contest with the church, that
he was a shameless and systematic liar, that he never pledged his word
except with the intention of breaking it at the first opportunity. This
is the mere extravagance of party malice or passion. When Cardinal
Viviani, after conversing with Henry, declared that he had never known
his equal in lying, we can only conclude that the churchman found
himself no match in diplomatic subtlety and stratagem for the king.

Henry's course of prosperity and success encountered no check,
scarcely anything to disturb for a moment its even and onward flow, till
after he had been between seven and eight years King of England. The
portion of his reign from the middle of the year 1162 till the end of
1170 was mostly spent in a contest with one of his own subjects. The
famous Thomas-a-Becket is said to have been born in London in 1117, and
his legendary history, which may have some foundation in fact, makes him
to have been the son of a citizen of English race, Gilbert Beck, Beckie,
or Becket, by the daughter of a Saracen chief, who, when he had been
taken prisoner in the east, whither he had followed his Norman lord to
the holy wars, had fallen in love with him, contrived to release him
from his captivity, and afterwards followed him to England, and found
him out by inquiring wherever she went for London and Gilbert, the only
two English words she knew. Thomas-a-Becket, like his father, attached
himself to the Norman conquerors of his native land; his accomplishments
and his obsequiousness had before the end of the reign of Stephen raised
him to high favour with Theobald, the Archbishop of Canterbury, who
induced him to take deacon's orders, and made him archdeacon of his
metropolitan church; he was presented to Henry soon after his accession,
and he was almost immediately appointed to the high office of chancellor
of the kingdom, to which were speedily added the custody of the castle
of Berkhampstead, the government of the Tower of London, and other
preferments. He was now the most powerful subject in England, the man
whom the king most delighted to honour, the familiar friend of his
sovereign, and his constant and intimate associate in his private life,
in his amusements and pleasures, as well as in the government of the
realm. One of Becket's biographers tells us that after they had finished
their serious affairs they would often play together like two boys of
the same age. This continued till Henry crowned his long unvarying
favour by making Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, in May, 1162. From
that moment his former friend, who had been indebted to him for so much,
for all that he had and all that he was, became his rival and his enemy.
Becket, indeed, was now in every respect a changed man. The gay,
careless, luxurious layman (for as such he had been hitherto considered,
notwithstanding his deacon's orders), the man of gallantry in every
sense of the term (for he had also borne arms with distinguished
reputation), was transformed at once into a cold, rigid, ascetic priest,
hard and unimpressible as a man of stone. All that he had hitherto
appeared, all that had seemed his nature and very self, was thrown off
as if it had been a masque or disguise. It is unnecessary, however, to
assume that Becket was insincere or dishonest either in the part he had
made a show of sustaining till now, or in this sudden metamorphosis. It
is rather proof of his inherent honesty, as well as of his force of
character, that he would not seem to be what he was not, that he would
not become a churchman in name without becoming one in reality. But,
with this spirit, his new position brought him immediately into
collision with Henry. A contest for supremacy between the church and the
state was not a new thing in England. Ever since the Conquest the
subjugation of the spiritual to the temporal power had been a prominent
and steadily pursued part of the policy of the crown. The Conqueror had
placed the Archbishop of Canterbury upon an eminence of rank and
political position, such as was scarcely occupied by any other subject
in Christendom; but in doing this he had strenuously aimed at the same
time at making the church part and parcel of the state; so that the
primate, with all the splendour of his station, and the other bishops,
should in fact form rather a baronage or nobility, the supporters and
servants of the crown, than a separate power. This system, however, was
entirely opposed to the pretensions and aims of the court of Rome, and
to the notions generally entertained by all orders of ecclesiastics in
that age. The papal power, professing to consider all legitimate royalty
and other civil authority to be derived from itself, and even to be
resumable at its will and pleasure, and maintaining the state to be
everywhere thus the creation of the church, always resolutely refused to
acquiesce, except occasionally in the way of compromise, in any
arrangements which seemed to proceed upon an opposite idea or principle.
Hence in the time of Rufus and Henry I. the contest between these kings
and Archbishop Anselm about investitures, or the right of nominating to
offices in the church, which the archbishop and the clergy held to be in
the pope, but which the crown insisted upon retaining in its own hands.
The first Henry had made good his claims in regard to this matter, and
the other subjects of difference between the two interests had not since
occasioned any serious disagreement. It is probable, however, that
during the weak irregular government of Stephen the spiritual power had
made some encroachments, if not in regard to investitures, in another
direction. It was a still more important question upon which Henry now
found himself opposed by Becket. This king was as little likely as
anyone of his predecessors to tolerate such of the pretensions of the
clergy as would have either allied them as a body with a foreign power,
or withdrawn them as individuals from subjection to the ordinary laws of
the realm. It can hardly be doubted that so long as Becket held the
office of chancellor (which he threw up as soon as he obtained the
primacy) he had gone vigorously along with his royal master in
discountenancing, and, where necessary, resisting, all such pretensions.
Now, however, when Henry insisted that clerks, or ecclesiastical
persons, when charged criminally, should be tried in the king's courts,
and punished, if found guilty, in the same way with other subjects, the
archbishop declared this to be a violation of the rights of the church,
and set himself to oppose what he denounced as a sacrilegious innovation
with all the powers of his office. Whether the system which Henry wished
to enforce was in conformity with the ancient customs of the kingdom, as
he maintained that it was, may indeed be disputed. It was manifestly, at
any rate, the only system compatible with the good government of the
kingdom. The highest punishments that the ecclesiastical courts could
inflict were flagellation, fine, imprisonment, and degradation; and the
crime of murder itself, when committed by a clergyman, was usually
expiated by a whipping when the case was left in their hands. On the
other hand the archbishop probably also conceived himself to be bound in
duty to make the stand he did for the claims set up by the church. There
is no difficulty in understanding how the two parties should see the
question differently from their opposite points of view; and they both
gave by the whole course of their conduct all possible evidence of their
sincerity. After other proceedings, Henry assembled a great council at
Clarendon, in Wiltshire, at Christmas, 1163, and there demanded the
assent of Becket and the other prelates to sixteen constitutions or
articles, embodying what he maintained to be the ancient law or custom
of the realm upon the matters in dispute. Becket, who had before refused
to promise obedience to a much less comprehensive enactment, was now
prevailed upon by the entreaties of his brethren to sign these
constitutions; but he would not affix his seal to them. Even his
signature, which had been wrung from him by importunity, was no sooner
given than it was bitterly repented of, and he made no scruple openly to
accuse himself of the most criminal weakness in doing what he had done.
The contest was now renewed with greater animosity on both sides than
ever, and before the end of the year Becket had clandestinely withdrawn
himself from England, and taken refuge in France, under the protection
of King Louis. He remained abroad, firmly refusing to make any
concession; but at last, in July, 1170, he and Henry held a conference
in a meadow near Freitville, or Freteval, on the borders of Touraine,
when the form of a reconciliation was gone through, and the archbishop
soon after set out on his return to England. He reached Canterbury on
the 3rd of December, and with the exception of making a visit to London,
remained there in quiet for the next three weeks. Meanwhile, however,
accounts had been brought to Henry in Normandy, that before he had
embarked at Wissant, he had sent forward letters of excommunication or
suspension against the archbishop of York, the bishop of London, and
others of the prelates who had stood by the king in the late
controversy. Several of these prelates instantly came themselves over to
Rouen, and informed the king of this extraordinary proceeding. Furious
with indignation Henry hastily exclaimed, "Of the dastards who eat my
bread is there no one who will deliver me from this ungrateful,
turbulent, incorrigible priest?" Four knights who heard the words, soon
after suddenly and secretly started for England. On that same day,
Saturday the 25th, the archbishop was present in his cathedral, at the
performance of the solemnities of Christmas, and preached to a crowded
auditory from the words "I am come unto you to die in the midst of you."
After his sermon he excommunicated some individuals who, he said, had
for the last seven years been busy in wronging and insulting himself and
the church. On the Tuesday following, being the 28th, the four knights
arrived from Normandy. On the afternoon of the next day, accompanied by
twelve others, they made their way into the archbishop's house; he was
prevailed upon by his friends to proceed to the Church; thither,
however, the conspirators followed him; they demanded that he should
absolve the excommunicated bishops, but, unbending to the last, he bid
defiance to their menaces; upon which he was struck down by repeated
blows at the foot of the altar. Henry was still keeping his Christmas
festival at Bure, in Normandy, when tidings of the event were brought to
him. There can be no reasonable doubt that he was profoundly affected
with horror at the crime that had been committed almost in his name, as
well as alarmed for the consequences. He shut himself up in his closet
for three days, admitting no one and refusing all nourishment. It was
not till after a negociation of two years that he obtained from the
Court of Rome, a full absolution, on his appearing in the cathedral of
Avranches, and there publicly taking his solemn oath on the Gospels,
that he was innocent of the murder of the archbishop both in word and
deed. Meanwhile, he had acquired new power and glory by the conquest of
Ireland; circumstances were also changed in other respects; new objects
had in part withdrawn him from the controversy with the church which had
occupied him almost to the exclusion of everything else, for the
preceding six or seven years; and now that Becket was removed the
pretensions of the clergy, although they may have remained the same in
words, had actually become something very different and much less
formidable. Henry therefore now also engaged, that if any customs
hostile to the liberties of the ecclesiastical order had been introduced
into his kingdom since his accession, they should be abolished. And four
years after, in a great council held at Northampton, the constitutions
of Clarendon were so far repealed as that, among other concessions of
less moment, clergymen were exempted from being personally arraigned
before a secular judge for any crime, unless it were against the forest
laws, or regarded a lay fee for which they owed service to a lay lord.
But, although we learn this from a letter written by the king to the
pope, Alexander III., which is preserved by the contemporary Latin
annalist Ralph de Diceto (himself a churchman), it may be doubted if the
satisfaction thus given to the clergy proved, after all, much more than
a form of words.

Before this, however, Henry had become involved in new troubles, and
had encountered the first gust of the storm that was to wrap the
afternoon of his reign and his life in darkness and ruin. In the year
1170, in the midst of his contest with Becket, he had had his eldest son
Henry consecrated and crowned as conjoint king with himself. The
ceremony was performed in Westminster Abbey by the Archbishop of York;
and a theory that has satisfied some modern historians is, that Henry's
object in this proceeding was simply to spite Becket and to diminish the
authority he derived from his station, by showing that a King of England
could be crowned without the assistance of the Archbishop of Canterbury.
It is certain, indeed, that Becket resented what had been done as an
invasion of the privileges of his see, and this was the principal ground
on which he had applied for, and obtained from the pope, the letters of
excommunication against the Archbishop of York and the other prelates
who had assisted him at the coronation, his display and threatened
employment of which had probably been the occasion of his murder. But
all the circumstances seem to show that Henry was principally actuated
by affection for his son, and a desire to place him in a position of
honour and of splendour, although his age, only fourteen, of course
precluded him from being as yet entrusted with any share in the
government. The young prince, however, or, as he was now called, the
young king, or sometimes Henry III., made no creditable return, whether
it was fondness or policy that had chiefly moved his father thus to
advance him. He appears to have been rather weak than ill-disposed; his
new title probably made him giddy; and, easily led in any direction, he
was much more likely, in his position, to be led wrong than right. All
cordiality between Henry and Queen Eleanor had long been at an end; his
infidelities and her jealous temper had completely divided and alienated
them; and Eleanor's natural resource was to endeavour to gain over her
sons to make common cause with her against their father. About the end
of the year 1172, the young king Henry, who was married to the daughter
of the French king, Louis VII., and had just been crowned a second time
along with his wife, startled his father by a sudden demand, that he
should immediately resign to him either the dukedom of Normandy or the
sovereignty of England. At this time the boy was not yet sixteen, and
his father was himself still under forty. The preposterous proposal is
believed to have been prompted by Queen Eleanor and King Louis; from the
day on which it was made, and of course instantly rejected, the young
king, we are told, spoke not one word more of peace to his father; a few
months after, while he was with his father at Chinon, on their way back
to Normandy from Limoges, he arose during the night and secretly
withdrew himself to the court of his father-in-law; his flight was
speedily followed by that of his two younger brothers Richard and
Geoffrey, upon the former of whom their father had conferred the earldom
of Poictiers, upon the latter the dukedom of Bretagne, and, who had been
left with their mother in Guienne; and lastly their mother set out to
join her sons, but, being caught as she travelled in man's attire, was
by her husband's orders put into immediate confinement, nor was she
afterwards released, except once for a short space, while Henry lived.

The war that followed between Henry and his sons, aided by King
Louis, did not last long. Attacked as he was on every side at once--in
Brittany, in Normandy, in Anjou, in Guienne, in England; from France,
from Toulouse, from Scotland--the vigour of the old king, as he was
called, carried everything before it; and a peace and reconciliation
were arranged after a few months. It was during this contest that Henry
performed his famous penance at the tomb of Becket. The desire to see,
in the quarrel between Becket and Henry, a struggle between the old
Anglo-Saxon population and their Norman conquerors has probably been
carried much too far by the eminent living French historian Augustin
Thierry: the controversy was in the main and essentially, there can be
no doubt, a trial of strength between the church and the state, between
the temporal and the spiritual powers, between the crown and the pope,
between the laity and the clergy; nor do we believe that the accident of
Becket being of Anglo-Saxon lineage went for anything in the case. There
is no good evidence that the circumstance ever was appealed to or taken
notice of either on the one side or the other. It may be conceded,
however, that both parties would naturally wish to secure whatever
support could be derived from the sympathy of the great body of the
people, and that in this way the native English, who had been already
for some time rising again from the state of prostration to which they
were struck down by the Conquest, would both be led to take the greater
interest in the dispute, and may have been benefited by it. Their
devotional and superstitious feelings also were, no doubt, strongly
excited by many of the proceedings to which the clergy resorted; and we
may well conceive that they would be transported to a state of the
highest enthusiasm, first, by horror at the barbarous and sacrilegious
murder of Becket, and afterwards, by the miracles with which the kingdom
resounded as having been performed at his tomb. But these were feelings
which there is every reason to believe were shared in an equal degree by
the generality of their Norman masters. The king himself was probably by
no means exempt from them. With all the licence that he allowed himself
in some respects, he was neither without the piety nor above the
superstition of his age; and the circumstances in which he now stood,
with troubles gathering around him, and the consciousness pressing upon
him that he had, by his hasty and passionate words, materially
contributed to Becket's death, were very likely to awaken his devotion
and penitence. It seems impossible to regard him as merely acting a
part, assuming the outward appearance of a reverence and contrition
which he did not feel, in this penitential pilgrimage, when the whole
proceeding and his demeanour throughout are fairly considered. He set
sail from Barfleur early on the morning of the 8th of July, 1174. It
blew fresh at the time, and, the gale increasing after the ship had got
under way, some apprehension began to be felt, upon which Henry, coming
forward so as to be seen by all, exclaimed, with eyes uplifted to
heaven, "If what I have in my mind be for the peace of my clergy and my
people, if God have determined to restore such peace by my arrival, then
may he in his mercy bring me safe into port; but, if he have resolved
still further to scourge my kingdom in his wrath, may it never be given
me again to set my foot on land." He landed at Southampton on the
morning of the 10th, and instantly getting on horseback, set out for
Canterbury, pursuing his journey all night, and taking no other
sustenance than a little bread and water. He came within sight of the
metropolitan church at the dawn of the next day, Friday the 11th, and
then dismounting, and throwing off both his silk apparel and his boots,
he walked in the garb of a pilgrim, and barefoot, over the flinty road
for the three remaining miles of the way. When he entered the city, his
footsteps were observed to leave their marks in blood upon the pavement.
Proceeding forthwith to the cathedral, he entered it along with the
thronging inhabitants of the city, collected by the ringing of the
bells, and, prostrating himself with his face to the ground, wept and
sobbed aloud, while the Bishop of London announced from the pulpit that
Henry King of England was here come to invoke God and the holy martyr
for the salvation of his soul; to protest that he never either ordered
or desired the death of the martyr; and to submit his naked flesh to be
scourged for the hasty and imprudent words uttered by him, by which the
murderers might pretend that they had been excited to the act. After
this the king descended to the crypt where the archbishop's body was
interred, and there, stripping off his clothes and kneeling down on the
tombstone, he submitted his bare back to be scourged with a knotted cord
by all the bishops and monks that were present, each giving him three,
four, or five strokes, while he pronounced the words, "As the Redeemer
was scourged for the sins of men, so be thou for thy own sin." He spent
all the rest of the day and the following night in the crypt in prayer
and fasting; and the next morning, after hearing mass, he left
Canterbury without tasting anything save a draught of the holy water
kept at the martyr's tomb. He rode to London; but when he had finished
his journey he was taken ill, and he was confined for some days by
fever. On the fifth night of his illness a messenger arrived at the
palace and insisted upon instant admission to the king. He brought the
news of the capture of the king of Scotland at Alnwick, by Ranulf de
Glanville. And it turned out that this great event had taken place on
the very Saturday on the morning of which Henry had risen an absolved
and reconciled man from the shrine of the martyr.

For some years from this time Henry was left at peace, although in


1179 his two eldest sons, Henry and Richard, took arms against each
other, and Poitou and Guienne were for a time disturbed and devastated
by their dissension. But in 1183 war again broke out between the sons
and the father. Sometimes he was opposed to one, sometimes to two of
them; sometimes to Henry, Richard, and Geoffrey, all at once. Both the
two elder were soon cut off; Henry, by fever, on the 11th of June, at
Chateau Martel, near Limoges; Geoffrey, early in 1185, by being thrown
from his horse and trampled to death, in a tournament at the court of
the new French king Philip II. (Augustus), whose aid he had sought
against his father. Richard, however, continued in rebellion, or rather,
repeatedly defeated and forgiven, still again and again took up arms,
whenever a favourable moment seemed to present itself. He had a story
that he was fond of relating, about a countess of Anjou, one of his
ancestry, who never went to church, and at last, on being taken there
one day by force, flew out of the window, on the elevation of the host,
and was never more seen; and he used to ask if it was to be wondered at
that, sprung from such a stock, the household to which he belonged
should be divided against itself. "What comes from the devil," said he,
"to the devil must return." Mutual hatred, he professed to believe, was
the doom of his family--the fatal inheritance which none of them would
ever renounce. At last, at a conference held at La Ferte Bernard, in
Maine, on the 18th of November, 1188, Richard, on his father's refusal
to comply with his demands, turned round in indignation to the French
king, who stood by, and, having ungirt his sword and fallen upon his
knees, offered his homage to Philip, in Henry's presence, for all the
territories that the latter held in France. Philip accepted his
allegiance, and the war was renewed as soon as the term of the truce
expired. By this time Henry's spirits, as well as his health, seem to
have been broken; his operations in the field were languid and
ineffective, and he was soon reduced to the necessity of suing for
peace. The matter in regard to which Richard and Philip had pretended to
feel most keenly was Henry's detention of Alice, the sister of the
French king, who many years before had been affianced to Richard, and
his refusal to allow their marriage to take place. He professed to wish
to marry her to his youngest son John; but it was suspected that he
loved the young and beautiful princess himself, and that her heart, too,
was his. Now, however, he offered to resign everything, Alice included;
he proposed that she should, in the meantime, be placed in such custody
as might be thought fittest, and delivered either to Richard or Philip,
on their return from their projected expedition to the Holy Land. The
French princess, we may mention, after all was not married to Richard.
Though he had demanded her so clamorously before, when he became king he
refused to have her; and she eventually became the wife of William Earl
of Aumale and Ponthieu, by whom she had a daughter, who married
Ferdinand III. King of Castile, and was the mother of Eleanor, the queen
of our Edward I. Henry and Philip met to arrange a peace on the 28th of
June, 1189, on a plain between Tours and Azay-sur-Cher. Henry agreed to
everything that was demanded of him. He became very ill before the
conference closed, and was carried from the place in a litter to his
quarters, where a few days after the articles of the treaty were sent to
him for his ratification. They were read to him one by one as he lay on
his bed; and when he had heard the one which secured from punishment all
who had been engaged on the side of Richard in the late war, either
openly or secretly, and allowed them, although they had hitherto been
his own subjects, liberty to continue the vassals of his son, he asked
how many and who were the persons whose faith and allegiance he would
thus have to lose. The first that was named to him was his youngest son
John, his favourite son, of whose affection and fidelity he had never
had a doubt, for whose sake, in great part, it had been that he had
resisted the demands of Richard, and brought himself to the state in
which he was. When he heard it pronounced he raised himself convulsively
half up in the bed, and, with a wild look, asked if it was true that
this son, whom he had so loved and trusted, for whom he had done and
suffered so much, had actually deserted him. He was assured that so it
was. He then fell back, and, turning his face to the wall, said, "Well,
then! henceforth let all things go as they may; I care nothing more
about myself or the world." A few days after he was removed to the
Castle of Chinon, and there, on the 6th of July, he breathed his last.
Geoffrey, his son by Rosamund Clifford, was with him to the end.




ROGER BACON


Some part of this biography will make the rest more intelligible if made
a preliminary explanation. Before the appearance of Wood's History of
Oxford (1674), no one had added anything to the summaries of Leland,
Bale, and Pits, which are little more than ill-understood lists of
works. The name of Bacon was known far and wide as a magician; and the
better informed could only judge from such fragments as had been
published, and from the traditional reputation of what remained in
manuscript, that he was a philosopher of the highest genius. These
printed fragments are as follows, so far as we can collect them, being
all that was published down to the appearance of Dr. Jebb's edition of
the 'Opus Majus:' which closes the list--

1. 'De mirabili Potestate Artis et Naturae et Nullitate Magiae,' Paris,
1542, 4to.; Basil., 1593, 8vo.; in English,[6] Lond., 1597, 4to.; Hamb.,
1608 and 1618, 8vo.; in French, Par., 1612, 8vo.; also in French, by
Girard, Par., 1557 and 1629; in vol. v. of Zetzner's 'Theatrum
Chemicum,' Argent., 1622, 8vo., and 1659 (?); in English, by T. M.,
Lond., 1659, 12mo.

2. 'Perspectiva,' 'Specula Mathematica,' and 'De Speculis Ustoriis,'
Francof., 1614, 4to., whether as one book or three we do not know; the
'Perspectiva' was reprinted in 1671, also at Frankfort.

3. 'De Retardatione Senectutis,' Oxon., 1590, 8vo.; translated, 'The
Cure of Old Age,' by R. Browne, M.D., Lond., 1683, 12mo.

4. 'De Secretis Operibus Artis et Naturae,' Hamb., 1618, 8vo., edited by
John Dee.

5. The 'Thesaurus Chemicus,' Franckfort, 1603 and 1620, 8vo. (?)
contains the 'Specula Mathematica,' the 'Speculum Alchymiae,' and some
other tracts, which Tanner puts down altogether as 'Scripta sanioris
medecinae in arte chemiae.'

6. 'Speculum Alchymiae,' Norimb., 1581, 4to.; Basil., 1561, 4to.;
Ursellis, 1602, 8vo.; in English, in 'Collectanea Chymica,' Lond., 1684,
8vo.; also[7] in English, Lond., 1597, 4to.

7. 'Practica Magistri Rogerii,' Venet., 1513 and 1519.

8. 'Epistolas Notis illustratas' (we take the title from Tanner), Hamb.,
1618, 8vo.

9. 'Fratris Rogeri Bacon, Ordinis Minorum, Opus Majus, ad Clementem IV.
Pontif. Rom.,' Londini, 1733, fol. By Dr. Jebb.

The little that is known of the greatest of English philosophers before
the time of his celebrated namesake, shows how long the effects of
contemporary malice might last, before the invention of printing had
made an appeal to posterity easy. His writings, destroyed or overlooked,
only existed in manuscript or mutilated printed versions, till nearly
the middle of the last century. In the mean time tradition framed his
character on the vulgar notions entertained in his day of the results of
experimental science; and the learned monk, searching for the
philosopher's stone in his laboratory, aided only by infernal spirits,
was substituted for the sagacious advocate of reform in education,
reading, and reasoning; and--what was equally rare--the real inquirer
into the phenomena of nature.

Roger Bacon died in 1292, in about the seventy-eighth year of his age,
which places his birth near the year 1214; roughly speaking, he lived
from the time of the Interdict in the reign of John, to the beginning of
the interference with Scotland in that of Edward I. His age is that of
Cardinal Cusa, Thomas a Kempis, Matthew Paris, Albertus Magnus, Raymond
Lully, Sacrobosco, &c., to whom we add, as they are sometimes confounded
with him, and not for their own note, two theologians, Robert Bacon and
John Bacon (died about 1346.) The former was a priest of the thirteenth
century, whom it would be hardly necessary to notice but for the fact
that some of our historians have made him the brother of Roger Bacon,
and the two have been often confounded. He is stated to have studied
successively at Oxford and Paris; and in 1233, when his friend and
teacher, Edmund Rich, was removed from the treasurership of Salisbury
Cathedral to the archbishopric of Canterbury, Robert Bacon was his
successor. The archbishop was canonized by the title of St. Edmund; and
Bacon wrote his life. Matthew Paris states that in 1233 Robert Bacon
preached before Henry III. at Oxford, and spoke openly against the
favourite, Peter des Roches (or De Rupibus), of Poiton, Bishop of
Winchester, who had given great offence by the introduction and
promotion of many of his countrymen. Serious disturbance was
apprehended, and the king appeared to waver; on which, says the
historian, a witty court chaplain, called _Roger_ Bacon, asked his
Majesty what was most dangerous to seamen. The king answered that seamen
best knew, on which the chaplain rejoined. "Petrae et Rupes;
acdiceretur, Petrus de Rupibus." This story is the likely origin of the
connexion between Robert and Roger, and also of the account which states
that Roger Bacon, the subject of this article, preached before the king
on the same occasion. Robert Bacon joined the order of preaching friars
in his old age, and died in 1248, whence the story (certainly false)
that Roger died in that year. ('Biogr. Britann.;' Tanner, 'Biblioth.
Britan. Hibern.;' Wood, 'Hist. et Ant. Oxon.')

Roger Bacon was born near Ilchester, in Somersetshire, of a respectable
family. He was educated at Oxford, and, according to the usual custom of
his day, proceeded to Paris, which was then the first university in the
world. The course of study in vogue, however unfavourable to
independence of thought, did not give so great a preponderance to the
works of Aristotle as was afterwards the case. The theology of the day
had set strongly against philosophy of every species. In 1209 a council
at Paris condemned and burnt, if not the works of Aristotle, at least
the mutilated and interpolated translations from the Arabic which then
existed. But when, towards the middle of the century, Latin versions
from the Greek began to appear, and the philosophy contained in them to
be warmly advocated by the new orders of Franciscans and Dominicans, and
particularly by Albertus Magnus (died 1282), the reputation of Aristotle
advanced so rapidly, that he had gained the exclusive title of "the
Philosopher" by the time Roger Bacon wrote his 'Opus Majus.' But Bacon
in no sense became an Aristotelian, except in that which comprehends all
who are acquainted with the opinions and methods of the Greek
philosopher. Better versed in the original than most of his
contemporaries, he freely criticises all he meets with (especially the
merit of the translations, which he says he would burn, if he could),
and is himself an early and sufficient proof that the absurdities of his
successors ought not to be called "Aristotelian," any more than
Aristotle himself "the Philosopher." Bacon could read Aristotle without
danger of falling into idolatry: his antagonists could have erected a
system of verbal disputes upon the Principia of Newton, if they had
possessed it.

After his return to Oxford, with a doctor's degree granted at Paris,
which was immediately also confirmed by the former university, he took
the vows of a Franciscan in a convent possessed by that order at Oxford,
on the persuasion, it is said, of Robert Greathead or Grostete, bishop
of Lincoln, of whom we shall presently speak. It has been conjectured
that he had already done so before his return to Oxford, but this
appears to have arisen from his having been known to have resided in a
Franciscan convent while at Paris. From the time of his return, which is
stated to have been A.D. 1240, he applied himself closely to the study
of languages, as well as to experimental philosophy. In spite of the vow
of poverty, he does not appear to have wanted means, for he says himself
that in twenty years he spent 2000 livres (French) in books and
instruments; a very large sum in those days.

The vow of the Franciscans was poverty, manual labour, and study; but
the first two were soon abandoned. On this subject we notice a writing
of Bacon, of which (except in Dr. Jebb's list) we can find only one
casual notice (in Vossius, 'De Hist. Lat.' art. "Bacon.") It is said
that he answered a work of St. Bonaventure, general of his order, which
treated of the above-mentioned vow; but which side either party adopted
is not stated.

The enmity of his brethren soon began to show itself: the lectures
which he gave in the University were prohibited, as well as the
transmission of any of his writings beyond the walls of his convent. The
charge made against him was that of magic, which was then frequently
brought against those who studied the sciences, and particularly
chemistry. The ignorance of the clergy of that time as to mathematics or
physics was afterwards described by Anthony-a-Wood, who says that they
knew no property of the circle except that of keeping out the devil, and
thought the points of a triangle would wound religion. Brought up to
consider philosophy as nearly allied to, if not identical with, heresy
itself, many of them might perhaps be honest believers in its magical
power; but we can hardly doubt that there were a few more acute minds,
who saw that Roger Bacon was in reality endeavouring to evoke a spirit
whose influence would upset the power they had acquired over the
thoughts of men, and allow them to read and reflect, without fear of
excommunication, or the necessity of inquiring what Council had
authorized the book. Not that we mean to charge those minds in every
instance with desiring such power for their own private ends: there has
always been honest belief in the wickedness of knowledge, and it is not
extinct in our own day. The following detached passages of the 'Opus
Majus' no doubt contain opinions which its author was in the habit of
expressing:--

"Most students have no worthy exercise for their heads, and therefore
languish and stupefy upon bad translations, which lose them both time
and money. Appearances alone rule them, and they care not what they
know, but what they are thought to know by a senseless multitude.--There
are four principal stumbling-blocks in the way of arriving at
knowledge--authority, habit, appearances as they present themselves to
the vulgar eye, and concealment of ignorance combined with ostentation
of knowledge.--Even if the first three could be got over by some great
effort of reason, the fourth remains ready.--Men presume to teach before
they have learnt, and fall into so many errors, that the idle think
themselves happy in comparison; and hence both in science and in common
life we see a thousand falsehoods for one truth.--And this being the
case, we must not stick to what we hear and read, but must examine most
strictly the opinions of our ancestors, that we may add what is lacking,
and correct what is erroneous, but with all modesty and allowance.--We
must, with all our strength, prefer reason to custom, and the opinions
of the wise and good to the perceptions of the vulgar: and we must not
use the triple argument; that is to say, this has been laid down, this
has been usual, this has been common, therefore it is to be held by. For
the very opposite conclusion does much better follow from the premises.
And though the whole world be possessed by these causes of error, let us
freely hear opinions contrary to established usage."

As might be supposed, Roger Bacon cultivated the acquaintance of men who
held sentiments similar to the above, which could not please his
brethren. Among them we have mentioned Grostete, bishop of Lincoln, who
usually resided at Oxford. This prelate, who was a good mathematician,
and a resolute opponent of undue interference on the part of the see of
Rome (_terrificus papae redargutor_, says Camden), had opposed Innocent
IV., who attempted to appoint his nephew, a boy, to a prebend at
Lincoln. On being excommunicated, Grostete appealed from the tribunal of
Rome to that of Christ; and so prevalent was the opinion of his
antipathy to the pope, that a story is gravely told by Knyghton (cited
by Blount, 'Censura,' &c.), that the Bishop of Lincoln, after his death,
appeared to Innocent in a dream, and exclaiming "_Surge, miser, veni in
judicium!_" actually stabbed his Holiness, who was found dead next
morning. It is needless to say that Innocent IV. died a natural death,
and useless to speculate upon the means by which such a circumstance as
the preceding, if true, could come to be known. But perhaps the memory
of Grostete may have been one reason of the willingness with which
succeeding popes continued Bacon's imprisonment, to which we shall soon
come; for though they might hold his spirit guiltless of the death of
Innocent, they long remembered what he had done in the flesh; and when
Edward I. and the University of Oxford, long after, applied to Clement
V. for the canonization of Grostete, they received for answer that the
pope would rather his bones were thrown out of consecrated ground.

In the mean time a pope was elected, to whom we owe the production of
the 'Opus Majus.' This was Clement IV. (elected 1265), who had
previously, when cardinal-bishop of Sabina, been legate in England. Here
he had heard of Bacon's discoveries, and earnestly desired to see his
writings; but, as before stated, the prohibition of the Franciscans
prevented his wish being complied with. After his election as head of
the Church, Bacon, conceiving that there would be no danger nor
impropriety in disobeying his immediate superiors at the command of the
pope, wrote to him, stating that he was now ready to send him whatever
he wished for. The answer was a repetition of the former request; and
Bacon accordingly drew up the 'Opus Majus,' of which it may be presumed
he had the materials ready. It appears that he had mentioned the
circumstances in which he stood; for Clement's answer requires him to
send the work with haste, any command of his superiors or constitution
of his order notwithstanding, and also to point out, with all secrecy,
how the danger mentioned by him might be avoided. The book was sent in
the year 1267, by the hands of John of London, a pupil of whom he speaks
highly, and who has usually obtained some notice from the very great
praise which Bacon in one place appears to give him, when he says that
he only knows two good mathematicians, one of whom he calls John of
London. But from some other circumstances Dr. Jebb concludes, with great
probability, that this John was not the pupil above mentioned, but John
Peccam, a London Franciscan, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, who
was well known as a mathematician, and whose treatise on Optics,
'Perspectivae communis libri tres,' was printed at least six times
between 1542 and 1627, at Nuremberg, Venice, Paris, and Cologne.

Before the 'Opus Majus,' Bacon, according to his own account, had
written nothing except a few slight treatises, "capitula quaedam."
Before he took the vows he wrote nothing whatever; and afterwards, as he
says to Clement, he would have composed many books for his brother and
his friends, but when he despaired of ever being able to communicate
them, he neglected to write.

With the 'Opus Majus' he sent also two other works, the 'Opus Minus'
and the 'Opus Tertium,' the second a sort of abstract of the first, and
the third a supplement to it. These exist in manuscript in the Cottonian
Library, but have not been printed. It appears that, after the death of
Clement, which took place in November, 1268 (not 1271, as stated by
some; the latter date is that of the election of Clement's successor,
the see having been vacant two years and three-quarters), he revised and
augmented the second of these works. What reception Clement gave them is
not known: some say he was highly gratified, and provided for the
bearer; others, that he at least permitted an accusation of heresy
against the writer. Both stories are unlikely: for Clement could hardly
have received the work before he was seized with his last illness.

Till the year 1278 Bacon was allowed to remain free from open
persecution; but in that year Jerome of Ascoli, general of the
Franciscan order, afterwards pope, under the title of Nicholas IV.,
being appointed legate to the court of France, this was thought a proper
opportunity to commence proceedings. Bacon, then sixty-four years old,
was accordingly summoned to Paris (Dr. Jebb implies that he had already
removed his residence there, to another convent of his order), where a
council of Franciscans, with Jerome at their head, condemned his
writings, and committed him to close confinement. According to Bale, or
Balaeus (cited by Dr. Jebb), the charge of innovation was the pretext,
but of what kind was not specified: according to others, the writings of
Bacon upon astrology were the particular ground of accusation. We cannot
learn that any offer of pardon was made to the accused upon his
recantation of the obnoxious opinions, as usual in such cases; which, if
we may judge from the 'Opus Majus,' Bacon would have conceived himself
bound to accept, at least if he recognised the legality of the tribunal.
A confirmation of the proceeding was immediately obtained from the court
of Rome. During ten years, every effort made by him to procure his
enlargement was without success. The two succeeding pontiffs had short
and busy reigns; but on the accession of Jerome (Nicholas IV.), Bacon
once more tried to attract notice. He sent to that pope, it is said, a
treatise on the method of retarding the infirmities of old age, the only
consequence of which was increased rigour and closer confinement. But
that which was not to be obtained from the justice of the pope, was
conceded to private interest, and Bacon was at last restored to liberty
by the intercession of some powerful nobles, but who they were is not
mentioned. Some say he died in prison; but the best authorities unite in
stating that he returned to Oxford, where he wrote a compendium of
theology, and died some months, or perhaps a year and a half, after
Nicholas IV. (who died April, 1292). We have adopted 1292 from
Anthony-a-Wood, as the most probable year of his death, though foreign
works frequently state that he died in 1284. He was buried in the church
of the Franciscans at Oxford. The manuscripts which he left behind him
were immediately put under lock and key by the magic-fearing survivors
of his order, until, not so lucky as those of another wizard, Michael
Scott, they are said to have been eaten by insects.

Of the asserted works of Bacon there is a very large catalogue, cited
mostly from Bale and Pits, in the preface to Dr. Jebb's edition of the
'Opus Majus.' They amount to five on grammar, six on pure mathematics,
seventeen on mechanics and general physics, ten on optics, six on
geography, seven on astronomy, one on chronology, nine on chemistry and
alchemy, five on magic, eight on logic and metaphysics, nine on
medicine, six on theology, twelve miscellaneous; a hundred and one in
all. But it is most likely that the greater part of these were extracts
from the 'Opus Majus,' &c., with separate titles, that some are not
genuine, and that others are more properly attributable to the two other
Bacons already mentioned. The principal manuscripts of the 'Opus Majus'
are, one in Trinity College Library, Dublin, discovered by Dr. Jebb,
which forms the text of his edition, two in the Cottonian Library, one
in the Harleian, one in the library of Corpus Christi College,
Cambridge, one in that of Magdalen College, two in the King's Library,
all containing various parts of the work. These are independent of the
'Opus Minus' and 'Opus Tertium' in the Cottonian Library, already
mentioned, of some in Lambeth Palace, in the Bodleian Library at Oxford,
and a host of others at home and abroad which we cannot specify. The
Dublin manuscript is the only entire one with which Dr. Jebb was
acquainted. It is a folio of 249 leaves, beautifully written on thick
paper, with a good margin, and in double columns. It is not dated, but
from the character of the writing it is judged to be of the reign of
Henry VIII., or perhaps the early part of that of Elizabeth. The
geometrical figures are neatly drawn in the margin. Pope Clement's
letters are in the Vatican Library.

It only remains for us to take a general view of the character of Roger
Bacon's writings, and of the contents of the 'Opus Majus.' It is
surprising how little is known of this work, the only one in print to
which we can appeal, if we would show that philosophy was successfully
cultivated in an English university during the thirteenth century. It is
of course in Latin, but in Latin of so simple a character, that we know
of none in the middle ages more easy to read: and it forms a brilliant
exception to the stiff and barbarous style of that and succeeding times.
We think we see the thoughts of the author untranslated, though the
idiom is often that of an Anglo-Norman; by which we mean that we
frequently find Latin words used in their modern English sense, as, for
instance, _intendere_ for _in animo habere_, meaning the same as our
word to _intend_; _praesumere_ for _sibi arrogare_ in the sense of to
_presume_. We should perhaps rather say that the English words receive
their meaning from the corrupted Latin, and not _vice versa_, in which
case the work of Roger Bacon may become useful in tracing the change,
and the more so on account of the great simplicity of the style.

The charge of heresy appears to be by no means so well founded as a
Protestant would wish. Throughout the whole of his writings Bacon is a
strict Roman Catholic, that is, he expressly submits matters of opinion
to the authority of the Church, saying (Cott. MSS. cited by Jebb) that
if the respect due to the vicar of the Saviour, "vicarius Salvatoris,"
alone, and the benefit of the world, could be consulted in any other way
than by the progress of philosophy, he would not, under such impediments
as lay in his way, proceed with his undertaking for the whole church of
God, however much it might entreat or insist. His zeal for Christianity,
in its Latin or Western form, breaks out in every page; and all science
is considered with direct reference to theology, and not otherwise. But
at the same time, to the credit of his principles, considering the
book-burning, heretic-hunting age in which he lived, there is not a word
of any other force except that of persuasion. He takes care to have both
authority and reason for every proposition that he advances: perhaps,
indeed, he might have experienced forbearance at the hand of those who
were his persecutors, had he not so clearly made out prophets, apostles,
and fathers to have been partakers of his opinions. "But let not your
Serenity imagine," he says, "that I intend to excite the _clemency_ of
your Holiness, in order that the papal majesty should employ force
against weak authors and the multitude, or that my unworthy self should
raise any stumbling-block to study." Indeed the whole scope of the first
part of the work is to prove, from authority and from reason, that
philosophy and Christianity cannot disagree; a sentiment altogether of
his own revival, in an age in which all philosophers, and mathematicians
in particular, were considered as at best of dubious orthodoxy.

The reasoning of Bacon is generally directly dependent upon his
premises, which, though often wrong, seldom lead him to the prevailing
extreme of absurdity. Even his astrology and alchemy, those two great
blots upon his character, as they are usually called, are, when
considered by the side of a later age, harmless modifications,
irrational only because unproved, and neither impossible nor unworthy of
the investigation of a philosopher, in the absence of preceding
experiments. His astrology is _physical_. "With regard to human affairs,
true mathematicians do not presume to make certain, but consider how the
body is altered by the heavens, and the body being altered, the mind is
excited to public and private acts, free will existing all the same." An
age which is divided upon the question of the effect of the moon upon
lunatics, and of which the philosophers have collected no facts decisive
against many alleged effects of the same planet upon plants, can ask no
more of a philosopher of the thirteenth century than that he should not
be too positive. The fame of Leibnitz has not suffered from the
_pre-established harmony_ one half as much as that of Bacon from his
astrology and alchemy, which were believed in to a much greater extent
by many of the learned of his time, and the united effect of which would
seem to us sense and logic, compared with the metaphysical folly, all
his own, of the eminent philosopher just cited.

This planetary influence appears to have been firmly believed in by
Bacon, and in particular the effect of the constellations on the several
parts of the human body. Perhaps he was rather prejudiced in favour of a
doctrine which was condemned by the same men who thought mathematics and
philosophy savoured of heresy. And it must be remembered that the
pretended science was almost universally allowed existence, even by
those who considered its use unlawful; nor can we infer that the church
disbelieved it, because that body discouraged it, any more than that it
rejected infernal spirits, because it anathematized magic.

We must draw a wide distinction between the things which Bacon relates
as upon credible authority, and the opinions which he professes himself
to entertain from his own investigations. In almost every page we meet
with something now considered extremely absurd, and with reason. But
before the day of _printing_ there was very little _publishing_: a book
which was written in one country, found its way but slowly into others,
one copy at a time; and a man of learning seldom met those with whom he
could discuss the probability of any narrative. The adoption of the
principle that a story must be rejected because it is strange, would
then have amounted to a disbelief of all that had been written on
physics; a state of mind to which we cannot conceive any one of that age
bringing himself. Nor can we rightly decide what opinion to form of
Bacon as a philosopher, until we know how much he rejected, as well as
how much he believed. These remarks apply particularly to his alchemy:
he does not say he had made gold himself, but that others had asserted
themselves to have made it; and his account of the drink by which men
had lived hundreds of years is a relation taken from another. Voltaire,
in his Philosophical Dictionary, has overlooked this distinction, and
has much to say in consequence. It was, however, no very strange matter
that Bacon, who (if the 'Speculum Alchemiae' be really his, of which,
from the style, we doubt) believed with many others that sulphur and
mercury were the first principles of all bodies, should endeavour to
compound gold, or should give credit to the assertions of those who
professed to have done so. But there is not in Bacon's alchemy any
direction for the use of prayers, fasting, or planetary hours.

The great points by which Bacon is known are his reputed knowledge of
gunpowder and of the telescope. With regard to the former, it is not at
all clear that what we call gunpowder is intended, though some
detonating mixture, of which saltpetre is an ingredient, is spoken of as
commonly known. The passage is as follows:--

"Some things disturb the ear so much, that if they were made to happen
suddenly by night, and with sufficient skill, no city or army could bear
them. No noise of thunder could compare with them. Some things strike
terror on the sight, so that the flashes of the clouds are beyond
comparison less disturbing; works similar to which Gideon is thought to
have performed in the camp of the Midianites. And an instance we take
from a childish amusement, which exists in many parts of the world, to
wit, that with an instrument as large as the human thumb, by the
violence of the salt called saltpetre, so horrible a noise is made by
the rupture of so slight a thing as a bit of parchment, that it is
thought to exceed loud thunder, and the flash is stronger than the
brightest lightning."--_Opus Majus_, p. 474.

There are passages in the work 'De Secretis Operibus,' &c. (cited by
Hutton, 'Dictionary,' article "Gunpowder"), which expressly mention
sulphur, charcoal, and saltpetre as ingredients. But, independently of
the claim of the Chinese and Indians, there is an author, Marcus
Graecus, whose work, 'Liber Ignium' (now existing only in Latin
translations from the Greek), is cited by Dr. Jebb from a manuscript in
the possession of Dr. Mead, and who appears to have been considered by
both as older than Bacon. Dr. Hutton, into whose hands Dr. Mead's
manuscripts passed, found this writer mentioned by an Arabic physician
of the ninth century. Graecus gives the receipt for gunpowder, namely,
one part of sulphur, two of willow-charcoal, and six of saltpetre. Two
manuscript copies of Graecus were also found in the Royal Library of
Paris. But it does not appear that Graecus was known for a long time
after Bacon: even Tartaglia knew nothing of him; for he says, in his
work on Artillery, that the oldest writers known to him use equal parts
of the three ingredients.

With regard to the telescope, it must be admitted that Bacon had
_conceived_ the instrument, though there is no proof that he carried his
conception into practice, or _invented_ it. His words are these:--"We
can so shape transparent substances, and so arrange them with respect to
our sight and objects, that rays can be broken and bent as we please, so
that objects may be seen far off or near, under whatever angle we
please; and thus from an incredible distance we may read the smallest
letters, and number the grains of dust and sand, on account of the
greatness of the angle under which we see them; and we may manage so as
hardly to see bodies, when near to us, on account of the smallness of
the angle under which we cause them to be seen: for vision of this sort
is not a consequence of distance, except as that affects the magnitude
of the angle. And thus a boy may seem a giant, and a man a mountain,
&c." The above contains a true description of a telescope; but if Bacon
had constructed one, he would have found that there are impediments to
the indefinite increase of the magnifying power; and still more that a
boy does not appear a giant, but a boy at a smaller distance.

That the remarks of Bacon are derived from reflection and imagination
only, is further apparent from his asserting that a small army could be
made to appear very large, and that the sun and moon could be made to
descend, to all appearance, down below, and stand over the head of the
enemy. At the same time it is worth notice, that these ideas of Bacon
did, in after times, produce either the telescope, or some modification
of it, consisting in the magnifying of images produced by reflection,
and that before the date either of Jansen or Galileo. Thomas Digges, son
of Leonard Digges, in his 'Stratiotikos,' London, 1590, page 359 (second
edition, the first being 1579), thus speaks of what his father had done,
in the presence, as he asserts, of numerous living eye-witnesses:--

"And such was his Felicitie and happie successe, not only in these
conclusions, but also in y^e Optikes and Catoptikes, that he was able by
Perspectiue Glasses, duely seituate upon conuenient angles, in such sort
to discouer every particularitie of the country round about, wheresoeuer
the Sunne beames might pearse: as sithence Archimedes (Bakon of Oxford
onely excepted) I have not read of any in action euer able by means
natural to perform the like. Which partly grew by the aid he had by one
old written book of the same Bakon's Experiments, that by strange
aduenture, or rather Destinie, came to his hands, though chiefely by
conioyning continuall laborious Practise with his Mathematicall
Studies."

And the same Thomas Digges, in his 'Pantometria,' London, 1571, Preface
(republished in 1591), had previously given the same story, with more
detail, omitting, however, all mention of Bacon. He says that his
father--"sundrie times hath by proportionall Glasses duely situate in
conuenient angles, not onely discouered things farre off, read letters,
numbred peeces of money with the very coyne and superscription thereof,
cast by some of his freends of purpose upon Downes in open Fields, but
also seuen miles off declared what hath beene doone at that instant in
priuate places. There are yet living diuerse (of these his dooings)
_Oculati Testes_."

The question has been agitated whether the invention of spectacles is
due to Bacon, or whether they had been introduced just before he wrote.
He certainly describes them, and explains why a plane convex glass
magnifies. But he seems to us to speak of them as already in use. "Hence
this instrument is useful to old persons and those who have weak eyes."

The 'Opus Majus' begins with a book on the necessity of advancing
knowledge, and a dissertation on the use of philosophy in theology. It
is followed by books on the utility of grammar and mathematics; in the
latter of which he runs through the various sciences of astronomy,
chronology, geography, and music. The account of the inhabited world is
long and curious, and though frequently based on that of Ptolemy, or the
writings of Pliny, contains many new facts from travellers of his own
and preceding times. His account of the defects in the calendar was
variously cited in the discussions which took place on the subject two
centuries after. The remainder of the work consists of a treatise on
optics and on experimental philosophy, insisting on the peculiar
advantages of the latter. The explanation of the phenomena of the
rainbow, though very imperfect, was an original effort of a character
altogether foreign to the philosophy of his day. He attributes it to the
reflection of the sun's rays from the cloud; and the chief merit of his
theory is in the clear and philosophical manner in which he proves that
the phenomenon is an appearance, and not a reality. Between the two
last-mentioned books is a treatise, 'De Multiplicatione Specierum,'
entirely filled with discussions somewhat metaphysical upon the
connexion and causes of phenomena.

Our limits will not allow us to enter further into details: nor could
we, in any moderate space, do justice to the varied learning of the
author, or distinctly mark even the chief of the numerous singular and
now exploded notions which are introduced; nor, as far as we know, does
there exist any full account of the contents to which we can refer the
reader.

The following amusing extract will show the sort of reputation which
Roger Bacon acquired:--

"How Friar Bacon made a brazen head to speak, by the which he would have
walled England about with brass.

"Friar Bacon reading one day of the many conquests of England,
bethought himself how he might keep it hereafter from the like
conquests, and to make himself famous hereafter to all posterities. This
(after great study) he found could be no way so well done as one; which
was to make a head of brass, and if he could make this head to speak
(and hear it when it speaks) then might he be able to wall all England
about with brass. To this purpose he got one Friar Bungey to assist him,
who was a great scholar and a magician (but not to be compared to Friar
Bacon), these two, with great pains, so framed a head of brass that in
the inward parts thereof there was all things like as in a natural man's
head: this being done, they were as far from perfection of the work as
they were before, for they knew not how to give those parts that they
had made motion, without which it was impossible that it should speak.
Many books they read, but yet could not find out any hope of what they
sought, that at the last they concluded to raise a spirit, and to know
of him that which they could not attain to by their own studies. To do
this they prepared all things ready, and went one evening to a wood
thereby, and, after many ceremonies used, they spake the words of
conjuration, which the devil straight obeyed, and appeared unto them,
asking what they would. Know, said Friar Bacon, that we have made an
artificial head of brass, which we would have to speak, to the
furtherance of which we have raised thee, and, being raised, we will
here keep thee, unless thou tell to us the way and manner how to make
this head to speak. The devil told him that he had not that power of
himself. Beginner of lies, said Friar Bacon, I know that thou dost
dissemble, and therefore tell it us quickly, or else we will here bind
thee to remain during our pleasures. At these threatenings the devil
consented to do it, and told them, that with a continual fume of the six
hottest simples it should have motion, and in one month's space speak,
the time of the month or day he knew not: also he told them, that if
they heard it not before it had done speaking all their labour should be
lost; they, being satisfied, licensed the spirit for to depart.

"Then went these two learned friars home again, and prepared the simples
ready, and made the fumes, and with continual watching attended when
this brazen head would speak. Thus watched they for three weeks without
any rest, so that they were so weary and sleepy that they could not any
longer refrain from rest. Then called Friar Bacon his man Miles, and
told him that it was not unknown to him what pains Friar Bungey and
himself had taken for three weeks' space, only to make and to hear the
brazen head speak, which, if they did not, then had they lost all their
labour, and all England had a great loss thereby: therefore he intreated
Miles that he would watch whilst that they slept, and call them if the
head speak."

Miles then begins his watch, and keeps himself from sleeping by merrily
singing.

After some noise the head spake these two words, _Time is_. Miles,
hearing it to speak no more, thought his master would be angry if he
waked him for that, and therefore he let them both sleep, and began to
mock the head . . . . After half an hour had passed, the head did speak
again two words, which were these, _Time was_. Miles respected these
words as little as he did the former, and would not wake them, but still
scoffed at the brazen head, that it had learned no better words, and
have such a tutor as his master . . . . Miles talked and sung till
another half hour was gone, then the brazen head spake again these
words, _Time is past_, and therewith fell down, and presently followed a
terrible noise, with strange flashes of fire, so that Miles was half
dead with fear. At this noise the two friars awaked, and wondered to see
the whole room so full of smoke; but that being vanished they might
perceive the brazen head broken and lying on the ground. At this sight
they grieved, and called Miles to know how this came. Miles, half dead
with fear, said that it fell down of itself, and that, with the noise
and fire that followed, he was almost frighted out of his wits. Friar
Bacon asked if he did not speak? Yes, quoth Miles, it spake, but to no
purpose; I'll have a parrot speak better in that time that you have been
teaching this brazen head. Out on thee, villain, said Friar Bacon, thou
hast undone us both: hadst thou but called us when it did speak, all
England had been walled round about with brass, to its glory and our
eternal fames. What were the words it spake? Very few, said Miles; and
those were none of the wisest that I have heard, neither. First he said,
Time is. Hadst thou called us then, said Friar Bacon, we had been made
for ever. Then, said Miles, half an hour after it spake again, and said,
Time was. And wouldst thou not call us then? said Bungey. Alas, said
Miles, I thought he would have told me some long tale, and then I
purposed to have called you: then after an hour after he cried, Time is
past, and made such a noise that he hath waked you himself, methinks. At
this Friar Bacon was in such a rage that he would have beaten his man,
but he was restrained by Bungey; but, nevertheless, for his punishment
he, with his art, struck him dumb for one whole month's space. Thus the
great work of these learned friars was overthrown, to their great
griefs, by this simple fellow."--From 'The Famous Historie of Fryer
Bacon.'




EDWARD III.


Henry II. was succeeded on the English throne by his eldest surviving
son, Richard I.; he by his younger brother John; he by his son Henry
III.; he by his son the first and greatest of the Edwards. The reigns of
these four kings fill the whole of the thirteenth century, with a few
years of the end of the twelfth, and a few of the beginning of the
fourteenth: Richard I. having reigned from 1189 to 1199; John from 1199
to 1216; Henry III. from 1216 to 1272; Edward I. from 1272 to 1307. Old
Froissart observes that it was an opinion commonly entertained by
Englishmen, and the truth of which had been often exemplified from the
days of King Arthur, that between every two valiant kings of England
there was most commonly one of less sufficiency both of wit and of
prowess. How far this rule may have obtained in more antient times we
shall not stop to inquire, but from the Norman Conquest it may be said
to have held good, with but slight exception, for nearly four centuries
and through a succession of more than a dozen sovereigns. From the
Conqueror to Henry IV. inclusive, the only interruption to such a
regular alternation of the good and the bad, or at least of the strong
and the weak, had been the coming together of Henry II. and his son
Richard I., followed by that of John and his son Henry III. Even here
there was the balance of the two valiant kings against the two of less
prowess and wisdom.

At any rate there can be no question about the old notion having proved
true in the case of the first and second Edwards; for, as Froissart
says, "the good King Edward the First was right valiant, sage, wise, and
hardy, adventurous and fortunate in all feats of war, and had much ado
against the Scots, and conquered them three or four times; for the Scots
could never have victory nor endure against him: and after his decease
his son of his first wife was crowned king and called Edward the Second,
who resembled nothing to his father in wit nor in prowess, but governed
and kept his realm right wildly, and ruled himself by sinister counsel
of certain persons, whereby at length he had no profit nor laud; for,
anon after he was crowned, Robert Bruce, King of Scotland, who had often
before given much ado to the said good King Edward the First, conquered
again all Scotland, and brent and wasted a great part of the realm of
England, a four or five days' journey within the realm, at two times,
and discomfited the king and all the barons of England at a place in
Scotland called Stirling, by battle arranged the day of St. John
Baptist, in the year of our Lord 1314." And many other were the
disasters and disgraces of Edward of Carnarvon's unhappy twenty years'
reign, besides the loss of Scotland and the defeat and rout of
Bannockburn.

On the 24th of January, 1308, about six months after his accession,
Edward II. was married at Boulogne to Isabella, daughter of the French
king, Philip IV. (surnamed le Bel, or the Fair); five kings in all, and
four queens, including the bride and bridegroom, being present at the
ceremony. Edward was in his twenty-fourth year; the French princess was
only in her thirteenth, but was already famous as the greatest beauty in
Europe. "One of the fairest ladies of the world," Froissart calls her.
In tradition and history, however, she lives as little less than a
beautiful demon. Never has beauty, never has a marriage been more fatal
than hers was to herself, to her husband, to both their native lands.
The radiant girl who now gave Edward her hand was in the end to deprive
him of his crown and of his life; a long imprisonment of eight and
twenty years was to be the dower of her own widowhood; and from their
union was to spring a quarrel between their two countries, which it was
to take nearly a century of bloodshed and desolation to fight out:--

    "Mark the year, and mark the night,
     When Severn shall re-echo with affright
     The shrieks of death through Berkeley's roofs that ring;
     Shrieks of an agonizing king!
     She-wolf of France, with unrelenting fangs,
     That tear'st the bowels of thy mangled mate,
     From thee be born who o'er thy country hangs
     The scourge of heaven!

He who was thus to prove "the scourge of heaven," to his mother's land
and race was her eldest son Edward, born at Windsor Castle on Monday the
13th of December, 1312. Young Edward appears to have been known till
near the end of his father's reign as Earl of Chester; he was summoned
to parliament by that title in 1320, and in each of the four following
years. In May, 1325, Isabella proceeded to France on the pretence of
negotiating a treaty of peace between her husband and her brother
Charles IV., the new king of that country; and in September following
she was joined there by her son Edward, who with his father's consent
set sail, splendidly attended, to be invested by the French king with
the dutchy of Guienne and the earldom of Ponthieu, which his father had
consented to resign to him. He did homage for the two fiefs, and
received investiture; but, although he had promised his father to hasten
his return, he remained abroad till the 24th of September of the next
year, when he landed at Orwell in Suffolk with his mother, come, with
her paramour Mortimer, to make open war upon her husband. The last
instrument issued in the name of Edward II. was on the 20th of January,
1327; on the next day he is understood to have formally resigned his
crown in the castle of Kenilworth to commissioners sent to him by the
parliament; his son was proclaimed as Edward the Third on Saturday the
24th. His reign, however, for some reason which is not known, was
reckoned as having commenced on the 25th. His father is supposed to have
been murdered in his dungeon in Berkeley Castle on the 21st of
September.

The new king, a boy of fourteen when he was thus raised to the throne,
was of course at first king only in name, and all power and authority
were in the hands of his mother and Mortimer. He was marvellously alert,
however, in assuming manhood in various ways. If he was not allowed any
share in the government of the country, he was thought already old
enough both to rule an army and to rule a wife. Within a few months
after his accession, he put himself at the head of a great force, and
went forth to fight the Scots; and in the beginning of the next year he
was married at York to Philippa, the second daughter of William Count of
Hainault, to whom he had been contracted by his mother shortly before
their return from the continent.

Edward's first campaign, however, must detain us for a little; for the
incidents were both remarkable in themselves, and they have been
recorded in much detail by the writer to whom we must be principally
indebted throughout our sketch. Froissart, indeed, is not so much a
great historian as a great historical painter--the greatest that ever
painted in words. He is extremely inaccurate in dates and names, and
other such prosaic matters, and even in his own proper line he may be
suspected of having sometimes intermixed a little fancy with his facts;
yet he may be always trusted, better than almost any other writer, for
what is after all the most important truth, the characteristic spirit or
inner life of what he describes; and even in this part of his chronicle,
which relates to events that happened before he was born, and in which
therefore he writes to a greater extent than in the latter portions of
it from report, he has thrown in much of what he had actually seen along
with what he had only heard, and, if the sketching be in so far a copy,
the colouring at least is his own. The account of the demonstration (for
it was hardly more) which Edward made on the northern border is a great
deal too long to be extracted in full; but we will select some of the
more striking incidents, or those in which the young English king
figures the most conspicuously. As we abridge the narrative, we will
retain as much as possible of our author's style and manner, adhering
for the most part to the excellent old English translation by Lord
Berners.

When Robert de Bruce, King of Scotland, we are told, heard how that
the old king, Edward the Second, was taken and deposed down from his
regality and his crown, and certain of his counsellors beheaded and put
to destruction, then, although he was himself become very old and
ancient, and sick (as it was said) of the great evil and malady, he
bethought him that he would defy the young king, Edward the Third,
because he was young, and that the barons of the realm were not all of
one accord, as it was said. So about Easter, 1327, he sent his defiance
to the young Edward and to all the realm, sending them word how that he
would enter into the realm of England, and bren before him, as he had
done before time. When the King of England and his council perceived
that they were defied, they caused it to be known all over the realm;
and commanded that all the nobles, and all other, should be ready
apparelled, every man after his estate; and that they should be, by
Ascension-day next after, at the town of York, standing northward. An
embassy was sent to Sir John of Hainault, lord of Beamond, by which his
assistance was obtained with a body of foreigners for the sum of
fourteen thousand pounds. This was a brother of the Earl of Hainault,
who had the preceding year accompanied Queen Isabella on her expedition
to England, and had only recently returned to his own country. He and
his men of war now landed at Dover, whence they rode straight to the
town of York, where the king, and the queen his mother, and all his
lords, with a great host, were tarrying their coming. They arrived at
York within three days of Pentecost. The English were lodged two or
three leagues off, all about in the country; the foreigners in the
suburbs of the city, an abbey of monks being assigned to Sir John for
himself and his household. Then the narrative proceeds:--"The gentle
King of England, the better to feast these strange lords and all their
company, held a great court on Trinity Sunday in the Friars, where he
and the queen his mother were lodged, keeping their house each of them
apart. All this feast the king had well five hundred knights, and
fifteen were new made. And the queen had well in her court sixty ladies
and damozelles, who were there ready to make feast and cheer to Sir John
of Hainault and to his company. There might have been seen great nobles,
plenty of all manner of strange victual. There were ladies and
damoselles, freshly apparelled, ready to have danced if they might have
leave. But incontinent after dinner there began a great fray between
some of the grooms and pages of the strangers and of the archers of
England, who were lodged among them in the same suburbs; and anon all
the archers assembled them together with their bows, and drove the
strangers home to their lodging; and the most part of the knights and
masters of them were as yet in the king's court, but, as soon as they
heard tidings of the fray, each of them drew to their own lodging, in
great haste such as might enter, and such as might not get in were in
great peril. For the archers, who were to the number of three thousand,
shot fast their arrows, not sparing masters nor varlets.... And the
Englishmen that were hosts to these strangers shut fast their doors and
windows, and would not suffer them to enter in to their lodgings:
howbeit some got in on the back side, and quickly armed them, but they
durst not issue out into the street for fear of the arrows. Then the
strangers broke out on the back side, and brake down pales and hedges of
gardens, and drew them into a certain plain place, and abode their
company, till at last they were a hundred and above of men of arms, and
as many unharnessed, such as could not get to their lodgings. And, when
they were assembled together, they hasted them to go and succour their
companions, who defended their lodgings in the great street." At the
lodging of the Lord D'Enghien, where there were great gates both before
and behind, opening into the great street, the English archers were
shooting fiercely at the house, and many of the foreigners were hurt;
but three good knights, whose names are given, although they could not
get into their lodgings to arm them, yet did as valiantly as though they
had been armed. "They had great levers in their hands, the which they
found in a carpenter's yard, with the which they gave such strokes that
men durst not approach to them. They three beat down that day, with such
few company as they had, mo than sixty. For they were great and mighty
knights." In the end the English archers were discomfited and put to the
rout, after about three hundred men had been slain on both sides. "I
trow," concludes the hearty old chronicler, "God did never give more
grace and fortune to any people than he did as then to this gentle
knight, Sir John of Hainault, and to his company. For these English
archers intended to none other thing but to murder and to rob them, for
all that they were come to serve the king in his business. These
strangers were never in so great peril all the season that they lay, nor
they were never after in surety till they were again at Wissant in their
own country. For they were fallen in so great hate with all the archers
of the host, that some of the barons and knights of England showed unto
the lords of Hainault, giving them warning that the archers and other of
the common people were allied together to the number of six thousand, to
the intent to bren or to kill them in their lodgings, either by night or
by day. And so they lived at a hard adventure; but each of them promised
to help and aid other, and to sell dearly their lives or they were
slain. So they made many fair ordinances among themself by good and
great advice; whereby they were fain oftentimes to lie in their harness
by night, and in the day to keep their lodgings, and to have all their
harness ready and their horses saddled. Thus continually they were fain
to make watch by their constables in the fields and highways about the
court, and to send out scout-watches a mile off, to see ever if any such
people were coming to themward as they were informed of, to the intent
that, if their scout-watch heard any noise, or moving of people drawing
to the cityward, then, incontinent, they should give them knowledge,
whereby they might the sooner gather together, each of them under their
own banner, in a certain place, the which they had advised for the same
intent. And in this tribulation they abode in the said suburbs by the
space of four weeks, and in all that season they durst not go far fro
their harness, nor fro their lodgings, saving a certain of the chief
lords among them, who went to the court to see the king and his council,
who made them right good cheer. For, if the said evil adventure had not
been, they had sojourned there in great case, for the city and the
country about them was right plentiful. For, all the time of six weeks
that the king and the lords of England, and mo than sixty thousand men
of war, lay there, the victuals were never the dearer; for ever they had
a penny worth for a penny, as well as other had before they came there;
and there was good wine of Gascoign, and of Anjou, and of the Rhine, and
plenty thereof; with right good cheap, as well of pollen[8] as of other
victuals; and there was daily brought before their lodgings hay, oats,
and litter, whereof they were well served for their horses, and at a
meetly[9] price."

How admirably in this way does the garrulous, graphic, picturesque old
chronicler bring before us England and the English five hundred years
ago! Immediately after we have an equally curious picture of the Scots,
and how they went to war, no doubt drawn or at least filled up from
Froissart's own observation when he visited the northern part of the
island some years later. About four weeks after the fray at York, the
army set out and marched forward to the city of Durham, "a day's journey
within the country called Northumberland, the which at that time was a
savage and a wild country, full of deserts and mountains, and a right
poor country of everything saving of beasts; through the which there
runneth a river, full of flint and great stones, called the water of
Tyne." It was now found that the Scots had effected the passage of the
Tyne without being noticed. They had passed at Haydon, about fifteen
miles above Newcastle. "These Scottish men," says Froissart, "are right
hardy, and sore travelling in harness and in wars. For, when they will
enter into England, within a day and a night they will drive their whole
host twenty-four mile, for they are all on horseback, without it be the
traundals and laggers of the host, who follow after a-foot. The knights
and squires are well horsed, and the common people and other on little
hackneys and geldings; and they carry with them no carts nor chariots,
for the diversities of the mountains that they must pass through in the
country of Northumberland. They take with them no purveyance of bread
nor wine, for their usage and soberness is such in time of war that they
will pass in the journey a great long time with flesh half sodden,
without bread, and drink of the river water without wine; and they
neither care for pots nor pans, for they seethe beasts in their own
skins. They are ever sure to find plenty of beasts in the country that
they will pass through. Therefore they carry with them none other
purveyance, but on their horse, between the saddle and the panel, they
truss a broad plate of metal, and behind the saddle they will have a
little sack full of oatmeal, to the intent that, when they have eaten of
the sodden flesh, then they lay this plate on the fire, and temper a
little of the oatmeal; and, when the plate is hot, they cast of the thin
paste thereon, and so make a little cake, in manner of a cracknel or
biscuit, and that they eat to comfort withal their stomachs. Wherefore
it is no great marvel though they make greater journeys than other
people do. And in this manner were the Scots entered into the said
country, and wasted and brent all about as they went, and took great
number of beasts. They were to the number of four thousand men of arms,
knights, and squires, mounted on good horses; and other ten thousand men
of war were armed after their guise, right hardy and fierce, mounted on
little hackneys, the which were never tied nor kept at hard meat, but
let go to pasture in the fields and bushes."

The account that follows of the movements and counter-movements of the
two hosts is one of the most curious and characteristic passages in
Froissart, and a pretty full abstract of it will introduce the reader
better than can be done in any other way both to Edward and his
historian, and to at least one leading department of life in England in
the fourteenth century.

The English, infuriated by what they saw and heard of the
devastations of the invaders, followed them for two whole days by the
guidance of the smoke that marked their destructive course; but,
although they were wasting, burning, and pillaging only five miles
ahead, they could not be overtaken. It was then determined to make for
the Tyne, and, crossing that river, to wait on its northern bank for the
return of the Scots. The march or ride is described as in the highest
degree toilsome and dangerous, many men and horses being lost among the
mountains, rocks, and marshes, and through the continual alarms that
were occasioned by the shouting of those that were foremost at the
harts, hinds, and other savage beasts, they were continually starting,
when those in the rear thought they had got engaged with the enemy, upon
which they hastened to their assistance over all impediments, "with helm
and shield ready appareled to fight, with spear and sword ready in hand,
without tarrying for father, brother, or companion." "Thus," continues
the chronicler, "rode forth all that day the young King of England, by
mountains and depths, without finding any highway, town, or village.
And, when it was against night, they came to the river of Tyne, to the
same place whereas the Scots had passed over into England, weening to
them that they must needs repass again the same way. Then the King of
England and his host passed over the same river, with such guides as he
had, with much pain and travail, for the passage was full of great
stones. And, when they were over, they lodged them that night by the
river side. And by that time the sun was gone to rest, and there was but
few among them that had either axe or hook, or any instrument to cut
down any wood to make their lodgings withal; and there were many that
had lost their own company, and wist not where they were. Some of the
foot-men were far behind, and wist not well what way to take; but such
as knew best the country said plainly they had ridden the same day
twenty-four English miles; for they rode as fast as they might, without
any rest, but at such passages as they could not choose. All this night
they lay by this river side, still in their harness, holding their
horses by their reins in their hands, for they wist not whereunto to tie
them: thus their horses did eat no meat of all that night nor day
before; they had neither oats nor forage for them: nor the people of the
host had no sustenance of all that day nor night, but every man his loaf
that he had carried behind him, the which was sore wet with the sweat of
the horses; nor they drank none other drink but the water of the river,
without it were some of the lords that had carried bottles with them;
nor they had no fire nor light, for they had nothing to make light
withal, without it were some of the lords that had torches brought with
them. In this great trouble and danger they passed all that night; their
armour still on their backs, their horses ready saddled." All the next
day it rained so that neither sustenance nor forage could be procured,
so that they themselves were forced to fast; and their horses had
nothing but leaves of trees and herbs. About noon they learned from some
country people that they were fourteen miles from Newcastle and eleven
from Carlisle, and that these were the nearest towns. Upon this it was
determined to send to Newcastle: and there was a cry, we are told, in
the king's name made in that town, that whosoever would bring bread, or
wine, or any other victual, should be paid for it forthwith at a good
price; it being at the same time proclaimed that the king and his host
would not depart from the place where they were till they had heard some
tidings of the enemy's whereabout. By the next day at noon the purveyors
returned with what they had been able to procure in this way: it was not
over much. But "with them," it is added, "came other folks of the
country, with little nags, charged with bread, evil baken, in paniers,
and small pear wine in barrels, and other victual, to sell in the host,
whereby great part of the host were well refreshed and eased." In this
state they remained for eight days, including the three in which they
had been in a manner without bread, wine, candle or other light, fodder,
forage, or any manner of purveyance; the scarcity even after this being
still so great that a penny loaf of bread was sold for sixpence, and a
gallon of wine, that was worth but sixpence, for six groats. "And yet,
for all that, there was such rage of famine, that each took victuals out
of other's hands, whereby there rose divers battles and strifes between
sundry companions; and yet beside all these mischiefs it never ceased to
rain all the whole week, whereby their saddles, panels, and
countersingles were all rotten and broken, and most part of their horses
hurt on their backs; nor they had naught wherewith to shoe them that
were unshod, nor they had nothing to cover themself withal from the rain
and cold, but green bushes and their armour; nor they had nothing to
make fire withal, but green boughs, the which would not burn because of
the rain." All this while they had heard nothing of the enemy;
discontent began to spread in the camp; it was determined to repass the
river, and proclamation was made that whosoever should first bring to
the king certain information of where the Scots were should be made a
knight and have land to the value of a hundred pounds a year settled
upon him and his heirs for ever. On the fourth day, about three in the
afternoon, a squire, one of fifteen or sixteen who had set forth in the
hope of winning this reward, came riding at a quick pace up to the king,
and, beginning, "An it like your grace, I have brought you perfect
tidings of the Scots your enemies," stated that he had actually been
taken prisoner by them, and brought before the lords of their host, who,
when he told them his object, had dismissed him without ransom, that he
might inform Edward that they were only three miles off, stationed on a
great mountain, and as desirous to find and fight with the English as
the English could be to meet with them. The name of the lucky squire was
Thomas de Rokesby. "As soon," continues our author, "as the king had
heard this tidings, he assembled all his host in a fair meadow to
pasture their horses; and besides there was a little abbey, the which
was all brent, called in the days of King Arthur, Le Blanch Land. There
the king confessed him, and every man made him ready. The king caused
many masses to be sung, to houzel all such as had devotion thereto; and
incontinent he assigned a hundred pounds sterling of rent to the squire
that had brought him tidings of the Scots, according to his promise, and
made him knight with his own hands before all the host. And, when they
had well rested them,[10] and taken repast, then the trumpet sounded to
horse, and every man mounted, and the banners and standers[11] followed
this new-made knight, every battle by itself in good order, through
mountains and dales, ranged as well as they might, ever ready appareled
to fight; and they rode and made such haste that about noon they were so
near the Scots that each of them might clearly see other." The Scots
were posted in three battles, or divisions, on the lower part of the
hill, with a rocky river at their feet, and precipitous rocks on each
flank. This new river was the higher part of the Wear, and the Scots
were on its right or south bank, not far from Stanhope. The English
commanders immediately drew up their forces on their own or the north
side. "And when their battles were set in good order, then some of the
lords of England brought their young king a horseback before all the
battles of the host, to the intent to give thereby the more courage to
all his people; the which king in full goodly manner prayed and required
them right graciously that every man would pain them to do their best,
to save his honour and common weal of his realm. And it was commanded
upon pain of death, that none should go before the marshals' banners,
nor break their array, without they were commanded. And then the king
commanded that they should advance toward their enemies fair and
easily." The Scots, however, though formally invited by a deputation of
heralds-at-arms to come down from their vantage ground, and have the
battle fought fairly in the plain, either that or the following day, as
they might themselves choose, wisely refused to stir. "Sirs," they
answered, "your king and his lords see well how we be here in this
realm, and have brent and wasted the country as we have passed through;
and, if they be displeased therewith, let them amend it when they will,
for here we will abide so long as it shall please us." On this it was
resolved by the English to remain where they were all that night. It was
the night of St. Peter's day, in the beginning of August. They lay in
their arms on the hard and stony ground. "They had no stakes nor rods,"
continues Froissart, "to tie withal their horses, nor forage, nor bush
withal to make any fire. And when they were thus lodged, then the Scots
caused some of their people to keep still the field whereas they had
ordained their battles, and the remnant went to their lodgings, and they
made such fires that it was marvel to behold. And between the day and
the night they made a marvellous great bruit with blowing of horns all
at once, that it seemed properly that all the devils of hell had been
there." This mere show and bravado was repeated on both sides for three
days, all the fighting being a little skirmishing between small parties
that occasionally came forth from either army, and crossed the stream,
some on horseback, some on foot; and the English, who learned from their
prisoners that the Scots, though they had plenty of beef, were run short
of meal, had made up their minds to remain till famine should force
their cautious and unassailable enemy either to fight or surrender. But
behold! on the morning of the fourth day, when they looked at the
mountain, no Scots were to be seen; they had quietly made off in the
middle of the night. About noon, however, they were discovered not far
off, upon another mountain, in a still stronger position, by the same
river side, having now a great wood on one of their flanks, enabling
them to go and come secretly whenever they chose. The English
immediately took their station on an eminence over against them,--in
Stanhope Park, according to the common account; the enemy were again
repeatedly invited to come over and fight fairly in the intermediate
plain; but they were deaf to all such proposals; and thus the two hosts
remained looking at one another for the long space of eighteen more
days. The first night, however, the Lord William Douglas, taking with
him about two hundred men of arms, crossed the river at a distant point,
and suddenly breaking into the English host about midnight, with the cry
of "A Douglas! A Douglas! ye shall all die, thieves of England!" slew or
carried off no fewer than three hundred men: the gallant leader spurring
on, and still alarming the night with his family battle-cry, had even
advanced to the king's tent, two or three of the cords of which he
struck asunder before he was driven off. This surprise made the English
afterwards keep strict watch and ward. At last the Scots again made
their escape during the night; and it was determined to pursue them no
farther. The young king is said to have wept bitterly in yielding to
this necessity. Before they commenced their retreat, or their return to
the south, "diverse of the English host," we are told, mounted on their
horses and passed over the river, and came to the mountain whereas the
Scots had been, and there they found mo than five hundred great beasts
ready slain, because the Scots could not drive them before their host,
and because that the English men should have but small profit of them;
also there they found three hundred cauldrons made of beasts' skins,
with the hair still on them, strained on stakes over the fire, full of
water and full of flesh to be sodden, and more than a thousand spits[12]
full of flesh to be roasted; and more than ten thousand old shoes made
of raw leather, with the hair still on them, the which the Scots had
left behind them; also there they found five poor Englishmen prisoners
bound fast to certain trees, and some of their legs broken." On the
second day about noon the English army, well nigh worn out with fatigue,
reached a great abbey two miles from Durham; on the morrow the king went
forward to that city, and visited the venerable old cathedral and made
his offering; and here every man found his carriage which he had left
thirty-two days before in a wood at midnight, when they first started in
pursuit of the Scots. "The burgesses and people of Durham had found and
brought them into their town at their own costs and charges. And all
these carriages were set in void granges and barns in safeguard, and on
every man's carriage his own cognizance or arms, whereby every man might
know his own. And the lords and gentlemen were glad when they had thus
found their carriages. Thus they abode two days in the city of Durham,
and the host roundabout, for they could not all lodge within the city;
and there their horses were new shod. And then they took their way to
the city of York; and so within three days they came thither, and there
the king found the queen his mother, who received him with great joy,
and so did all other ladies, damozelles, burgesses, and commons of the
city."

Before the end of the year a peace was made with Scotland; and in a
parliament assembled at York in March following, Edward renounced for
himself and his successors all claims of superiority over the crown of
that country; and shortly after, his sister the Princess Jane or Joanna
(called De la Tour, from having been born in the Tower of London) was
carried to Berwick by her mother, and there affianced to David, the
Prince of Scotland, as yet only in his fifth year. The great Bruce died
within a year after (on the 7th of July, 1329), and was succeeded by his
infant son as David the Second; about two years after whose accession
Edward Baliol made a sudden inroad into the country, and got himself
crowned at Scone, but was driven out again in a few weeks. In a second
invasion, however, in the following year, 1333, in which he was assisted
by the English king, the Scots were defeated by Edward, on the 19th of
July, in the great battle of Halidon Hill, near Berwick; upon which that
town was forced to surrender, nearly every other stronghold in the
kingdom immediately followed its example, and the young King David took
refuge in France. Baliol, however, whom these events had again seated on
the throne, was again driven out within a year; the war was carried on
for some years, in the course of which Edward once, in the summer of
1336, proceeded as far north as to Inverness, carrying fire and sword
wherever he appeared; but no permanent occupation or subjugation could
be effected; as soon as the English army disappeared the Scots were
again in arms; in May 1341 David and his queen returned from France; and
at last, in the beginning of 1343, a truce was concluded which left the
two countries at peace for nearly four years.

But long before this time a great domestic revolution had changed
every thing at the court of England. The arrogance of Isabella and
Mortimer, who had early in the new reign been created Earl of March, and
the general conviction of their criminal intimacy, had very soon begun
to disgust the nation; and the alarm of a powerful party had been
excited by the condemnation and execution, in the beginning of 1330, of
Edmund earl of Kent, one of the king's uncles, on pretence of high
treason, his real crime being, as was universally believed, that he was
hated and dreaded by the favourite. Even Edward himself, now eighteen,
was staggered by after-reflection upon this act, though he had been
induced, in the persuasion of the earl's guilt, to give his consent to
it at the time. Already married, too, and a father, for his son Edward,
afterwards so famous as the Black Prince, had been born at Woodstock on
the 15th of June, 1330, he no doubt felt the state of tutelage, or at
least of exclusion from all share in the government, in which he was
kept by his mother and Mortimer, every day more galling. It is said that
the king confided his feelings to the Lord Montacute; and by his advice
it was resolved to make an attempt to seize Mortimer at a parliament
which was to be held at Nottingham in October. At this parliament the
favourite appeared "in such glory and honour," says Stow, "that it was
without all comparison. No man durst name him any other than Earl of
March; a greater rout of men followed at his heels than on the king's
person; he would suffer the king to rise to him, and would walk with the
king equally, step by step and cheek by cheek, never preferring the
king, but would go foremost himself with his officers." While he took up
his own lodgings with the queen and her son in Nottingham Castle, he
directed that the highest of the other nobility, including the king's
cousin, the Earl of Lancaster, should be lodged in the most distant
parts of the town or without it. The conspirators, however, opened their
design to Sir William Eland, who had long been keeper of the castle; and
he engaged to admit them during the night by a subterraneous passage,
leading from a point at a considerable distance on the west side of the
rock, of the existence of which Mortimer was not aware. On the night of
the 19th of October, accordingly, having concerted their plans with the
king, Montacute and his associates entered by this passage. They were
joined by Edward on the principal staircase. Advancing in silence, and
with their naked swords in their hands, they soon came to a room, where
the voice of Mortimer was heard conversing. Leaving the king without,
they rushed in, and slaying two knights, who endeavoured to oppose them,
laid hold of the earl. The queen, who was in bed in the adjoining
chamber, the door of which was open, cried out "Bel filz, Bel filz, Ayez
pitie de gentil Mortimer" (Fair son, fair son, have pity upon gentle
Mortimer); she then rose, and, rushing into the room, passionately
exclaimed that he was a worthy knight, her well-beloved cousin, her
dearest friend; but he was quickly secured and hurried off. At a
parliament held at Westminster about a month after, he was condemned,
with little form of trial, to die the death of a traitor; and he and one
of his confederates were hanged together at the Elms at Tyburn, on the
29th of November. "He hung," Stow tells us, "two days and two nights by
the king's commandment, and then was buried in the Grey Friars' Church,"
now Christ's Hospital, in Newgate Street. Yet Mortimer's attainder was
reversed in 1352, and his honours restored to his grandson; his
great-granddaughter married Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third son of
Edward III.; his great-great-granddaughter and ultimately sole heir, Ann
Mortimer, by her marriage with Richard Plantagenet Earl of Cambridge,
conveyed her right to the crown thence derived to the House of York; her
grandson mounted the throne as Edward IV.; and it has been occupied ever
since the death of Henry VII. by her descendants. As for Queen Isabella,
she was, upon her fall from power, reduced to an income of 3000_l._ a
year (which was afterwards increased to 4000_l._), and ordered to
confine herself in what some authorities call her manor of Risings near
London, others Rising Castle, on the coast of Norfolk, where once a year
her son paid her a visit of ceremony, and where she survived almost
forgotten by the world for nearly eight and twenty years. She died on
the 22nd of August, 1358, and was then buried in the choir of the same
church of the Grey Friars where the body of Mortimer had been laid.

In 1328, an event occurred which suddenly gave a new direction to the
exertions and ambition of the English king, and changed altogether the
policy of the remainder of his reign. Hitherto, the object that may be
said to have mainly occupied him had been that inherited from his father
and his grandfather, the subjugation of Scotland; his efforts were now
to be withdrawn to a much more extraordinary, daring, and magnificent
scheme, that of the conquest of France. Upon this attempt he adventured
on the strength of a right which he professed to derive through his
mother. Isabella, it will be recollected, was the daughter of the French
king Philip IV. Philip died in 1314, and was succeeded by his eldest son
Louis X. (styled Le Hutin, or the Quarrelsome). Louis died in 1316, and
was in the first instance succeeded by a posthumous son, named John,
who, however, as he lived only a few days, is not usually reckoned among
the kings of France. It was then determined, for the first time, that
the French crown, by what was called the Salic law, did not descend to
females; and, to the exclusion of the daughter of Louis, Joanna,
Countess of Evreux, afterwards Queen of Navarre, his brother became king
as Philip V. (surnamed the Long). In like manner, when Philip died in
1322, although he left four daughters, he was succeeded by his next
brother, Charles IV. (styled Le Bel, or the Fair). The event which
happened in 1328, and which we have described as having been attended
with important consequences both to France and to England, was the death
of Charles IV. He also left two daughters, but no son. In these
circumstances, according to the two last precedents, it seemed that the
heir to the crown was to be sought for in the nearest male who could
claim through an unbroken male descent; the principle apparently being,
as in other cases in which male descent only was recognised, that
females should be regarded as nullities, or should not be introduced
into the genealogical tree at all. The individual thus circumstanced was
indisputably Philip of Valois, whose father, Charles of Valois, was the
second son of Philip III. (the Hardy), and the younger brother of Philip
IV. (the Fair). Against his right, however, Edward III. set up a
principle or rule of succession which was at least new. He admitted that
females were excluded from actually reigning in France, otherwise the
Queen of Navarre would have succeeded her father Louis X., and would
have excluded not only both himself and his present competitor, but also
the two last kings, Philip V. and Charles IV. But he contended that,
although females could not be called to the throne themselves, they
nevertheless conveyed a right of succession to their male descendants;
and that he therefore, as the grandson, through his mother, of Philip
IV., had a preferable claim to Philip of Valois, who was only the
grandson of Philip III. If this had been the whole case, Edward's
pretensions might have had some plausibility; it might have been
conceived and understood how, in conformity with the general principles
of feudalism, a female, though excluded in her own person from a certain
office or possession, might still serve as a link for transmitting a
right to it to her male descendant. She might be held only as it were to
step aside and allow him to take her place in a function which her sex
was deemed to disqualify her from discharging. But the real weakness and
inadmissibility of Edward's claim lay in the necessity he was under of
qualifying this principle upon which he founded it by a limitation
entirely opposed to the genius and spirit of the feudal system, and
which would have made the law of descent a self-contradictory mass of
confusion and absurdity. For, if a female universally might transmit a
right which she could not herself exercise or enjoy to her male
descendant, then in the present case, before Edward, who was the
grandson, through a female, of Philip IV., would come all the existing
and possible male descendants of the three subsequent kings, Louis X.,
Philip V., and Charles IV., all of whom left daughters, though no sons.
To this conclusion the principle upon which Edward took his stand,
stated broadly and without limitation, would incontrovertibly have led.
He therefore drew an ingenious distinction, and maintained his own right
as the son of the daughter of Philip IV. to be preferable to that of the
son of any daughter of any of the kings that had since reigned, on the
ground that he alone had been born in the lifetime of his grandfather.
The novelty and gratuitous nature of this assumption would alone have
formed its sufficient answer and refutation. But it was fraught with the
most absurd and inconvenient consequences. If there be one principle
which more than another may be said to belong to the essence of the
feudal system of descent, it is that the position and rights of a line
in relation to other lines are not to be affected by the date of the
birth of any individual forming a link of it. Thus, no priority of birth
can enable a nephew to come in before a son. So absolutely does this
principle operate, that, even if there be no son in existence at the
time of the death of a married man, his next relation does not inherit,
or only inherits conditionally, till the time has passed within which it
is possible that his widow should bring him a son. We had an instance in
the case of the descent of the English crown on the death of the late
king, William IV., when the present queen assumed the government at
first only as it were provisionally, or with reservation of the rights
of any possible unborn cousin. But the claim set up to the crown of
France by Edward III., on the death of Charles IV., would have
contravened this essential principle in the most flagrant and wholesale
manner. It would have excluded in his favour more than half a dozen
lines, all otherwise entitled to come in before that to which he
belonged--those, namely, of the descendants, actual or possible, of the
two daughters of Charles IV., of the four daughters of Philip V., and of
the daughter of Louis X., all of which kings had reigned since his
ancestor Philip IV. And this transposition it would have made
permanently; these seven lines would all have been extruded out of their
proper places by his for ever, or at any rate until some one of them,
possibly the last of all, should be again suddenly lifted over the heads
of all the rest, and made the first, by the operation of the same
strange principle which Edward contended had now produced that effect in
his favour.

Strange as were the principles or grounds upon which Edward advanced
his claim to the French crown, his means of enforcing it seemed at least
proportionally inadequate, and his chances of success still more slight
and visionary. It was not a case of the heads of two great national
parties, dividing between them the adherence and support of the
community. Edward had no party in France; the kingdom the succession to
which was disputed was wholly with his opponent. The English crown had
even been stripped in the course of the last century and a half of the
greater part of the territories which it anciently possessed in France.
Bretagne, Normandy, Anjou, Maine, and Touraine had all been wrested from
it in the disastrous reign of John; and the loss of Poitou had followed
in that of his equally unfortunate son Henry III. Of all the vast
continental possessions of that great king the second Henry, there
remained only the Duchy of Aquitaine or Guienne; and even that had
fallen more than once into the hands of the French monarchs, and the
prevalent popular feeling was probably already more French than English.
Edward's bold project, therefore, was nothing less than to effect the
conquest of France by the sole force of England; and that, too, while he
had already upon his hands the war with Scotland, the object of which
was also the subjugation of that kingdom, and the annexation of its
crown to his own. The latter scheme, indeed, he found himself obliged to
abandon soon after he had involved himself in his contest with France.
But Scotland continued, nevertheless, for a time to divide his
attention, if not his ambition; and at least, it may be said, to occupy
his left arm.

Strangest of all was the measure of success he attained. In
September, 1339, he entered France from Flanders, with a small army of
fifteen thousand men, and immediately proceeded to lay waste the
country. In January following, by the advice of his ally Jacob von
Artaveldt, the famous brewer of Ghent, and leader of the democratic
interest in Flanders, he publicly assumed the title of King of France,
and quartered the French lilies with the English lions. On the 24th of
June, 1340, he obtained a great naval victory over the fleet of Philip
off Blakenberg. Hostilities were then for some time suspended: but arms
were resumed in the summer of 1345 with much more formidable
preparations on both sides. On the 26th of August, 1346, was won the
ever memorable victory of Creci by seven or eight thousand English from
a hundred or a hundred and twenty thousand French, in which eighty of
the enemy's banners were captured, while in the carnage of that and the
following day above thirty thousand of them were slain, including twelve
hundred knights and eleven persons of princely rank, among the rest the
aged John, King of Bohemia, from whom the Princes of Wales are said,
though doubts have been lately cast upon the old story, to have borrowed
their plume of three ostrich feathers, with the motto _Ich dien_ (I
serve). The young Prince of Wales, called the Black Prince from the
colour of his armour, shared, at any rate, among the foremost, boy as he
was (he had just entered his fifteenth year), in the peril and glory of
the day. Assisted by the Earls of Warwick and Oxford, he commanded the
first division of the little army which bore the brunt of the battle.
The king himself remained with the reserve. Pressed by the multitude of
the enemy, "they with the prince," says Froissart, "sent a messenger to
the king, who was on a little windmill hill. Then the knight said to the
king, Sir, the Earl of Warwick and the Earl of Oxford, Sir Reynold
Cobham, and other such as be about the prince your son, are fiercely
fought withal and are sore handled; wherefore they desire you that you
and your battle will come and aid them; for if the Frenchmen increase,
as they doubt they will, your son and they shall have much ado. Then the
king said, Is my son dead or hurt, or on the earth felled? No, Sir,
quoth the knight; but he is hardly matched; wherefore he hath need of
your aid. Well, said the king, return to him, and to them that sent you
hither, and say to them that they send no more to me for any adventure
that falleth, as long as my son is alive; and also say to them that they
suffer him this day to win his spurs; for, if God be pleased, I will
this journey[13] be his, and the honour thereof, and to them that be
about him." The king's answer, when it was brought to them, only gave
new life and courage to the heroic combatants. "This Saturday," the old
chronicler further writes, "the Englishmen never departed fro their
battles for chasing of any man, but kept still their field, and ever
defended themself against all such as came to assail them. This battle
ended about evensong time. On this Saturday, when the night was come,
and that the Englishmen heard no more noise of the Frenchmen, then they
reputed themself to have the victory, and the Frenchmen to be
discomfited, slain, and fled away. Then they made great fires, and
lighted up torches and candles, because it was very dark. Then the king
availed[14] down from the little hill whereas he stood, and of all that
day then his helm came never off on his head. Then he went with all his
battle to his son the prince, and embraced him in his arms and kissed
him, and said, Fair son, God give you good perseverance: ye are my good
son: thus ye have acquitted you nobly: ye are worthy to keep a realm.
The prince inclined himself to the earth, honouring the king his father.
This night they thanked God for their good adventure, and made no boast
thereof; for the king would that no man should be proud, or make boast,
but every man humbly to thank God." As for Philip of Valois, he had only
been able to escape with his life from this disastrous field. "In the
evening," says Froissart, "the French king, who had left about him no mo
than a threescore persons, one and other, whereof Sir John of Hainault
was one, who had remounted once the king, for his horse was slain with
an arrow, then he said to the king, Sir, depart hence, for it is time;
lese[15] not yourself wilfully; if ye have loss at this time, ye shall
recover it again another season. And so he took the king's horse by the
bridle, and led him away in a manner per force. Then the king rode till
he came to the castle of La Broyes; the gate was closed, because it was
by this time dark. Then the king called the captain, who came to the
walls, and said, Who is it that calleth there this time of night? Then
the king said, Open your gate quickly, for this is the fortune of
France. The captain knew that it was the king, and opened the gate, and
let down the bridge. Then the king entered, and he had with him but five
barons, Sir John of Hainault, Sir Charles of Montmorency, the Lord of
Beauvieu, the Lord Daubigny, and the Lord of Montford. The king would
not tarry there, but drank and departed thence about midnight; and so
rode by such guides as knew the country, till he came in the morning to
Amiens, and there he rested."

Within two months after the defeat and rout of the French at Creci,
another great victory broke the power of the Scots. As soon as King
David found Edward fairly engaged in his continental war, he made
preparations for crossing the borders. Setting out from Perth at the
head of an army of three thousand men-at-arms, and thirty thousand
others mounted on hackneys, he advanced by Edinburgh and Roxburgh,
entered Cumberland, took the pile, or castle, of Liddel, and then,
burning and wasting as he passed, directed his course into the
bishopric. The energetic English king allowed no one of his family to be
idle, any more than himself, and seems to have made it a principle to
accustom his sons at the earliest possible age to at least the
consciousness of the duties of their high position, and the sense if not
the actual exercise of authority and power; he had left the nominal
guardianship of the kingdom in the hands of his second son Lionel, a boy
only eight years old; the actual charge and direction of affairs he had
intrusted to his queen, the admirable Philippa. In those days, when the
chivalrous spirit was at its height, heroism was the virtue of both
sexes, as well as of all classes; a few years before this, the principal
military personage that had figured in a war for the possession of the
duchy of Bretagne was the famous Jane, Countess de Montfort; while her
husband, one of the rival claimants, lay fast bound in a French prison,
she took what would have been his place in the command of fortresses, at
the head of armies, and in the thick of battles;[16] and now Queen
Philippa was to do the same thing in the absence of Edward. The English
force that had been hurriedly assembled to meet the Scots amounted to a
body of fifteen or sixteen thousand men, and a considerable part of it
was composed of the clergy of the northern counties--the class of
persons that could be most easily spared or got at, and quite as ready
and as apt for the work to be done as any others. "The queen of
England," says Froissart, "who desired to defend her country, came to
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and there tarried for her men, who came daily fro
all parts. When the Scots knew that the Englishmen assembled at
Newcastle, they drew thitherward, and their couriers came running before
the town; and at their returning they brent certain small hamlets
thereabout, so that the smoke thereof came into the town of Newcastle;
some of the Englishmen would a issued out to have fought with them that
made the fires, but the captains would not suffer them to issue out."
The two armies, however, at last encountered, on the 17th of October, at
Nevil's Cross, in the neighbourhood of the city of Durham. On the
English side, after the divisions were all drawn up in array--the first
under the command of the Bishop of Durham, the second under that of the
Archbishop of York, the third under that of the Bishop of London, the
fourth under that of the Archbishop of Canterbury, each warlike prelate,
however, having a lay lord as his coadjutor--"the queen," Froissart
informs us, "went fro battle to battle, desiring them to do their
devoir,[17] to defend the honour of her lord the King of England, and,
in the name of God, every man to be of good heart and courage, promising
them that, to her power, she would remember them as well, or better, as
though her lord the king were there personally. Then the queen departed
fro them, recommending them to God and to Saint George. Then, anon
after, the battles of the Scots began to set forward, and in like wise
so did the Englishmen; then the archers began to shoot on both parties;
the shots of the Scots endured but a short space, but the archers of
England shot fiercely, so that when the battles approached there was a
hard battle; they began at nine and endured till noon. The Scots had
great axes, sharp and hard, and gave with them many great strokes;
howbeit, finally the Englishmen obtained the place and victory." The
slaughter was considerable on both sides, but far the greatest on that
of the Scots, fifteen thousand of whom, including many of their chief
nobility, were left dead on the field. The greatest loss of all,
however, was the capture of their young and gallant king. Refusing to
fly, he had, after receiving two dangerous wounds from arrows, one of
which pierced his head, been dragged or fallen from his horse; but still
he fought on; till at last, overpowered by numbers, he was disarmed and
carried off by John Copland, a gentleman of Northumberland, who did not,
however, secure his prize without a violent struggle, in which the king,
deprived of his sword, wounded him with his gauntlet. David Bruce
remained in captivity in England for more than ten years.

Meanwhile Edward was engaged abroad in the memorable siege of Calais,
the garrison of which, after a blockade of nearly a year, was forced to
surrender by famine, on the 4th of August, 1347. All our readers are no
doubt familiar with the scene of the appearance in the English camp of
Eustace de St. Pierre and his five fellow-townsmen, come to offer
themselves, barefoot and bare-headed, and with halters about their
necks, as sacrifices to appease the anger of their long-baffled
conqueror, in which Queen Philippa again shines forth so nobly. The
story rests upon the authority of Froissart, but has no air of
improbability or even of much fanciful embellishment. When Sir Walter
Manny, we are told, "presented these burgesses to the king, they kneeled
down, and held up their hands and said, 'Gentle king, behold here, we
six, who were burgesses of Calais, and great merchants, we have brought
to you the keys of the town and of the castle, and we submit ourself
clearly into your will and pleasure, to save the residue of the people
of Calais, who have suffered great pain: Sir, we beseech your grace to
have mercy and pity on us through your high nobless.' Then all the earls
and barons, and other that were there, wept for pity. The king looked
felly on them, for greatly he hated the people of Calais for the great
damages and displeasures they had done him on the sea before. Then he
commanded their heads to be stricken off. Then every man required the
king for mercy, but he would hear no man in that behalf. Then Sir Walter
of Manny said, 'Ah, noble king, for God's sake, refrain your courage; ye
have the name of sovereign nobless, therefore now do not a thing that
should blemish your renown, nor to give cause to some to speak of you
villainy; every man will say it is a great cruelty to put to death such
honest[18] persons, who by their own wills put themself into your grace
to save their country.' Then the king wried away from him, and commanded
to send for the hangman, and said, 'They of Calais had caused many of my
men to be slain; wherefore these shall die in like wise.' The queen,
being great with child, kneeled, down, and sore weeping said, 'Ah!
gentle sir, sith I passed the sea in great peril, I have desired nothing
of you: therefore now I humbly require[19] you, in the honour of the son
of the Virgin Mary, and for the love of me, that ye will take mercy of
these six burgesses.' The king beheld the queen, and stood still in a
study a space, and then said, 'Ah, dame, I would ye had been as now in
some other place; ye make such request to me that I cannot deny you;
wherefore I give them to you to do your pleasure with them.' Then the
queen caused them to be brought into her chamber, and made the halters
to be taken fro their necks, and caused them to be new clothed, and gave
them their dinner at their leisure; and then she gave each of them six
nobles, and made them to be brought out of the host in safeguard, and
set at their liberty." Calais, thus won, remained an English town for
more than two centuries--till it was lost in the reign of Mary, in the
year 1558.

The remaining course of the war with France may be very summarily
sketched. After the fall of Calais a succession of armistices or truces
suspended hostilities for about six years. Meanwhile King Philip had
died in 1350, and been succeeded by his eldest son John. By this time
Edward had come to perceive how little impression his brilliant but
insulated successes had made upon the real strength of his
adversary--how little a way--or, rather, no way at all--he had advanced
towards the conquest of France by the mere winning of a great battle or
two, and the capture and retention of a single town. In the end of the
year 1353, therefore, he renewed more formally an offer which he had
already made to Philip, of renouncing his claim to the French crown on
condition of being acknowledged as sovereign of Guienne, Poitou, and the
other territories in France which the English kings had hitherto held as
vassals. The negotiations consumed some time, but ended in nothing:
several months were then spent in preparations for the renewal of the
war; at last, in October, 1355, the Black Prince, who had been for some
years intrusted with the government of Guienne, took the field at the
head of an army of sixty thousand men, with which, advancing from his
capital of Bordeaux, he made a circuit through Armagnac and Languedoc,
spreading devastation wherever he went, and laying, it is affirmed, more
than five hundred towns and villages in ashes in the space of seven
weeks. In the summer of the next year he proceeded to repeat the same
experiment in a different direction: this time the force with which he
set out amounted to only about twelve thousand men, and with these he
boldly crossed the Garonne, and penetrated into the heart of France. For
some weeks he pursued his destructive course without opposition; but, at
last, when making for Poictiers, and within a short distance of that
city, he suddenly found himself enveloped by a French army, commanded by
King John, more than four times as numerous as his own. Then, on the
19th of September, was fought the battle of Poictiers, making that other
name worthy to be associated for ever in story and in song with Creci,
of which both the extremity of peril and the glorious deliverance were
now more than renewed. The French host was beaten back at all points,
and in the end utterly routed, scattered, and annihilated by Prince
Edward and his handful of English. Most of the chief nobility of France
were either slain or captured: King John himself fell into the hands of
the victors. The illustrious captive was treated with noble courtesy
both by the Black Prince and by the king his father; but, although the
extraordinary fortune of Edward had now placed in his power the persons
of the kings of both the countries which he had so long been
endeavouring to subdue, it soon appeared that he was still as far from
the conquest of either as ever. King David was liberated by a treaty
concluded in 1357; and in 1360 peace was made with France by the treaty
of Bretigny, in which Edward renounced his claim both to the French
crown and to the possession of Normandy, Anjou, Touraine, and Maine, on
condition of being acknowledged the full sovereign of Guienne, Poitou,
and Ponthieu. This treaty set King John at liberty; but three years
after, on finding himself unable to pay the instalments due upon the sum
that had been agreed upon for his ransom--three million gold crowns--he
honourably returned to his imprisonment; and he died in England, in the
palace of the Savoy, London, in the beginning of April, 1364. His eldest
son immediately mounted the throne of France as Charles V. Charles, from
the commencement of his reign, had betrayed a disposition to extricate
himself as soon as an opportunity should occur from the obligations of
the treaty of Bretigny, the renunciations stipulated by which had never,
in fact, been actually made on either side. Meanwhile the course of
circumstances favoured his views. The King of England was no longer the
man he had been either in ardour or in energy; his heroic son had also
fallen into ill health, the effect of exposure in an expedition, to be
lamented on every account, which he had made in the winter of 1366-7
into Spain, to assist Pedro the Cruel in his contest for the throne of
Castile with his illegitimate brother Enrique; and much disaffection had
been excited both in Poitou and Guienne by the severe exactions of the
English government, rendered necessary by the expenses of this
expedition, and by the debts incurred in the late war. In the beginning
of the year 1369 Charles openly took his ground by summoning the Black
Prince, as Duke of Aquitaine, to appear in his court as a vassal, and
answer the complaints of the people of that duchy. The most memorable
event of the short war that followed was the sad and atrocious massacre
by the English prince of the inhabitants of Limoges, the capital of his
country of the Limosin, after he had recovered the town, which had a
short time previously been taken by, or had given itself up to, the
French general, the Duke of Berri. "It was great pity," says Froissart,
"to see the men, women, and children that kneeled down on their knees
before the prince for mercy, but he was so inflamed with ire that he
took no heed to them, so that none was heard, but all put to death as
they were met withal, and such as were nothing culpable: there was no
pity taken of the poor people, who wrought never no manner of treason,
yet they bought it dearer than the great personages, such as had done
the evil and trespass. There was not so hard a heart within the city of
Limoges, an if he had any remembrance of God, but that wept piteously
for the great mischief that they saw before their eyen; for mo than
three thousand men, women, and children were slain and beheaded that
day. God have mercy on their souls! for I trow they were martyrs."
Disease by this time seems to have debilitated and perverted the very
moral nature of the prince. He was soon after obliged to sheathe his
sword, and come home to England, where he lingered, in such debility and
suffering as allowed him to take very little actual share in public
affairs, although his name remained influential, till his death on the
8th of June, 1376. The war in France, meanwhile, had prospered so ill,
that by the year 1374 Edward, who had retained and still used the title
of king of that country, had lost all the territory he had ever
possessed there, with the exception only of Calais, Bordeaux, and
Bayonne, and a few detached localities between those two last-named
towns. No peace, however, was ever made while Edward lived. After the
death of the Black Prince the chief ascendancy in the government was
acquired by his younger brother John of Gaunt (that is, Ghent, the place
of his birth), Duke of Lancaster. The king himself, who had lost Queen
Philippa in 1369, had, in the weakness of old age, sunk under the
dominion of a female favourite, Alice Perrers or Piers. She was a
married woman, and had been lady of the bedchamber to Queen Philippa;
and she is said to have been eminently distinguished by her wit and
talent, as well as by her beauty, an influence to which Edward had all
his life been extremely sensible, although in his better days he had at
least never allowed it to master the soldier or the king. This artful
woman, however, soon acquired so much power over him, and abused it with
so much insolence, that shortly before the death of the Black Prince the
parliament had passed an ordinance declaring that, whereas complaint had
been made before the king that some women had pursued causes and actions
in the king's courts by way of maintainance, and for hire and reward,
which thing displeased the king, the king forbade that any woman should
do it hereafter, "and in particular Alice Perrers, under the penalty of
forfeiting all that the said Alice can forfeit, and of being banished
out of the realm." Alice, notwithstanding, still remained about the
king's person; while Edward, wasting with disease, lay, to quote the
words of Stow, "neglecting the benefit of time that God had given him,
like as he should never have died; trusting the fond fables of the
oft-named Alice when she affirmed he should recover his health, so that
at that time he talked rather of hawking and hunting than of any thing
that pertained to the saving of his soul; only he granted pardon of
death for offences throughout his kingdom to the inhabitants." "Being
now," continues this old chronicler, "suddenly taken with the day of his
death, he began to have manifest signs thereof; what Alice Piers then
did any man may judge, although we set them not down in writing; for, as
soon as she saw the king had set foot within death's door, she bethought
her of flight; yet before she went, that all men might perceive that she
loved not the king for himself, but for that which was his, she took the
rings from his fingers which for the royalty of his majesty he was wont
to wear. Thus yielding him such thanks for his benefits, she bade him
adieu, and so withdrew herself from him. The king, keeping thus at the
point of death, was left not only of her the said Alice Piers, but of
other the knights and esquires, who had served him, allured more with
his gifts than his love. Amongst a thousand, there was only present at
that time a certain priest (other of his folks applying the spoil of
what they could lay hands on), who, lamenting the king's misery, and
inwardly touched with grief of heart for that, amongst so many
counsellors which he had, there was none that would minister to him the
word of life, came boldly unto him, and admonished him to lift up the
eyes as well of his body as of his heart unto God, and with sighs to ask
mercy of him, whose majesty he well knew he had grievously offended;
whereupon the king, listening to the words of the priest, although he
had a little before wanted the use of his tongue, yet then taking
strength to him, seemed to speak what was in his mind; and then, what
for weakness of his body, contrition of his heart, and sobbing for his
sins, his voice and speech failed him, and, scarce half pronouncing the
word Jesu, he with this last word made an end of his speech, and yielded
up the ghost." He died at Richmond in Surrey (then called Shine or
Sheen), about seven o'clock on the evening of Sunday the 21st of June,
1377; leaving the throne to his grandson, Richard II., son of Edward the
Black Prince, by his wife Joan, called the Fair Maid of Kent, the
daughter of his great uncle Edmund, Earl of Kent, and previously the
wife of Thomas Holland, who in her right had assumed the title of Earl
of Kent in 1360, but died in the end of the same year, upon which his
widow immediately gave her hand to the Prince of Wales.

The children borne to Edward III. by his wife Queen Philippa were,
Edward the Black Prince, in 1330; Isabel, who became the wife of
Ingelram de Coucy, in 1332; Joan de la Tour, in 1335; William of
Hatfield, in 1336; Lionel, afterwards Duke of Clarence, in 1338; Blanche
de la Tour, who died in childhood in 1340; John of Ghent, afterwards
Duke of Lancaster, in 1340; Edmund, afterwards Duke of York, in 1341;
Mary, afterwards Duchess of Bretagne, probably in 1342; Margaret,
afterwards Countess of Pembroke, in 1346; William, in 1349; and Thomas,
afterwards Duke of Gloucester, in 1355.

It has been observed, in regard to Edward III., by Sir James
Mackintosh, that "though his victories left few lasting acquisitions,
yet they surrounded the name of his country with a lustre which produced
strength and safety; which perhaps also gave a loftier tone to the
feelings of England, and a more vigorous activity to her faculties."
"During a reign of fifty years," it is added, "Edward III. issued writs
of summons, which are extant to this day, to assemble seventy
parliaments or great councils: he thus engaged the pride and passions of
the parliament and the people so deeply in support of his projects of
aggrandisement, that they became his zealous and enthusiastic followers.
His ambition was caught by the nation, and men of the humblest station
became proud of his brilliant victories. To form and keep up this state
of public temper was the mainspring of his domestic administration, and
satisfactorily explains the internal tranquillity of England during the
forty years of his effective reign. It was the natural consequence of so
long and watchful a pursuit of popularity, that most grievances were
redressed as soon as felt, that parliamentary authority was yearly
strengthened by exercise, and that the minds of the turbulent barons
were exclusively turned towards a share in their sovereign's glory.
Quiet at home was partly the fruit of fame abroad."




WICLIFFE


Beyond that of most of our great men, has the fame of Wiclif[20]
undergone fierce dispute within the last few years. From regarding him
with reverence as "the Morning Star of the Reformation," it has come to
be more than questioned whether he was a reformer at all, or whether a
certain superior craft was not the motive that incited him throughout
his career. It will be convenient to leave the consideration of this
matter till we have looked at the leading events of his life, when we
shall be better prepared to estimate his character. To assume a
controversial tone--as it would be scarcely possible to avoid doing if
we entered into the discussion of the various views and statements that
have been put forth respecting him--is not at all our intention. We have
examined the several statements; we shall be content with expressing our
own opinions.

There is some uncertainty about both the year and the place of John
Wiclif's birth: the place which seems most probable, however, is a
little village pleasantly situated near the junction of the rivers Greta
and Tees, about six miles from Richmond in Yorkshire; the year 1324.
What is known of his life commences with the year 1340, when he entered
as a commoner at Queen's College, Oxford, then newly founded: his name
is in the list of the first scholars. From Queen's he soon removed to
Merton College, at that time highest in repute at the University; where
he greatly distinguished himself. The theology taught at this period was
that of the schoolmen, who, as Bacon afterwards said of them, "did, out
of no great quantity of matter, spin out those laborious webs of
learning which are extant in their books...admirable indeed for the
fineness of the thread, but of no substance or profit." In this
scholastic discipline Wiclif became so deeply versed, that his
contemporary Knighton, a bitter enemy and a competent judge, declared he
was without an equal (_in scholasticis disciplinis incomparabilis_.) Nor
was he skilled in this alone; he appears to have pursued, with almost
equal success, the whole round of moral, philosophical, and legal
studies as then taught. According to the standard of his time he was an
eminently learned man.

The earliest of Wiclif's publications, so far as is known, was written
in 1356; it was first printed in 1840. The work itself does not occupy
more than fourteen small pages, and is of little value on its own
account, but deserving attention, as Wiclif's first work, written when
he was thirty-two years old, a period in a man's life when his character
is fixed and his tone of thought determined, and when consequently the
opinions he has formed will almost certainly colour the actions of the
remainder of his life. We may therefore spend a few minutes in looking
at this production and at the circumstances which called it forth. In
1349 a fearful pestilence occurred in England. It had marched slowly
from the east, ravaging every country it passed through. Nearly the
whole of Europe was visited by it. The voice of the terrified nations
affirmed that only a tithe of the human race had escaped; that all
children born since it were deficient in the number of their teeth; that
even the brute creation was not spared, their corpses being so many as
to fill the air with a horrible taint. So severe indeed was the
visitation, that, in this country at least, it long served as an epoch
from which legal documents were dated. The Scriptures told that
pestilence had of old been the scourge wherewith an offended God had
punished the sins of the nations; and the people devoutly believed that
this had been sent for such a purpose. The plague ceased, but sober men
saw with sorrow that the rulers and the priests had not heeded the
heavenly warning, and to the faithful the wickedness that stalked abroad
seemed like an awful defiance of the divine power. Under such
circumstances and prompted by some such feelings was it that Wiclif
wrote 'The Last Age of the Church.' Taking for his guide the prophecies
of Abbot Joachim, a mystic who lived in the twelfth century, and
combining therewith a cabalistic computation of the Scriptural
prophecies, and turning also to the verses of the Sybil, he thought the
end of the world was at hand, and announced its speedy dissolution. He
was mistaken, and lived to see that he was mistaken. But although his
prophecy failed, there is much in the tract that shows the man as he
then was, and throws a bright light on his future career. It proves that
he had thus early come to have identified in his mind religion with the
whole life of man, to look upon it as reaching to all his duties and
employments, that he, indeed, regarded it as the animating principle of
the whole of the political and social institutions. It proves that he
had cast an anxious look around him, and, dissatisfied with the state of
the world, he was more dissatisfied with the ministers of religion, whom
he boldly and broadly charges with a disregard of their higher
functions, and an indulgence in a greedy and unholy rapacity. It may in
a word be said, that the object of the tract is to declare the troubles
that will fall upon the church and the world, on account of the simony
of the priests, and the encroachments and exactions of the papal power.

These feelings were brought out more strongly a few years later. In
1360 he engaged in what a recent historian calls "a fierce but
ridiculous controversy with the different orders of friars." To the
stern moral dignity of Wiclif the controversy did not seem a ridiculous
one, and indeed it hardly seems to us more ridiculous than that of
Luther with Tetzel and the Dominicans. These friars had been established
in England for more than a century, and had obtained considerable
influence. Although vowing poverty, they had acquired great wealth;
under the guise of sanctity they had concealed, it was affirmed, gross
depravity. They had almost from the first been at enmity with the
secular clergy, and were especially obnoxious to the University of
Oxford. Before Wiclif, they met with a steady opponent in Fitz-Ralph,
chancellor of Oxford, and afterwards Bishop of Armagh, who carried his
charges against them to the papal throne. Fitz-Ralph died in 1360, from
which time Wiclif pursued the war fiercely, and only ceased to prosecute
it with his life. Of the works he produced against them at this period
it is not certain that any remain. Two pieces, one which he presented to
the court of Richard II., and the other which seems to have been written
a year or two before his death, were printed by Dr. James in 1608, and
serve to show the nature of his quarrel. It was not, as Dr. Lingard
implies, merely a charge against them for depending upon alms, which
Wiclif asserted to be repugnant to the Gospel; though upon that he
strongly insisted, but rather that they misled the unwary, by holding
out to them false hopes of pardon, and by their untrue representations
obtained their property from them, leading them to trust to these
worthless pardons thus purchased by money, instead of setting before
them the great Gospel truth. He charges them with doing this that they
might obtain the wealth of their dupes. They become, he says in his
bitter and plain-spoken language, "confessors, preachers, and rulers
commonly of all men, and they teachen them not their foul sins, for
winning of stinking muck and lusts of their own bellies, that is foul
worm's meat and a sack of dirt." And elsewhere, "St. James directs to
visit the fatherless and motherless children, and widows in their
tribulation, and to keep man unfouled from the world, that is, from
pride, covetise, and vanities. But friars do all the contrary, for they
visiten rich men, and by hypocrisy getten falsely their alms, and
withdraw from poor men; but they visiten rich widows for their muck, and
maken them to be buried at the Friars, but poor men come not in there."
This was Wiclif's quarrel, and this continued to be his quarrel with
them, that while intent only on driving a lucrative and disgraceful
trade, they were deceiving the souls of those who trusted to them: no
ridiculous controversy that, to a man of Wiclif's mind! As he said, so
doubtless he thought--"Friars be worse enemies and slayers of man's
soul, than is the cruel fiend of hell by himself. For they under the
habit of holiness lead men and nourish them in sin, and be special
helpers of the fiend to strangle men's souls." It is not our business to
palliate the violence of Wiclifs language, but only to represent his
feelings, and a cold statement in the calm phraseology of our day would
poorly express the vehemence of his indignation. These words were not
probably written till long afterwards, but these were no doubt his
sentiments then. His controversy with the friars marks the commencement
of his career as a reformer.

The year following that in which he engaged in this controversy he was
chosen master of Baliol College, and presented to the living of
Fillingham, a valuable benefice in the diocese of Lincoln. Four years
afterwards he was appointed warden of Canterbury Hall, by Archbishop
Islip, the founder of that college.[21] Originally the archbishop had
appointed Woodhall, a friar, to be warden, and had founded eleven
scholarships, three to be held by monks, and eight by clerks, or secular
clergymen. At this time the dispute between these orders was at its
height, and the peace and security of the infant establishment were soon
disturbed by the bickerings of its inmates. To such a length were they
carried, that Islip felt himself called upon to interfere, and he
determined to prevent the probability of a recurrence of the quarrel by
removing the monks, and substituting for them seculars. Islip did not
live long after this change; and, on the succession of Langham to the
vacant see, Woodhall appealed to him, as visitor of Canterbury Hall, to
remove Wiclif, who, he affirmed, had procured his appointment at a time
when Islip was incapable from sickness of judging aright. He was
successful; but Wiclif in his turn appealed from the new archbishop to
the pope; his holiness, however, ratified the decision of Langham, but
not till after a delay of nearly four years. Meanwhile Wiclif had done
nothing to propitiate the papal power, but he had done some things to
offend it. In 1365 Urban V. renewed the papal claim to a domination over
the sovereignty of England, which had been conceded to the holy see by
John; and he demanded the payment of an annual tribute of a thousand
marks, together with the arrears of the last thirty years. Edward III.
was little disposed either to acknowledge his subjection or to pay the
money. He submitted the claim of the pontiff to his parliament, which on
the next day, and without dissent from laymen or clergy, declared his
submission to the pope to be beyond the power of any sovereign to
render, and engaged, if the demand were persisted in, to oppose it with
the whole power of the nation. Urban was intimidated by an opposition so
much more resolute than he expected. A monk, however, published a tract,
in which he reasserted the right of the pontiff to the tribute, and
ventured to declare, that England was justly forfeit on account of the
non-payment of it; and hence he presumed to assert that the clergy were
absolved from their subjection to the English king. To controvert his
argument he challenged Wiclif by name. The reformer was not the man to
submit quietly to such a challenge. He speedily replied to it, though,
as he declared, he was not ignorant that the object of his antagonist
was to involve him in difficulties with the pope, and to obtain for
himself, and his order, the papal favour. Wiclif gives a statement of
the debate in parliament, and of the reasons there adduced against the
grant; and then, in his own name, shows that the papal claim, and the
grant on which it was founded, were dishonest, and that therefore, as
the conditions were bad, the consequences that were asserted to result
logically from them were bad also. Wiclif in this tract calls himself
the king's chaplain, and it is a proof of the eminence to which he had
attained, that he should be singled out for this encounter, unless it
arose from his prior controversy.

In 1368, before the dispute respecting the wardenship of Canterbury
Hall was determined, Wiclif exchanged the rectory of Fillingham for that
of Ludgershall, also in the diocese of Lincoln. After the award of the
pontiff was received, Woodhall remained two years before he could obtain
the king's confirmation, which was, it is said, then only procured by a
bribe of two hundred marks. But another and more important dignity was
at this time conferred upon Wiclif by the University. In 1372 he was
elected Professor of Theology, and at the same time he took the degree
of D.D. This is a most important period in his life. It is evident that
he had already attained a high position in the esteem of those who were
most competent to judge of his abilities, but it is probable that his
election to this office may have arisen from their gratitude for his
services in opposition to the growing influence and power of the monks,
and his fervid declaration against the continuous encroachment of the
pope. But if it were for these less immediately _religious_ services
that he received the appointment of professor of divinity, it is not to
be doubted but, in accordance with his repeatedly declared sentiments of
the responsibility of the ministers of religion, he would address
himself devoutly to the important duties of the office he had
undertaken. He appears, indeed, from this time to have more earnestly
and more rigorously set himself to the study of the Scriptures. In those
days the Scriptures were not unknown to the teachers of religion, as has
been sometimes asserted, but the knowledge of them does not appear to
have been general or exact. Wiclif's quotations from them were now more
frequent; his expositions of them always exhibited them as the ultimate
rule. It is probable that from this time we may date the establishment
of his main doctrinal views, and also his departure from the received
theology. It is not possible in our brief space to extract from the
works that appear to belong to this period, but we may say that, if they
have been correctly dated, he now distinctly set forth those truths
which caused him to be branded as a heretic. His lectures on the
Decalogue afford striking proofs of the clearness and vigour of his
powers, and exhibit his leading views of religion with much
distinctness. These views were very different from those generally
received, and must have excited much surprise--much enmity, and much
deep attachment. As we shall have to speak of his opinions more
hereafter, we may conveniently leave any further remarks upon them for
the present.

The papal claims occupied much of the attention of Edward III.,
especially in the latter part of his reign. An embassy had been sent to
the pope, Gregory XI., in 1373, respecting the appointment of bishops,
the reservation of benefices, and other matters in which Edward and his
parliament declared that the pontiff had largely encroached on the
ancient customs. Some partial concessions were made, but the English
king was far from being satisfied with the extent of them, and it was
resolved in 1374 to send another embassy. The name of Wiclif stands
second on the list of commissioners, the first name being that of the
Bishop of Bangor, who had been employed in the previous negotiation;
with them were united five other persons. The conference was held at
Bruges, where the papal nuncios met them. Wiclif appears to have stayed
in this city from August, 1374, till July, 1376. What results were
obtained are not exactly known. For Wiclif himself the consequences were
probably of much importance. At this time, it will be remembered, the
pope's residence was at Avignon, and the papal court had attained to a
rather bad eminence. It is not probable that, with his strong feelings
of the responsibility of the office of a minister of religion, Wiclif
would become more attached to the dignitaries of the church from the
closer intercourse he would now have with them. His visit to Bruges may
have produced as strong an impression on his mind as was wrought on that
of Luther by his journey to Rome. In fact, according to Dr. Vaughan,
"his rebukes, which had hitherto been directed toward the head of the
church but distantly and by implication, are applied in that quarter,
soon after this time, with unsparing severity."

During his absence at Bruges the king marked his satisfaction with his
conduct, by conferring on him the rectory of Lutterworth in
Leicestershire, and a prebendal stall in the collegiate church of
Westbury, in the diocese of Worcester. The principal commissioner, on
the other hand, received his reward from the pope, who translated him to
the see of Hereford, and a few years after to that of St. David's. A few
months only elapsed after the return of Wiclif, when he was summoned to
appear before a convocation to answer the charge of holding heretical
doctrines. What was the exact nature of the heresies does not appear;
they were probably not definitely stated, owing to a strange scene that
occurred. The convocation was held at St. Paul's, February 19, 1377, and
that edifice was crowded by the populace, as well as by the clergy, long
before the reformer made his appearance. When he arrived it was between
two of the most powerful nobles in the land, one the king's eldest
surviving son, the celebrated John of Gaunt, the other Lord Percy, the
Lord Marshal of England. With Gaunt Wiclif had probably become
acquainted at Bruges, for, during his stay there, the duke had visited
that city, as ambassador, to conduct some negotiations with the minister
of the French monarch; and no doubt Wiclif, from his official position,
would have some intercourse with him. The support of the duke and of
Lord Percy arose most likely from political rather than religious
motives. The dignity of these nobles scarcely sufficed to procure an
approach through the crowd to Courtney, bishop of London, who presided
on the occasion. Some slight tumult occurred in making their way, which,
being perceived by the bishop, he called out "Lord Percy, if I had known
beforehand what masteries you would have kept in the church, I would
have stopt you out from coming hither." To this rough salutation the
Duke of Lancaster replied, "He shall keep such masteries here, though
you say nay." Percy desired Wiclif "to sit down, as he had many things
to answer to, and needed to repose himself;" but the bishop declared it
to be unreasonable that one cited before his ordinary should sit, and
peremptorily affirmed that "he must and should stand." Gaunt replied
that Percy's motion was but reasonable, and continued, "As for you, my
Lord Bishop, who are grown so proud and arrogant, I will bring down the
pride not only of you, but of all the prelacy in England." The bishop
told him to "do his worst;" and after some further bickering, the duke
vowed that sooner than submit to such words he would "pluck the bishop
by the hair out of the church." The bystanders had been growing excited
by these outrageous proceedings; and now, fancying the duke would
proceed to violent acts, they rose in a body for their bishop, and the
duke and his followers were compelled to a speedy flight. The Londoners,
not content with driving the duke and his friends from the church,
assembled in a tumultuous mob and proceeded to his palace, but he had
made his escape, and they contented themselves with reversing his arms.
They then proceeded to the house of Lord Percy, which they damaged, but
they did not succeed in finding its owner: an unlucky priest, however,
whom they found, and imagined to be Percy in an assumed habit, they
hung. The mayor and aldermen were afterwards removed from their offices
for not suppressing the riot, but none of the rioters appear to have
been punished. It does not seem that Wiclif took any part in these
discreditable proceedings, nor that the mob attempted to injure him. Of
course, he would be far more obnoxious than ever to his opponents, and
from this period they appear to have pursued him with more determined
hate.

After this meeting Wiclif devoted himself to his parochial duties,
but in a few months he was summoned from them to answer new charges.
Probably some of his more inveterate enemies had forwarded to Rome
statements of his heterodox notions, for on the 22nd of May, 1377, the
pope issued four bulls against him, addressed respectively to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, and the University of
Oxford, and with these was sent a letter to the king, stating that
information had been received from creditable persons that John Wiclif,
rector of Lutterworth, and professor of theology, had been actively
engaged in propagating certain detestable and erroneous notions utterly
subversive of the church. These bulls authorise the incarceration of
Wiclif, and his examination upon the various matters stated: the results
of the examination were to be transmitted to the pope for his
determination. The charges preferred are probably nearly similar to
those that would have been brought forward at the convocation but for
the unexpected disturbances. These charges, or "conclusions" as they are
called, show that the pontiff was most moved by their appearing to
question his pre-eminence. They state that Wiclif denied the political
supremacy of the pope, and asserted that the whole race of men agreeing
had not power to ordain such supremacy--that it was beyond the power of
God himself to confer it. That he denied the efficacy alike of
benediction and of excommunication assumed by priests; that absolutions
are valueless except as they agree with the law of God; and that the
spiritual power of the ministers of religion does not differ in degree.
These bulls vary only in trifling particulars. They impress alike on all
to whom they are sent the urgent necessity of extirpating such
detestable heresies, which they liken to those of Ganduno and Marcillus,
condemned fifty years before by Pope John XXII. These men opposed the
papal see on political grounds; and it is plain from the tone of the
bulls that it was the attack on his temporal authority that disconcerted
Gregory. Before these documents could arrive Edward III. had ceased to
live, and his decease afforded Wiclif a little breathing time. The other
parties to whom they were addressed did not take any public proceedings
in connexion with them till several months had elapsed. The University
of Oxford seriously demurred at receiving the bull, and, when they had
received it, took no steps for furthering the object of it. The
Archbishop of Canterbury, however, had no such scruples; he addressed a
letter to the Chancellor of Oxford, directing him to make inquiries
respecting the errors referred to in the papal mandate, and to forward
to him the result of his investigations, with his own judgment thereon,
sealed with the University seal: he also directs him to cite Wiclif to
appear at St. Paul's to answer the charges, on the thirtieth court-day
from the 18th of December, 1377. Wiclif appeared not at St. Paul's, but
at Lambeth; but the result was not more hurtful to him than on the
previous occasion. Gaunt was no longer supreme in the court, but the
reformer had now another friend there. The Dowager-Princess of Wales,
the king's mother, at this time possessed much influence, and she used
it on this occasion on Wiclif's behalf. The Londoners, too, appear to
have been now as much opposed to the bishops as they had before been to
Wiclif's friends. They attended, and, by their clamours against the
proceedings, created much confusion; and before the tumult could be
appeased, a messenger from the princess commanded the bishops to abstain
from any decision injurious to Wiclif; they, as Walsingham indignantly
says, "became soft as oil in their speech; so were they stricken with
fear, you would think them as a man who hears not, or one in whose mouth
are no reproofs." Before this convocation was held Wiclif had circulated
an answer to the papal "conclusions;" which, somewhat altered or
corrected, he put in at his trial. These modifications, and his answers
or explanations to the "conclusions," have been declared to be "quibbles
and evasions unworthy of a sensible or of an honest man." But the proofs
adduced by the reverend historian, especially as coming from one so
learned in the theology of the schools, are strangely inadequate to
sustain so grave a charge. The explanations are undoubtedly strained,
but the conclusions are strained too, and the whole bears the appearance
of a scholastic wrangle. It would not be worth while to examine these
answers here, could we afford the space, but we must repeat that to us
they appear anything but evasive, although not consistent with our modes
of reasoning. It does not appear that Wiclif had really expressed his
opinions in anything like the form they bear in the pope's mandate; they
were "conclusions" gathered out of his writings. In judging Wiclif in
this matter it should not be forgotten either, that the only authority
for the paper ascribed to him is Walsingham, who was most unfriendly to
him, and it may be not literally exact. Wiclif concludes his paper by
assuring his judges that he is a true son of the church; that he has not
advanced any opinions without warrant from Scripture and the writings of
holy doctors, as he is ready to show; but that he is most willing to
retract whatever can be proved to be erroneous. The answers were
admitted as sufficient by the bishops, and he was dismissed with a
warning to avoid in future such questionable matters. By Wiclif the
result was considered as a triumph, and the warning disregarded. He was
immediately afterwards attacked on the subject of the papal
infallibility by an anonymous writer whom he calls a "Motley divine"
(Mixtus theologus), who appears to have been not a little startled by
Wiclif's daring, and in consequence to have thought it necessary to
reassert the authority and infallibility of the pontiff in the strongest
terms. Among other things he declared, according to Wiclif, that as the
pope could not commit mortal sin, whatever he ordained must be just. To
which Wiclif replied, that if so, he might remove any book from the
Scripture, and introduce any novelty in its place; and thus, making the
very Scripture heresy, establish heresy in its stead. From this Wiclif
advances to more direct and stronger attacks on a power so enormous and
so capable of abuse, and urges the more influential classes to cast off
so intolerable a thraldom. He attacks with equal vigour his other
positions, but the full swell of his indignation is reserved for the
impious declaration that the pope and clergy could as fully absolve from
sin as the Almighty himself. It is evident that he had now arrived at
the point when he was prepared to oppose to the utmost the papal power.

That this power would soon have been brought to bear upon him, if
Gregory had lived, is not to be doubted, but he was saved by the
breaking out of the "Great Schism of the West." Pope Gregory XI. died on
the 27th of March, 1378, and while the Italian cardinals elected and
obeyed Urban VI., those attached to the interests of France chose
Clement VII. Urban was acknowledged in England, but he had too much
employment at home to prosecute an English heretic. For the next three
years, therefore, Wiclif was left undisturbed. He spent most part of
this time at Lutterworth, diligently pursuing the course he had already
commenced.

The comparative tranquillity in which he now found himself, he left not
unimproved. He had now resolutely bent the whole of his energy against
the doctrine of the pope's infallibility, and he gladly seized the
opportunity of exhibiting the absurdity of the tenet, afforded by the
rival claimants. His 'Schism of the Popes,' which he now published, is a
keen piece of controversy, and from the circumstances must have been
very effective at the time it was produced. All reserve is now cast
aside in his attacks on the rival heads of the church, whom he contrasts
with Christ and his apostles, and assimilates to Simon Magus.

From this time it may be said that he left the consideration of the
political bearings of the papal usurpation, and directed his attention
to the religious aspect of it. Henceforth, indeed, his writings and
teaching were almost entirely religious. Very much of the confusion
respecting Wiclif's opinions at various periods, and the support they
gained for him from different parties of influence in the country, has
arisen from inattention to the ground on which he received that support.
The commencement of his career was signalized by his attacks on the
mendicant friars. At that time they were opposed, as they had long been,
as interlopers by the secular clergy, and Wiclif was hailed as a
powerful champion by them and by the University of Oxford. Their
admiration of him arose from _party_ considerations, though his dislike
to the friars rested on a far wider basis. During the greater part of
the reign of Edward III. the king and the parliament were engaged in a
determined struggle against papal encroachments. It was prolonged
through the whole of his reign and the greater part of the reign of his
successor, before it terminated successfully for the English monarch.
When so learned and able a clergyman stepped forth as an opponent of the
pope's supremacy, it is not surprising that he should be received with
welcome, and be firmly upheld by the sovereign and his advisers, so long
as he confined himself to the _political_ bearings of the subject; and
if he exceeded those limits a little, it would not in such an age be
taken much heed of. Again, when with a more earnest zeal he set his face
against the corruptions of the clergy of all ranks--when he denounced as
hirelings such as sought after "filthy lucre" and neglected the
spiritual advancement of their charges, and pronounced them the most
desperate of sinners, backed as his animadversions were by the purity
and even austerity of his own life--he would be sure to obtain the
suffrages of serious men of all classes, who would bitterly regret the
contradiction between the lives and the profession of such priests. Nor
is this an imaginary sketch. It appears to have been exactly the course
of events in his life and teaching. His doctrinal views were either not
propagated, or they did not attract much attention till the latter part
of his life. Then a devoted band rallied round him, and, when those who
had used him for temporary purposes had cast him off, they clung to him
with an ever growing intensity of affection.

Nothing is more manifest in tracing his opinions than the increasing
attention he gave to the Scriptures. In his last years they were the
test to which he brought every doctrine, almost every opinion, or matter
of practice. As his regard for the Scriptures increased, his anxiety to
impart a knowledge of them to others increased also. At this time, of
course, the version used in the church was the Latin Vulgate. There had
been at various times portions of the Old and New Testament translated
into the Saxon and English languages, but no complete translation had,
it is probable, been made. Wiclif resolved to enable his countrymen to
read the Word of God in their own tongue--a noble resolution nobly
performed. Aided no doubt by some of the learned disciples who now
surrounded him, he diligently commenced his undertaking, and in due time
completed it. Before the invention of printing the publication of a book
was a very different matter to what it now is. The only mode of making
known the contents of a work then was by transcribing and circulating
many copies, and this was the way in which Wiclif published his Bible.
That it was diligently circulated there can be no question--from the
number of copies of it remaining; and from the certainty that he would
be anxious to diffuse as widely as possible the authority to which he so
constantly appealed, and on the acknowledgment of which the acceptance
of his views depended.[22]

Wiclif's version was not made from the original Greek, but from the
Vulgate, of which it is a faithful representation. The language is firm
and nervous, and was no doubt perfectly intelligible at the time it was
written. But nearly five centuries have passed since then, and many
changes have taken place in our English. There is however, even now,
little difficulty in understanding it, if the uncouth spelling be
disregarded, and it is read with the pronunciation of the northern
counties, as we have ascertained in several trials with different
listeners. The New Testament has been three times printed: by the Rev.
J. Lewis, the author of his Life, in 1731; by the Rev. H. H. Baber, in
1810; and again, and more carefully, in Bagster's 'Hexapla,' 1841. This
last work contains the six principal English translations from that of
Wiclif to the Authorized Version; and it is interesting to trace the
influence of Wiclif's on all the succeeding versions. Most who examine
them in this work, as they stand side by side, will agree with Professor
Blunt, that "on comparing it with the authorized version of King James,
it will be found that the latter was hammered on Wiclif's anvil."
Besides its vast importance in a higher point of view, there can be no
doubt that Wiclif's translation of the Scriptures did very much to fix
our language. Except Mandeville's 'Travels,' it was the first English
prose work of any importance. Wiclif's Old Testament has never been
printed--it has been spoken of for some years as in preparation for
printing at the Clarendon Press.

But the translation and publication of the Scriptures was not the only
object that occupied his thoughts. Among the plans he had devised for
spreading abroad his views of truth, was the formation of a band of what
he termed his "poor priests." Wiclif had assumed a plain coarse garb,
and they were clad like him. Their duty was to go about instructing the
poor in the truths of the Gospel. They were to be unencumbered by
worldly goods themselves, and they were not to acquire wealth for their
order. They had no benefices, and the reasons for it he explained in a
tract he promulgated, entitled 'Why poor priests have no benefices.' His
principal reasons are--1. The fear of simony. 2. The danger of
misspending the money of the poor. 3. The hope of doing more good by
moving from place to place. Allowing for the difference of the times,
they bear a strong resemblance to John Wesley's original "preachers;"
and they were as effective. Wiclif was untiring in his labours; the
amount of tracts he wrote is surprising, even allowing that he was much
assisted in preparing them. His position and employment at this time
were very similar to Luther's the years preceding his death. His pen was
ever employed, and ever ready for fresh employment. But, important as
were his own labours, it is probable that his poor priests did even more
to diffuse his doctrines; and how widely they were diffused may be
guessed from Knighton's angry assertion--taken as it may and ought to be
with considerable abatement--that "his followers so increased that they
everywhere filled the compass of the kingdom; insomuch that a man could
not meet two people on the road, but one of them was a disciple of
Wiclif." This, he affirms, arose from "the respect they always pretended
for what they call 'Goddis Law,' to which they profess themselves to be
in their opinions and actions strictly conformable."

While thus zealously employed in furthering the great purpose to which
he had devoted himself, his life was an example of what he upheld as the
character of a true priest. His conduct was unblameable, his attention
to his pastoral duties unremitting. Three hundred of his sermons are
said to be still remaining, and they fully prove his energy, fervour,
and devotion--_he_ was no idle, careless priest. Like Milton--who in
many respects greatly resembled him--he believed that he who attempts a
great work must live a life worthy of his undertaking; and the whole of
his own conduct, and the judgment he formed of others, were moulded by
his exalted notion of the dignity of the priestly office.[23]

So long as Wiclif confined himself, in his attacks on the popes and
their agents, to their political claims or their immoral conduct, he met
with the support of the secular authorities; and also of the people,
whose dislike of the papal supremacy was a national far more than a
religious feeling. They could not endure that an Italian or a French
priest should domineer over their country and their king, and they
little liked that his representatives, though Englishmen, should usurp
such power. They would not have a priest to rule over them. When Wiclif
preached against the doctrinal errors of the popes, he was regarded with
suspicion by those who had before most strenuously supported him, and
soon indeed encountered from them strong opposition. In 1381 he
published at Oxford his twelve "conclusions," in which he appears for
the first time to have questioned the doctrine of transubstantiation.
His view of it much resembled that of Luther, and which is still that of
the Lutheran church. The Chancellor of Oxford immediately summoned a
meeting of twelve doctors, who condemned the "conclusions" as heterodox,
and adjudged that all who should teach them in the University should be
placed under the ban of the greater excommunication, suspended from all
their offices and privileges, and imprisoned--and, that the chance of
such errors spreading might be at once cut off, they condemned those who
listened to them to a similar punishment. Wiclif was lecturing in the
school of the Augustinians when their sentence was communicated to him.
He appealed from them to the civil magistrate. Until the parliament, to
which the matter was now referred, should meet, which was not till the
next year, it is probable that Wiclif abstained from teaching his views
at the University, but he developed them more clearly and fully in some
tracts which he now published: one of them, entitled the 'Wicket,' has
been three or four times printed, and is a powerful piece of
controversial writing.

The year 1381 was signalized by the revolt of the commons under Wat
Tyler, and many of Wiclif's enemies have with small success endeavoured
to connect his name with that affair. It arose from causes sufficiently
known to all acquainted with our history, and Wiclif is as little
responsible for it, as Luther for the famous rise of the peasants after
the publication of his doctrines. In May, 1382, Courtney, now Archbishop
of Canterbury, summoned a council to consider the doctrines attributed
to Wiclif. Eight bishops and fourteen doctors, with other learned
persons, met on the 17th of May, at Grey Friars in London. The
proceedings had scarcely commenced when the place in which they were
assembled was shaken by an earthquake, to the great alarm of the
doctors, who were disposed to attribute it to the Divine displeasure--an
opinion in which Wiclif coincided. The archbishop, however, explained it
differently, and the doctors, reassured, proceeded with their
deliberations.[24] After three days' careful consideration they
pronounced ten of the "conclusions" to be heretical, and the remaining
fourteen to be erroneous. The heretical notions being those on the
eucharist, his denial of the need of priestly absolution, his
declaration that clerical endowments were unlawful, and his condemnation
of the papal infallibility. Everything was done that appeared likely to
impart force and solemnity to this decision. After an imposing
procession through London, a friar was appointed to explain to the
people from St. Paul's the enormity of the heresy. Copies of the
sentence were forwarded to the leading bishops; and even to the clergy
about Lutterworth. Messengers were dispatched to the king, and to the
University of Oxford. Wiclif again appealed to the secular power. This
appeal has been complained of as opposed to his principles: after all,
it has been said, "the new apostle was in no haste to grasp the crown of
martyrdom."[25] But Wiclif did not depart from his own principles. He
held and taught that the secular power ought to preserve the lives and
liberties of the subjects, and it does not seem that he asked the
parliament to affirm the truth of his doctrines. The archbishop called
on the king to put down by force the growing heresy; and the monarch
readily answered the call, by issuing a writ to the Chancellor of
Oxford, directing him to search out such as were suspected of holding
these opinions, and to seize and imprison any who harboured Wiclif or
his followers. In his appeal to the parliament Wiclif had somewhat more
success. The king, at the instigation of the bishop, had promulgated an
ordinance in the form of an act of parliament, directing all sheriffs,
&c. to arrest any persons found preaching any of the doctrines condemned
at the convocation; but on the meeting of parliament this ordinance was
declared to be illegal, the parliament itself having had no share in
framing it--and they would not, they said, subject themselves to the
jurisdiction of the prelates in a manner unknown to their fathers. It
was, in fact, a bold attempt of the bishop to introduce something very
like the Holy Office into England.

But Wiclif's success ended here. He was now left to sustain the unequal
conflict alone. His principal supporters at Oxford had been summoned
before a synod to answer for their own delinquencies, and had been
compelled to retract or explain away their obnoxious sentiments. John of
Gaunt no longer stood by him. Perhaps sincerely shocked at his venturing
to question so sacred a doctrine as transubstantiation was then
generally believed to be, he earnestly recommended Wiclif to submit to
his diocesan--and left him to his fate. Wiclif was soon summoned to
appear before a convocation at Oxford, at which the archbishop presided,
and several bishops were present. He delivered in two statements of his
sentiments on the eucharist; one in Latin, the other in English. The
former is declared to be unintelligible--it is fenced about with all the
forms of scholastic dialectics, and may be passed by; the other, as it
is in English, was probably meant for the unlearned, and is plain and
perfectly comprehensible. It is evident that his matured and deliberate
views were the same as we have already stated them to be. His bearing
before the assembly was firm and manly--his enemies say haughty and
obstinate. He did not retract. The result was that his opinions were
again condemned, and himself deprived of his professorship of divinity,
and banished from the University.

He was not further molested,--at least for the next two years. This
interval was busily employed. A host of opponents sprung up against him
after the adjudication at Oxford, and he was not of a temper to let them
pass unanswered. His intense energy was little impaired by age or
anxiety, and his opponents still found him a ready antagonist. Bowed
down by persecution, his life by illness made a living death, he wavered
not, nor ceased from his labours. During his last years Wiclif suffered
much from paralysis--the effect, no doubt, of his anxious and stormy
life. His first attack was in 1379. Perhaps the knowledge of his weak
state prevented his enemies from pressing for the infliction of physical
punishment. But a few months before his death he was cited by Urban II.
to appear before him at Rome, to answer for his heresies. Wiclif was
unable from illness to go, but he addressed a letter to his holiness in
which he "tells his belief." The main points of it are his declaration
of his entire dependence on Christ as the Son of God, and of his
assurance of the supreme authority of Scripture. He acknowledges the
pope to be Christ's chief vicar on earth--but adds, that he ought to
follow the example of his master, who was the poorest of men when in
this world. "This I take as wholesome counsel that the pope leave his
worldly lordship to worldly lords, as Christ gave (charged) him, and
move speedily all his clerks (clergy) to do so: for thus did Christ, and
taught thus his disciples, till the fiend had blinded this world." He
declares that if he were able he would go to the pope; but as he cannot,
he supposes the pope will not show himself open anti-Christ by
commanding him again to do that which God had rendered him unable to do.
If his opinions can be prayed to be wrong, he is ready to recant; if it
be necessary to die for them, he is willing, "for that I hope were good
for me."

As he was assisting at the celebration of mass by his curate in his
parish church of Lutterworth, on the 29th of December, 1384, another and
more fatal stroke of paralysis deprived him of the use of speech and of
motion. He lingered two days, when his spirit ascended to that world
where misapprehension and strife are alike unknown. His corpse was
buried in the church; and there it rested, till forty years afterwards
the Council of Constance, at the same time that it crowned itself with
eternal infamy by its treacherous murder of John Huss and of Jerome,
condemned Wiclif's doctrines, and directed that his corpse should be
exhumed and burnt, "if it could be discerned from those of the
faithful." The order was obeyed. Richard Fleming, bishop of Lincoln, in
whose diocese Lutterworth was situated, directed the process. The
reformer's remains were taken up, burnt, and the ashes cast into the
Swift, a little stream that runs at the foot of the hill on which the
town is built. "Thus this brook," says Fuller, "hath conveyed his ashes
into Avon, Avon into Severn, Severn into the narrow seas, they into the
main ocean. And thus the ashes of Wiclif are the emblem of his doctrine,
which now is dispersed all the world over."

We have endeavoured, as far as our limits would allow us, to exhibit
Wiclif according to his own principles. It remains for us to add a few
words on his sentiments, and express our own impression of his
character. His opinions have been the subject of much disputation, and
it is often said that they are so enwrapped in explanations and
mystifications, that it is difficult to make out what they really were.
But to one desirous to understand them, the difficulty soon disappears.
The contemporary notices of him do not imply that there was any
obscurity: the charges brought against him; his own defences; the
references his followers make to him, do not suggest it. That his
opinions will appear contradictory to one who extracts from his
different writings, without regard to the circumstances and the time in
which each was written, there can be no doubt; but if it be borne in
mind that his creed, like that of every reformer, and especially of
every religious reformer, was progressive--that his opinions were slowly
formed, often forced upon his conviction after a long struggle against
them--so that he would more than any other lament the necessity imposed
upon him to admit, and especially to diffuse them,--if this gradual
formation of his creed be remembered, the difficulty of reconciling the
articles of it with the statements and reasonings to be found in others
of his writings, will not surprise any candid inquirer, whether he admit
the truth of the opinions or not. To us it appears he might truly be
called the first Protestant--the first who boldly and firmly protested
against the papal domination, both in relation to society and to
individual man. His doctrinal views were in the main those afterwards
adopted by Luther and the reformed churches--in others, he went far
beyond them, verging closely upon Puritanism; while to the last he held
many things now only retained by the Romish church.

His moral character was unimpeached. His sincerity has been questioned,
but to us it seems to stand firm and unshaken. His faults, however, are
manifest. Living up to the lofty character he set before him, he stooped
not to one who was unable to attain to the same elevation. A fierce
polemic, he is unmeasured in the expression of his wrath against all
whom he opposed. But we must not let our dislike of such violence lead
us too far. A wise man has told us "not to condemn bitter and earnest
writing." In truth, a man cannot beat down idols with a feather broom:
and Wiclif's task was not merely to sweep the dust off those about the
holy place. After all, Wiclif was abundantly repaid in his own coin. For
every handful of mud he flung, a cart-load was thrown back upon him. Let
him not be condemned for a fault common to every one who has undertaken
so apparently hopeless a task as the destruction of a mighty system of
evil. It is a fault that seems to spring out of the vehemence of temper
natural and almost necessary to the character of a reformer. The
vehemence of his language in some instances, and its cautiousness at
other times, appear to have arisen from the fact that, _seeing_ palpably
the evil practices of the religious orders about him, and the
consequences that resulted from them, he attacked them with an
overflowing asperity--while in matters of _doctrine_ he formed his
opinions deliberately, was conscious of all the difficulties of the
question, and spoke cautiously, moderately, and with an honest desire
not to obtrude extreme opinions. This, at least, appears to us the true
explanation.

We regard Wiclif as one of the noblest of our Worthies; and as long as
true manly earnestness and Christian worth are honoured by his
countrymen, his name will live in their remembrance, and be cherished
with devout gratitude, A true, honest, noble-hearted man, he recognised
the divinity within him, and followed its bidding--through evil and
through good report. With him worldly honours were nought; the fear of
man he knew not; he had a work to accomplish, and he turned not aside
from it. As long as he had a hand or a tongue to labour with, he ceased
not to labour. Wiclif was the pioneer in the great struggle to release
man from spiritual thraldom. He stood forth and proclaimed the forgotten
truth, that the soul of man is responsible alone to its Creator; that no
man can stand between his fellowman and his Divine Master. The welcome
with which his doctrine was met showed that the hollowness of the ground
upon which men stood was felt. He died, but his work survived him. In
this country a goodly band remained, and carried on what he had begun;
and when they were silenced, his opinions were cherished in private,
till on the introduction of the reformed doctrines they were lost in the
broader stream. It is probable, indeed, that these secret dissentients
within the English church largely contributed to the easy introduction
of the reformed opinions here. On the Continent, too, his views found a
home and a welcome. Carried into Bohemia immediately after his death,
they there spread widely; nor did the martyrdom of John Huss stop their
progress. The result was their accomplishment in the great Reformation.

The number of writings attributed to Wiclif, from tracts of a page up to
large and elaborate works, which remain in MS. scattered through public
libraries, is very great. Few of them have been printed, and it is not
creditable to our literature that while the various societies
established for the republication of the works of our earlier writers
are loading their shelves with much worthless rubbish, only one work
attributed to Wiclif (and that not known to be his) should have been
printed. The Religious Tract Society, a few years back, published a
volume of selections from his writings; but the language is modernized
with very little judgment, and the work is of course of no value.

The authorities we have consulted for this sketch are Wiclif's own
writings, so far as accessible to us; Walsingham, Knighton, and Wilkins;
the Lives by Lewis and Vaughan; the Introduction to the 'Hexapla;' the
various ecclesiastical histories; and the papers and prefaces by Dr.
Todd.




CHAUCER


Two undertakings of more than ordinary importance mark the second half
of the fourteenth century, and suggest on various grounds an interesting
and useful parallel. Pursuing one of these undertakings, the chief actor
in it collected vast sums of treasure by the taxation of the people of
England, drew from the peaceful and profitable avocations of industry
the materials for army after army of English citizens, and poured them
upon the soil of a neighbouring country, which he was determined at all
costs to conquer. To found for England a new empire on the Continent,
was the undertaking on which the brave, able, accomplished, but grasping
and unscrupulous Edward III. concentrated the energies of a life. About
the very same time that Edward began in earnest to prosecute this
undertaking, there was a youth, buried in the seclusion of study, not
less actively engaged in the promotion of another undertaking; that--too
gigantic in its character probably to be determined upon, or even
rightly estimated then--was doubtless dawning little by little upon his
mind. For this undertaking, he too drew supplies from all quarters, but
his levies were of books, his treasure the accumulated stores of thought
that time had bequeathed to the world. And when he had mastered all that
could thus be obtained, he went forth into the world to study men, as
well as man, before he attempted the conquest of the empire _he_
meditated, over the hearts and minds of his fellows. And how fared these
respective undertakings? Failures of course affected the ambitious
student as well as the ambitious warrior, but we have not in the one
case, as in the other, a record of them; let us therefore look simply at
the successes of both, and the results. The battle of Creci, the first
great encounter between the two nations, was won in 1346, and in the
same year the first important poem of the first great English poet is
understood to have been produced. Ten years later, Creci had been
followed by Poitiers; the 'Court of Love,' by the noble 'Troilus and
Cressida;' and by an announcement contained in the concluding lines of
that work, which showed the poet had essayed and was satisfied as to his
powers, and was preparing to give to England a work that should rival
the divine comedy of the illustrious Italian (Dante) lately deceased.
"Go, little book," wrote the poet--

               "go, little tragedy,
    Where God my maker, yet ere that I die.
    So send me might to make some comedy."

Sixteen or seventeen years more elapse, and the iron-willed sovereign
bends beneath a fiat even more potent than his own, and in deep
humiliation feels that he is utterly defeated; about the same time the
poet is receiving from the lips of an illustrious contemporary an
addition to the materials for the work that is to form the culminating
point of his life and fame, the last of a long series of productions
destined to be as permanent as the language itself which they have done
so much to create, the 'Comedy,' in short, of which he has so long
dreamed;--he is hearing from Petrarch the exquisitely pathetic story of
Griselda. Edward dies in 1377, a broken-hearted man; deserted, even on
his palace-hearth, at the last hour, by those he had fed and clothed and
honoured; he who would have conquered France cannot even now command the
presence of a single lackey: when Chaucer dies, it is amidst the
profound regrets of all who knew him personally or through his works;
and as he goes "home" and takes his "wages," it is with the conviction
that he has indeed done his "worldly task," in the foundation of what,
all things considered, it is no national vanity to call the mightiest of
Literatures. The parallel we have thus ventured to draw does not even
end here. Whilst we still drink refreshing draughts from Chaucer's "well
of English undefiled," and wonder to see how little of essentially
differing qualities his greatest successors have infused into the
national literature, the only effect, if there be any one now
perceptible, of Edward's unjust attempt, or of his brilliant victories,
is in the unhappy jealousy which these and similar events have left in
the minds of the people who most suffered from them. Truly if the sword
in its day is honoured at the expense of the pen, the pen in the long
run repays itself with sweeping interest. We have said nothing in these
remarks of the connexion between the two personages whose respective
undertakings we have placed in juxtaposition with each other, but that
connexion is not the least interesting or least important portion of the
biography of either: we do not know whether Edward intentionally
forwarded Chaucer's poetical undertakings, but it is clear that by his
patronage they _were_ forwarded--and greatly; whilst Chaucer, on the
other hand, was one of the most trusted and valued of the king's
servants; promoting Edward's views by his personal services in the field
as a soldier, and still more influentially by his experience and wisdom
in the cabinet as a diplomatist.

It is a curious though a very common characteristic of certain
biographers, in dealing with cases where information is as desirable as
it is meagre, to make the little less, by throwing all sorts of doubts
upon the facts that we thought had been settled and realized. They have,
in short, a horror of all speculations but those which may tend to
disturb existing beliefs. Unable to build themselves, they would deny to
others the use of the necessary foundations. Why, for instance, must
there be a doubt excited as to the date of Chaucer's birth? Most of the
old writers say it took place in the second year of the reign of Edward
III., 1328, and their statement is supported by a host of indirect
evidences, which show that it must have been about the time they
mention. But it is urged, that when Chaucer, in 1386, gave his
deposition in the controversy between Lord Scrope and Sir Robert
Grosvenor relative to the right of using a certain coat-of-arms (an
important part of Chaucer's biography, to which we shall subsequently
refer), he described himself "of the age of forty and upwards," and as
having borne arms for twenty-seven years. Do the doubters therefore
abide by their own necessary inference that he was born in 1345, and
became a soldier at the ripe age of thirteen? Not a whit; they
acknowledge that such a date cannot be correct; it has even been pointed
out that other persons who were examined at the same time are known to
have been from ten to twenty years older than the depositions make them.
Whatever, therefore, the explanation of the phrase "forty and upwards,"
it is clear that it is not to be received in contradiction of the date
that makes the poet to have been in his fifty-fifth year. Yet the doubt
is raised just the same! So again as to the place of Chaucer's birth. In
his prose work, the 'Testament of Love,' where the poet is as evidently
and avowedly referring to himself as poet well can, he speaks of the
City of London that is "to me so dear and sweet, in which I was forth
grown; and more kindly love have I to that place, than to any other in
earth; as every kindly creature hath full appetite to that place of his
kindly engendure, and to wiln [wish] rest and peace in that stead
[place] to abide." But then as some biographers have mistaken various
other passages in that work, this passage also is to be doubted, nay,
the whole production laid aside as one that cannot be relied on. It is
true, that for a comprehensive and trustworthy Life of Chaucer greater
care must be shown in the use of the somewhat perplexing materials that
wait the biographer's disposal than ever yet has been shown, but it is
not by a system of wholesale negation that the work will be
accomplished. Nothing can come of nothing, and, trite as the observation
may be, there are some few for whom it still seems requisite to be
asserted. Not simply useless, but mischievous, is that kind of biography
which delights to reduce what at all events looks like flesh and blood
to a pure skeleton, and has no objection to take away even a bone or two
from that.

Chaucer then was born in 1328, in London; and there doubtless he spent
his earliest years, until, as he says, he was "forth-grown." Of his
parents we know nothing direct. A long list of persons has been
collected, who during the period in question bore the name of Chaucer,
which was derived from the old Norman word Chaucier or Chaussier,
signifying a shoemaker; and used in that sense during the poet's life by
Richard of Hampole, a hermit, who translated the Gospel of St. Mark, and
died in 1394. The passage, "There cometh one mightier than I after me,
the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose,"
is thus rendered by Richard: "A stalworthier man than I shall come after
me, of whom I am not worthy, downfalling or kneeling, to loose the thong
of his chawcers." But that the poet's parents were certainly persons of
wealth, probably also of consideration, may be assumed from the
excellence of the education given to their son, and from the ready
access which he found, on entering into public life, to the very person
and favour of the sovereign. Chaucer, in a word, was born a gentleman;
and the fact is of importance, not only for the incalculable benefit
that it involved through the instrumentality of that education, but as
showing us still more plainly than otherwise could have been shown the
true nobility of the poet's mind. It is Chaucer who tells us, in the
'Wife of Bath's' tale, that he who ever intendeth to perform all kinds
of gentle deeds is the greatest gentleman, and that he who will perform
none of them--

    "He is not gentle, be he duke or earl;"

and that the poet here speaks his own sentiments, while relating the
sentiments of the knight's apparently aged and hideous bride, is clear
from his ballad on the same subject, where it is inculcated that unless
a man love virtue and fly vice,

    "He is not gentle, though he riche seem,
     All wear he mitre, crown, or diademe."

Where Chaucer was educated is uncertain; but the assertions of the older
biographers that he was both at Cambridge and Oxford, and that he
subsequently went to Paris, then the most famous and flourishing of all
the European universities, is supported by the known facts in the lives
of other eminent men, who became, like him, distinguished by their
scholastic attainments. Grostete, Roger Bacon, and Michael Scott, all
pursued the exact route ascribed to Chaucer. The poet is supposed to
refer to himself under the designation of "Philogenet of Cambridge,
clerk," in the 'Court of Love,' and the indications of a correct
knowledge of the locality exhibited in the Reve's Tale are referred to
as an additional corroboration of his residence in the neighbourhood.
Even the very college is named--Clare Hall--at which he studied, and
where he may have written his earlier poems, including the 'Court of
Love.' Clare Hall, Speght says, is the same with that mentioned in the
Reve's Tale, under the denomination of the Soleres or Scholars'. It is
to be hoped the licentious freaks of the scholars, as described in that
tale, are not to be received as characteristic of the order at the
period that Chaucer was a member.

Two of Chaucer's most intimate friends appear to have been the "moral
Gower" and the "philosophical Strode," whose names he has thus embalmed
in his verse; and both were members of the University of Oxford at the
time that all three must have been engaged in the business of mental
culture. To them he dedicated his 'Troilus and Cressida;' and the poem
itself, which is said to have been written at Oxford, may have been
composed while in the daily enjoyment of their society. But whether it
was Oxford, or some other place, that the poet left at the termination
of his English academical studies, we may rest assured that Leland was
essentially correct in his general statement when he wrote, "At the
period of his leaving Oxford, he was already an acute dialectician, a
persuasive orator, an eloquent poet, a grave philosopher, an able
mathematician, and an accomplished divine. These no doubt are lofty
appellations; but whoever shall examine his works with a curious eye,
will admit that I have sufficient ground for my panegyric." But the
touches of the "finishing school," it appears, from the same authority,
were still requisite, and were obtained. Chaucer went to Paris, where
"he imbibed all the beauties, elegance, charms, wit, and grace of the
French tongue, to a degree that is scarcely credible." And thus
accomplished, and possessing a handsome person, which must have been
trained and developed into strength and activity by martial exercises,
the young poet returned to England, and prepared to enter into the
ordinary business of life, from which alone, it is probable, he
thenceforward derived his chief or entire support. At first he entered
into the study of the law, and became a member of the Inner Temple; but
the only result was, an affair in which he became subject to the law,
instead of an expounder of it. Some friar having offended the poet in
Fleet Street, he is said to have given him a beating, and to have been
fined five shillings for the offence. But it was not in the time of the
Third Edward that a young ambitious man, in the possession of all that
nature could possibly confer upon her greatest favourites--whether of
personal or mental advantages, and whose acquisitions were as remarkable
as his endowments,--it was not then such a man could shut himself up in
the dusty solitudes of the Temple chambers, and pore over legal
treatises from morn to noon--from noon to dewy eve. It was not the moths
of fashion that the dazzling radiance of the court of King Edward
attracted, but England's bravest and ablest men, her noblest and most
virtuous women, whose beauty, however conspicuous, formed the least of
their qualifications. It was with such as these that the palace halls of
Windsor were thronged. To mention but two names, each sufficient to
immortalize any court--there were then among the brilliant groups that
surrounded Edward, his queen Philippa, the saviour of the illustrious
citizens of Calais, and the Countess of Salisbury, the heroine of
Froissart's charming narration, who not only resisted the king's
unlawful love, but so purified the heart of the lover, that when the
well-known accident happened at a ball, he founded the order of the
Garter in her eternal honour: an act, all things considered, unequalled
for its combination of chivalrous, poetical, and lover-like feeling.

It was among such personages the young poet desired to be, and his
wishes were speedily gratified. And it is evident that he was at least
as much admired as he could admire, notwithstanding his modest and
retiring, if not even reserved habits. A pleasant tradition tells us
that the Countess of Pembroke, the king's daughter, one of his
patronesses, told him his silence created more mirth than his
conversation; for he was very bashful and reserved in company,
notwithstanding that life and spirit which appeared in his writings. But
Chaucer had no desire to play the courtier--and he was understood. More
than one of his poems are believed to have originated in conversations
between the poet and the noble women who honoured themselves and him by
taking an interest in his career. Thus, to appease them generally, when
they professed to be offended by the strictures contained in some of his
writings, he produced, at the command of Queen Philippa, 'The Legend of
Good Women,' which, it has been pointedly observed, should rather be
called 'The Legend of Bad Men.' Lydgate says--

    "The poet wrote, at the request of the queen,
       A Legende of perfect holiness;
     Of good women to finde out nineteen
       That did excel in bounty and faireness;"

and the sly monk adds, for all his labour he found it impossible

    "In all this world to find so great a number."

How the poet obtained admittance to the court we know not. In the
absence of any facts tending to show that he was by birth entitled to
expect as a matter of course the remarkable favour that was accorded to
him, we do not see why we may not fall back upon the agreeable
hypothesis that it was not social rank (though he had as much of it as
was indispensable), but intellectual merit that really introduced him
there. At all events such a supposition is supported in a remarkable
manner by the known nature of his connexion with the man who, next to
Edward and his son the Black Prince, occupied in his time the largest
share of the attention of the people of England: we refer to John of
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, the fourth son of Edward, and of course,
therefore, the brother of the prince just named.

Among the poems of Chaucer there are three which have been looked upon,
and no doubt correctly, as illustrating the personal history of the duke
as a lover and a husband. In the first of these, 'The Complaint of the
Black Knight,' the poet, in a charming passage, describes himself as
walking forth on a May morning, and meeting in an arbour the Black
Knight, who is bewailing the cruelty of his mistress. It is worthy of
observation, that the poem shows how much better the poet felt what did
concern him, the beauty of the time and season, than what did not touch
very deeply his sympathies, the love-distresses of his friend and patron
John of Gaunt. The second work of the series, 'Chaucer's Dream,' shows
that the lady's obduracy was, as usual, more apparent than real. The
royal lover has married the lady of his heart, Blanche, daughter of the
Duke of Lancaster. The third poem, the 'Book of the Duchess,' records
the premature death of Blanche in 1369, and the profound grief of her
husband. The historical facts relating to John of Gaunt, "time-honoured
Lancaster," harmonize so completely with the poetical ones contained in
this trio of poems, that there can be no reasonable doubt as to the
scope and origin of the latter. And this conviction is of greater value
than may be at first apparent. The 'Complaint of the Black Knight,'
referring to the duke's courtship, and 'Chaucer's Dream,' referring to
the duke's marriage, must have been written--the one a little before and
the other a little after that marriage, which took place at Reading, in
May, 1359, and was solemnized with great splendour. Knowing then the
period and the circumstances of the production of these poems, we shall
find, on looking at the one named 'Chaucer's Dream,' that we also know
the essential history of the poet's own courtship and marriage. In the
other two poems he is thinking chiefly of his friend and patron; in this
one he makes all turn toward the expression of his own heartfelt wishes.
In the 'Dream' he imagines himself in a lodge, beside a well in the
forest, reposing after the fatigues of a hunt. The difficulties
attending the courtship of the duke and duchess are then shadowed forth
by an account of their death, and revival, ending in their union. Then
follows a long and highly important passage, evidently, up to a certain
point, narrating facts. After the marriage was determined upon, the
royal lovers sent out messengers in all directions

    "To kinges, queenes, and duchesses,
     To divers princes, and princesses,"

inviting them to be present at the solemnity. Then, says the poet, they
ordered that certain knights and squires and officers--

    "In manner of an embassade,
     With certain letters clos'd and made,
     Should take the barge and depart,
     And seek _my lady_ every part
     Till they her found."

The duke and duchess[26] (Blanche) tell them to charge her to be there
at the day; again and again Blanche desires to be commended to her, and
she is to be told that, unless she come, all will be wasted,

    "And the feast but a business,
     Withouten joy or lustiness."

The embassy departs, and, after fourteen days, returns with the object
of their search in the barge. The duchess, in her delight, cannot wait
for her arrival at the court, but, says the poet, she met my lady on the
sand, and clasped her in her arms. And for twelve hours after they
parted not, but wandered alone, talking of their joys and troubles, with
the pleasure natural to their young and tender years. And when night
came, they still remained together. On the morrow the prince of lords

    "Came, and unto my lady said
     Of her coming glad, and well apaid[27]
     He was, and full right cunningly
     Her thanked, and full heartily,
     And laugh'd and smil'd, and said, 'Ywis
     That[28] was in doubt, in safety is.'"

The marriage takes place, and then, continues the poet,

    "The prince, the queen,[29] and all the rest
     Unto my lady made request
     And her besought often, and pray'd
     To me-wards to be well apaid
     And consider mine olde truth,
     And on my paines haven ruth,
     And me accept to her service
     In suche form and in such wise
     That we both mighten be as one;
     Thus pray'd the queen and every one,
     And, for there should ne be no Nay,
     They stinten jousting all a day
     To pray my lady, and requere
     To be content and out of fear,
     And with good heart make friendly cheer,
     And said it was a happy year;
     At which she smiled, and said 'Ywis
     I trow well he my servant is,
     And would _my_ welfare, as I trist,[30]
     So would I _his_; and would he wist
     How; and I knewe that his truth
     Continue would, withouten sloth,
     And be such as ye here report.
     Restraining both courage and sport,
     I could consent at your request
     To be ynamed of your feast,
     And doen after your usance
     In obeying of your pleaesance.
     At your request this I consent,
     To pleasen you in your intent:
     _And eke the sovereign above,
     Commanded hath me for to love,
     And before others him prefer_;
     Against which prince may be no wer;[31]
     For his power o'er all reigneth,
     That other would for nought him paineth;
     And sith his will and yours is one,
     Contrary in me shall be none.'"

Here we have passed the boundaries of fact. That the lady had not yet
said what the poet so delicately tells her she should say, much less
that the marriage had taken place amidst all the ceremonies and gladness
and splendour that he next so picturesquely describes, the poet
presently proceeds to tell us. The sounds

    "Round about, and in all the tents,
     With thousandes of instruments,"

trouble him in his sleep; he wakes, and finds no lady, alas! And now
the mask, assumed for the moment, is dropped; he avows his prayer that
his lady will accept of his service in such a manner that the substance
of his dream may prove true, or that he may return into the same
pleasant isle of fancy. And then, in direct appeal to her for grace
(under the title of L'Envoy), he concludes the poem.

If we need any other evidence of the correctness of the idea that this
poem records the poet's own feelings and position, and the position of
the lady loved by him, we have only to inquire who it was that is known
to have inspired such sentiments in his breast. She was the daughter of
Sir Payne Roet, Guienne, king-of-arms, who is supposed to have come over
from Hainault with Queen Philippa, after whom she may have been named,
and in whose service she remained up to the day of the queen's death.
This lady therefore was a member, and, as we know, a highly favoured
one, of the household of the wife of John of Gaunt's brother. But the
connexion may be traced still closer. Philippa Roet's sister Katherine,
widow of Sir Hugh Swynford, was in the household of the duchess Blanche
herself, the queen of Chaucer's dream, and it was that Katherine whom
the great duke, later in life, married.

And what did the lady say, on the receipt of this poem, so exquisitely
contrived and carried out? We know not, but may guess from subsequent
circumstances that it was not very unfavourable. Suddenly, however, the
sound of war rouses the lovers from all such dreamy delights. Edward,
like a losing gamester, growing only the more desperate, is fitting out
a new army for the conquest of France. The poet must accompany him. It
is Chaucer's first military expedition. We must for a while forget the
poet in the soldier.

Our knowledge of this important incident in the poet's career is derived
from the deposition before mentioned, and forms the chief value of that
document. Though delivered, therefore, many years subsequent to the
period in question, we may here fitly transcribe it. Chaucer, among a
host of other witnesses, was called by Richard, Lord Scrope, to bear
testimony to his right to certain arms, in opposition to a similar claim
on the part of Sir Robert Grosvenor.

"Geoffrey Chaucer, Esquire, of the age of forty and upwards, armed for
twenty-seven years, produced on behalf of Sir Richard Scrope, sworn and
examined: Asked, whether the arms 'Azure, a bend Or' belonged or ought
to belong to the said Sir Richard? Said yes, for he saw him so armed in
France, before the town of Retters [apparently the village of Retiers,
near Rennes, in Brittany], and Sir Henry Scrope armed in the same arms
with a white label, and with a banner; and the said Sir Richard armed in
the entire arms 'Azure, with a bend Or,' and so he had seen him armed
during the whole expedition, until the said Geoffrey was taken. Asked,
how he knew that the said arms appertained to the said Sir Richard? Said
that he had heard say from old knights and esquires, that they had been
reputed to be their arms, as common fame and the public voice proved;
and he also said that they had continued their possession of the said
arms; and that all his time he had seen the said arms in banners, glass,
paintings, and vestments, and commonly called the arms of Scrope. Asked,
if he had heard anyone say who was the first ancestor of the said Sir
Richard who first bore the said arms? Said no, nor had he ever heard
otherwise than that they were come of ancient ancestry, and of old
gentry, and used the said arms. Asked if he had heard any one say how
long a time the ancestors of the said Sir Richard had used the said
arms? Said no, but he had heard say that it passed the memory of man.
Asked, whether he had ever heard of any interruption or challenge made
by Sir Robert Grosvenor, or by his ancestors, or by any one in his name,
to the said Sir Richard, or to any of his ancestors? Said no; but he
said that he was once in Friday Street, in London, and as he was walking
in the street, he saw hanging a new sign made of the said arms, and he
asked what inn that was that had hung out these arms of Scrope, and one
answered him and said, No Sir, they are not hung out for the arms of
Scrope, nor painted there for those arms, but they are painted and put
there by a knight of the county of Chester, whom men call Sir Robert
Grosvenor; and that was the first time he ever heard speak of Sir Robert
Grosvenor, or of his ancestors, or of any other bearing the name of
Grosvenor."

Chaucer says he had been armed twenty-seven years; this means,
according to the then prevalent mode of speaking of such matters, that
in 1359, twenty-seven years before the date of the deposition, 1386,
Chaucer had _first_ borne arms. He says also, he was in France, in one
of the military expeditions of the time. Now as 1359 is the very year in
which Edward took a great army into that country, and as for three years
before and for ten years after, there was no other such expedition set
on foot, and as when fresh ones were despatched we know the poet was not
concerned in them, but was differently engaged--why, on the whole, the
inference is irresistible, that it was in Edward's expedition of 1359
that Chaucer first became a soldier.

And that expedition was one calculated to test most searchingly his
possession of the soldier's best quality, fortitude, though not at all
calculated to make him enamoured of the vocation. The expedition
throughout exhibited to him only the shades of military life, without a
glimpse of its sunshine. A more formidable army had never perhaps left
the English shores--certainly had never left it to meet so melancholy a
fate; it comprised a hundred thousand men, and filled a thousand ships
during the passage from coast to coast. And if for a time it seemed as
irresistible as it had promised to be, that was because no army came
forth to meet it. From Calais Edward moved on through Artois to Picardy;
and thence to Rheims, which he besieged with the intention, it is said,
of having himself crowned king of France in the cathedral, the usual
place of coronation for the sovereigns of the country. But the garrison
was brave, the place strong, and the season winter. In the end he raised
the siege, and marched into Burgundy, and then, turning towards Paris,
he moved forwards till the dismayed Parisians beheld an English army
encamped without their walls. The French, however, had learned wisdom
from the success with which they had often defended their fortified
places, and from the failure that attended their efforts in the open
field. So they were not to be drawn outside the walls of the capital,
not even by a challenge; and at the same time Edward was quite unable to
force his way in; so, harassed by insufficient supplies of provisions,
he presently retreated towards Brittany. Every step of his way was
marked by falling horses and men, who died from hunger or the
intolerable fatigue to which they were subjected. No wonder that the
spirits of the troops sank, and that Edward's own mind was so affected
that he became superstitious, and yielded, beneath the terror of a great
storm, the peace that not all the miseries of his own subjects, and the
infinitely greater miseries they had inflicted on the French people,
could wring from him. On the 8th of May, 1360, the treaty of Bretigny
was concluded; Bretigny being a village near to Chartres. Of the greater
part of the horrors of the expedition Chaucer was an eyewitness and
participator, with the additional pang added that, as he himself tells,
he was "taken" prisoner. How long he remained in captivity it is
impossible to say; but there is reason to fear that the period may have
even extended to five or six years. From 1359-60 to a little before 1366
his history is a blank to us; and the next circumstance we find related
of him looks very like the greetings of his friends and of his sovereign
after a prolonged and painful absence. In or before 1366 he received the
hand of Philippa Roet, who, on the 12th of September in that year, was
granted, by Edward, a pension of ten marks for life, by the name of
Philippa Chaucer; and on the 20th of June in the following year, we find
her husband holding a post (that of valet) in the king's household,
corresponding to hers in the queen's, and enjoying that king's especial
favour, as expressed by a grant of twenty marks yearly, in consideration
of his former and future services. It is tolerably evident from all
this, that it was not through the exertions of his own friend and patron
John of Gaunt, or through the existence of any particular private desire
to aid him in the minds of the still more influential friends and
patrons of his wife, that the poet thus succeeded in establishing a
position for himself in the world. The reward looks as though it were
apportioned simply to the amount of the desert; and through all
Chaucer's subsequent and highly distinguished career we shall find the
same characteristic prevailing in the treatment of him. Or if there be
any discrepancy, it is that the rewards on the whole seem to fall short
rather than to exceed what might be supposed the legitimate amount. The
king's grant to Chaucer was to last for life, or until he should be
otherwise provided for. The promise here held out to the poet was not
long left unredeemed. In 1370 he was sent abroad on the king's service;
and--having been raised to the rank of one of the king's own
squires--again in 1372, when he went to Genoa, to treat on the subject
of the choice of a port in England where the Genoese might form an
establishment. In 1376 a secret mission, and the nature of which still
remains secret, was intrusted to him and Sir John Burley. In 1377 he
accompanied Sir Thomas Percy on another secret mission to Flanders, and
in the same year is supposed to have been concerned in the negotiations
for peace with France; all missions of an important nature, and all
comprised within the period of the life of Edward. But change of
monarchs made no change in this respect; the poet's abilities,
character, and services were sufficient to command the respect and
attention of Edward's successor. One of the earliest events of the new
reign was the appointment of an embassy to treat of the marriage of
Richard II. with the daughter of the king of France: Chaucer was one of
the ambassadors. This was in January, 1378, and the poet could scarcely
have fulfilled his duty and returned, before he was again despatched, in
May of the same year, to Lombardy, to treat with the lord of Milan and
the famous free commander Sir John Hawkwood. An interesting circumstance
marks this embassy. Gower was one of the two representatives who acted
for the poet in England during his absence. This is one of the numerous
valuable facts that Sir Harris Nicholas has made known for the first
time in his (as yet unpublished) 'Life of Chaucer.'

It was in the embassy to Genoa, of 1372, that Chaucer is supposed to
have met Petrarch, and to have heard from him the story of Griselda.
This supposition, the truth of which one would be glad to be satisfied
of, rests upon the following evidence:--Chaucer, in the prologue to the
Clerk's Tale, makes the clerk say,

    "I will you tell a tale, which that I
     Learned at Padua, of a worthy clerk,
     As proved by his wordes and his work.
     He is now dead and nailed in his chest;
     I pray to God so give his soule rest.
     Francis Petrarch, the laureate poete,
     Highte this clerk, whose rhetoric sweet
     Illumined all Itaille of poetry."

Now Boccaccio was the author, in the Italian language, of the story in
question, 'Griselda;' and why did Chaucer, if he is not referring to an
actual and highly interesting incident of his own history, make the
clerk go out of his way to speak of Petrarch, who only translated, in
Latin, Boccaccio's work? No one supposes that Chaucer was ignorant of
the existence or nature of the writings of Boccaccio; and the only
answer given to Godwin, who put the foregoing question, is, that Chaucer
may not have been acquainted with the Italian language, and therefore
preferred acknowledging an obligation to Petrarch, whose translation
alone had enabled him to become familiar with the tale. It might be so;
though it is not very likely. Not only was Chaucer, as we have seen,
distinguished in youth for the depth and universality of his
attainments, but had been at least twice an ambassador to Italy. The
strong probability therefore is, that he did know the language, and was
perfectly well acquainted with the 'Decameron' (the exemplar of his own
Canterbury Tales) in its mother tongue, but that having met Petrarch,
_who was at Arqua near Padua_ at the very time that Chaucer was in the
neighbourhood, he could not tell the tale he had then heard, under such
remarkable circumstances, without a passing record of them.

That same Genoese embassy involved important consequences as regarded
the fortunes of the poet. On the 8th of June, 1374, only a few months
after his return, Edward conferred upon him the lucrative and
distinguished office of comptroller of the customs for wool, &c. But the
king had not waited until that time to show what he thought of Chaucer's
conduct; he had already conferred upon him a marked testimony of his
approbation; and at a time and under circumstances that make the blood
stir, and the imagination busy itself in a thousand vain attempts to
picture what might have been from the knowledge of what was. On St.
George's day, the 23rd of April, 1374, when the king would be sitting in
high and solemn festival, surrounded by all the chief nobility of the
land, and when Chaucer, as one of his own squires, would, as a matter of
duty and office, be in attendance on him, Edward conferred upon the poet
the grant of a pitcher of wine to be supplied to him daily for life. In
the very same year, and after the appointment to the customs, John of
Gaunt, as if desiring to show how deeply he sympathised in the poet's
prosperity, still further swelled his income by a grant of ten pounds
for life. The following year, 1375, brought also its own good gifts, in
the shape of two wardships, granted by Edward; from one of which Chaucer
received 104_l._, equivalent, according to Godwin's estimate of the
comparative value of money then and now, to about some eighteen hundred
pounds of the nineteenth century.

And now for some years the poet's life appears to have rolled on
smoothly, usefully, happily. And although it was a condition expressly
made by Edward, that the poet should keep the accounts of the
comptrollership with his own hand, and not put off his duties upon a
deputy (a wise provision, and fitly made by a king who knew so well how
to pay for real services), it is supposed that it was during these busy
years that Chaucer produced some of his best miscellaneous poems. The
'Romaunt of the Rose,' a translation from the French work that enjoyed
so long a period of popularity, had probably been written long before,
in the days when the poet imitated previous writers rather than drew
from himself; the dates of the 'Cuckoo and the Nightingale' and some
others are unknown; but the 'House of Fame,' a noble poem, and worthy of
its suggestive title, bears internal evidence that it was written while
its author held the office of comptroller: and some very agreeable
information it gives to us of the poet's habits. Jupiter, who addresses
the poet personally, tells him he is aware he attends nothing now to
tidings of love, nor of nothing else--not even

          "of thy very neighebours
    That dwellen almost at thy doors,
    Thou hearest neither that nor this
    _For when thy labour all done is,
    And hast made all thy reckonings_,
    Instead of rest, and of new things,
    Thou goest home to thine house anon,
    And all so dumbe as a stone
    Thou sittest at another book,
    Till fully dazed is thy look,
    And livest thus as a hermite,
    Although thine abstinence is lite,"[32] &c.

In the love of good living, here acknowledged, we may see the origin of
that goodly bulk upon which Harry Bailley, in the 'Canterbury Tales,'
banters the poet. "Now," he calls out to the pilgrims,

    "'Ware yon, sirs, and let this man have place;
       He in the waist is shapen as well as I:
     This were a poppet in an arme to embrace
       For any woman."

Through the same medium the poet describes himself as accustomed to look
on the ground, to be "elvish" of countenance, silent, and reserved. We
need only add to these traits another, also on the best of
authorities--his own--namely, the love of walking, and enjoyment of all
the sights and sounds of natural phenomena. In his 'Legend of Good
Women' he writes--

    "And as for me, though that I can but lite,[33]
     On bookes for to read, I me delight,
     And to them give I faith and full credence
     And in mine heart have them in reverence,
     So heartily, that there is game none
     That from my bookes maketh me to gone;
     But it be seldom on the holyday,
     Save certainly when that the month of May
     Is comen, and that I hear the fowles[34] sing,
     And that the flowres 'ginnen for to spring,
     Farewell my book and my devotion."

In 1386 the people emphatically marked their approbation of him whom
kings had delighted to honour, by electing Chaucer to parliament as a
knight of the shire for Kent. But, in all probability, that honour
destroyed the poet's peace. Misfortunes began from this time to fall
thickly upon him. Within two months after the meeting of parliament he
was deprived of the comptrollership, as well as the comptrollership of
the petty customs, that had been conferred by Richard II. four years
before; and we are utterly in the dark as to the cause. Tyrwhitt,
Godwin, and others have built up an elaborate hypothesis, as to his
connexion with the civic commotion in London in 1384, when John of
Northampton stood for the office of mayor in opposition to the court
candidate; and which ended, they say, as concerned the poet, in his
expatriation to Zealand, in his enduring great sufferings there, in his
return to England in 1386, and in his committal to the Tower, until
1389. All these presumptions, founded on various passages of the
'Testament of Love,' the right key to which has evidently not yet been
found, have been utterly set at rest by Sir Harris Nicholas's discovery
of records showing that from 1380 to 1388 Chaucer received his pension
regularly as it became due, in London, _with his own hands_. And,
indeed, we have only to weigh for a moment the character and doings of
the parliament to which he was elected, to satisfy us that there need be
no surprise excited at the treatment experienced by Chaucer.
Legislation, in the dictionary of the leading politicians of the day,
meant intrigues for the possession of power. The parliament was divided
into two parties; one supporting the king, and the king's favourites, De
la Pole and De Vere, and the other determined to drive those favourites
from power. The opposition was headed by the Duke of Gloucester, a
brother of John of Gaunt, and it succeeded; De la Pole was dismissed,
impeached, and imprisoned; and, finally, the successful party demanded
and obtained from Richard a council for the government of the nation.
There would be little relish then for the advice, little sympathy with
the conduct of a man who in his writings was accustomed, whilst bidding
the people to obey the king and the law, also to say to their
governors--

    "Knight, let thy _deedes worship determine_,"

and

    "Go forth, king, and rule thee by sapience;"

and who was in religion a Wickliffite.

In struggles between ambitious nobles and a king who desired to be
despotic, a man of independent character might easily give deep offence
to those against whom he acted, and without particularly pleasing those
who might look upon him generally as their supporter; and that Chaucer
appears to have done. He was made the victim of the one, and received no
compensating benefits from the other. So, in 1388, he was compelled to
sell two of his pensions, which were accordingly assigned to John
Scalby. His wife's pension had ceased with the life of her to whom it
had been granted. The last payment to Philippa Chaucer took place in
June, 1387. She died therefore within a twelvemonth after the events
that plunged them both in adversity.

In 1389, Richard, then in his twenty-second year, suddenly dismissed
Gloucester, and confided the administration to another uncle, the Duke
of York, and to a cousin, Henry of Bolingbroke, the son of John of
Gaunt, who during all these changes was on the Continent endeavouring to
establish for himself a Spanish sovereignty. Within two months after
that change, Chaucer was appointed Clerk of the Works at the king's
chief palaces, at a salary of two shillings a day, and in the course of
his duties he had to superintend the onerous but honourable and
gratifying task of repairing St. George's Chapel, Windsor. But again he
was dismissed, after about two years' service; unless, indeed, which is
possible rather than probable, that he, in order to carry out his
literary views, had himself determined to retire finally from all public
employment. He was now sixty-three years old; the "Comedy" over which he
had so long pondered, and which was to contain the accumulated wealth of
his genius, wisdom, and experience, was still unwritten, except in
parts, and he had evidently long desired to abstract himself from mere
worldly avocation. Thus in 1384 he had obtained from Richard a
relaxation of Edward's stringent regulation, that he should not nominate
a deputy, and in the very year that he ceased to hold his architectural
appointments he had caused John Elmhurst to officiate for him. At all
events, the years 1393, 1394, 1395, are supposed to have been those of
the production of the 'Canterbury Tales' (which are known to have been
produced after Jack Straw's insurrection, as that occurrence is
mentioned in them), and we see no reason to disturb the supposition.
Woodstock, a royal seat, was, according to tradition, the scene of the
poet's labours on this his greatest work, as well as of others of an
earlier date. In the scientific treatise addressed by Chaucer to one of
his two sons, Lewis, who appears to have died young, there does appear
something like evidence that Chaucer was living in the neighbourhood of
Oxford when he composed that piece, which contains the date of 1391.
Chaucer there speaks of the astrolabe he has "compounded after the
latitude of Oxford." But there is really so little tangible knowledge
concerning the poet's residence either at Woodstock or at Donnington
Castle, that it is best to rest content with the fact that tradition
does say Chaucer resided at both, and that at Donnington he planted the
three oaks known respectively as Chaucer's oak, the king's oak, and the
queen's. But then tradition must not be too exacting--must not also ask
us to believe that the poet wrote several of his poems beneath the shade
of one of the trees he had planted. It must have been a most precocious
tree else.

In deep gloom, much we fear, the poet spent the latter hours of his day
of life, though not without a sudden lighting up of the horizon ere the
close, as if to surround his passage into the grave with something of
the glory that should attend the sunset of such a life. Sir Harris
Nicholas has collected together in his work (to which we must refer for
the particulars) facts of the deepest interest, as showing that he was
in poverty, sheer unmistakeable poverty, from 1394 to 1398. And yet John
of Gaunt had not only returned to England, but had married the sister of
the poet's wife, through which marriage therefore Chaucer became
connected with the royal family of England. Was the poet too proud to
make known the real state of his affairs? In 1398 Richard, with whom
sympathy and admiration for Chaucer seem to have been the mere
occasionally recurring whim of the moment, did again so far remember the
poet as to confer on him another grant of wine, more valuable than the
first, to be delivered by the poet's own son, Thomas, who had then risen
to the rank of chief butler. In 1399 Richard was deposed, and
Bolingbroke became king of England; and within _four_ days the pension
of twenty marks that Richard had granted to Chaucer in 1394 (six years
after the sale of the two pensions formerly possessed by him) was
_doubled_, leaving him, on the whole, the recipient of an income from
the crown amply sufficient for all his wants. He now took a lease of a
house situated in a garden adjoining Westminster Abbey, and there
probably he died, on the 25th of October, 1400. He was buried in
Westminster Abbey, and it is only fitting that Poets' Corner, like
English poetry itself, should date its foundation from Geoffrey Chaucer.
As a poet, he needs no epitaph, but whenever we do--what has been often
talked of--rebuild his monument in the Abbey, we need desire no nobler
testimony of his character as a man to be inscribed on it, than the
ballad with which we conclude, and which was written by him, as the
affecting title states, when he lay upon his death-bed in "great
anguish:"--

    "Fly from the press,[35] and dwell with soothfastness,[36]
     Suffice unto thy good, though it be small,
     For hoard hath hate, and climbing tickleness;
     Praise hath envy, and weal is blent over all;
     Savour[37] no more than thee behove shall;
     Rede[38] well thyself that other folk canst rede
     And truth thee shall deliver, it is no drede.

     Paine thee not each crooked to redress,
     In trust of her that turneth as a ball,
     Great rest standeth in little business;
     Beware also to spurn against a nall,[39]
     Strive not as doth a crocke with a wall;
     Doome thyself that doomest others dede,
     And truth thee shall deliver, it is no drede.

     That[40] thee is sent, receive in buxomness,[41]

     The wrestling of this world asketh a fall;
     Here is no home, here is but wilderness;
     Forthe pilgrim, forthe beast out of thy stall,
     Look up on high, and thanke God of all,
     Waive thy lusts, and let thy ghost[42] thee lead,
     And truth thee shall deliver, it is no drede."




WILLIAM OF WYKEHAM.


There is an old tradition, perhaps not worthy of much credit, that upon
the wall of a tower in Windsor Castle, known as the Winchester Tower,
was inscribed "This made Wykeham." The great churchman raised this tower
as the architect of Windsor Castle, working under the commands of his
patron Edward III. It is further said, that the king being offended at
this inscription, its more obvious meaning was dexterously explained
away, seeing that it should be interpreted to record that the building
of the castle was "the making" of the architect. There are other proud
edifices still remaining upon which might be inserted "This made
Wykeham" in the most complete sense. No man ever left more permanent
traces of his course and character. The founder of Winchester College,
and of New College, Oxford,--the builder of the noblest part of
Winchester Cathedral,--had a title to be called their "maker," with no
king or subject to dispute his pretensions. He was one of the very few
men who, having raised themselves by their abilities and integrity to
riches and honour, worked not sordidly for themselves to heap up
treasure, but nobly employed their wealth in works of the highest public
utility. The life of such a man is for example. William De Wykeham, or
Of Wykeham, was born at Wykeham or Wickham, in Hampshire, in the year
1324, and, as his biographer Bishop Lowth has shown, some time between
the 7th of July and the 27th of September. There is reason to believe
that he did not take his name from his native village, the same name
being borne by several of his relations living in his own day, who do
not appear to have been born there. All that is certainly known about
his father and mother is that their Christian names were John and Sybil:
if his father bore the name of Wykeham, he appears to have also passed
by that of Long or Longe, and to have had an elder brother who was
called Henry Aas.

Lowth thus sensibly remarks upon this obscurity of the name of so
distinguished a man:--"If we consider the uncertain state of
family-names at the time of the birth of Wykeham, we shall not think it
strange that there should be such doubt with regard to the surname of
his family; or even if it should appear that he had properly no
family-name at all. Surnames were introduced into England by the Normans
at the Conquest: 'But certain it is,' says Camden, 'that as the better
sort, even from the Conquest, by little and little, took surnames; so
they were not settled among the common people fully until about the time
of Edward the Second.'"

The parents of Wykeham are held to have been poor, but of creditable
descent and reputable character. When their son became a dignitary of
the church, he employed a seal with heraldic bearings and a quaint
motto; but it is believed that these honours were not hereditary. Lowth
holds that his relations were of the common people, and adds, "I am even
inclined to think that he himself disclaimed all farther pretensions.
The celebrated motto which he added to his arms (of which probably he
might have received a grant when he began to rise in the world) I
imagine was intended by him to intimate something of this kind: _Manners
makyth Man_: the true meaning of which, as he designed it, I presume to
be, though it has commonly been understood otherwise, that a man's real
worth is to be estimated not from the outward and accidental advantages
of birth, rank, and fortune, but from the endowments of his mind and his
moral qualifications. In this sense it bears a proper relation to his
arms, and contains a just apology for those ensigns of his newly
acquired dignity. Conscious to himself that his claim to honour is
unexceptionable, as founded upon truth and reason, he in a manner makes
his appeal to the world; alleging that neither high birth, to which he
makes no pretensions, nor high station, upon which he does not value
himself, but

    "'Virtue alone is true nobility.'"

He was put to school at Winchester, not by his father, who had not the
means, but by some wealthy patron, who is traditionally said to have
been Nicholas Uvedale, lord of the manor of Wykeham and governor of
Winchester Castle. The tradition further asserts that, after leaving
school, he became secretary to Uvedale; and that he was secretary to the
constable of Winchester Castle is stated in a written account compiled
in his own time. Afterwards he is said to have been recommended by
Uvedale to Edyngton, bishop of Winchester, and then by those two friends
to have been made known to King Edward III. There seems to be no reason
for supposing that he ever studied at Oxford, as has been affirmed by
some of the later writers of his life. It is evident, indeed, that he
had not had a university education, and that he never pretended to any
skill in the favourite scholastic learning of his age. His strength lay
in his natural genius, in his knowledge of mankind and talent for
business; and probably the only art or science he had much cultivated
was architecture.

He is said in an ancient contemporary account to have been brought to
court when he was no more than three or four and twenty, which would be
about the year 1348; but the earliest office which there is the evidence
of records for his having held, is that of clerk of all the king's works
in his manors of Henle and Yesthampsted, his patent for which is dated
10th of May, 1356. On the 30th of October in the same year he was made
surveyor of the king's works at the castle and in the park of Windsor.
It is affirmed by a contemporary writer to have been at his instigation
that King Edward pulled down and rebuilt great part of Windsor Castle.
Wykeham had the sole superintendence of the work. Queenborough Castle,
in the Isle of Sheppy, was also built under his direction.

The king now began to reward him bountifully. He had probably taken
deacon's orders at an early age; Lowth finds him designated 'clericus,'
or clerk, in 1352. It was not, however, till the 5th of December, 1361,
that he was admitted to the order of acolyte: he was ordained sub-deacon
on the 12th of March, 1362, and priest on the 12th of June following.
Meanwhile his first ecclesiastical preferment, the rectory of Pulham in
Norfolk, had been conferred upon him by the king's presentation on the
30th of November, 1357. On the 1st of March, 1359, he was presented by
the king to the prebend of Flixton, in the church of Lichfield. On the
16th of April following he had a grant of 200_l._ a year from the crown,
over and above all his former appointments, till he should get quiet
possession of the church of Pulham, his induction into which living had
been opposed by the court of Rome. On the 10th of July in the same year,
he was appointed chief warden and surveyor of the king's castles of
Windsor, Leeds, Dovor, and Hadham, and of the manors of Old and New
Windsor, Wichemer, and sundry other castles and manors, with the parks
belonging to them. On the 5th of May, 1360, he received the king's grant
of the deanery of the royal free chapel or collegiate church of St.
Martin-le-Grand, London. In October, 1360, he attended upon the king at
Calais, probably in quality of public notary, when the treaty of
Bretigny was solemnly confirmed by the oaths of Edward and King John of
France. Numerous additional preferments in the church were heaped upon
him in the course of the next three years. By June, 1363, moreover he
had been appointed to the office of warden and justiciary of the king's
forests on this side Trent. On the 14th of March, 1364, he had by royal
grant an assignment of twenty shillings a-day out of the exchequer. On
the 11th of May, 1364, he was made keeper of the privy seal, and soon
after he is styled secretary to the king, or what we should now call
principal secretary of state. In May, 1365, he was commissioned by the
king, with the chancellor, the treasurer, and the Earl of Arundel, to
treat of the ransom of the King of Scotland (David II., taken at the
battle of Nevil's Cross in 1346), and the prolonging of the truce with
the Scots. And not long after this he is designated, in a paper printed
in the 'Faedera,' chief of the privy council and governor of the great
council, which phrases, however, Lowth supposes do not express titles of
office, but only the great influence and authority which he had in those
assemblies. "There are several other preferments, both ecclesiastical
and civil," adds Lowth, "which he is said to have held; but I do not
mention them, because the authorities produced for them are such as I
cannot entirely depend upon. And, as to his ecclesiastical benefices
already mentioned, the practice of exchanging them was then so common,
that 'tis hard to determine precisely which of them he held altogether
at any one time." There is extant, however, an account given in by
himself on occasion of the bull of Pope Urban V. against pluralities, of
the entire number and value of his church benefices, as the matter stood
in the year 1366; and from this statement, in which Wykeham calls
himself "Sir William of Wykeham, clerk, archdeacon of Lincoln, and
secretary of our lord the illustrious King of England, and keeper of his
privy seal, it appears that the total produce of those which he had held
when the account was demanded, was 873_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._, and of those of
which he remained in possession when it was given in, 842_l._"

Froissart, speaking of the English court at this period, says, "At this
time reigned a priest called William of Wykeham. This William of Wykeham
was so much in favour with the King of England, that everything was done
by him, and nothing was done without him."

Upon the death of William de Edyngton, on the 8th of October, 1366,
Wykeham was immediately, upon the king's earnest recommendation, elected
by the prior and convent of Winchester to succeed him as bishop of that
see. He was not consecrated till the 10th of October in the year
following; but this delay, till an adjustment was effected of the
conflicting pretensions of the royal authority and the court of Rome,
was evidently occasioned, as Lowth has shown, only by a contention
between the king and the pope as to which of them should have the
largest share in Wykeham's promotion. Meanwhile he had been appointed by
the king lord high chancellor of England; he was confirmed in that
office on the 17th of September, 1367.

He continued chancellor till the 14th of March, 1371, when he delivered
back to the king both the great and the privy seals, on the change of
ministry made in compliance with a petition presented shortly before by
the Lords and Commons, complaining of the mischiefs which had resulted
from the government of the kingdom having for a long time been in the
hands of men of the church, and praying that secular men only might be
appointed to the principal offices both in the king's courts and
household. There is no appearance, however, of this complaint being
specially directed against any part of the conduct of the Bishop of
Winchester, who assisted at the ceremony of constituting his successor
in the chancellorship, and seems to have for years after this continued
to retain both the favour of the king and the goodwill of the
parliament, and even to have remained in habits of intimate and
confidential connexion with the Duke of Lancaster, to whose influence
the removal of the clergy from the offices of state is said to have been
owing.

With reference to the complaint that men of the church filled high civil
offices, Lowth observes, "The truth of the matter seems to be, that the
laity in general looked with an evil eye upon the clergy, who had of
late filled for the most part the great posts of honour and profit in
the state; which, as it was obvious to remark, neither lay within their
province nor were suitable to their function and character. The
practice, however improper in itself and liable to objection, yet seems
to have taken its rise from the necessity of the times: the men of
abilities had for a long time been chiefly employed abroad in the wars;
this was the most open road to riches and honours, and every one was
pushing forward in it. Besides, it was not at any time easy to find
among the laity persons properly qualified, in point of knowledge and
letters, to fill with sufficiency some of the highest offices. We see
the king was now obliged to have recourse to the lawyers: they gave as
little satisfaction as the churchmen had done; and in a few years it was
found necessary to discharge them, and to call in the churchmen again."

At the period of Wykeham's election to the see of Winchester, the
bishops of that diocese had no fewer than twelve different castles or
palaces, all furnished and maintained as places of residence. Wykeham's
first undertaking after he found himself in possession of the see was to
set about a thorough repair of these episcopal houses.

To these palaces or castles the bishops of Winchester resorted in
turns, "living, according to the custom of those times, chiefly upon the
produce of their own estates. So great a demand as the bishop had upon
his predecessor's executors for dilapidations could not very soon or
very easily be brought to an accommodation; however, the account was at
last settled between them without proceeding on either side to an action
at law. In the first place they delivered to him the standing stock of
the bishopric due to him by right and custom: namely, 127
draught-horses, 1556 head of black cattle, 3876 weathers, 4777 ewes,
3521 lambs: and afterwards for dilapidations, in cattle, corn, and other
goods, to the value of 1662_l._ 10_s._ sterling."

Before his repairs were accomplished, Wykeham had disbursed twenty
thousand marks of his own revenue. This energetic improver also applied
himself with great zeal and diligence to the reformation of abuses in
the monasteries and religious houses of all sorts throughout his
diocese. The ancient hospital of St. Cross, at Sparkeford, near
Winchester, founded in 1132 by the famous Bishop Henry de Blois, brother
to King Stephen, in particular engaged much of his attention, and the
objects of the charity were indebted to his persevering exertions for
the restoration of many rights and benefits which they had originally
enjoyed, but of which they had been for a long time defrauded.

In 1373 a school at Winchester, founded wholly by the munificence of
this high-minded prelate, was first opened. The history of the endowment
and completion of Winchester College, and of New College at Oxford, for
which Winchester is preparatory, is so well told by Lowth, that we
transcribe his narrative and just remarks without abridgment:--

"At the same time that Wykeham was thus engaged in the reformation of
these charitable institutions, he was forming the plan of a much more
noble and extensive foundation of his own, and taking his measures for
putting it in execution. He had long resolved to dispose of the wealth
which the Divine Providence had so abundantly bestowed upon him to some
charitable use and for the public good, but was greatly embarrassed when
he came to fix his choice upon some design that was like to prove most
beneficial, and least liable to abuse. He tells us himself that upon
this occasion he diligently examined and considered the various rules of
the religious orders, and compared with them the lives of their several
professors; but was obliged with grief to declare that he could not
anywhere find that the ordinances of their founders, according to their
true design and intention, were at present observed by any of them. This
reflection affected him greatly, and inclined him to take the resolution
of distributing his riches to the poor with his own hands, rather than
employ them in establishing an institution which might become a snare
and an occasion of guilt to those for whose benefit it should be
designed. After much deliberation and devout invocation of the Divine
assistance, considering how greatly the number of the clergy had been of
late reduced by continual wars and frequent pestilences, he determined
at last to endeavour to remedy, as far as he was able, this desolation
of the church, by relieving poor scholars in their clerical education;
and to establish two colleges of students, for the honour of God and
increase of his worship, for the support and exaltation of the Christian
faith, and for the improvement of the liberal arts and sciences; hoping
and trusting that men of letters and various knowledge, and bred up in
the fear of God, would see more clearly and attend more strictly to the
obligation lying upon them to observe the rules and directions which he
should give them. Wykeham seems to have come to this resolution, and in
some measure to have formed in his mind his general plan, as early as
his becoming Bishop of Winchester; for we find that in little more than
two years after, he had made purchases of several parcels of ground in
the city of Oxford, which make the chief part of the site of his college
there. His college of Winchester, intended as a nursery for that of
Oxford, was part of his original plan; for as early as the year 1373,
before he proceeded any further in his design for the latter, he
established a school at Winchester, of the same kind with the former,
and for the same purpose. He agreed with Richard de Herton, that for ten
years, beginning from Michaelmas of the year above mentioned, he should
diligently instruct in grammatical learning as many poor scholars as the
bishop should send to him, and no others without his leave; that the
bishop should provide and allow him a proper assistant; and that Herton,
in case of his own illness or necessary absence, should substitute a
proper master to supply his place.

"Wykeham's munificence proceeded always from a constant generous
principle, a true spirit of liberality. It was not owing to a casual
impulse or a sudden emotion, but was the effect of mature deliberation
and prudent choice. His enjoyment of riches consisted in employing them
in acts of beneficence, and while they were increasing upon him, he was
continually devising proper means of disposing of them for the good of
the public, not delaying it till the time of his death, when he could
keep them no longer, nor leaving to the care of others what he could
better execute himself; but forming his good designs early, and, as soon
as he had the ability, putting them in execution, that he might have the
satisfaction of seeing the beneficial effects of them, and that by
constant observation and due experience he might from time to time
improve and perfect them, so as to render them yet more beneficial."

The pious and patriotic exertions of the good bishop were interrupted
for a time by a political storm which rose against him in 1376, the last
year of the reign of Edward III. He had been appointed one of the
council established to superintend the conduct of affairs on the
petition of the parliament which met in April of that year; and in
consequence became a principal object of the resentment of the Duke of
Lancaster and his party, who, after the death of the Black Prince in
June, and the rise of the parliament in July, took possession of the
superannuated and dying king, and proceeded to overthrow all the reforms
that had been lately made in the government, and to effect, as far as
they could, the ruin of all concerned in them. By the duke's contrivance
eight articles were exhibited against the bishop at the beginning of the
next Michaelmas term, charging him with various acts of pecuniary
defalcation, oppression, and other sorts of misgovernment while he had
been in office many years before as keeper of the privy seal and lord
chancellor. He was heard in his defence, before a commission of bishops,
peers, and privy councillors, about the middle of November, when
judgment was given against him upon one of the articles, involving at
the utmost a mere irregularity; and upon this, under the influence that
then prevailed at court, an order was immediately issued for the
sequestration of the revenues of his bishopric, and he was at the same
time forbidden, in the king's name, to come within twenty miles of the
court. The next parliament, which met on the 27th of January, 1377, was
wholly devoted to Lancaster; and when, soon after, on the petition of
the Commons, an act of general pardon was issued by the king, in
consideration of its being the year of his jubilee, the Bishop of
Winchester alone was specially excepted out of its provisions. All this,
in the circumstances of the time, may be taken as the best attestation
to Wykeham's patriotism and integrity. His brethren of the clergy,
however, assembled in convocation, now took up his cause with great
zeal; and, whether in consequence of their bold representations on the
subject to the king, or for some other reason, it was soon deemed
expedient to drop the proceedings against him, and on the 18th of June
his temporalities were restored to him, on condition of his fitting out
three ships of war for the defence of the kingdom and maintaining them
at sea for a quarter of a year. And even from this mulct he was released
on the accession of Richard II., a few days after. But the loss
nevertheless to which he had been subjected by his prosecution is said
to have amounted to ten thousand marks.

The instrument by which, on the accession of the young king, Wykeham
was relieved from the pains and penalties which a dominant party had
imposed upon him, is very full and explicit. It sets forth "that the
king, reflecting upon the great damages and hardships that the Bishop of
Winchester hath sustained on occasion of the said impeachment, and
revolving in his mind the many acceptable, useful, and laudable services
which the said bishop with great labour and expense hath long performed
for his grandfather, the many high offices which he hath held under his
grandfather and father, and the special affection and sincere love which
his father while he lived always bore towards the said bishop, out of
his special favour and with his certain knowledge, and also by advice
and consent of his uncle the Duke of Lancaster and other prelates and
lords of his council, remits and pardons all the aforesaid articles, and
all other crimes and offences whatsoever in the amplest terms, and in
the fullest manner, the exception of the said bishop in the Act of Grace
passed in the last parliament of the late king, and all other statutes
to the contrary notwithstanding; concluding with a clause to this
effect: 'Willing that all men should know that, although we have granted
to the Bishop of Winchester the said pardons and graces, nevertheless we
do not think the said bishop to be in anywise chargeable, in the sight
of God, with any of the matters thus by us pardoned, remitted, or
released unto him, but do hold him to be, as to all and every of them,
wholly innocent and guiltless.'"

His pardon was immediately followed by his employment in offices of
trust and authority, where his great abilities and force of character
gave assurance of a just and wise administration. As soon as Wykeham was
released from his troubles he hastened to apply himself anew to the
carrying forward and completion of his two colleges. The business of
teaching appears to have commenced both at Winchester and at Oxford in
1373; Pope Urban VI.'s bull of licence for founding Winchester College
was granted 1st June, 1378; the building of the College at Oxford, which
he called "St. Mary College of Winchester in Oxford," was begun in 1380,
and was finished in 1386; that of the College at Winchester was begun in
1387, and was finished in 1393. The papal bull confirming the statutes
of the college at Oxford is dated 19th July, 1398. As soon as his two
colleges were erected, he entered upon another great work, which still
remains a monument of his taste and munificence: he resolved to rebuild
his cathedral in the greater part of its extent. This undertaking he
commenced in 1395, and he just lived to see it brought to a close in
about ten years after.

The Bishop of Winchester was one of the fourteen persons appointed in
1386, on the petition of the parliament, instigated by the king's uncle,
the Duke of Gloucester, to be a council to the king for one year, and in
fact for that term to exercise all the powers of government. As soon as
the parliament was dismissed. Richard made an attempt to break from the
yoke thus imposed upon him; the commission and statute appointing the
council were declared by the judges, on the royal command, to be illegal
and null, and to have involved all who had been concerned in procuring
them in the guilt of treason. Upon this the Duke of Gloucester and his
friends raised an army of forty thousand men. Having encamped before
London, they sent a deputation, of which the Bishop of Winchester was a
member, to the king; the deputies were graciously received, and returned
with proposals for an accommodation; but in the mean time a body of
forces which had been raised for the king in Wales and Cheshire, under
the command of his minion the Duke of Ireland, was encountered by the
Earl of Derby and a part of the army of the confederated lords at
Radcott Bridge in Oxfordshire, and entirely defeated. This blow
compelled Richard to yield for the present. But in May, 1389, another
revolution in the government was effected by the king suddenly declaring
himself to be of age, and removing the Duke of Gloucester and his
friends from the council-board. He did not, however, dispense with the
services of the Bishop of Winchester, but, on the contrary, forced him
again to accept the great seal. Wykeham remained chancellor till the
27th of September, 1391, when he retired from office, Gloucester having
by this time been restored to his place in the council, and all parties
having been for the present again reconciled, in a great measure, it is
probable, through the bishop's mediation. From this date Wykeham appears
to have taken little or no share in public affairs. In 1397, when the
Duke of Gloucester was put to death, and several of those who had joined
him in taking arms in 1386 were attainted for that treason, the Bishop
of Winchester and others were, at the intercession of the Commons,
declared by the king from the throne in parliament not to have been
implicated in what their fellow-commissioners had done. Wykeham was
present in the parliament held 30th September, 1399, when Richard was
deposed, and also in the first parliament of Henry IV., summoned a few
days after; but this was the last which he attended. He continued,
however, in the active discharge of his episcopal duties for two or
three years longer, and was able to transact business till within four
days of his death, which took place at South Waltham, about eight
o'clock on the morning of Saturday the 27th of September, 1404.

We conclude with Lowth's just eulogium upon the high-minded munificence
of this remarkable man:--"We frequently hear of men who, by the force of
their genius, by their industry, or by their good fortune, have raised
themselves from the lowest stations to the highest degrees of honour,
power, and wealth; but how seldom do we meet with those who have made a
proper use of the advantages which they have thus happily acquired, and
considered them as deposited in their hands by Providence for the
general benefit of mankind? In this respect Wykeham stands an uncommon
and almost singular example of generosity and public spirit. By the time
that he had reached the meridian of life, he had acquired great wealth;
and the remainder of his days he employed not in increasing it to no
reasonable end, but in bestowing it in every way that piety, charity,
and liberality could devise. The latter half of a long life he spent in
one continued series of generous actions and great designs, for the good
of his friends, of the poor, and of his country. His beneficence was
ever vigilant, active, and persevering: it was not only ready to answer
when opportunity called, but sought it out when it did not offer itself.
No man seems to have tasted more sensibly the pleasure of doing good;
and no man had ever a greater share of this exquisite enjoyment. The
foundation of his colleges, the principal monuments of his munificence,
was as well calculated for the real use of the public, and as
judiciously planned as it was nobly and generously executed. Whatever
Wykeham's attainments in letters were, he had at least the good sense to
see that the clergy, though they had almost engrossed the whole learning
of that age, yet were very deficient in real and useful knowledge;
besides that by the particular distresses of the times, and the havoc
that several successive plagues had made in all ranks of the people, but
especially among the clergy, the church was at a loss for a proper
supply of such as were tolerably qualified for the performance of the
common service. It was not vanity and ostentation that suggested this
design to him; he was prompted to it by the notorious exigence of the
times and the real demands of the public. The deliberation with which he
entered upon it, and the constant attention with which he pursued it for
above thirty years, shows how much he set his heart upon the success of
his undertaking, and how earnestly he endeavoured to secure the
effectual attainment of the end proposed, the promotion of true piety
and learning. In a word, as he was in his own time a general blessing to
his country, in which his bounty was freely imparted to every object
that could come within the reach of his influence, so the memory of this
great man merits the universal regard of posterity, as of one whose
pious and munificent designs were directed to the general good of
mankind, and were extended to the latest ages."




FOOTNOTES:


[1] 'History of the Life of King Henry II.' i. 281.--Henry,
when he first made his appearance in England, attracted observation,
among other things, by being dressed, after the manner of boys in his
native country, in a coat or jacket with short skirts, or perhaps
without any skirts at all; whence they gave him the sobriquet of
_curt-mantle_. This we learn from the writer of 'Brompton's Chronicle,'
who, in giving an account of Henry's death, after telling us that those
present, in their rapacity, stripped the royal corpse, and that it lay
for a long time naked, till a boy threw over the lower part of it a
short cloak, absurdly observes that thus was fulfilled the surname which
the king had borne from his infancy, originally given to him because he
had first brought the fashion of the short coat from Anjou into
England.--Twisden, _Scriptores_ x. 1150.

[2] Twisden, Scriptores, p. 346.

[3] The original is, "De David legitur, ad commendationem
decoris ejus, quoniam rufus erat. Vos autem dominum regem subrufum
hactenus extitisse noveritis, nisi quia colorem hunc venerabilis
senectus et superveniens canities aliquantulum alteravit." The writer of
an amusing article on 'Ancient Collections of Private Letters,' in the
'Quarterly Review' for April, 1837 (vol. lviii, pp. 414-464), renders
the latter of these sentences thus:--"You are aware that his complexion
and hair were a little red, but the approach of old age has altered this
somewhat, and the hair is turning grey." Peter of Blois's Latin is not
purer than that of the generality of the writers of his age; but he
would not have used _noveritis_ for _novistis_, as this translation
would imply that he did. As to the sense in which he uses _rufus_ and
_subrufus_, there may be more doubt. In our English version of the
Bible, David is described as ruddy, or of a florid complexion; but the
word in the Vulgate is _rufus_, which, at least in middle-age Latin, may
signify either red-faced or red-haired. King William II., however, was
certainly called Rufus from the redness of his complexion--either
because it was excessive, or perhaps to distinguish him from his father
of the same name, who may have been a man of a dark complexion. On the
other hand, the immediately subsequent mention of the beginning greyness
(_superveniens canities_) may seem to favour the notion that Peter of
Blois means here to speak of David as having been red-haired, and of
Henry as having also had originally hair of a reddish colour. Dr.
Lingard, however, we observe, understands, as we have done, that what is
indicated is Henry's florid complexion. (_Hist. Eng._, ii. 194, edit. of
1837.) We may notice, by the bye, that the writer in the 'Quarterly
Review' has throughout his article inadvertently designated Henry II. as
Henry Beauclerc, whereas it was his grandfather, the first Henry, who
was known by that name.

[4] The Latin is "equestres tibiae," which the writer in the
'Quarterly Review,' amusingly enough, translates, "his shins like a
horse's." We presume there can be no doubt that what we have given in
the text is the true meaning. At any rate, the _tibiae_ described as
_equestres_ must be equestrian, not equine, shins or shanks--those of a
horseman, not of a horse.

[5] The original is "Vestibus utitur expeditis;" and the
Quarterly Reviewer's translation is, "He uses--a tight dress." _Vestis
expedita_ is not, we believe, a classical Latin phrase, and its
signification may perhaps admit of some doubt; but it ought to mean
rather a light than a tight dress.

[6] These two are in the same book.

[7] These two are in the same book.

[8] Poultry.

[9] Meet, fit, reasonable.

[10] For the night, apparently.

[11] Standards.

[12] Lord Hailes says the French term, _hastiers_, means stands
on each of which several spits were turned.

[13] Day.

[14] Descended

[15] Lose, ruin.

[16] When besieged in Hennebon by Charles of Blois, "the
Countess herself," says Froissart, "ware harness on her body, and rode
on a great courser fro street to street, desiring her people to make
good defence; and she caused damozelles and other women to cut short
their kirtles, and to carry stones, and pots full of chalk, to the
walls, to be cast down to their enemies. This lady did there an hardy
enterprise; she mounted up to the height of a tower to see how the
Frenchmen were ordered without; she saw how that all the lords and other
people of the host were all gone out of their field to the assault; then
she took again her courser, armed as she was, and caused three hundred
men a horseback to be ready, and she went with them to another gate,
whereas there was not assault; she issued out, and her company, and
dashed into the French lodgings, and cut down tents and set fire in
their lodgings; she found no defence there, but a certain of varlets and
boys, who ran away." On another occasion, in a sea-fight, we are told,
"the Countess that day was worth a man; she had the heart of a lion, and
had in her hand a sharp glaive, wherewith she fought fiercely."

[17] Duty.

[18] Honourable.

[19] Request.

[20] There are about twenty variations of the mode of spelling
the name. Wiclif, Wicliffe, and Wycliffe are the most common modes. In
strict propriety we ought to write _De_ Wiclif.

[21] In the Gentleman's Mag. 1841, an attempt was made to show
that the warden of Canterbury Hall was another John Wiclif (or
_Wiclive_). The writer proves that there was another of that name, then
rector of Mayfield in Sussex, for which living he was indebted to the
friendship of Islip, but he does not succeed in identifying him with the
warden of Canterbury; if the wardens of Canterbury and Baliol could be
shown to be different persons, it would, however, remove some
difficulties that had been pointed out long before this curious
discovery was made (see Vaughan's 'Life of Wycliffe,' i. 272, note).
Wiclif nowhere mentions his connexion with Canterbury Hall himself, but
it seems to be referred to by his contemporaries.

[22] It is said, on the authority of Sir Thomas More, who
asserts that he had seen Bibles of an earlier date than Wiclif's, that
the Scriptures had been translated long before his time, but although
parts had been at different times translated, there is good reason to
doubt whether any _complete_ translation had been made. See an excellent
summary of the information on the subject in the Introduction to
Bagster's 'Hexapla,' p. 5 et seq.

[23] Milton's tracts on 'Church Government,' 'Removing
Hirelings from the Church,' &c., might have been written by Wiclif if he
had lived in that day. Their views were very similar in these matters,
and there is an approximation in Wiclif to Milton's opinions on Divorce.
The men were greatly alike in character--stern, uncompromising, each
gave himself up with his whole heart to the promotion of the objects he
had in view, and both measuring other men by their own lofty standard,
dealt out the harshest censure on such as fell short of it.--Milton, by
the way, obliquely defends the violence of his own language by the
example of Wiclif. The genius of the two was so different as obviously
to prohibit comparison--it is in their inflexibility of purpose, their
moral and religious severity of character, that the resemblance
consists.

[24] Courtney said it was a symbol of the need there was of
purifying the church from the pestiferous vapours that hung over it;
Wiclif, that the earth trembled because they were about to put a heresy
upon Christ, as it before trembled when they put his body to death.

[25] Dr. Lingard is hard to please: he sneers at Wiclif for
_not_ seeking the martyr's crown, yet when one of his followers, a few
years later, obtains it, he coolly says, "The enthusiast aspired to the
crown of martyrdom, and had the satisfaction to fall a victim to his own
folly!"--'Hist. of England,' iv. 188 and 332.

[26] Chaucer, perhaps to avoid letting the poems appear to the
public too strict a narration of actual facts, calls them here, and in
various other places, the king and queen.

[27] Pleased.

[28] That which.

[29] Blanche. (See previous note.)

[30] Trust.

[31] War.

[32] Little.

[33] Little.

[34] Birds.

[35] Crowd.

[36] Truth.

[37] Taste.

[38] Counsel.

[39] Nail.

[40] That which.

[41] Obedience, patience.

[42] Spirit, or inward monitor.




ERRATA:


Pg. 111 - Typo corrected: entiled changed to entitled
Pg. 113 - Typo corrected: attribute changed to attributed
Pg. 114 - Typo corrected: doctines changed to doctrines
Pg. 115 - Typo corrected: adjudicaiton changed to adjudication
Pg. 148 - Removed an extra 'other'.




END OF VOL. I.

LONDON: WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cabinet Portrait Gallery of British
Worthies, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PORTRAIT GALLERY--BRITISH WORTHIES ***

***** This file should be named 35544.txt or 35544.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/5/4/35544/

Produced by Marcia Brooks, Donna M. Ritchey and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
