Project Gutenberg's In the Days of Queen Victoria, by Eva March Tappan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: In the Days of Queen Victoria

Author: Eva March Tappan

Release Date: March 14, 2011 [EBook #35576]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN THE DAYS OF QUEEN VICTORIA ***




Produced by Bethanne M. Simms and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Important Historical Books for the Young
_Makers of England Series_

By EVA MARCH TAPPAN, Ph.D.

  _In the Days of Alfred the Great_
    Cloth. Illustrated. _Net_ $1.00

  _In the Days of William the Conqueror_
    Cloth. Illustrated. _Net_ $1.00

  _In the Days of Queen Elizabeth_
    Cloth. Illustrated. _Net_ $1.00

  _In the Days of Queen Victoria_
    Cloth. Illustrated. _Net_ $1.00


By CALVIN DILL WILSON

  _The Story of the Cid Young People_
    Cloth. Illustrated by J. W. Kennedy. $1.25


Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Co., Boston



[Illustration: Her Majesty the Queen in her state robes.
(_From painting by Alfred F. Chalon, R.A., 1838._)]



Makers of England Series



IN THE DAYS

OF

QUEEN VICTORIA



By

EVA MARCH TAPPAN, Ph.D.

AUTHOR OF "IN THE DAYS OF ALFRED THE GREAT," "IN THE DAYS OF
WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR," "IN THE DAYS OF QUEEN ELIZABETH," ETC.

_ILLUSTRATED FROM FAMOUS PAINTINGS AND ENGRAVINGS AND FROM
PHOTOGRAPHS_



BOSTON:
LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO.

Published, August, 1903

COPYRIGHT, 1903, BY LEE AND SHEPARD
_All rights reserved_

IN THE DAYS OF QUEEN VICTORIA




PREFACE


To her own people Queen Victoria was England itself, the emblem of the
realm and of the empire. To millions who were not her people the words
"the Queen" do not bring even yet the thought of the well-beloved woman
who now shares the English throne, but rather of her who for nearly
sixty-four years wore the crown of Great Britain and gave freely to her
country of the gift that was in her.

Other women have been controlled by devotion to duty, other women
have been moved to action by readiness of sympathy, but few have
united so harmoniously a strong determination to do the right with
a never-failing gentleness, a childlike sympathy with unyielding
strength of purpose.

Happy is the realm that can count on the list of its sovereigns one
whose career was so strongly marked by unfaltering faithfulness, by
honesty of aim, and by statesmanlike wisdom of action.

EVA MARCH TAPPAN.

WORCESTER, MASS.
_February, 1903._




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                           PAGE

   I. BABY DRINA,                                    1

  II. THE SCHOOLDAYS OF A PRINCESS,                 21

 III. EXAMINATION DAY,                              43

  IV. A QUEEN AT EIGHTEEN,                          68

   V. THE CORONATION,                               89

  VI. THE COMING OF THE PRINCE,                    114

 VII. HOUSEKEEPING IN A PALACE,                    138

VIII. A HOME OF OUR OWN,                           163

  IX. NIS! NIS! NIS! HURRAH!                       186

   X. THE ROYAL YOUNG PEOPLE,                      212

  XI. THE QUEEN IN SORROW,                         235

 XII. THE LITTLE FOLK,                             259

XIII. MOTHER AND EMPRESS,                          278

 XIV. THE JUBILEE SEASON,                          299

  XV. THE QUEEN AND THE CHILDREN,                  319

 XVI. THE CLOSING YEARS,                           338




ILLUSTRATIONS


Her Majesty the Queen in her state robes. (_From painting
by Alfred E. Chalon, R.A., 1838_)                     _Frontispiece_

                                                       _Facing page_

Her Royal Highness the Duchess of Kent and Princess Victoria
(_From painting by Sir W. Beechey, R.A._)                        16

The Princess Victoria at the age of eleven                       46

The coronation of Queen Victoria. (_From painting by Sir
George Hayter_)                                                 110

Albert, Prince Consort, in the uniform of a field marshal       136

The Queen in 1845. (_From a painting by John Partridge_)        158

Queen Victoria; Prince Albert; Victoria, Princess Royal;
Albert Edward, Prince of Wales; Prince Alfred; Princess
Alice; Princess Helena. (_From a painting by F. Winterhalter,
1848_)                                                          188

Westminster Abbey                                               216

Balmoral Castle                                                 244

Houses of Parliament                                            274

Windsor Castle                                                  302

Her Majesty, Queen Victoria. (_From a photograph by
A .Bassano_)                                                    338




In the Days of Queen Victoria




CHAPTER I

BABY DRINA


"Elizabeth would be a good name for her," said the Duke of Kent.
"Elizabeth was the greatest woman who ever sat on the throne of
England. The English people are used to the name, and they like it."

"But would the Emperor Alexander be pleased?" asked the Duchess. "If he
is to be godfather, ought she not to be named for him?"

"Alexandra--no; Alexandrina," said the Duke thoughtfully. "Perhaps you
are right. 'Queen Alexandrina' has a good sound, and the day may come
when the sovereign of England will be as glad of the friendship of the
Emperor of Russia as the Regent is to-day."

"Are you so sure, Edward, that she will be a sovereign?" asked his wife
with a smile.

"Doesn't she look like a queen?" demanded the Duke. "Look at her golden
hair and her blue eyes! There, see how she put her hand out, just as if
she was giving a command! I don't believe any baby a week old ever did
that before. The next time I review the troops she shall go with me.
You're a soldier's daughter, little one. Come and see the world that
you are to conquer." He lifted the tiny baby, much to the displeasure
of the nurse, and carried her across the room to the window that looked
out upon Kensington Garden. "Now, little one," he whispered into the
baby's ear, "they don't believe us and we won't talk about it, but
you'll be queen some day."

"Is that the way every father behaves with his first baby?" asked the
Duchess.

"They're much alike, your Grace," replied the nurse rather grimly, as
she followed the Duke to the window with a blanket on her arm. The Duke
was accustomed to commanding thousands of men, and every one of them
trembled if his weapons and uniform were not spotless, or if he had
been guilty of the least neglect of duty. In more than one battle the
Duke had stood so firmly that he had received the thanks of Parliament
for his bravery and fearlessness. He would never have surrendered a
city to a besieging army, but now he had met his match, and he laid the
baby in the nurse's arms with the utmost meekness.

The question of a name for the child was not yet decided, for the
wishes of someone else had to be considered, and that was the Prince
Regent, the Duke's older brother, George. He thought it proper that his
niece should be named Georgiana in honor of himself.

"Georgiana let it be," said the Duke of Kent, "her first name shall be
Alexandrina."

"Then Georgiana it shall _not_ be," declared the Prince Regent. "No
niece of mine shall put my name second to any king or emperor here in
my own country. Call her Alexandrina Alexandra Alexander, if you
choose, but she'll not be called Alexandrina Georgiana."

When the time for the christening had arrived the Archbishop of
Canterbury and the Bishop of London came to Kensington in company with
the crimson velvet curtains from the chapel at St. James' and a
beautiful golden font which had been taken from the Tower for the
baptism of the royal baby. The Archbishop and the Bishop, the Prince
Regent, and another brother of the Duke of Kent, who was to represent
the Emperor of Russia as godfather, all stood around the golden font in
the magnificent cupola room, the grand saloon of Kensington Palace. The
godmothers were the child's grandmother and aunt, and they were
represented by English princesses. All the royal family were present.

After the prayers had been said and the promises of the sponsors made,
the Archbishop took the little Princess in his arms and, turning to the
godfathers and the godmothers, he said: "Name this child."

"Alexandrina," responded the Duke of York.

"Give her another name," bade the Duke of Kent in a low tone.

"Name her for her mother, then," said the Prince Regent to the
Archbishop, and the baby was christened Alexandrina Victoria.

It made little difference to either the Duke or the baby how the Prince
Regent might feel about her name, for the Duke was the happiest of
fathers, and the little Drina, as the Princess was called, was a merry,
sweet-tempered baby. Everyone at Kensington loved her, and over the sea
was a grandmother, the Dowager Duchess of Coburg, who could hardly wait
for the day to come when she would be able to see the child. "How
pretty the little Mayflower will be," she wrote, "when I see it in a
year's time." Another letter said: "The English like queens, and the
niece of the beloved Princess Charlotte will be most dear to them."
Princess Charlotte was the only child of Prince George, and the nation
had loved her and longed to have her for their queen. She had married
Leopold, the brother of the Duchess of Kent, and had died only two
years before "Princess Drina" was born.

The succession to the English crown was in a peculiar condition. The
king, George III., had become insane, and his eldest son, George, was
ruling as Prince Regent. If the Regent lived longer than his father, he
would become George IV. His next younger brother was Frederick, Duke of
York; then came William, Duke of Clarence; and then the Duke of Kent.
George and Frederick had no children, and William's baby girl died on
the very day that the Princess Alexandrina was born. If these three
brothers died without children, the Duke of Kent would become king; but
even then, if the Duke should have a son, the law was that he, rather
than the daughter, should inherit the crown. The baby Princess, then,
stood fifth in the succession to the throne, and a child born to any
one of these three uncles, or a son born to her father, would remove
her still further from sovereignty.

The English people had talked of all these possibilities. The Duke of
Kent had also several younger brothers, but they were all middle-aged
men, the youngest forty-five, and not one of them had a child. If all
the children of George III. died without heirs, the English crown would
descend to a line of Germans who had never walked on English soil. "We
have had one king who could not speak English," said the people, "and
we do not want another." The Duke of Kent was a general favorite among
them, and they hoped that he, and after him his daughter, would become
their ruler. Indeed, they hoped for this so strongly that they began to
feel sure that it would come to pass. Everyone wanted to see the little
Princess. Many a person lingered under the palace windows for hours,
and went away feeling well repaid for the delay if he had caught a
glimpse of the royal baby in her nurse's arms.

When the Princess was four months old, the Duke gave orders one
afternoon that she should be made ready for a drive with him.

"But is it not the day of the military review on Hounslow Heath?" asked
the Duchess.

"Yes," replied the Duke, "and where else should a soldier's daughter be
but at a review? I want to see how she likes the army. You know she
will be at the head of the army some day," he added half in jest and
half in earnest. "Won't you let me have her?" The Duchess shook her
head playfully. Just then the nurse entered the room with the little
Princess in her outdoor wraps. The tall Duke caught up the child and
ran to the carriage like a naughty boy with a forbidden plaything, and
the nurse followed.

At the review the Duke was not so stern a disciplinarian as usual, for
more than one man who was expected to stand "eyes front" took a sly
look at the pretty baby in her nurse's arms, and the proud father
forgot to blame him for the misdemeanor. After the review the people
gathered about the carriage.

"God bless the child," cried an old man. "She'll be a Princess
Charlotte to us."

"Look at her sweet face," said another. "Did you ever see such bright
blue eyes? She'll be a queen who can see what her people want."

There were hurrahs for the Princess and hurrahs for the Duke. Then a
voice in the crowd cried: "Give us a rousing cheer for the Duchess who
cares for her own baby and doesn't leave her to the hired folk."

In all this hubbub and confusion the blue-eyed baby did not cry or show
the least fear. "She's a soldier's child," said the Duke with delight,
and he took her from the nurse and helped her to wave her tiny hand to
the admiring crowd.

Prince George had never been on good terms with his brother, the Duke
of Kent, and after the affair of the name he was less friendly than
ever. He was always jealous of the child, and when he heard of her
reception at the review he was thoroughly angry. "That infant is too
young to be brought into public," he declared.

She was not brought into so public a place again, but she won friends
wherever she went. The Duke could not bear to have her away from him
for an hour, and the greatest honor he could show to a guest was to
allow him to take the little one in his arms. An old friend was at the
Palace, one evening, and when he rose to go, the Duke said: "No, come
with me first and see the child in her crib." As they entered the room
of the little Princess, the Duke said: "We are going to Sidmouth in two
or three days to cheat the winter, and so we may not meet again for
some time. I want you to give my child your blessing. Pray for her, not
merely that her life may be brilliant and free from trouble, but that
God will bless her, and that in all the years to come He will guide her
and guard her." The prayer was made, and the Duke responded with an
earnest "Amen."

In a few days the family set out for Sidmouth. Kensington was becoming
cold and damp, and the precious baby must not be risked in the London
chills of the late autumn. The Duchess, moreover, had devoted herself
so closely to her child that she needed a change and rest.

At Sidmouth the old happy life of the past six months went on for a
little while. The house was so small that it was called "hardly more
than a cottage," but it had pretty verandas and bay windows, shaded by
climbing roses and honeysuckles. It stood on a sunny knoll, with tall
trees circling around it. Just below the knoll was a little brook
running merrily to the sea, a quarter of a mile away, and, following
the lead of the brook, was the road. Sidmouth was a nest of sunbeams,
and the baby Princess was well and strong. "She is too healthy, I
fear," wrote the Duke, "in the opinion of some members of my family by
whom she is regarded as an intruder."

The people of Sidmouth did not look upon the pretty, blue-eyed baby as
an intruder, and there was great excitement in the village when it was
known that the Duke had taken Woolbrook Glen. Every boy in the country
around was eager to see the soldier Duke who had been in real battles,
and every girl longed for a sight of the little Princess, There was no
difficulty in seeing them when they had once come, for whenever it was
pleasant they were out of doors, walking or driving. A lady who met the
party one morning wrote that the Duke and the Duchess were strolling
along arm in arm, and close to them was the nurse carrying the Princess
with her white swansdown bonnet and cloak. She was holding out her hand
to the Duke, and just as the village people drew near, he took her from
the nurse and lifted her to his shoulder.

When the Duke had been away from the house, his first thought on
returning was the little daughter. One morning, only a few days after
this meeting with the lady and her children, he took a long walk in the
rain. He was hardly over the threshold on his return before he called,
"Where's my daughter? Bring little Drina."

"But, Edward," the Duchess objected, "your boots must be wet through.
Won't you change them first? You will surely be ill."

"Soldiers aren't ill, my lady," replied the Duke, laughing. "I never
was ill in all my life. Where's my queen?"

An hour's romp with the merry baby followed. But then came a chill, and
the strong man was overcome with inflammation of the lungs. In those
days physicians had little knowledge how to treat such a disease. They
had an idea that whenever one was feverish he had too much blood, and
that some of it must be taken away; so the Duke was bled until, if he
had not been in the least ill, the loss of blood would have made him
faint and weak. A messenger was sent to London to bring a famous
doctor, but when he came the Duke was dead. "I could have done nothing
else," said the great man, "except to bleed him much more than you have
done."

Prince Leopold had come to Sidmouth a day or two earlier, and he went
with the Duchess and the Princess to London. The villagers gathered
about the carriage to bid a silent farewell to the sorrowful company.
Many of them were weeping and their tears flowed still faster when the
nurse held the baby up to the carriage window and whispered, "Say
good-by to the people;" for the little one waved her hand and patted
the glass and sprang up and down in her nurse's arms without the least
realization of her loss.

The carriage rolled away, but the people stood watching it until it was
out of sight.

"That's the sweetest child in all England," said one woman, wiping her
eyes with the corner of her apron, "and now the poor little thing will
have no father."

"Did ever you see a man so fond of his child as the Duke?" said another
with a sob.

"King George had nine sons," said a man who stood near, "and the Duke
was every whit the best of them. The King never treated him fairly.
When the others wanted money, they had it; but when the Duke needed it,
his father just said, 'Get along as you can.' There wasn't one of the
sons that the King wasn't kinder to than to the Duke."

"He'll have little more chance to be kind or unkind," declared another.
"Have you not heard the news from London? The King is very ill, and the
Prince Regent will soon be George IV."

"It's bad luck speaking ill of him that's to be king," said one, "but
the man that's gone to London in his coffin was the man that I'd have
liked to see on the throne."

"Will the Duchess go back to her own land, think you?" questioned the
first woman.

"Yes, that she will," replied the second positively "There never was a
woman that loved her own people better than she. Folks say she writes
her mother every day of her life."

"I say she'll not go back," declared one of the men with equal
positiveness. "She'll do her duty, and her duty is to care for the
Princess. God bless her, and make her our queen some day."

So the people in the village talked, and so people were talking
throughout the kingdom. After the first sad days were past the question
had to be decided by the Duchess and her devoted brother Leopold. The
Duchess loved her family and her old home at Amorbach, near Heidelberg.
There she and the Duke had spent the first months of their married
life, and nothing would have helped her more to bear her loneliness
than a return to the Bavarian Palace, in which every room was
associated with memories of him. She was a stranger in England and she
could not even speak the language of the country. The Duke's sisters
loved her, and Adelaide, who had been a German princess before she
became the wife of the Duke of Clarence gave her the warmest sympathy
in this time of sorrow; but the Regent disliked her and had always
seemed indignant at the possibility that his brother's child would
inherit the throne. The Regent had now become king, for his father had
died on the very day of the Duchess's return to London. Unless a child
was born to either the Duke of York or the Duke of Clarence the baby
Princess would become queen at their death. The child who would rule
England ought to be brought up in England.

There was something else to be considered, however. When the Duchess
was only a girl of seventeen she had become the wife of the Prince of
Leiningen, and at his death he had made her sole guardian of their two
children, Charles and Feodore. As soon as Charles was old enough he
would succeed his father as ruler of Leiningen but until then his
mother was Regent.

"Is it right for me to neglect my duties in Bavaria?" questioned the
Duchess; "to give up the regency of Leiningen? Shall I neglect Charles
to care for Drina's interest?"

"Charles will be well cared for," said Prince Leopold. "His people love
him already and will be true to him. England is a great kingdom. It is
not an easy land to rule. A queen who has grown up in another country
will never hold the hearts of the people."

"True," said the Duchess. "I must live in England. That is my duty to
my child and to her country."

How the Duchess and her child were to live was a question of much
importance. The King could not refuse to allow them to occupy their old
apartments in Kensington Palace, but the Duchess was almost penniless.
Nearly all the money which her first husband had left her she had been
obliged to give up on her second marriage and she had surrendered all
the Duke's property to his creditors to go as far as it would in paying
his debts. Some money had been settled upon her when she married the
Duke, but that was so tied up that it would be many months before she
could touch it. The only plea that she could make to the King would be
on the ground that her child might become his heir, and nothing would
have enraged him so much as to suggest such a thing. Whatever
Parliament might appropriate to the Princess would be given against the
wishes of the King, and there would, at any rate, be a long delay. It
was a strange condition of affairs. The child would probably have
millions at her command before many years had passed, but for the
present there was no money even to pay the wages of the servants for
their care of her.

[Illustration: Her Royal Highness the Duchess of Kent and Princess
Victoria.
(_From painting by Sir W. Beechey, R.A._)]

If this story had been a fairy tale, the fairy godmother with the magic
wand would have been called upon to shower golden guineas into the
empty purse, but in this case it was the good uncle who came to the aid
of his Princess niece. When Prince Leopold married the Princess
Charlotte he went to England to live, for he expected that some day his
wife would become Queen of Great Britain. After her death he made his
home in England, but spent much of his time in travelling. He was not
rich, but he was glad to help his sister as much as possible, and after
the death of the Duke of Kent he made her and her children his first
care.

It was decided, then, that the Duchess would remain in England, and
that Kensington Palace should become the home of the Princess
Alexandrina Victoria. This was a large, comfortable-looking abode. It
had been a favorite home of several of the English sovereigns. About it
were gardens cut into beds shaped like scrolls, palm leaves, ovals,
circles, and all sorts of conventional figures so prim and stiff that
one might well have wondered how flowers ever dared to grow in any
shape but rectangular. The yew trees were trimmed into peacocks and
lions and other kinds of birds and beasts. All this was interesting
only as a curiosity, but there was a pretty pond and there were long,
beautiful avenues of trees. There were flowers and shrubs and soft
green turf. It was out of the fog and smoke of the city; indeed it was
so far out that there was danger of robbers to the man who ventured to
walk or drive at night through the unlighted roads. For many years
after the birth of the Princess a bell was rung Sunday evenings so that
all Londoners might meet and guard against danger by going over the
lonely way to their homes in one large company.

The life at Kensington was very quiet. No one would have guessed from
seeing the royal baby that the fate which lay before her was different
from that to be expected for any other child who was not the daughter
of a Prince. She spent much of the time out of doors, at first in the
arms of her nurse, then in a tiny carriage, in which her half-sister,
the Princess Feodore, liked to draw her about. "She must learn never to
be afraid of people," declared the wise mother, and before the child
could speak plainly she was taught to make a little bow when strangers
came near her carriage and say, "Morning, lady," or "Morning, sir."

The little girl was happy, but life was hard for the mother. She had
given up her home and her friends, and now she had to give up even her
own language, for English and not German must be her child's mother
tongue, and she set to work bravely to conquer the mysteries of English
Her greatest comfort in her loneliness was the company of the Duchess
Adelaide, wife of the Duke of Clarence. For many weeks after the death
of the Duke of Kent, the Duchess drove to Kensington every day to spend
some time with her sister-in-law. When the Princess was about a year
and a half old, a little daughter was born to the Duchess Adelaide, but
in three months she was again childless. She had none of the royal
brothers' jealousy of the baby at Kensington, and she wrote to the
Duchess of Kent, "My little girls are dead, but your child lives, and
she shall be mine, too."




CHAPTER II

THE SCHOOLDAYS OF A PRINCESS


Nothing could be more simple than the order of the Princess' day at
Kensington. Breakfast was at eight, and it was eaten out of doors
whenever the weather was good. The Princess sat in a tiny rosewood
chair beside her mother, and the little girl's breakfast was spread on
a low table before her. Whatever other children might have, there were
no luxuries for this child. Bread and milk and fruit made up her
breakfast, and nothing more would have been given her no matter how she
might have begged for it. After breakfast she would have liked to play
with her beloved Feodore, but Feodore had to go to her lessons. When
the weather was fair, however, a pleasure awaited the little girl. Her
uncle, the Duke of York, had given her a white donkey, and at this hour
she was allowed to ride it in Kensington Gardens. Her nurse walked
beside her, and on the other side was an old soldier whom her father
had especially liked. This riding was a great delight to the child, but
there was sometimes a storm of childish wrath before the hour was over,
for the Duchess had said, "She must ride and walk by turns," and when
the turn came for walking, the tiny maiden often objected to obeying
her mother's orders.

When it was time for the Duchess to eat luncheon, the Princess had her
dinner, but it was so simple a meal that many of the servants of the
palace would have felt themselves very hardly used if they had had no
greater variety and no richer fare. The afternoon was often spent under
the trees, and at some time, either before supper or after, came a
drive with her mother. Supper was at seven, but the little girl's meal
consisted of nothing but bread and milk. At nine o'clock she was put to
bed, not in the nursery, but in her mother's room, for the Duchess had
no idea of being separated from her children, and the Princess Feodore
slept at one side of her mother, while on the other hand stood the
little bed of the baby sister.

It was a simple, happy, healthy life. The great objection to it was
that the child rarely had a playmate of her own age. Two little girls,
daughters of an old friend of the Duke's, came once a week to see her,
but they were several years her seniors. Feodore was never weary of
playing with her, but Feodore was almost twelve years older, so that
when the child was four years old, Feodore was quite a young lady.
Perhaps no one realized how much she needed children of her own age,
for she was so merry and cheerful, so ready to be pleased and amused,
and so friendly with everyone who came near her.

A learned clergyman reported that when he called on the Duchess the
little Princess was on the floor beside her mother with her playthings
"of which I soon became one," he added.

One day the Duchess said: "Drina, there is a little girl only a year
older than you who plays wonderfully well on the harp. Should you like
to hear her?"

"I'm almost four years old," was the child's reply. "What is her name?"

"She is called Lyra," said the Duchess. "Should you like to hear her
play?"

The Princess was very fond of music even when she was hardly more than
a baby, and she could scarcely wait for the day to come when she could
hear the little girl. At last Lyra and her harp were brought to the
palace, and the music began. The talented child played piece after
piece, then she stopped a moment to rest. This was the Princess'
opportunity. Music was good, but a real little girl was a great rarity,
and the small hostess began a conversation.

"Does your doll have a red dress?" she asked. "Mine has, and she has a
bonnet with swans-down on it. Does yours have a bonnet?"

"I haven't any doll," answered Lyra.

"Haven't you any playroom?" asked the Princess wonderingly.

"No," said the little musician.

The Princess had supposed that all children had dolls and toys, and she
said: "I have a playroom upstairs, and there are dolls in it and a
house for them and a big, big ship like the one my papa sailed in once.
Haven't you any ship or any doll-house?"

"No."

"Haven't you any sister Feodore?"

"No."

Then the warm-hearted little Princess threw her arm around the child
musician and said:

"Come over here to the rug, and let's play. You shall have some of my
playthings, and perhaps your mamma will make you a doll-house when you
go home."

The Duchess had left the two children for a few minutes, and when she
returned they were sitting on the fur rug in front of the fire. The
harp was forgotten, and they were having a delightful time playing
dolls, just as if they were not the one a princess and the other a
musical prodigy. They were too busy to notice the Duchess, and as she
stood at the door a moment, she heard her little daughter saying:

"You may have the doll to take home with you, Lyra. Put on her red
dress and her white bonnet and her cloak, for she'll be ill if you
don't. Her name is Adelaide, for that is my aunt's name."

The Princess was not yet four years old, but her mother was beginning
to feel somewhat anxious about her education. Other children might
play, but the child who was to be queen of England must not be allowed
to give even her babyhood to amusement. The mother began to teach her
the alphabet, but the little girl had a very decided will of her own,
and she did not wish to learn the alphabet.

"But you will never be able to read books as I do, if you do not
learn," said the mother.

"Then I'll learn," promised the child. "I'll learn very quick."

The alphabet was learned, but the resolutions of three-year old
children do not always endure, and the small student objected to
further study.

"My little girl does not like her books as well as I could wish," wrote
the Duchess to her mother; but the grandmother took the part of the
child. "Do not tease your little puss with learning," was her reply.
"She is so young still. Albert is only making eyes at a picture book."
This Albert was one of the Princess' German cousins only a few weeks
younger than she; and the great delight of the Coburg grandmother was
to compare the growth and attainments of the two children and note all
their amusing little speeches.

The Duchess, however, did not follow the advice of her mother, but more
than a month before her little daughter was four years old she decided
to engage a tutor for her. She herself and Feodore were reading English
with the Rev. Mr. Davys, the clergyman of a neighboring parish, and
during even the first few lessons the Duchess was so charmed with his
gentle, kindly manner and his intellectual ability that she said to him
one day: "You teach so well that I wish you would teach my little
daughter."

So it was that the learned clergyman appeared at the palace one bright
April morning armed with a box of alphabet blocks. The Duchess seemed
quite troubled and anxious about the small child's intellectual
deficiencies, and when the preparations for the lesson had been made,
she said:

"Now, Victoria, if you are good and say your lesson well, I will give
you the box of bright-colored straw that you wanted."

"I'll be good, mamma," the little girl promised, "but won't you please
give me the box first?"

The lesson began with a review of the alphabet; then came a struggle
with the mysterious _b-a, b-e, b-i, b-o, b-u, b-y_, "which we did not
quite conquer," the tutor regretfully writes. Mr. Davys kept a journal
of the progress of the Princess during the first two years of his
instruction, and he records gravely after the second lesson that she
pronounced _much_ as _muts_, that he did not succeed in teaching her to
count as far as five, and that when he tried to show her how to make an
_o_, he could not make her move her hand in the right direction. It
seems to have been a somewhat willful little hand, for a week later
when he wished her to make an _h_, she would make nothing but _o's._
"If you will make _h_ to-day," said the patient tutor, "you shall have
a copy of _o's_ to-morrow;" but when to-morrow had come and the copy
had been prepared, the capricious little maiden did not care to make
_o_, she preferred to make _h_.

The troubled instructor tried various plans to interest his small
charge. He wrote short words on cards and asked her to bring them to
him from another part of the room as he named them. He read her stories
and nursery rhymes, and one day, when he seems to have been almost at
his wit's end, he persuaded the Princess Feodore and her governess to
stand with his little pupil and recite as if they were in a class at
school. His report for that day records with a good deal of satisfaction,
"This seemed to please her." Willful as she was, however, she was very
tender-hearted, and when he asked her to spell the word _bad_, she
sobbed and cried, because she fancied that he was applying it to
herself.

When Mr. Davys came in the morning, he would frequently inquire if she
had been good. One day he asked the Duchess:

"Was the Princess good while she was in the nursery?"

"She was good this morning," replied her mother, "but yesterday there
was quite a little storm."

"Yes, mamma," added the honest little girl, "there were two storms, one
when I was washed and another when I was dressed."

Sometimes her honesty put her mother into a difficult position. One day
the Duchess said:

"Victoria, when you are naughty you make both me and yourself very
unhappy."

"No, mamma," the child replied, "not me, but you."

The lessons went on with much regularity, considering that the pupil
was a princess. On her fourth birthday she not only had a birthday
party, but she was invited to court. "Uncle King," as she called George
IV., gave a state dinner, and she was asked to be one of the guests.
Most children, however, would have thought the invitation hardly worth
accepting, for she was only brought into the room for a few minutes to
speak to the King and the royal family, then she was taken away to eat
her usual simple meal.

When the Princess had been studying with Mr. Davys about five months,
she was taken to the seashore, and from there she wrote, or, rather,
printed, a letter to her tutor. It said:

    "MY DEAR SIR I DO NOT FORGET MY LETTERS NOR WILL I FORGET YOU
    VICTORIA."

The name Alexandrina had been gradually dropped. The Duchess had feared
at first that as "Victoria" was unfamiliar in England, the English
people might dislike it. Moreover, as the royal brothers were so
unfriendly to her, she did not wish that the use of her name should
prejudice them against the child. There was little danger of anyone
disliking the child, however, for she was so winsome a young maiden
that whoever spoke to her became her friend. One of her most devoted
admirers was her Uncle Leopold, and her idea of the highest bliss was
to make a visit at his house. A few months after the beginning of her
education, she visited him, and Mr. Davys drove to the house twice a
week to continue her instruction. Her uncle was present at the lessons,
and he was as troubled as the Duchess because little Victoria did not
like to read.

It is no wonder that the child enjoyed her visits to Claremont. Prince
Leopold's home was a large brick mansion, with stately cedars on the
lawn, and high up on a column a great bronze peacock that was a source
of wonder and amusement. There was a lake, with groves of pines beyond
it. There was a farm, with lambs and calves and ducklings. Best of all,
there was Uncle Leopold, who was always ready to walk or drive with
her, and to tell her wonderful stories.

It was very delightful to visit an uncle who was a prince, but even at
Claremont it was never forgotten that the wee child was being trained
to be a queen. The stories must not be without a moral; her uncle's
charming talks of flowers and animals must be planned to introduce her
to botany and natural history; and even in her play she was carefully
watched lest some thoughtlessness should be overlooked which ought to
be checked. One day she took her tiny rake and began to make a haycock,
but before it was done something else interested her, and she dropped
the rake. "No, no, Princess," called her governess, "come back and
finish the haycock. You must never leave a thing half done."

In Kensington she was never taken to church, lest she should attract
too much attention, but service was read in the chapel of the palace.
At Claremont, however, she went to the village church. She usually wore
a white dress, made as simply as that of any village child, and a plain
little straw bonnet; but at the church door the resemblance ended, for
while other children might fidget about or perhaps go to sleep, the
Princess had some hard work to do. Mr. Davys had said that she was
"volatile," and disliked fixing her attention. That fault must be
corrected, of course, and so the child was required to remember and
repeat to her mother not only the text but the principal heads of the
sermon, no matter how uninteresting it might be. The little girl must
have longed to do something, somewhere, with no one to watch her. There
is a story that when she once went to visit the Duchess of Clarence,
her aunt asked: "Now, Victoria, what should you like to do? What will
be the greatest treat I can give you?" and, the little child replied,
"Oh, Aunt Adelaide, if you will only let me clean the windows, I'd
rather do that than anything else."

Money matters had become somewhat easier for the Duchess, as an
allowance had been made her which enabled her to give the Princess such
surroundings and advantages as ought to be given to one in her
position. Nevertheless, the simplicity of the child's daily life was
not altered, and her pocket money was not made any more lavish. When
the little girl was seven years old, she was taken to a bazaar, where
she bought presents for one after another until she had reached the
bottom of her rather shallow purse. But there was a half-crown box that
she did so want to give to someone!

"I should like this very much," she said wistfully, "but I have no more
money to-day."

"That makes no difference," replied the storekeeper, and he began to
wrap the box with her other purchases.

"No," objected the governess, "the Princess has not the money, and she
must not buy what she cannot pay for."

"Then I will lay it aside until she can purchase it," said the
storekeeper, and the little girl exclaimed, "Oh, thank you! if you will
be so good."

When the day for the payment of her allowance came, the child did not
delay a moment, but long before her breakfast hour she appeared at the
store to pay for the box and carry it home with her. She was not at all
afraid of carrying bundles, and thought it was a delightful expedition
to go to the milliner's with her mother and Feodore to buy a new hat,
to wait in the shop until it was trimmed, and then carry it home in her
own hand.

The great excitement of her seventh year was the visit that she paid
the King. Disagreeable as he often was to the mother, he made himself
quite charming to the child, and he was delighted with the frank
affection that she showed him in return.

"The band shall play whatever you choose," he said to her. "What shall
it be?"

"I should like 'God Save the King,'" replied the little girl.

It was hard to be jealous of such an heir to the throne as that. During
her stay the King had taken her to drive, and this was a great event,
for he himself had held the reins. When she was saying farewell at the
close of the three-days' visit, he asked, "What have you enjoyed most
during your visit?" and he was much pleased when she answered, "Oh,
Uncle King, the drive I had with you." It is no wonder that the
grandmother in Coburg wrote, "The little monkey must have pleased and
amused him; she is such a pretty, clever child."

The Duchess was beginning to receive the reward that she deserved for
giving up her home and her friends, not only in the result of her
devotion to her little daughter as shown in the child's character, but
also in the appreciation of herself and her efforts which was felt in
her adopted country. In both the House of Lords and the House of
Commons speeches had been made paying the warmest tributes to the
manner in which she was bringing up the little girl who was to become
the queen.

Before Victoria was eight years old, it was thought to be time for her
education to receive still more attention, though one would suppose
that there need have been no anxiety about the intellectual progress of
the child, who before she was six years old could repeat the heads of
one of the lengthy sermons of the day. Mr. Davys was now formally
appointed her tutor, and he went to live at Kensington. Then, indeed,
there was work. Miss Lehzen, governess of the Princess Feodore, taught
the child as usual; a writing-master made his appearance, who taught
her the clear, refined, and dignified hand that never changed; a
teacher of singing was engaged; another teacher instructed her in
dancing; a Royal Academician taught her drawing; German and French were
also studied.

Mr. Davys' special work was to teach her history and English, and the
number of books that she read with him is somewhat startling. During
the year 1826 there were four books of Scriptural stories and four
books of moral stories on her list. The children's books of the day had
a fashion of not being satisfied with teaching one thing at a time, and
even one of the four natural histories that she read contrived to make
the story of each bird contain some profound moral instruction. One
book on English history and one on modern history in general appear on
the list. Geography and grammar are each represented by two small
volumes. Poetry appears in the form of "The Infant's Minstrel," a title
which the eight-year old child of to-day would utterly scorn. "General
Knowledge" is represented by one book on the famous picture galleries,
castles, and other noteworthy structures in England, and another
describing the occupations and trades of the land. Even here, however,
moral lessons had their allotted place, and each trade was made to
teach some moral truth. The third book of the series described the
quaint old customs of the kingdom.

During the following three years the instruction of the Princess was
continued on similar lines. In 1827, the year in which her eighth
birthday occurred, she began a book with the comprehensive title, "An
Introduction to Astronomy, Geography, and the Use of the Globes." After
she had studied this book with the hard name for two years, it seems a
great intellectual downfall to find her "promoted" to "Elements of
Geography for the Use of Young Children." In 1828 she began Latin.
She also studied the catechism and then an abridgment of the two
Testaments. Remembering that the little girl was studying French,
German, music, dancing, and drawing, one wonders how she ever
"crowded it in." Fortunately, her schedule for the week has been
preserved, and it is interesting reading. Her day's work began at
half-past nine. On Monday morning the first hour was given to
geography and natural history, the second to a drawing lesson. From
half-past eleven till three was devoted to dinner and either playing
or walking. From three to four she drew or wrote a Latin exercise.
The following hour was given to French, and from five to six came
music and "repetition"--whatever that may have been--for Mr. Davys.
After her three hours of study in the afternoon, without even a
ten-minutes' "recess," the day's work was at an end, and from six to
nine there was no more studying; but there seems to have been some
instructive reading aloud by either the Duchess or Miss Lehzen, for
the story has survived that when the Duchess was reading Roman
history and read the old story of Cornelia's pointing to her sons and
declaring, "These are my jewels," the small critic remarked, "But,
mamma, she ought to have said, 'These are my carnelians.'"

No two days in the Princess' week were alike. One hour a week was
devoted to learning the catechism, another to a dancing lesson, another
to needlework and learning poetry by heart. All this teaching went on
for six days in the week, for she had no Saturday holidays; and on
Saturday morning came an hour that would alarm most children, for it
was devoted to a repetition to Mr. Davys of all that she had learned
during the week. Her lessons were made as interesting as possible by
explanations and stories and pictures and games. A history and a little
German grammar were written expressly for her; but, after all, the
little girl was the one who had to do the work. She had to understand
and learn and remember, and even if she was a princess no one could do
these things for her. Sir Walter Scott dined with the Duchess of Kent
during Victoria's ninth year. He wrote in his journal: "Was presented
to the little Princess Victoria, the heir-apparent to the throne as
things now stand." It is no wonder that he added, "This lady is
educated with much care."

The same year stole away the beloved Feodore, for she married a German
prince and went to the Continent to live. This was a great loss to the
little Princess, for she was so carefully guarded that Feodore had been
almost her only playmate. Other children had companions without number;
they went to children's parties and had good times generally; but a
party was a great rarity in the life of the Princess, and she was ten
years old before she went to a children's ball.

This famous ball which she then attended was her first sight of a court
ceremonial. It was given in honor of a little girl of her own age,
Maria, Queen of Portugal, who was making a visit to England. The
Princess wore a simple white dress, but the little Donna Maria was
gorgeous in crimson velvet all ablaze with jewels. Every one was
comparing the two children in dress and looks and manners. The plain
dress of the Princess was generally preferred, and her graceful manners
were admired, but the Portuguese queen was called the prettier. When
the King first talked of giving this ball, a lady of the court
exclaimed, "Oh, do! It will be so nice to see the _two little queens_
dancing together." The King was very angry at the speech, but he
finally decided to give the ball, and the "two little queens" did dance
in the same quadrille. It is rather sad to relate that the small lady
from Portugal fell down and hurt herself, and, in spite of the sympathy
of the King, she went away crying, while the English Princess danced on
and had the most delightful evening of her life. Then Cinderella went
to bed, and in the morning she awoke to the workaday world that she had
left for a single evening.




CHAPTER III

EXAMINATION DAY


When Queen Victoria was a tiny child, she is said to have asked her
mother one day, "Mamma, why is it that when Feodore and I are walking
all the gentlemen raise their hats to me and not to her?" In 1830, when
she was nearly eleven years old, her mother and her teachers thought
that it was time for her question to be answered. The King was so ill
that everyone knew he could not live many months. The Duke of York had
died three years earlier; therefore at the King's death William, Duke
of Clarence, would ascend the throne, and Victoria would succeed him.

It seems quite probable that the bright little girl had before this
time answered the question for herself. There are stories that if she
failed in a lesson a certain teasing boy cousin of hers used to say,
"Yes, a pretty queen you will make!" and then he would suggest that
when a queen did not rule well her head was likely to be cut off.
Another story is that when the child was reading aloud to her mother
about the Princess Charlotte, she suddenly looked up from her book and
asked, "Mamma, shall I ever be a queen?" Tradition says that the
Duchess replied: "It is very possible. I want you to be a good woman,
and then you will be a good queen." Whether there is any truth in these
stories or not, the child was too observing not to have noticed when
very young that she was treated differently from other children, even
her sister Feodore. She lived very simply, and Miss Lehzen was always
at hand to correct the least approach to a fault; but she could not
have failed to see that she was watched wherever she went and that far
more attention was paid to her than to her mother. Indeed, she herself
said long afterwards that the knowledge of her position came to her
gradually and that she "cried much" at the thought of ever having to be
a queen.

The little girl kept these thoughts to herself, and even her mother did
not know that she was dreading a future on a throne. There are several
accounts of just how she was finally told that she would some day wear
the crown, but a version which may be trusted comes from Mr. Davys.

"Princess," he said, "to-morrow I wish you to give me a chart of the
kings and queens of England."

When morning came, she gave him the chart, and he read it carefully.
Then he said:

"It is well done, but it does not go far enough. You have put down
'Uncle King' as reigning, and you have written 'Uncle William' as the
heir to the throne, but who should follow him?"

The little girl hesitated, then she said, "I hardly liked to put down
myself."

One story of the way the announcement was made to the Princess was
written--nearly forty years after the event--by her strict and adoring
governess, but it makes her out such a priggish, Pharisaical little
moralizer that one cannot help fancying that the devoted woman
unconsciously put into the mouth of her idol the speeches that seemed
to her appropriate, not to the child, but to the occasion. She says
that when the Princess was told of her position, she declared: "Many a
child would boast, but they don't know the difficulty. There is much
splendor, but there is more responsibility." Then the governess
reminded her that if her Aunt Adelaide should have children they would
be the ones to ascend the throne. According to this account, the child
answered: "If it were so, I should be very glad, for I know by the love
Aunt Adelaide bears me how fond she is of children." It seems probable
that after the Princess had been told what lay before her, Miss Lehzen
made speeches somewhat like these, and that the conscientious,
tender-hearted little girl assented to them.

Mr. Davys told the Duchess about the chart, and she wrote at once to
the Bishop of London that the Princess now understood her position. The
letter ended, "We have everything to hope from this child."

[Illustration: The Princess Victoria at the age of eleven.]

It must have given the little girl of eleven years a strange feeling to
read a chart of sovereigns of her country and know that her own name
would be written in the next vacant place. She had seen the deference
paid to "Uncle King," she knew that his will was law, and it must have
made the child's brain whirl to think "Some day I shall be in his
place." She had always been trained to the most strict obedience, but
she knew that some day whatever order she chose to give would be
obeyed. She seems to have thought more of the responsibility of the
throne than of its glories; but if she had felt ever so much inclined
to boast, she would soon have realized that after all she was only a
little girl who must obey rather than command, for the first
consequence of her queenly prospects was an examination in her lessons
before two learned bishops.

The Duchess believed that the training of the future queen was the most
important matter in the country. She could hardly have helped feeling
that she had been most successful in her efforts to make the child what
she ought to be, but after all, she herself was a German, her child was
to rule an English realm, and the careful mother wished to make sure
that the little girl was having the kind of instruction that would best
prepare her for the difficult position she would have to fill. She
selected two bishops as her advisers, men of much learning and fine
character, and wrote them a long letter about the Princess. She told
them what masters had been chosen for her and in what branch each one
had instructed her. She enclosed a list of the books the Princess had
read, a record of every lesson she had taken, and the schedule of her
study hours. She said that she herself had been present at almost every
lesson, and that Miss Lehzen, whose special task it was to assist the
little girl in preparing her work for the different masters, was always
in attendance.

With this letter went a report from each instructor, stating not only
what books she had used but what his opinion was of her progress and
ability. Although there was so much temptation to use flattery, these
reports seem to have been written with remarkable sincerity and
truthfulness. The writing master said that his pupil had "a peculiar
talent" for arithmetic, but he was apparently not quite satisfied with
her handwriting, for he closed with the sentence, "If the Princess
endeavors to imitate her writing examples, her success is certain." The
teacher of German wrote, "Her orthography is now tolerably correct,"
but he did not show the least enthusiasm over his statement, "There is
no doubt of her knowing the leading rules of the German language quite
well," though surely this was no small acquisition for a child of
eleven. The French teacher declared that her pronunciation was perfect,
that she was well advanced in knowledge of French grammar and could
carry on a conversation in French, but that she spoke better than she
wrote. He added: "The Princess is much further advanced than is usually
the case with children of her age." Mr. Davys, with his great love for
his little pupil, seems to have had a struggle with himself to keep
from speaking of her as warmly as he longed to speak, but he did allow
himself to say at the close of his report:

"It is my expectation that the disposition and attainments of the
Princess will be such as to gratify the anxious wishes, as well as to
reward the earnest exertions, with which your Royal Highness has
watched over the education of the Princess."

These honest, straightforward reports were sent to the two bishops. The
Duchess asked them to read the papers carefully and then examine the
"singularly situated child," as she called the Princess, to see whether
she had made as much progress as she should have done, and in what
respects they would suggest any change of method and teaching.

Three weeks after the letter was written the two bishops went to
Kensington and examined the little maiden in "Scripture, catechism,
English history, Latin, and arithmetic." Both were gentle, kindly men,
and both had little children of their own. Evidently they knew how to
question the royal child in such a fashion that she was not startled or
made too nervous to do her best, for one of them wrote in his journal
about the examination, "The result was very satisfactory." The bishops
went home from Kensington and three days later they sent the anxious
mother a report of the interview. They wrote that they had asked the
Princess "a great variety of questions," and that her answers showed
she had learned "with the understanding as well as with the memory."
They were so well pleased with the results of their visit, they said,
that they had no change to recommend in the course which had been
pursued. So it was that the little girl began her public life, not by
congratulations and entertainments and rejoicings, but by a thorough
examination in her studies before two learned men.

Two months after the bishops' visit to Kensington the Princess passed
her eleventh birthday. One month later "Uncle King" died, and "Uncle
William" became sovereign, with the title of William IV. At William's
death Victoria would become queen, and as that event might occur before
she was eighteen and capable of ruling for herself, it was necessary to
have a guardian appointed at once, so that, if it should come to pass,
there would be no delay in matters of state.

A law was proposed in Parliament called the Regency Bill. As it was
possible that William would have a child, Victoria was spoken of as the
"heir presumptive"--that is, the one who is presumed or expected to be
the heir, although with a possibility of changes that would put someone
else before her. The bill provided that if she should come to the crown
before she was eighteen, her mother should be her guardian and should
rule the country in her name until she was of age. This bill became a
law, and few laws have been so pleasing to both houses of Parliament
and to the whole country. Speeches were made by prominent statesmen
praising the Duchess of Kent and her manner of training her little
daughter. The grandmother in Coburg wrote, "May God bless and protect
our little darling," and the whole country echoed the prayer.

When Parliament was prorogued, or closed until the next session, the
Princess was with her Aunt Adelaide, who was now the Queen. They stood
together at one of the palace windows watching the procession, while
the people shouted, "Hurrah for Queen Adelaide! Long live the Queen!"
Then the loving aunt took the little girl by the hand and led her out
on the balcony so that all might see her. The people cheered louder
than before, not only for the Princess, but for the generous woman who
had not a thought of jealousy because it was the child of her friend
and not one of her own little girls that stood by her side.

King William was fond of the child, but he did not like the mother. The
Duchess always spoke of him with respect and kindness, but she
contrived to have her own way in bringing up her daughter, and she was
so quick-witted that she could usually prove, though in a most
courteous and deferential manner, that he was in the wrong. He was very
indignant that Victoria was not allowed to spend time at court, but
there was nothing for him to say when the mother quietly took the
ground that the little girl was not strong enough for the excitements
of court life. Soon after his accession he sent the Prime Minister to
the Duchess to express his opinion that the education of the heir
presumptive ought to be in charge of some clergyman of high rank in the
church, and not in that of the minister of a little country parish. The
Duchess replied with the utmost courtesy. "Convey to his Majesty my
gratitude," she said to the Prime Minister, "for the interest that he
has manifested. Say to him that I agree with him perfectly that the
education of the Princess ought to be intrusted to a dignitary of the
church." Then she added: "I have every ground for being satisfied with
Mr. Davys, and I think there can be no reason why he should not be
placed in as high a position as his Majesty could wish." King William
must have raged when he received the message, but he was helpless, and
there was really nothing to do but to follow the suggestion of the
Duchess. This was done, and Mr. Davys became Dean of Chester.

One other official was, however, added to the household of the
Princess, a "state governess," the Duchess of Northumberland. Her
business was to attend the royal child on all state occasions and to
teach her the details of court etiquette that were to be observed. This
lady had nothing to do with the education of the Princess in any other
respect, and Miss Lehzen remained her governess as before.

Miss Lehzen, or Baroness Lehzen, for King George had made her a German
baroness, was a finely educated woman, the daughter of a German
clergyman. She had come to England with the Duchess of Kent as
governess to the Princess Feodore, and she had performed her duties so
satisfactorily that the Duchess was glad to be able to place the
Princess Victoria in her charge. She was a woman of keen, sagacious
judgment, with the ability to see everything that was going on about
her, and not at all afraid to express her opinions. One day when an
aide-de-camp of one of the royal dukes was presented to her, she
greeted him with the frank speech: "I can see that you are not a fop or
a dandy, as most of your Guardsmen are." She was severe in her manner,
but her bluntest speeches were made with such a friendly glance of her
shrewd and kindly eyes that most people who met her became, like the
aide-de-camp, her loyal friends. Many years later her former pupil said
of her: "I adored her, though I was greatly in awe of her. She really
seemed to have no thought but for me."

The education of the schoolgirl Princess went on in much the same way
as during the previous years. Her study hours were observed with such
strictness that even when a favored guest at Kensington was about to
take his departure, she was not allowed to leave her work for a moment
to say good-by. Occasionally, however, an interruption came, and three
months before she was twelve years of age the books had to be closed
for one day that she might make her first appearance at Queen
Adelaide's drawing room. She wore a white dress, hardly more elaborate
than her ordinary gowns, but a diamond ornament was in her hair, and
around her neck was a string of pearls. She stood beside the Queen, and
although the ceremonies were almost as unwonted to her as they would
have been to any other child of her age, she did not appear
embarrassed, but seemed to enjoy her new experience. Baroness Lehzen
wrote a letter to a friend about this time describing the little girl.
She said:

"My Princess will be twelve years old to-morrow. She is not tall, but
very pretty; has dark blue eyes, and a mouth which, though not tiny, is
very good-tempered and pleasant; very fine teeth, a small but graceful
figure, and a very small foot. Her whole bearing is so childish and
engaging that one could not desire a more amiable child." The Baroness
seems to have just returned from some absence when she wrote the
letter, for she adds, "She was dressed to receive me in white muslin,
with a coral necklace."

During this year, 1831, while the glories of Victoria's brilliant
future were beginning to shine faintly about her, the first sorrows of
her life came to her in the death of her grandmother of Coburg and the
departure of her Uncle Leopold for Belgium. The year before, he had
been asked to become king of Greece, but had refused. Now the throne of
Belgium was offered him, and he accepted it. The happiest days of the
little niece had been spent with him, and the child, who, in spite of
her royal birth, had so few pleasures was sadly grieved at his
departure. All her life he had been her devoted friend, always near,
and always ready to do anything to please her. Child as she was, she
knew enough of thrones and sovereigns to understand that the visits of
kings and queens must be few and far between, and that she could never
again have the delightful times of her earlier years.

The coronation of King William took place in September, but neither the
Duchess nor the Princess was present. No one knew the reason of their
absence, and, therefore, all sorts of stories were spread abroad. "The
Princess is not strong enough to attend so long and wearisome a
ceremonial," said one. "Her mother keeps her away to spite the King,"
declared another; and yet another reason assigned--and this was
probably the true one--was that the Princess was not allowed to go
because the King had refused to give her the place in the procession
which her rank and position demanded.

Whatever reason may have been the correct one, the Princess remained at
home, but she did some little traveling during the summer. It was only
around the western part of the Isle of Wight, but to the child whose
journeys until the previous season had been hardly more than from
Kensington to London or to Claremont these little trips were full of
interest.

The following summer brought much more of travel. Not only the King but
the people of the kingdom in general were beginning to feel somewhat
aggrieved that so little was seen of the Princess. The Duchess believed
that the best way for the future Queen to know her realm was to see it,
and that the best way to win the loyalty of her future subjects was for
them to see her. She thought that her daughter was now old enough to
enjoy and appreciate journeys through the country. These journeys were
not lengthy, for the travelers did not leave England except for a short
stay at Anglesey, but they could hardly fail to be of interest to a
wide-awake girl of thirteen who wanted to "see things and know things."

The general course of their travel was from Kensington to the
northwest, and its limit was the little island of Anglesey. Of course
the child who had not been allowed to leave a haycock unfinished lest
she should develop a tendency to leave things incomplete was not
permitted to make an expedition like this without a vast amount of
instruction. She was required to keep a journal, and she was seldom
allowed to look upon the manufacture of any article without listening
to an explanation of the process. It speaks well for her intelligence
and her wish to learn that she seems to have been genuinely interested
in these explanations. She found a tiny model of a cotton loom as
fascinating as most children would find a new toy, and she was never
weary of watching the manufacture of nails. As a memento of the visit
to the nail-makers she carried away with the greatest delight a little
gold box that they had presented to her. Within the box was a quill,
and in the quill was a vast number of nails of all varieties, but so
tiny that they could hardly be seen without a magnifying glass. Other
gifts were made her. At the University Press she was presented with a
richly bound Bible and a piece of white satin, on which was printed a
glowing account of her visit. Here in Oxford she was enthusiastic in
her enjoyment of the Bodleian Library. One thing in this library
interested her especially, a book of Latin exercises in which Queen
Elizabeth wrote when she was thirteen, just the age of the Princess. Of
course the little visitor compared her own handwriting with that of
Elizabeth, and the thought must have passed through her mind that some
day her exercises and copybooks would perhaps be put into libraries to
be looked at as she was looking at Queen Elizabeth's.

Other events than receiving gifts and studying manufactures came into
those weeks of travel. The Princess laid the corner stone of a boys'
school; she planted a little oak tree on the estate of one of her
entertainers; in Anglesey she presented the prizes at the National
Eisteddfod, a musical and literary festival which had been celebrated
annually from ancient times; she listened to addresses without number
from mayors and vice chancellors, and she was present at the formal
opening of the new bridge over the Dee, which for this reason was named
the Victoria Bridge. One thing which seems to have made a special
impression upon the child's mind, and which she noted particularly in
her journal, was that she was allowed to dine with her mother and the
guests at seven o'clock.

Traveling in those days was quite a different matter from making a
journey to-day. One or two short railroads had been built in England,
but it was many years too early for the comfortable, rapid express
trains of the present time, and the journeys of the Princess were made
entirely by carriage. She had set off for Kensington with a little
company of attendants, very few, indeed, considering her position as
heir presumptive, but it was hardly possible, without offending the
loyal people of the places through which they passed, to refuse the
honors which were shown to her and her mother and the requests of the
yeomanry of various counties that begged the privilege of escorting
them. In the days of Queen Elizabeth, that lover of gorgeousness used
to make journeys about her kingdom that were regarded as an excuse for
all magnificence and lavishness. These were called progresses, and now
King William often jested about "little Victoria's royal progresses."
He was not exactly pleased, however, and he kept a somewhat jealous
watch of the honors that were paid to her.

The next year the Princess and her mother spent considerable time in
their yacht, and the King had a fresh cause of annoyance in the fact
that now they were greeted not only with addresses but with the firing
of guns. He could not endure that anyone but himself should receive the
royal salutes. "The thing is not legal," he said to the naval
authorities. "Stop those poppings." The naval authorities respectfully
insisted that the thing _was_ legal. The King had not learned wisdom
from his previous encounters with the Duchess of Kent, and in his
dilemma he actually tried to compel her to refuse to accept the
salutes. The dignified lady replied with all courtesy: "If the King
wishes to offer me a slight in the face of the people, he can offer it
so easily that he should not ask me to make the task easier." King
William was fairly worsted, but he would not yield. He called the Privy
Council and ordered them to pass an order that even the royal flag
should not be saluted unless the vessel flying it bore either the King
or the Queen.

To turn from royal salutes and mayors' addresses and the laying of
corner-stones to playing with dolls is a little startling, but such was
the course of the Princess' life. She was heir to the throne, and she
could bestow prizes and receive delegations and meet the eager gaze of
thousands without being at all troubled or embarrassed, but she was a
child for all that; she was not allowed to sit at the table when her
mother gave an elaborate dinner party for the King, and she still
retained her liking for the dolls that her lack of playmates had made
so dear to her. There is now in existence a little copybook on which is
written "List of my dolls." By their number and their interest, they
certainly deserve the honor of being catalogued, even at the present
time, for there were 132 of them, and they were often dressed to
imitate noted persons of the day. Most of them were little wooden
creatures from three to nine inches high, with sharply pointed noses,
cheeks red as a cherry in some one spot--wherever the brush of the
maker had chanced to hit--jet black hair, and the most convenient
joints, that enabled the small bodies to be arranged in many attitudes.
The men dolls had small black mustaches, and the women dolls were
distinguished by little yellow "back-combs" painted on the black dab
which represented their hair. The baby dolls were made of rags, upon
which comical little faces were painted.

The fascination of these dolls does not lie in their beauty, but in
their wardrobes. Most of them were dressed between 1831 and 1833, or
when the Princess was from twelve to fourteen years old. One group
represents the play of Kenilworth, which she had evidently seen. The
Earl of Leicester is gorgeous in knee-breeches of pink satin, with
slashes of white silk. His tunic reverses the order and is of white
satin slashed with pink. He wears the blue ribbon of the Order of the
Garter and a wide black velvet hat swept with yellow and white plumes.
Queen Elizabeth appears in cloth of gold with enormous puffed sleeves.
From her shoulders hangs a long train lined with bright crimson plush
and trimmed with ermine. She wears crimson plush shoes and a heavy
girdle of gold beads.

There are all sorts of characters among these little wooden people.
There are court ladies, actors, and dandified young gallants. Perched
on a table is a merry little ballet-dancer in blue satin trimmed with
pink and yellow roses. There are mothers with their babies, and there
is "Mrs. Martha," a buxom housekeeper, with a white lawn frock, full
sleeves, and purple apron pinked all around. She wears a white lace cap
adorned with many frills and tied under her small wooden chin with pink
ribbons. She stands beside a home-made dressing table of cardboard
covered with white brocade.

The conscientious little owner of these dolls marked carefully which
ones she herself dressed and in which she was helped by the Baroness
Lehzen. The wardrobes of thirty-two were made entirely by the fingers
of the little girl, and, remembering the schedule of studies, it is a
wonder how she found the time; one hopes that at least the hour marked
"Needlework and learning poetry by heart" was sometimes devoted to this
purpose, though how any dress-maker, old or young, could learn poetry
with a court costume on her hands is a mystery.

It is equally a mystery how even the most skillful of childish fingers
could manufacture such tiny ruffles and finish two-inch aprons with
microscopic pockets whereon were almost invisible bows. Handkerchiefs
half an inch square have drawn borders and are embroidered with colored
silk initials. Little knitted stockings beautify the pointed wooden
feet; bead bracelets adorn the funny little wooden arms that hang from
the short sleeves; coronets and crowns and wreaths glorify the small
wooden heads.

The Princess had a long board full of pegs into which the feet of these
little favorites of hers fitted, and here she rehearsed dramas and
operas and pantomimes. Even in her play with dolls, however, she could
not be entirely free from the burden of her destiny, for sometimes they
were used by the state governess to explain court ceremonials and teach
the etiquette of various occasions. When the Princess was fully
fourteen, the dolls were packed away, though no one guessed how soon
the little owner would be called upon to decide, not the color of a
doll's gown, but the fate of men and women and the weighty questions of
a nation.




CHAPTER IV

A QUEEN AT EIGHTEEN


During the years from 1833 to Victoria's eighteenth birthday, on May
24, 1837, her life was sometimes that of a child, sometimes that of a
young woman. Much of the time she lived quietly at Kensington. She
studied, rode, walked, sketched, and played with her various pets. When
her fourteenth birthday came, she was--for a few hours--treated like a
"grown-up," for at a juvenile ball given in her honor King William led
her into the room, and at supper her health was drunk by the whole
company.

During the following summer there was more of the educational traveling
in which the Duchess believed so firmly and which gave so much pleasure
to the people of the country. This summer the Princess and her mother
visited chiefly forts, arsenals, lighthouses, and men-of-war. On
shipboard they delighted the men by tasting their dinner, and the
sailors in return amused them by dancing a hornpipe. Addresses were
made; the Princess presented new colors to a regiment; a procession of
young girls with flowers and a crown met the royal guests; at one town,
whose trade was chiefly in straw, the Princess was presented with a
straw bonnet. Wherever she went, her charming grace and cordiality and
readiness to be pleased won her lasting friendships.

Throughout the land there was talk about the quiet young girl at
Kensington. King William was growing feeble. For half a century England
had been ruled by elderly men; how would it fare in the hands of a
young girl? Victoria was not as well as she had been, and there were
rumors that she would not be equal to the labors of sovereignty.
Baroness Lehzen was indignant at the least criticism. "The Princess is
not too delicate and she is not too young," declared the lady with her
wonted emphasis. "I know all about her, and she will make a greater
queen than Elizabeth herself."

An interesting man visited the Princess at this time, Baron Stockmar,
who had long been a trusted friend of King Leopold's. "He was the only
honest man I ever saw," said a statesman who knew him well, and King
William was eager to hear Stockmar's opinion of the young Princess. The
Baron had no hesitation in expressing it. "If she were a nobody," he
said, "I should say she is gifted with an intelligence beyond her
years; but being destined to rule over this great empire, I say that
England will grow great and famous under her rule."

"Do you say that?" exclaimed the King. "Then I shall no longer regret
that I have no children to hand the crown down to." And yet, some
months after this speech was made, the young woman who was to make
England great and famous was sent to bed after dancing just one dance
at a grand ball given in her honor. The health of the girl was too
precious in the eyes of the Duchess to be wasted in late hours.

Soon after her sixteenth birthday the Princess was confirmed. The
ceremony was performed in the chapel of St. James', and none were
present except members of the royal family. Even as a child Victoria
had often shown great self-control, but when the Archbishop of
Canterbury spoke to her, tenderly indeed, but with deep solemnity, of
the responsibilities of the life that lay before her, of what good or
what harm a single word or deed of hers might cause, then the earnest,
conscientious young girl could not remain unmoved. She laid her head on
her mother's shoulder and sobbed like a little child.

The wisdom of the watchful mother's care was made manifest in the
increasing health and strength of the Princess. She was seen in public
far more frequently. The little girl had become a young lady. The plain
little white dresses were laid aside, and she now appeared in garments
as rich and handsome as were permitted to her youth. One costume that
she wore, a pink satin gown and a large pink bonnet, was the special
delight of those of her future subjects who had the good fortune to see
her in it. This was what she wore when a young American author gazed
upon her admiringly and then went away to moralize over the sad fate of
royalty. "She will be sold," he said, "bartered away, by those great
dealers in royal hearts."

It was true that "dealers in royal hearts" had long before this laid
their plans for the disposal of the Princess' affections. King William
had proposed five suitors, one after another, but his polite and
exasperating sister-in-law had courteously waived all his suggestions.
Another scheme had been formed across the water by the Coburg
grandmother nearly seventeen years earlier. There was a baby
granddaughter in England and a baby grandson in Coburg. If they would
only be as fond of each other as the grandmother was of them! Not a
word was said to the little English girl, but there is a tradition that
when the grandson was but three years old his nurse used to say: "Be a
good boy now, Prince Albert, and some day you shall go to England and
marry the Queen." However the truth of this story may be, it is certain
that not only the grandmother but King Leopold earnestly hoped that
some day the Prince might marry the Princess.

When the cousins were seventeen years old, King Leopold thought that
the time had come for them to meet; but the wise sovereign had no idea
of exposing his warm-hearted little niece to the fascinations of a
young man who might not be worthy of her, and he sent the faithful
Baron Stockmar to learn all that he could about the character of the
Prince. The report was as favorable as the devoted uncle could have
wished, and he at once persuaded the Duchess to invite Prince Albert
and his brother to spend a month at Kensington.

The two young men arrived and were most royally entertained. Such a
round of parties, balls, receptions, dinners, all sorts of festivities,
they had never seen. Prince Albert was just a little bored by so much
gayety, and acknowledged in his home letters that he had "many hard
battles to fight against sleepiness." He seems to have found more
pleasure in the quiet hours of walking, sketching, and playing piano
duets with the little blue-eyed cousin.

After the brothers had taken their departure, King Leopold wrote his
niece, telling her very frankly of his hopes. She replied at once and
with equal frankness. One cannot help seeing that the two cousins had
become deeply interested in each other, for the letter of the Princess
begs her uncle to take special care of one "now so dear to me," and
closes with the words, "I hope and trust that all will go on
prosperously and well on this subject now of so much importance to me."

There were subjects, however, concerning which all did not go on
"prosperously and well." The Princess loved her devoted mother with all
her warm heart, and she also loved "Uncle William," who was always good
to her. She was now so old that the friction between them could no
longer be concealed from her. The King's special grievance was that she
was not allowed to visit him save at rare intervals. The "Sailor King"
was a favorite among his people, because he was bluff and cheery and
witty; but his wit was often coarse, and his good nature not
infrequently turned into a "swearing rage" when his humor changed.
There were certainly good reasons why the young girl should have been
kept from his court; and he was keen enough to see that the Duchess had
other grounds than care of her daughter's health for refusing to allow
her to visit him. His gentle, stately sister-in-law had outwitted him
in every encounter, and at last his wrath burst forth.

The time was a state dinner which he gave in honor of his seventy-first
birthday. In his speech to the guests he lost all control of himself
and declared, "I hope that my life may be spared nine months longer,
after which period, in event of my death, no regency will take place. I
shall then have the satisfaction of leaving the royal authority to the
personal exercise of that young lady"--here the King looked at the
Princess Victoria, then, glaring at the Duchess, he roared--"and not in
the hands of a person now near to me." He went on like a madman,
heaping every kind of abuse upon the Duchess and declaring that she had
insulted him by keeping the Princess from his presence.

The Duchess sat like marble, but her daughter burst into tears. At last
the dinner came to an end, and the Duchess ordered her carriage that
she and the Princess might leave at once instead of spending the night.
But Queen Adelaide interposed. "Stay," she said, "stay, I beg of you.
The King is ill, he is not himself;" and she whispered, "You have borne
so much, bear a little more." The Duchess yielded and remained at the
palace until morning.

The nine months passed rapidly, and the morning of May 24, 1837,
arrived. The Princess was now eighteen, and the whole land celebrated
her coming of age. The day began with a serenade under her window by a
band of thirty-seven musicians. One of the songs commenced:

    "Spring renews its golden dreams,
      Sweet birds carol 'neath each spray;
    Shed, O sun! thy milder beams
      On the fairest flower of May."

The Princess was delighted with this serenade, but the only song that
she asked to have repeated was one that was full of compliments to her
mother.

The Union Jack had already been hoisted on the church in Kensington,
and its greeting was responded to from the palace by a banner of white
silk whereon was "Victoria" in letters of blue. Almost every house had
its flag or its bit of decoration of some sort. The King sent a
birthday gift of a handsome piano, and that was only the beginning, for
all day long costly presents were arriving. Addresses of congratulation
were sent by numerous cities and by many public bodies, and the house
was thronged with callers. The greatest nobles of the kingdom, the
people of most wealth, and the greatest statesmen hastened to
Kensington to give their best wishes to the young girl. In the evening
a state ball, the most splendid affair of the kind that had been known,
was given for her at the Palace of St. James', but the illness of the
King kept both him and Queen Adelaide away from the festivities.
Between the dances the Princess was escorted to the chair of state.
Before this the Duchess had always stood first, but now the young girl
who was to rule England took precedence of even her mother.

The way of the Princess to the throne seemed very clear, but there was
one man in England who was determined that she should never reach it.
He was the Duke of Cumberland, Victoria's uncle. He was the next
younger brother of the Duke of Kent, and had it not been for the birth
of his niece, the throne of England would have been his own. At that
time the sovereign of England was also ruler of Hanover, but Hanover
had a law called the Salic law, which forbade any woman to be its
monarch. Two or three years earlier the Duke of Cumberland had confided
to an English officer his desire to gain the crown.

"The Salic law prevents the Princess Victoria from ruling Hanover," he
said, "and therefore she has no right to rule England. If I should be
proclaimed king, would you and your troop follow me through London?"

"Yes, and to the Tower the next day!" the officer answered indignantly.

"What will the Princess do for you?" demanded the Duke. "If I were
king, I could make you a great man. But this is nothing. I only asked
to see what you would say."

The Duke was in earnest, however--so much in earnest that he even
ventured to allow his wishes to become known to King William. One day
when the two brothers were dining together, the Duke proposed the
toast, "The King's health, God save the King!" This was drunk, and then
the Duke proposed a second toast, "The King's heir, God bless him!"
Both the brothers had drunk too much, but King William was equal to the
occasion. He called out, "Drink to the King's heir, God bless _her_!"
and the toast was drunk by all except the Duke.

Nevertheless, the Duke of Cumberland did not give up his wild scheme.
He knew that he himself was by no means a favorite in England, and that
he had no friends whose devotion would place him upon the throne; but
he fancied that he could arouse opposition to the Princess and so open
a way for himself to become sovereign. There was nothing to be said
against her, but he did his best to arouse dislike to her family. "The
Coburgs are the people who have influence with her," he said. "King
Leopold has just married a Roman Catholic princess, and the cousin of
Victoria has married Queen Maria of Portugal, who is also a Roman
Catholic. King William cannot live long, and England will have on its
throne not only a child but a child who will be no Protestant."

Now for a century and a half England had had a law that as a Protestant
country it must be ruled by a Protestant, and that the husband or wife
of the sovereign must also be a Protestant. If Victoria had become a
Roman Catholic, she would have forfeited the throne at once. This
argument of the Duke of Cumberland was, therefore, almost too absurd to
notice; but England was too loyal to the young girl at Kensington not
to be in a storm of indignation.

Even then the Duke of Cumberland fancied that he might still have a
chance, and he was so insane as to go to that sternly loyal old
soldier, the Duke of Wellington, and ask what he thought was the best
thing to do.

"To do?" cried the "Iron Duke." "Get out of this country as fast as you
can, and take care you don't get pelted as you go."

In less than a month after the eighteenth birthday of the Princess came
the night of June nineteenth. The country knew that King William was
dying. The Royal Life Guards were at their barracks, but not to sleep.
The sentries were doubled. Every horse was saddled, and by it stood its
master, ready to race to Windsor to guard the lifeless body of the
King, or to gallop to Kensington to escort the girl Queen to her
throne.

All that night the officers sat in the messroom and talked of the
Princess.

"I saw her on horseback," said one. "She rides superbly, but she looks
like a child."

"The Duke of Sussex says the little ones have the brains," remarked
another.

"She's a queen, every inch of her," one declared, "and I tell you that
England is going to be greater than it ever was before. She's a
soldier's daughter, too. King William was a sailor. He could not have
held a review to save his--What's that?" The young man broke off
abruptly, for the gallop of a horse was heard in the courtyard. There
was dead silence in the messroom. In a few minutes the Colonel entered.
He held up his hand for attention, but he did not need to do this, for
every ear was strained.

"Gentlemen," he said, "King William is dead. Let us drink to the health
of the Queen. God save the Queen!"

Early in the morning the Life Guards were ordered to go, part of them
to Windsor to do honor to the dead King, part of them to Kensington to
do honor to the young Queen.

Meanwhile the Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Conyngham, the Lord
Chamberlain, had been driving at full speed from Windsor to Kensington.
Not a person was stirring about the palace, and the only sound heard
was the singing of birds. The two men rang, but there was no response.
They knocked, they thumped, and they pounded. Finally a very sleepy
porter opened the gate and let them into one of the lower rooms of the
palace. No one came to them, and at last they rang for a servant.

"Tell the attendant of the Princess Victoria," said the Lord
Chamberlain, "that we have come to see her on business of the utmost
importance."

The servant withdrew, but no one appeared. They rang again, and at last
the attendant of the Princess came to them.

"The Princess Victoria is sleeping," she said, "and she must not be
awakened."

Then said the Lord Chamberlain: "We are come on business of state to
_the Queen_, and even her sleep must give way to that."

There was no more delay. The Duchess was called, and she awoke her
daughter, who still slept in a bed beside her own. "The King is dead,"
she said. "Lord Conyngham is here, and he wishes to see you. You must
not keep him waiting."

The Princess threw on a long white dressing gown and stopped at the
door for her mother to accompany her.

"No," said the Duchess. "He wishes to see the Queen alone."

For the first time the young girl was required to stand by herself, and
as she stepped over the threshold she left all her free, girlish life
behind her. She went down the stairs in her long white dressing gown,
with her fair hair falling over her shoulders. As she entered the room,
Lord Conyngham knelt before her, kissed her hand, and presented a
paper, the formal certificate of the King's death.

Then the Archbishop said: "Your Royal Highness, Queen Adelaide wished
me to accompany Lord Conyngham, for she thought that you would be glad
to hear how peaceful and quiet the King was at the last."

To the young Queen the sight of the Archbishop brought no thought of
the glories of the throne, but rather of those solemn words that he had
spoken to her in the chapel of St. James' two years before. With tears
in her eyes she said to him, "I beg your Grace to pray for me."

Messengers had been sent to the members of the Privy Council to summon
them to immediate attendance at Kensington. When they arrived, they
were shown into the ante-chamber in which were the Duke of Sussex,
uncle of the Queen; the Duke of Wellington, Lord Melbourne, the Prime
Minister, and a few others. The doors were closed and an address of
loyalty was read aloud and then signed by all present.

In the great saloon adjoining were the Queen and her mother. The
Duchess withdrew, and when the doors were opened, there stood near the
threshold the slender figure of the girl Queen, looking even slighter
and younger than she was in her close-fitting dress of black silk. It
was perfectly plain; her hair was parted and drawn back smoothly from
her forehead; and she wore not a single ornament. The Duke of Sussex
stepped forward to meet her, put his arm around her and kissed her. The
others kissed her hand. The address was given to the usher, and the
doors between the two rooms were closed. Not a word had been spoken.

A little later in the day came the famous First Council. Lord Melbourne
had told the Queen just what was to be done and what her part would be.
The Council assembled, and the Lord President read the formal
announcement of the death of King William. Then he requested the Prime
Minister and several others to go to the Queen and inform her also of
the King's death. This was done with as much ceremony as if she had
known nothing of it before. When they returned, the proclamation of her
accession was read. Then the doors into the adjoining saloon were
thrown open, and the Queen stepped forward, wearing a plain, simple
mourning dress. Her two uncles, the Duke of Cumberland and the Duke of
Sussex, went forward to meet her and led her into the room.

At the end of a long table a platform had been placed, and on the
platform was the chair of state. The Queen bowed to the Councilors and
took her seat in this chair. She read her speech at once, clearly and
with as much calmness and dignity as her mother could have shown. It
closed, "I shall steadily protect the rights and promote to the utmost
of my power the happiness and welfare of all classes of my subjects."

She signed the usual oath insuring the liberty of the Church of
Scotland, and then came the solemn swearing of each Councilor to be
faithful to her. Her two uncles were sworn first, and as the Duke of
Cumberland kissed her hand, she blushed as any other young girl might
have done to have an elderly man, her own uncle, kneel at her feet. She
kissed him and also the Duke of Sussex. This second uncle was too
feeble to make his way to her easily, and she rose from her seat and
stepped toward him. After the swearing of the Dukes, the oath was taken
by the other members of the Council. When this had been done, she rose
and left the room, led by her two uncles.

Never were men more surprised than these experienced Councilors, who
thought that they understood all kinds of people and knew what sort of
behavior to expect from them.

"I am amazed," said Sir Robert Peel. "She is as modest as a child, but
she is firm and self-possessed, and she understands her position
perfectly."

Greville, the Clerk of the Council, said: "William IV. came to the
throne at sixty-five, and he was so excited that he nearly went mad.
The young Queen is neither dazzled nor confounded, but she behaves with
all the sedateness and dignity the want of which was so conspicuous in
her uncle."

The Duke of Wellington was never weary of praising her behavior. "Lord
Melbourne was far more nervous than she," said the Duke. "He did not
dare to take his eyes off her for fear she might say or do the wrong
thing. He need not have been afraid. She is born to rule, and if she
had been ten years younger she would have done it equally well; such a
bit of a girl as she is," he added; and he finished by saying
emphatically, "If she had been my own daughter, I could not have wished
that she should do better."

And the good Baroness Lehzen said with tears in her honest blue eyes,
"I knew it, I knew my Princess."

There were yet Cabinet Ministers for the Queen to meet, there were
matters little and matters great to think of, and the next morning
there was to be another Council meeting and the observance of the
ancient custom of proclaiming a new sovereign to the public; but the
young girl found time in this first day of her dominion to write a
letter of sympathy to her "Aunt Adelaide." She addressed it as usual to
"Her Majesty the Queen." When she was reminded that the widow of King
William was no longer "Queen," but "Queen Dowager," she replied, "I
know that her position is altered, but I will not be the first to
remind her of the change."




CHAPTER V

THE CORONATION


When the young Queen awoke on the morning after her accession, she must
have fancied for a moment that she had dreamed all the events of the
previous day. She had gone to bed expecting a quiet morning of study;
she had been aroused to hear that she was a queen. Thus far she had
remained in her own home, and had merely received those who had come to
her, the Prime Minister, the Councilors, and others; but when she had
been Queen for a little more than twenty-four hours, the time had come
for her to go to London and be proclaimed sovereign of England in the
presence of thousands of her subjects.

Victoria and her mother came out of the palace followed by Lord
Melbourne. Both ladies were in mourning. The young Queen wore a black
dress with white at the neck and wrists. Her bonnet was black and, in
comparison with the great pink one that had so delighted her subjects,
it was very small. In front of the royal carriage were the Life Guards,
a magnificent body of men, everyone drawing himself up to his full
height in his pride that it was _his_ company that was to escort the
Queen on her first appearance. She bowed to them first, then to the
crowds that thronged about the entrance. She and her mother entered the
carriage. More of the Life Guards followed and a long line of carriages
filled with lords and ladies.

The carriages did not go rapidly, for every road and lane and passage
way was full of people, who cheered and waved banners and shouted "God
save the Queen!"

When they arrived at St. James', the officers of state stood waiting to
receive them, and they were escorted to a window overlooking the
quadrangle below, which had long been filled with a great crowd of
enthusiastic people.

"Make way for his Grace, the Garter King-at-Arms!" cried the heralds,
and that officer advanced, escorted by the Earl-Marshal, gave one look
over the assembled people, then waved his scepter for silence, and read
the formal proclamation of Victoria as Queen of Great Britain and
Ireland. He was glittering in all the insignia of his office, but the
eyes of the people were not on him; they were turned toward an upper
window where against a background of crimson curtains stood the slender
figure of the Queen, accompanied by her mother and the Prime Minister.
The last words of the proclamation were "God save the Queen!" and "God
save the Queen!" repeated the bands in a great outburst of martial
music. The trumpets sounded, the cannon in the park roared, and the
cannon in the Tower roared in response. The people in the court
cheered, and the people outside the court cheered. They waved their
handkerchiefs, hats, canes, umbrellas, anything that they could wave.
They could not be induced to leave the place, and thousands hung about
the entrance to the palace for hours, hoping for just one glimpse of
their sovereign.

Not long after this proclamation, the Queen presided over another
Council meeting, and did it, so said one who was present, "as if she
had done nothing else all her life." This was not the end of the day by
any means, for now the reception of archbishops, bishops, and judges
followed. She met them with the most perfect dignity; but she was a
merry young girl as well as a queen, and after she had received the
bishops and had withdrawn from the room with a most stately demeanor,
they were greatly amused to see her running down the corridor like a
child just let out of school. Her Majesty had forgotten that the door
was made of glass!

While all this rejoicing was going on, the dead King lay in state at
Windsor Palace, shrouded in a crimson pall and under a purple canopy.
The crowns of England and of Hanover lay above him. There were banners
and imperial escutcheons. Around him were nobles, admirals, and
guardsmen. Nearest stood the feeble old Duke of Sussex in his scarlet
uniform. The Dead March sounded, and the long line moved slowly on and
down to St. George's Chapel. The last honors were duly paid to the dead
King, but the thoughts of all the land were with the young Queen.

Before the day had closed, Victoria and her mother were escorted back
to Kensington by the Life Guards to spend a short time before the Queen
should take up her abode in Buckingham Palace. "I do not want to go
there," she said to the Duke of Sussex. "I love the old Kensington
Gardens, where I can wander about as I please. Buckingham Palace is far
too big and too grand for me."

Other people may choose their homes, but sovereigns are less free, and
there was nothing to do but to leave the homelike Kensington, where her
greatest troubles had been an occasional hard lesson, and go to
Buckingham, or the New Palace, as it was called, which was to be her
London residence.

The New Palace was not yet completed, but men had been working night
and day to prepare it for the Queen. It stood on a desolate sand-flat.
There were dirty alleys and mud-puddles and dingy little hovels around
it, but the coming of the Queen was to make it gorgeous. A splendid new
throne, all dazzling in its crimson and gold, was built for her.

"Is it as your Majesty would have it?" inquired the builder.

"It's the most comfortable throne I ever sat on," replied the merry
young sovereign.

Buckingham was not lonely by any means. From over the whole country
came delegations from universities, corporations, and all kinds of
societies. One of these delegations was composed of Quakers, who
believe that to uncover the head is to show to man a reverence that
should be shown to God alone, and they marched up the stairway without
removing their broad-brimmed gray hats. This could not be allowed, but
the delegates could hardly be forbidden to see their Queen. Someone was
quick-witted enough to discover a way out of the dilemma. "The Quakers
won't take off their hats," he whispered, "but it is against their
principles to resist violence and they won't object if we do it for
them." Two of the attendants then respectfully raised each man's hat as
he passed between them, and returned it to his head when the audience
had come to an end.

At the death of a sovereign, Parliament is always dissolved, and a new
election is held. Victoria had stood by her "Aunt Adelaide's" side and
seen the grand procession which marked the prorogation, but now the
time had come for her to take the principal place in the procession.

"It would be better to remain away and allow your speech to be read for
you," said both her mother and her physician. "Remember how much you
have been through within the past month, and avoid this unnecessary
excitement."

The little Queen was wiser than her watchful advisers. She knew well
that her subjects had thronged every road leading to Buckingham because
they wanted to see her, and she meant to gratify them and appear in all
the splendor that a prorogation demanded. As to being exhausted by
these ceremonials, she laughed at the idea of such a thing. "I like it
all," she said. "I have lived so quietly that it is new to me. It isn't
tiresome, it is amusing."

Therefore "Victoria Regina" was written in letters of gold about a
beautiful new throne in the House of Lords. Mr. Davys, her "good, kind
master," as she called him, heard her practice her speech; then she was
made ready for the ceremony. There were no more simple white muslin
dresses for her. She wore a kirtle of white satin and over it a crimson
velvet robe with border of ermine. The kirtle flashed with gold
embroidery, and the velvet robe was confined by a heavy golden cord and
tassels. Diamonds glittered and sparkled in her bracelets and coronet
and on her stomacher. A few years before, the young girl had walked to
the milliner's and home again, carrying her new bonnet in her hand; but
now she seated herself in the royal carriage and was drawn by eight
cream-colored horses. The Yeomen of the Guard rode before her; and so
she went to the House of Parliament.

The band played "God Save the Queen," as she entered the House of Lords
and was conducted to the throne on which "Victoria Regina" was written.
It was fortunate that she had no farther to walk, for before she seated
herself the lords-in-waiting laid upon her shoulders the heavy
parliamentary mantle of purple velvet.

The brilliant company of peers and bishops remained standing. "My
lords, be seated," said the Queen. The usual forms of business were
followed, but all interest centered in the speech of the sovereign. Mr.
Davys had tutored her well, and when she had finished, Fanny Kemble,
the greatest actress of the day, declared, "I never heard any spoken
words more musical in their gentle distinctness." Charles Sumner wrote,
"I never heard anything better read in my life;" and the Queen's kind
old uncle, the Duke of Sussex, could only wipe his eyes and murmur,
"Beautiful!"

It was not long before the court moved to Windsor Palace. The ordinary
routine of the Queen's day was breakfast with her mother between eight
and nine, followed by an hour or two with Lord Melbourne attending to
matters of state. Then came an audience with the Cabinet Ministers,
whenever there was business to be transacted. About two o'clock the
Queen and some twenty or thirty of the ladies and gentlemen of the
court took a horseback ride of two hours or longer. After this came
music or amusement of some kind until the dinner hour. If there were
any children in the palace, the Queen was always ready to spend this
time with them, and their company must have been a great relief after
the formalities of the day. Dinner was at about half-past seven. After
dinner came music, games, dancing, and conversation. This was the order
of the day when it was not broken into, but it was almost always broken
into, for there were balls, receptions, concerts, banquets, and the
reception of delegations.

One visit which was soon paid to the court of England gave the Queen
special delight. It was that of her uncle, King Leopold, and his Queen.
Victoria had never played the hostess before, but there could have been
no one else to whom she would have been so glad to show honor; and now
there was a merry time, indeed, for the English Queen planned picnics,
dinner parties, sailing parties, and all sorts of gayeties.

Those who looked on from the outside thought of the Queen as a
light-hearted young girl enjoying to the full what was almost her first
taste of gayety and pleasure, but there was quite another side to her
life. More was required of the sovereign of England than to sit on a
throne and wear handsome dresses and jewels. There was much hard work
for her to do, and this merry little Queen had no thought of attempting
to escape it. Those morning hours with Lord Melbourne were hours when
she must give her keenest thought and closest attention. At an age when
many girls have little more responsibility than to learn a lesson or to
choose a dress, this girl had to read complicated papers, to listen to
arguments on difficult subjects, and sometimes to decide whether a man
proven guilty of crime should live or die. Of course she might have
made all this much easier for herself by simply writing her name
wherever her Ministers advised, but she would not sign any paper
without reading and understanding it.

"Your Majesty," said Lord Melbourne one day, "there is no need of your
examining this paper, as it is of no special importance."

"But it is of special importance to me," replied the Queen, "whether I
sign a paper with which I am not thoroughly satisfied."

Papers of all sorts were showered upon her. Sometimes after listening
to Lord Melbourne's advice she would come to a decision on the first
reading, but often she would say, "I must think about this before I
sign it." Never was a sovereign so overwhelmed with papers, and her
friends began to suspect that some of the officials who wished to have
matters go their own way were trying to disgust her with public
business hoping that after a little while she would become so tired of
it that she would sign whatever was sent her. They did not know that
they were dealing with a Queen who had had to finish her haycocks when
she was a little girl. Even Lord Melbourne used to say laughingly, "I'd
rather manage ten kings than one queen."

There could hardly have been a better man than Lord Melbourne for the
difficult position of adviser to a young woman who was also a queen. He
was three times her age, and while his manner to her was always one of
most profound respect, he showed an almost fatherly feeling for the
fatherless young girl. He was her Prime Minister and was also her
trusted friend. Before she became Queen, he had won her confidence in a
remarkable way, by opposing her desires and those of her mother. In one
of those constantly recurring differences between King and Duchess, he
had stood firmly for the King's wishes, because he was the King's
servant, although he knew that in a few months at most the Princess
would be on the throne. Victoria was wise enough to see that the man
who would be faithful even at the probability of his own loss was the
man whom she might safely trust, and she did trust him implicitly.

Another member of the Queen's household was the honest Baron Stockmar.
He had been sent by King Leopold, as soon as his royal niece had
attained her eighteenth birthday, to guard her interests and advise her
if it should be necessary. With people in general he was quiet and
reserved. At table he "ate nothing and talked less," according to the
description of one who was at the court; but all felt that the Queen
was especially frank with him, and that he and Lord Melbourne were in
perfect agreement. One other duty he had at the English court which was
known only to himself and King Leopold and that was to prepare the way
for the marriage that the King hoped would come about between his niece
and his nephew. The two young people were really in training for
sovereignty. King Leopold kept Prince Albert with him for nearly a year
after Victoria's accession He saw to it that the young man should
acquire a good knowledge of English and of the English constitution.
Baron Stockmar was in the meantime teaching the Queen the rightful
position of the sovereign of England. "The sovereign must belong to no
party," he said. "Whatever party is in power has been put in power by
the nation, and has a right to claim the loyalty of the Queen."

Of course the devoted Baroness Lehzen had followed her beloved pupil,
for one of the first acts of the Queen was to appoint her private
secretary. The Baroness said: "I copy all her private correspondence
just as I used to do when she was my Princess, and she is as frank with
me as when she was a child; but she has never shown me a state document
or said a word to me about any state business. She knows that such
matters should go to her advisers, and not to me or any other woman."

Surely the little Queen was not without good friends. There were King
Leopold, the wisest sovereign in Europe; Baron Stockmar, the "only
honest man"; Lord Melbourne, who seemed to have no thought but for her,
and Baroness Lehzen, who had loved her from her babyhood. The position
of her mother was very peculiar and not agreeable in all respects. For
eighteen years her only aim in life had been to prepare her daughter
for the throne of England. The daughter was now on the throne, and the
Duchess felt that her occupation was gone. She realized that matters of
state must be discussed with the councilors only, and for this she was
prepared; but it was not a pleasant surprise to find that the young
girl who less than a year before her accession had meekly left the
ballroom for bed at her mother's bidding was now manifesting very
decided opinions of her own. The Duchess had the fullest confidence in
one of the executors of her husband's will, and she would have been
glad that he should hold some office in the new government. The Queen
treated her mother with the most tender affection, and she willingly
granted the gentleman a generous pension, but she refused to have
anything to do with him.

Victoria had ascended the throne, but she had never yet worn the
English crown, for though a young girl may become a queen in a moment,
a coronation is a different matter. "The King is dead, and therefore
Victoria is Queen," declared the Council, and she was Queen; but the
preparations for a coronation require more time than does the writing
of an address of loyalty, and it was a whole year before these
preparations were completed. It was not an easy task to decide just
what ceremonies should be observed. One matter to be seriously
deliberated upon was whether the left cheek of the young girl should be
forced to endure six hundred kisses of state from the six hundred
nobles and bishops. There was not even a crown suited to the occasion,
for the old one weighed seven pounds, and the most devoted admirers of
the ancient usages could not ask that the "little Queen" should carry
that load on her head. After many lengthy consultations, these
momentous questions were decided. The tradesmen were assured that there
would be enough ceremony to bring about large sales, the peers and
bishops were told that they would not be allowed to kiss the pink cheek
of the Queen, and the crown jewelers were bidden to set to work on a
new crown that should weigh only half as much as the old one.

The day came at last, June 28, 1838. London evidently meant to make the
most of it, and as soon as the eager watchers saw the first glimpse of
dawn, a salute of twenty-one cannon was fired. It was only a little
after three o'clock, but the earliness of the hour made little
difference to the thousands that had been up all night. Some had stayed
up to be sure of securing a good place to see the procession, some
because the services of the hairdressers were in such demand that, when
a head was once in order, no risk of disarrangement could be ventured
upon, and some had been kept awake by pure excitement and nervousness.
There was no sleeping after daylight for anyone, for those who were far
enough from the Tower to drowse through the firing of cannon were
aroused by the ringing of bells which followed, as every church tower
rang out its merriest chimes. At five o'clock Westminster Abbey was
opened, and this was none too early, for the people who were fortunate
enough and rich enough to obtain tickets had long been thronging the
entrance. These people in the Abbey had a long time to wait, for it was
fully ten o'clock before the salute of twenty-one guns from the park
gave the signal that the procession had started from Buckingham Palace.

Such a procession as it was! First came the trumpeters, then the Life
Guards, bands, foreign ambassadors in most gorgeous carriages, more
Life Guards, the carriage of the Duchess of Kent, the Duke of Sussex,
and others of the royal family, the officers of the royal household,
and the Yeomen of the Guard. Then all the thousands along the way were
agape, for the eight cream-colored horses were seen drawing the chariot
of state, wherein sat the pretty little maiden who was the center and
cause of all this magnificence. A circlet of diamonds was on her head.
She wore a dress of gold tissue, and a mantle of crimson velvet trimmed
with gold lace and lined with ermine. Pearls and diamonds gleamed and
flashed at every motion. With her rode the Mistress of the Robes and
the Master of the Horse. A body of cavalry followed her.

The procession was nearly an hour and a half in reaching the Abbey, for
the Queen would not go by the shortest way. All that time people were
shouting, and banners were waving, for every house along the line of
march was brilliant with as much decoration as its owner could afford.
Half a million strangers were in London, and many houses were rented at
enormous rates. Five or six thousand dollars was not looked upon as a
rental at all exorbitant, and some were let at a much higher price.

At the door of the Abbey, the Queen was met by the chief officers of
state. She walked slowly up the aisle, but not alone by any means.
Heralds, clergy, and officers of state came first; then a noble bearing
the coronet of the Duchess of Cambridge, followed by the Duchess
herself, with her long train of purple velvet. Another coronet was
borne on a silken cushion, and after it came the Duchess of Kent. Then
came six nobles, each carrying some piece of the regalia. There were
dukes and earls and marquises and generals and field marshals and
bishops, all in their most brilliant array. A little whisper, "The
Queen, the Queen!" ran through the long lines of peers and peeresses
and ambassadors and judges. It was followed by the waving of
handkerchiefs and scarfs and such shouts of applause as shook the Abbey
to its foundations, and Victoria advanced, escorted by three bishops.
Eight young girls in white silk and silver, with blush roses, carried
her train. Then came members of the royal household, gentlemen-at-arms,
lords-in-waiting, and other officials without number.

All this time the choir were singing "I was glad when they said unto
me, Let us go into the house of the Lord." Then they sang "God save the
Queen!" and the trumpets sounded the accompaniment. A most impressive
moment followed. The trumpets ceased, every voice was hushed, not a
sound was heard among all the thousands in the vast Abbey. The Queen
had passed through the door looking "like a young girl on her
birthday," but now her face was grave, and she knelt before the altar
for a moment of silent prayer. By an ancient privilege, the Westminster
schoolboys had the right to give the first greeting to the sovereign,
and as she rose, the Abbey rang with their shouts, "Victoria! Victoria!
Vivat Victoria Regina!"

The next part of the ceremony is known as the "Recognition"--that is,
the recognition of the new sovereign as the lawful sovereign. The Queen
and the Archbishop of Canterbury turned to the north, and the
Archbishop said:

"Sirs, I here present unto you Queen Victoria, the undoubted Queen of
this realm; wherefore, all you who are come this day to do your homage
are you willing to do the same?" "God save Queen Victoria!" the people
cried. The Archbishop and the Queen then turned to the south, to the
east, and to the west, and the same words were repeated with the same
response. This signified that the people of the land had formally
accepted her as their sovereign.

After this, the Queen, followed by the eight train-bearers, walked to
the altar, and she made an offering of a golden altar cloth and a
pound's weight of gold. This was only the beginning of the four-hours'
ceremony, and next came a long sermon preached by the Bishop of London,
followed by the solemn oath of the Queen to be just and govern
according to the law.

Then came the act of coronation, but for this Victoria was not to
appear in jewels and ermine. She was escorted to one of the chapels and
robed in a flowing gown of fine white muslin. Over this was thrown a
robe of gold brocade worked with the rose, the shamrock, and the
thistle emblematic of England, Ireland, and Scotland. In this quaint
and ancient costume she knelt before the altar. The Archbishop led her
to the famous old chair of St. Edward, wherein was the stone of Scone,
and touched her head and hands with the holy oil. The scepter, orb,
sword, and other things signifying power and authority in either Church
or state, were handed to her, each with a few words from the
Archbishop, exhorting her to use it properly. The ruby ring was placed
upon her finger, and the cloth-of-gold mantle upon her shoulders. Then
the Archbishop slowly lifted the crown, which was blazing with
diamonds, sapphires, rubies, and emeralds, and placed it upon her head.
The next moment all the peers and peeresses lifted their coronets and
put them on. The whole building flashed and glittered until one might
have fancied that it was raining diamonds. "God save the Queen!" echoed
and re-echoed. The thousands who stood outside the Abbey caught up the
cry, the bells of all the churches in London began to ring, and the
guns of all the garrison towns were fired.

[Illustration: The Coronation of Queen Victoria.
(_From painting by Sir George Hayter._)]

The ceremony of homage followed. The Archbishop, the two royal dukes,
and many other dukes, marquises, earls, viscounts, and barons knelt
and, kissing her hand, said: "I do become your liege man of life and
limb, and of earthly worship, and faith and truth I will bear unto you,
to live and die against all manner of folk, so help me God!" One of the
peers was so aged and infirm that he tried twice in vain to ascend the
steps. The Queen rose and moved toward him and extended her hand to him
as simply and naturally as any other young girl might have done who was
not sitting on a throne. After the homage, she received the Holy
Sacrament; the "Hallelujah Chorus" was sung; and then the procession
re-formed and went slowly over the way to Buckingham Palace.

When George III. was crowned, he complained of some blunders that were
made, but he could hardly have been much comforted by the reply that
matters would "go better next time." Even though Victoria was the third
sovereign crowned since the time of George III., there were still some
mistakes. England was accustomed to crowning strong men, but not
slender young girls, and the orb was made so heavy that holding it was
very wearisome, while the ruby ring was made for the little finger and
had to be forced upon the ring finger as best it could be. When the
peers did homage, they were required to touch the crown; and the Queen
said it was fortunate that she had had it made as tight as possible,
for many of them knocked it, and one actually clutched it.

After such a day as this, Victoria must have felt that she was "really
and truly" a queen; but with all her dignity and her royalty, she was
still a frank, natural young girl, and the story is told that when she
entered Buckingham Palace and heard the bark of her favorite dog, she
exclaimed, "Oh, there's Dash! I must go and give him his bath."

The English were proud of their Queen, of her dignity and her royal
bearing, but it was these touches of frankness and simplicity that won
their hearts, and made them feel that with all her jewels, her velvets,
and her ermine, she was, after all, one of themselves. It was at this
time that the Duke of Sussex wrote to a friend:

"The girl Queen is becoming more and more popular. You would simply
idolize her if you saw that bright little face, with clear blue eyes,
winning all hearts and making us all say, 'God save the Queen!'"




CHAPTER VI

THE COMING OF THE PRINCE


The coronation ceremonies in Westminster Abbey were, indeed,
magnificent, but it must not be supposed that England was satisfied
with no further celebration of so joyful an event. Throughout the realm
there were for several days fairs, balls, and entertainments of all
kinds. London was illuminated, and the theaters were made free to all
who chose to attend them. People's hearts and purses were opened. The
rich were not satisfied with having a good time themselves; they wanted
the children of the land and the poor to have a good time also. In many
places feasts were given, and one of the most famous of these was held
in a great open field in Cambridge, where more than fourteen thousand
persons were entertained.

In the center of the field was a space for the band, and around it a
platform. Much money had been subscribed for the feast, but the
committee felt sure that large numbers of people would be ready to pay
from seventy-five cents to one dollar and a half for the privilege of
walking about on this platform and seeing what was to be seen. They
were right, for there was "a most fashionable and select company," who
promenaded around the circular platform and watched the feasters.

Sixty tables, each two hundred and thirty feet long, stretched out from
the central platform like the rays of a star; and when the signal was
given, the fourteen thousand persons, poor people and children of all
ages, marched to their places. It must have been an amusing procession
for each one was obliged to bring his own plate, knife, fork, and mug
for beer. There was roast beef, and there were various other good
things; but the member of the committee who wrote the account of the
dinner seems to have been especially interested in the puddings.
"Beautiful puddings," he says they were, and he tells just where each
one was boiled. He states, too, that 2475 pounds of raisins were put
into them.

At the end of the dinner, pipes, tobacco, and snuff were passed to the
grown folk. There was a salute of nineteen guns in honor of the Queen's
nineteen years. A balloon, which the enthusiastic committeeman calls a
"stupendous machine," was sent up, and the health of the Queen was
drunk. The Sunday-school children sang a song of better intention than
rhyme, which began:

    "Victoria! Victoria!
      We hail thy gentle rule;
    Victoria! the Patroness
      Of every Sunday school."

After the singing, came various games and contests. Men tried to climb
a well-soaped pole to get a leg of mutton which was fastened to the
top. Others were tied into sacks, and jumped as far as possible in the
attempt to win a pair of boots. There was a wheelbarrow race run by ten
blindfolded men. A pig was offered to the man who could catch the
animal and swing it over his shoulder by the well-greased tail. Men
grinned through horse-collars to see who could make the ugliest face
and so win a pair of new trousers. Six boys with their hands tied
behind their backs were given penny loaves and molasses, and a new hat
was waiting for the one who ate his loaf first. Other boys with their
hands tied were "bobbing for apples"--that is, trying to lift apples
with their teeth from a tub of water--and another group of boys were
struggling to see who could first swallow a pennyworth of dry biscuit,
and so win a new waistcoat. There were foot races and donkey races and
hurdle races, and races among men each with one leg tied up. At last
the day came to an end with fireworks, and all the happy, tired people
went home, fully convinced that under this new sovereign their country
would be more prosperous than ever.

It seems very strange that this Queen who was worshiped by her people
in the summer of 1838 should in the course of a few months have become
exceedingly unpopular with some of her subjects, but so it was. There
were in England two political parties, the Whigs and the Tories. Queen
Victoria's sympathies were with the Whigs. They were in power when she
came to the throne, but in the spring of 1839 the Cabinet proposed an
important bill which Parliament refused to make a law. Under such
circumstances it is the custom for the Prime Minister and the Cabinet
to resign, because such a refusal is supposed to signify that the
people, whom Parliament represents, do not approve of their acts.

When Lord Melbourne told the Queen that he must resign, she felt very
badly. She must stand at the head of a great nation, and the one in
whose advice she had trusted could advise her no longer. The leaders of
the Tories were "the Duke," as the Duke of Wellington was called, and
Sir Robert Peel; and Lord Melbourne told her that her wisest course
would be to ask the Duke to become her Prime Minister and select a
Cabinet of Tories. The Duke had declared before this that he did not
know what the Tories would do for a Prime Minister if they should come
into power. "I have no small talk," he said, "and Peel has no manners?"
but when the Queen sent for him, of course he obeyed. She asked him to
be her Prime Minister, and said to him honestly: "I cannot help being
very sorry to make a change and give up my Ministers, especially Lord
Melbourne, for he has been almost a father to me."

The straightforward old soldier was delighted with her frankness, but
he said: "I am somewhat deaf, and I am too old a man to undertake this
work and serve you properly. Moreover, it would be much better for one
who can lead the House of Commons to be your Majesty's Prime Minister.
I advise you to send for Sir Robert Peel."

Now, this girl of nineteen did not like the man who had "no manners,"
but she was a lady as well as a Queen, and when Sir Robert appeared--in
full dress, as was required--she received him so courteously that he
went away much pleased, having promised to obey her command and form a
Cabinet. This was easily done, and the next morning he brought her a
list of names.

"But you must not expect me to give up the society of Lord Melbourne,"
she said.

"Certainly not," was Peel's reply. "Moreover Lord Melbourne is too
honorable a man to attempt to influence your Majesty in any way against
the existing government." Sir Robert then suggested several men whom he
knew that she liked for various positions of honor in the royal
household. Finally he said, perhaps a little bluntly, "It will be
desirable to make some changes in the ladies of your Majesty's
household." Then a storm arose.

"I shall not part with any of my ladies," declared the Queen.

"But, your Majesty," said Sir Robert, "most of these ladies are closely
related to the former Cabinet Ministers." The Queen would not yield,
but she was willing to discuss the subject later with him and the Duke.
When they appeared before her, they said: "Your Majesty, the ladies of
the household are on the same footing as the lords."

"No," declared the Queen, "I have lords besides and I have let you do
with them as you chose. If you had just been put out of office and Lord
Melbourne had come in, I am sure that he would not have asked me to
give up my ladies."

"There are more Whigs than Tories in the House of Commons," said Peel,
"and if these ladies who are closely related to prominent Whigs are
retained, all Europe will look upon England as the country that is
governed by a party which the sovereign dislikes and in which she has
no confidence."

"I give you my lords," replied the Queen steadfastly, "but I keep my
ladies." The two nobles were in a dilemma. According to the British
constitution, "The Queen can do no wrong"--that is, not she, but the
Prime Minister is held responsible for every public act. Sir Robert
could not remain Prime Minister if the Queen positively refused to
yield to a course which he thought necessary.

While the Tory leaders were trying to plan some way out of the
difficulty, the Queen sent a letter to Lord Melbourne which was written
in much the same way that an indignant young girl would write to her
father. "Do not fear," she said, "that I was not calm and composed.
They wanted to deprive me of my ladies, and I suppose they would
deprive me next of my dressers and housemaids; they wished to treat me
like a girl, but I will show them that I am Queen of England."

Lord Melbourne called his Cabinet together in such haste that one
member had to be brought from the opera and another from a dinner
party. He read them the Queen's letter, and asked, "What shall we
advise?"

"Advise her to give up two or three of her principal ladies," suggested
one, "and perhaps that will satisfy Peel."

"Does anyone know exactly what Peel wants," queried another, "and how
many ladies he demands shall be removed?" This was an exceedingly
sensible question, and if it had been taken to Peel for an answer, the
trouble might have been brought to an end. He would probably have been
satisfied with the resignation of two or three of the strongest
partisans and principal talkers among the ladies; and, although the
Queen was insisting upon what she believed was her right, yet much of
her indignation arose from her belief that Peel meant to deprive her of
all who were then her attendants perhaps even the Baroness Lehzen. The
question was not taken to Peel, however, and the discussion in the
Cabinet went on.

"Let us write a letter for the Queen to copy and send to Peel," was the
next suggestion, "saying that she will not consent to a course which
she believes to be contrary to custom and which is repugnant to her
feelings." This suggestion was adopted. The letter was written, and the
Queen copied it to send; but before it reached Sir Robert, he resigned
his position, and Lord Melbourne was again Prime Minister.

This was the famous "Bedchamber Plot," and it aroused all England. Lord
Melbourne and the Whigs said:

"It is a small matter that the Queen should be allowed to retain her
favorite attendants."

Sir Robert and the Tories replied:

"The Prime Minister is responsible for the acts of the Queen, and it is
a large matter if she refuses to follow his advice when he believes
that the good of the realm demands a certain course. She is not the
Queen of the whole country, she is only the Queen of the Whigs, and the
whole thing is a plot to keep the Whigs in power."

"_We_ are loyal to our sovereign," declared the Whigs.

"_We_ stand by the constitution of Great Britain not by the whims of
a girl of nineteen," retorted the Tories. The amusing part of the
struggle was that the Whigs had always prided themselves on standing by
the constitution and the rights of the people, while the Tories had
favored increasing the power of the sovereign; but in those days the
question was too serious to strike anyone as amusing.

As the weeks of the summer and the early autumn passed, matters only
grew worse. Victoria was spoken of most contemptuously, and was even
hissed in a public assembly. Mr. Greville wrote in his journal: "The
Tories seem not to care one straw for the crown, its dignity or its
authority, because the head on which it is placed does not nod with
benignity to them." Peel was, of course, above such behavior as that of
some of his violent partisans, but he must have been somewhat surprised
at developments. He had been afraid that the Queen's opinions and
judgment were so weak that she would be influenced by the talk of a few
ladies in attendance and would be unable to judge questions fairly and
without prejudice; but he had found that, whatever might be the faults
of the young lady on the throne, she could never be accused of having
no will of her own.

During the first two years of her reign, the friends of the Queen were
watching her with much anxiety. She was an unusual girl, with an
unusual training, but, after all, she was only a girl, and she had
responsibilities to meet from which, as Carlyle said, "an archangel
might have shrunk." Her position was all the more dangerous because she
was too young to realize her difficulties; and when trouble arose,
there was no one in the land of whom she could ask counsel without
arousing the enmity of someone else. Everyone who was capable of
advising her was prominent in one political party or the other. If she
had discussed any of her hard questions with even her own mother, and
it had become evident that suggestions had come from the Duchess of
Kent, there would have been talk at once of "foreign influence."

Meanwhile, "foreign influence" in the person of the wise King Leopold
was busily at work. The young Queen had reigned for more than two
years, and the first novelty of her position had passed. At first it
had been delightful to her to feel that she was "the Queen," and that
she could do precisely as she chose. Even the Bedchamber Plot had
resulted in her having her own way, in keeping her ladies and the Whig
Cabinet; but so clear-minded a woman as Queen Victoria must have
seen--as, indeed, she declared some years later--that she had not
behaved like a constitutional monarch, and she knew that thousands of
her subjects were indignant with her.

Never was a loving uncle more shrewd in his affection than this "wisest
sovereign in Europe;" for just at this time, when his niece was feeling
far less self-sufficient than she had felt some months earlier, he
proposed that Prince Albert and his brother Ernest should pay her a
visit. The young men came, bringing with them a letter from the King
which spoke of them in most matter-of-fact terms as "good, honest
creatures, really sensible and trustworthy." The point of the letter
was in its closing sentence, "I am sure that if you have anything to
recommend to them, they will be most happy to hear it from you."

The Queen knew very well what this sentence signified, and she was more
ready to "recommend" than she would have been some months before. She
had seen her cousins only once, and that was more than three years
earlier. Prince Albert was then a lovable boy, and the Princess was
willing that her relatives should understand that she would marry him
some day. When nearly two years had passed and she had become Queen,
she felt much older and more mature; but she thought of her cousin as
still a boy. She expected to marry him some time in the future, but she
was not willing to permit even any formal engagement at that time. King
Leopold wrote urging her to make some "decisive arrangement" for the
following year. The Queen replied: "Albert and I are both too young to
think of marriage at present. He does not know English well enough, and
there are other studies which he needs to pursue."

King Leopold saw that it was of no use to press the question further at
that time, and he told the Prince that the marriage would have to be
postponed for a few years. The Prince saw the truth in Victoria's
objections. He knew that his position in England would demand all the
skill and knowledge that he could acquire, and he admitted that her
arguments were strong.

"You understand, and you will wait?" asked his uncle.

"Yes," answered the Prince, "I will wait, if I have only some certain
assurance to go on; but I do not want to be left in the ridiculous
position of Queen Elizabeth's suitors. I do not want all Europe talking
for years about my marriage and then laughing at the announcement that
Victoria never meant to marry me."

Another year passed. Then came the Bedchamber trouble. King Leopold
watched every item of news from England. "Now is the time," said the
sagacious King to himself, and he proposed the visit.

There had been little correspondence between the cousins. Prince Albert
had sent the Princess sketches of the places that he had visited in his
travels, and when she became Queen, he wrote her a somewhat formal
little letter, reminding her that the happiness of millions lay in her
hands, and closing rather primly, "I will not be indiscreet and abuse
your time." Victoria must have had in her mind a picture of her cousin
that was a strange combination of a serious young man somewhat given to
sermonizing and the stout, merry boy of seventeen who had slipped down
to the floor of his carriage and pushed his dog's head up to the window
when people pressed around to see the Prince.

With these two conflicting notions in her thoughts, the Queen went to
the head of the staircase in Windsor Palace to welcome her "two dear
cousins." The stout boy had vanished but in his place stood a tall,
manly, handsome young man, with a cheery, thoughtful face. Two days
later a letter went from the Queen to "Uncle Leopold," which said, "My
dear Uncle, Albert is fascinating." Then she remembered that she had
two cousinly guests and added, "The young men are very amiable,
delightful companions, and I am very glad to have them here."

King Leopold wrote at once, "I am sure you will like the cousins the
more, the longer you see them." Then he talked about the Prince.
"Albert is full of talent and fun and draws cleverly. May he be able to
strew roses without thorns on the pathway of life of our good Victoria!
He is well qualified to do so."

While the hopeful uncle was writing this letter, Victoria was talking
with Lord Melbourne.

"My lord," she said, "I have made up my mind at last, and I am ready to
marry Prince Albert whenever he wants me."

"I am very glad of it," replied her fatherly friend. "You will be much
more comfortable; for a woman cannot stand alone for any time, in
whatever position she may be."

"Do you think that my people will be pleased?" she asked.

"I believe that they will," he replied, for he knew very well how eager
they were for her marriage. No one liked the Duke of Cumberland, who
was now King Ernest of Hanover, but if the Queen died without children,
he would come over to England and wear the English crown as well as
that of Hanover. The feeling against him was so strong that it had even
been proposed in Parliament to make a law forbidding him ever to occupy
the throne.

On the fourth morning of their visit, the two Princes went hunting. It
was a long forenoon to the Queen, for she had what she afterwards
called a "nervous" thing to do. They came back at noon, but they had
hardly time to change their hunting clothes before a message was
brought to Prince Albert that the Queen wished to see him.

Now, royal etiquette forbade that this Prince of a little German duchy
should ask the sovereign of Great Britain for her hand; so when Albert
reached the Queen's apartments, he was obliged to wait until she had
spoken.

"I think you must know why I wished you to come," she said shyly. The
Prince had still to keep silent; he could only bow, but his bow must
have expressed a great deal, for she went on bravely: "It will make me
very happy if you will consent to what I wish."

In just what form the Prince made his reply the Queen did not reveal,
but it was evidently satisfactory, for she wrote, "He is perfection in
every way." That very day she sent a letter to King Leopold in which
she said: "I am so much bewildered by it all that I hardly know how to
write. But I do feel very happy."

A few weeks before this time she had written Baron Stockmar that she
could not think of marrying for three or four years, but that very day
she wrote him: "I _do_ feel so guilty, I know not how to begin my
letter, but I think the news it will contain will be sufficient to
insure your forgiveness. Albert has completely won my heart, and all
was settled between us this morning I feel certain that he will make me
very happy. I wish I could say," continued the modest little sovereign
of Great Britain, "that I felt as certain of making him happy, but I
shall do my best."

Prince Albert, too, had some letters to write; and as Victoria had
written to King Leopold, his first was to Baron Stockmar. After telling
of his happiness and of his love for the Queen, he wrote: "I cannot
write more, I am too much bewildered." It certainly was bewildering. He
had been told not long before that the Queen was determined not to
marry for three or four years at any rate, and that she would not
consent to any formal engagement. He had come to England with a
determination to insist either that she should recognize the informal
engagement between them or that it should be broken off.

The Duchess of Kent had loved Albert from the first, and she was very
happy in the thought of the marriage. She and the Baroness Lehzen,
together with Lord Melbourne and Prince Albert's brother, were the only
ones in England who knew the secret until five or six weeks had passed.
Then came a difficult five minutes for the young Queen. She had to meet
her Council of eighty middle-aged men and tell them of her engagement.
It is no wonder that she "hardly knew who was there." The picture of
the Prince in her bracelet gave her courage, and though Lord Melbourne
was far down the room, she caught a kind look from him and saw the
tears of sympathy in his eyes. Her fingers trembled, but she soon
controlled herself and read: "It is my intention to ally myself in
marriage with the Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha." She went
through the rest of the paper with her usual clear, sweet voice, and
one of the Councilors wrote of the event: "Certainly she did look as
interesting and as handsome as any young lady I ever saw."

When the reading of the paper was finished, the Lord President asked:
"Have we your Majesty's permission to publish this declaration?" The
Queen bowed and left the Council Chamber. About two months later she
had something even harder to do; she had to open Parliament and ask
that an income should be granted to the Prince. Another matter also had
to be settled, and that was what position he should hold in England.
Whether he should enter a room before or after dukes, earls, and
members of the royal family was a question that gave rise to much
discussion. These two questions were not settled as the Queen wished,
for the sum granted to the Prince was but three-fifths of what her
Ministers had asked, and Parliament refused to pass a law giving him
precedence next to herself. The Duke of Wellington said, "Let the Queen
put the Prince just where she wishes him to be;" and this she did, as
far as England was concerned, by issuing an order in Council that he
should stand next to herself. Some of her royal relatives were
indignant and King Ernest declared positively that he would never give
precedence to the younger brother of a German duke. "I won't give way
to any paper royal highness," he declared. The Queen was both hurt and
angry at these decisions but Prince Albert's only fear was lest they
indicated objection to the marriage on the part of the English, and he
wrote: "While I possess your love, they cannot make me unhappy."

A little more than a week after this letter was written, the day of the
wedding came. It had been the custom to celebrate royal weddings in the
evening, though other weddings must by law take place before noon; but
on this, as on most other subjects, the Queen had a very definite
opinion. "I wish to be married as my subjects are married," she said,
"and the ceremony must be at noon."

"Is it the will of your Majesty that the word 'obey' be omitted from
the promise that you make to the Prince?" asked the Archbishop of
Canterbury.

"No," she answered with decision. "I am not to be married as a queen,
but as a woman."

The wedding day was stormy, but that made little difference to bride,
groom, or any of the brilliant company assembled in the Chapel of St.
James'. The Prince wore the uniform of a British field-marshal, with
the collar of the Garter, and looked exceedingly handsome. As he came
into the Chapel, the organ burst out into the strains of "See, the
Conquering Hero Comes." He stood by the altar waiting for his bride,
and in a short time she appeared, escorted by the Lord Chamberlain. She
wore a dress of heavy white satin, woven in England. Her veil had made
scores of poor women happy, for she had ordered it of the lace-makers
of Honiton in Devon. She wore no crown, but only a wreath of orange
blossoms. She had diamond earrings and necklace, and a few diamonds in
her hair. Twelve bridesmaids in white tulle and white roses bore her
train; and a hard time they had, for, although it was six yards long,
they found it too short for so many bearers. One of them wrote: "We
were all huddled together, and scrambled rather than walked along,
kicking each other's heels and treading on each other's gowns."

[Illustration: Albert, Prince Consort, in the uniform of a field
marshal.]

At the moment the ring was placed on the Queen's finger, the guns in
the Park and at the Tower were fired, and the bells rang out their
merriest peals. When the ceremony was over, the party returned to
Buckingham Palace for a wedding breakfast. The bridesmaid who wrote the
account of the wedding said that Prince Albert "seemed a little nervous
about getting into the carriage with a lady with a tail six yards
long," but they all reached the palace in safety. After the breakfast
the sunshine at last beamed down upon them, and the young couple sped
away for their honeymoon at Windsor Castle.




CHAPTER VII

HOUSEKEEPING IN A PALACE


Common people may make a wedding tour, but kings and queens are too
fully occupied to afford such luxuries. The sovereign of England could
spend her honeymoon in Windsor Castle, but it must be a honeymoon of
only four days. Those four days, however, were marked by a freedom
which she had never enjoyed before. For the first time in her life she
could talk with someone of her own age without having to be on her
guard lest what she said should be repeated and do harm.

One of the subjects that needed to be discussed and to be reformed was
the royal housekeeping. Many a woman living in a two-room cottage is
quite as comfortable as the Queen of Great Britain was in 1840. Three
men, the Lord Steward, the Lord Chamberlain, and the Master of the
Horse, were supposed to have the management of the household. These
persons were men of high rank, and their offices were given them in
reward for their political services rather than for their ability to
manage the domestic affairs of a palace. Of course they were entirely
too stately to take any charge themselves of the housekeeping, and they
did not delegate their power to anyone in the palace. Some of the
servants were under one of these three, and some were under another. No
one was at the head of the house, and everyone did about as he chose.
If the Queen rang a bell for a servant, the servant might answer it, or
he might be absent from the palace, just as it happened, and the Queen
was helpless, for the only one at all responsible was some aristocratic
nobleman who was, perhaps, far away on a yachting trip. When the Prime
Minister of France was a guest at Windsor, he wandered over the palace
for an hour trying to find his bedroom, for there was no one on duty to
point it out to him. At last he was sure that he had it, and he opened
the door. Behold there stood a maid brushing the hair of a lady who sat
at a toilet table, and could see in the glass the embarrassed gentleman
as he hurriedly retreated. The next day he discovered that the lady
before the glass was her Majesty. Baron Stockmar wrote that cleaning
the inside of the windows belonged to one department and cleaning the
outside to another. It is quite probable that when the little Princess
Victoria asked Queen Adelaide to let her clean the windows there was
visible need of such work. The servants of one department brought the
wood and laid the fire, but it was not their work to light it, and for
that duty a servant from another department must be called. A pane of
glass could not be mended without the signatures of five different
officials. No one was responsible for the cleanness of the house or
even for its safety; and if the man whose business it was to guard an
entrance preferred to do something else, there was no one to interfere
with his pleasure. The doors were indeed so carelessly guarded that one
night a boy was found under a sofa in the room next to the Queen's
bedroom. He could not be punished as a thief, for he had stolen
nothing. He was not a housebreaker, for he had simply walked in through
open doors, and no one had been on guard to prevent such intrusions. It
was finally decided that he was a vagabond, and he was imprisoned for
three months.

Prince Albert was very anxious to have better management of the
household, and he laid the matter before the Prime Minister.

"But men of high rank are now eager to hold these offices in the royal
household," was the reply "and it will make trouble if anyone is put
over them, or if there is any interference with their departments."

"True," replied the Prince, "but the household machinery is so clumsy
and works so ill that, as long as its wheels are not mended, there can
be neither order nor regularity, comfort, security nor outward dignity
in the Queen's palace." Reforms began, but the Prince had to work very
slowly, and some years passed before either the Queen or her guests
could live in comfort.

If the Queen had insisted upon these changes being made at once, many
of them could probably have been carried out; but the Bedchamber Plot
had taught her that the sovereign must not act contrary to the wishes
of her people. There was especial need of care at the time. Within
hardly more than half a century, the American colonies had freed
themselves from England and become a republic; France had had a
terrible revolution; throughout Europe people were thinking of change,
of more power for the people and less for the government. In England
there was little probability of a revolution, but it was more than two
hundred years since there had been any general and lasting enthusiasm
for the monarch of the realm; and both Prince Albert and the Queen felt
that the only way to make the throne strong and enduring was to win the
affection of the people. This was the teaching of Baron Stockmar, the
faithful friend and adviser of the royal couple. They appreciated his
devotion, and all the more because they could do nothing for him. He
did not care for money or office, and he was absolutely independent.
When dinner was over, he did not trouble himself to go to the drawing
room unless he felt inclined. He would generally spend the winter with
the Queen, but he disliked good-bys, and when he wanted to go home to
his family, he left the palace without a word of farewell.

Baron Stockmar had good pupils. Prince Albert was not yet twenty-one at
the time of his marriage, and the question had arisen whether, as he
was not of age, he could legally take the oath that was required of
every member of the Council. Soon after the marriage, King Leopold
asked an English lady about him.

"Do the English like him? Will he be popular?" inquired the King.

"They call him very handsome," was her reply, "but the English are
always ready to find fault with foreigners, and they say he is stiff
and German."

As the months passed, however, the English learned that this young
Prince was a remarkable man in his grasp of politics, his talent for
art and music, and his honest and unselfish devotion to the good of the
realm. What was more, they showed their appreciation by an act of
Parliament. The country was not yet at rest about the succession to the
crown. If the Queen should have a child and die before the child was of
age, a regent would be necessary. Parliament discussed the question,
and named the Prince, "the foreigner," as regent. "They would not have
done it for him six months ago," declared Lord Melbourne with delight.

The Queen had always been loved by the Whigs, and just about this time
a great wave of devotion to her swept through not only their ranks but
also those of the Tories. A boy of seventeen tried to shoot her, not
because he hated her, but because he wished to be notorious. The Queen
was in her carriage with the Prince when the attempt was made. She
drove on rapidly to tell the Duchess of Kent that she was safe, then
she returned to the park, where hundreds of people had gathered, hoping
to see her and make sure that she was not injured. She was received
with cheers and shouts of delight, and all the horseback riders formed
in line on both sides of her carriage as if they were her bodyguard.
When she appeared at the opera a few days later, she was greeted with a
whirlwind of cheers and shouts. The whole house sang "God Save the
Queen!" Then they pleased her still more by crying, "The Prince! The
Prince!" and when Prince Albert stepped to the front, he was cheered so
heartily that she knew he was fast winning the hearts of her people.

Operas and popularity were not the only things to be thought of in
those days. The royal couple, barely twenty-one years of age, were
working hard on constitutional history. They were very anxious, too,
about the possibility of war with France on account of trouble in
regard to Turkey and Egypt, and when their little daughter was born, in
November, 1840, the Queen said: "I really think she ought to be named
Turko-Egypto."

The little girl was not named Turko-Egypto, but Victoria Adelaide Mary
Louise, and she had to wait three months for her name, as the
christening did not take place until February. She was baptized with
water brought from the River Jordan. The font was not taken from the
Tower, as it had been for her mother's baptism, but a new one was made
of silver, marked with her coat-of-arms and also those of her father
and her mother. She was a very decorous little Princess, and the proud
father wrote home to Coburg that she "behaved with great propriety and
did not cry at all."

There was much rejoicing at the birth of this Princess Royal; but when,
a year later, a Prince was born, then the delight of the nation knew no
bounds. He was the heir to the throne, and it was impossible to do too
much to celebrate his birth. Punch said:

    "Huzza! we've a little Prince at last,
      A roaring Royal boy;
    And all day long the booming bells
      Have rung their peals of joy.

    "And the little Park guns have blazed away
      And made a tremendous noise,
    Whilst the air has been filled since eleven o'clock
      With the shouts of little boys."

One or two questions in regard to the celebration had to be settled by
the courts of justice. It was an old privilege that when an heir to the
throne was born, the officer on guard at St. James' Palace should be
promoted to the rank of major. In this case the child was born at
Buckingham, but the guard at St. James' demanded his promotion
nevertheless. The matter was complicated by the fact that the change of
sentry had chanced to occur just at the time of the birth of the
Prince, and whether the old or the new guard actually held the keys was
a difficult question to determine. Another difficulty of the same kind
arose at Chester. The Prince had the title of Earl of Chester, and the
mayor of that city declared that by ancient right he had claim to a
baronetcy. Exactly the same question arose as with the sentinels, for
at about the moment when the keys were transferred the new mayor was
taking the oath of office.

All England rejoiced; but across the water, in Germany, was a man who
was not at all pleased to hear that a son and heir was born to
Victoria, for he had always had a lingering hope that he might yet
become King of Great Britain. His aide-de-camp said that King Ernest
was generally ill-natured when he heard from England; and he was
indignant enough when he was not asked to become his grandnephew's
godfather. Who should be the chief sponsor was a weighty matter but
Baron Stockmar's advice was followed, and the King of Prussia was
invited to take the place of honor. The Queen wished the little Prince
named Albert for the husband who was so dear to her, and Edward for the
father whom she could not remember, and these names were given him.
This small Prince was an expensive baby, for it is said that the
festivities at his christening cost at least $1,000,000. The Queen gave
him the title of Prince of Wales when he was only a month old by
signing an interesting bit of parchment which declared that she girded
him with a sword and put a golden rod into his hands that he might
direct and defend the land of the Welsh.

In all these regal honors and rejoicings the little baby sister was not
forgotten, and the Queen wrote in her journal: "Albert brought in
dearest little Pussy in such a smart merino dress, trimmed with blue,
which mamma had given her, and a pretty cap. She was very dear and
good."

The children's father and mother would have been very glad to forget
all outside cares and splendors and live quietly by themselves, but
that could not be. There was much to think of and many subjects
concerning which they felt anxiety. One of these was the change of
government, for a little before the birth of the Prince the event took
place which the Queen had dreaded so long, the victory of the Tories
and the resignation of Lord Melbourne. Never was a retiring Minister
more generous to his opponents and more thoughtful of the comfort of
his sovereign. Soon after his resignation he had a little conversation
with Mr. Greville about the Tories.

"Have you any means of speaking to these chaps?" he asked.

"Certainly," answered Greville.

"I think there are one or two things Peel ought to be told," said Lord
Melbourne, "and I wish you would tell him. When he wishes to propose
anything, he must tell the Queen his reasons. She is not conceited; she
knows there are many things which she does not understand, and she
likes to have them explained."

Sir Robert was grateful for the advice and followed it. It was not
pleasant for him to become Prime Minister, for, although the Queen
treated him with the utmost courtesy, he knew that she looked upon him
as responsible for cutting down the grant to Prince Albert and for
opposing her wish to give the Prince precedence next to herself. Peel
had done exactly what he thought was right, but he could not help
feeling sensitive when he was brought into so close relationship with
the Queen and knew that this relationship was not welcome to her. "Any
man with the feelings of a gentleman would be annoyed at having
unavoidably given her so much pain," he said. Moreover, he was
exceedingly shy, "so shy that he makes me shy," said the Queen.
Fortunately, Sir Robert and Prince Albert found that they had much in
common in their love for literature and art, and the Queen could not
help liking the man who showed such warm appreciation of the husband
whom she adored. Very soon Peel paid him a compliment that completely
won her heart. The new houses of Parliament were to be decorated, and
there was a strong desire felt by all who were interested in art that
they should be so artistic as to be an honor to the country. Peel
invited the Prince to become the chairman of the commission which was
to control the matter. This position gave him the best of opportunities
to become connected with the prominent men of the country, and both
Prince and Queen were grateful to Peel for his thoughtfulness. The
Queen came to appreciate the Tory Premier; then she saw that the Tories
were not so black as they were painted; and before the end of 1841,
Victoria was no longer "Queen of the Whigs," but Queen of all her
people.

The Queen had no easy life. "She has most of the toil and least of the
enjoyments of the world," wrote her husband. She had also much of the
danger. Without an enemy in the world, she was shot at twice during the
summer of 1842 by men who seemed to have no motive for such a deed.
When Peel heard of the attempt on her life, he hurried to the palace to
consult with the Prince. The Queen entered the room, and the shy, cold,
self-contained Minister actually wept tears of joy at her safety. After
that, there was no question about the friendliness between the Queen
and her Premier.

Just how these would-be assassins should be punished was an important
matter, and here the common sense of the sovereign found a way out of
the dilemma. "It is a mistake," she said, "to treat such attempts as
high treason, for it dignifies the crime, and makes the criminals feel
that they are bold and daring men." Parliament learned from her wisdom
and passed a bill punishing any attempt upon the sovereign's life by
imprisonment and flogging. This had so good an effect that the Queen
saw seven years of peace before another attempt was made to injure her.

In spite of all these dangers and political responsibilities, Victoria
was radiantly happy. The home life was all that she could have asked.
She and the Prince were not only husband and wife, they were the best
of comrades. Whenever they could win a little leisure from the cares of
state, they read and sketched and sang together. Music gave them both
the most intense pleasure, and both had rare musical ability, which had
been carefully cultivated. Mendelssohn describes a visit to them which
he seems to have enjoyed as much as they.

The great composer says that he found Prince Albert alone, but as they
were looking at the new organ and trying the different stops, the Queen
came in, wearing a very simple morning gown.

"I am glad that you have come," she said. "We love your music, and it
is a great pleasure to have you with us."

"I thank your Majesty," replied the guest, and he went on to speak of
the beauty of the organ.

"Yes, it is indeed fine," said the Queen, "but then I think any
instrument fine when the Prince is playing on it. But what confusion!"
she exclaimed, glancing around the room. The wind had scattered leaves
of music over the floor, even on the pedals of the organ, and she knelt
down and began to pick them up. Prince Albert and Mendelssohn started
to help, but she said, "No, go on with the stops, and I will put things
straight."

"Will you not play something for me?" begged Mendelssohn of the Prince,
and added, "so I can boast about it in Germany?" The Prince played,
while the Queen sat by him listening and looking perfectly happy. Then
Mendelssohn played his chorus, "How Lovely Are the Messengers," but
before he was at the end of the first verse, his royal hosts were
singing with him.

"It is beautiful," said the Queen. "Have you written any new songs? I
am very fond of your old ones."

"You ought to sing one for him?" suggested the Prince.

"If you only will," pleaded Mendelssohn.

"I will try the 'Fruhling's Lied,'" she said, "if it is here, but I am
afraid that all my music is packed to go to Claremont." Prince Albert
went to look for it, but when he returned, he reported that it was
already packed.

"But could it perhaps be unpacked?" suggested Mendelssohn daringly.

"It shall be," said the Queen. "We must send to Lady Frances." The bell
was rung, and the servants were sent to find the music, but they were
unsuccessful.

"I will go," the Queen declared, and she left the room. While she was
gone, the Prince said: "She begs that you will accept this present as a
remembrance," and he gave the composer a beautiful ring marked "V. R.
1842."

When the Queen returned, she said, "It is really most annoying; all my
things are gone to Claremont."

"Please do not make me suffer for the accident," begged Mendelssohn,
and at last another song was chosen. "She really sang it charmingly,"
he wrote in a letter, but when he told her so, she exclaimed, "Oh! if I
only had not been so frightened."

The Prince sang, and Mendelssohn gave them one of his wonderful
improvisations; then the musician took his leave. "But do come to
England again soon and pay us a visit," said the Queen earnestly, as he
made his farewells.

Running about to see the world was not so common an amusement in the
first half of the nineteenth century as it is to-day, neither were
railroads as common, and the Queen of England was twenty-three years of
age before she ever made a journey by rail. This new way of traveling
produced quite a disturbance among some of her attendants. The Master
of Horse said that as it was his business to arrange for her journeys,
he must assure himself that the engine was in proper condition; and,
much to the amusement of the engineer, he appeared at the railway
station several hours before the train was to start, that he might
inspect the engine, as if it were a horse. There was even more
difficulty in satisfying the claims of the coachman. "When the Queen
travels, it is my business to drive for her," he declared; "therefore,
I must at least be on the engine." He was permitted to ride on the
pilot engine, but the dust and cinders made such havoc with his scarlet
livery and his white gloves that he concluded not to press his claims
quite so urgently in future.

This famous journey was only twenty-five minutes long, and in spite of
the gorgeousness of crimson carpets laid from the royal carriage to the
train, it could not have been especially comfortable, for airbrakes and
good roadbeds were inventions yet to come. Nevertheless, the royal lady
was not discouraged in her desire to travel, and in the autumn of 1842
she and the Prince made a journey to Scotland.

Much that she saw was almost as new to her as it would have been to any
village maiden who had never left her home, and she was interested in
whatever came before her. She was especially delighted with Edinburgh.
"It is beautiful," she wrote; "totally unlike anything else I have ever
seen." As she entered the city, she was met by the Royal Archers
Bodyguard. This was an association formed by one of her royal ancestors
more than two hundred years before. Its special business was to protect
the sovereign, and in the old days its members were covered from head
to foot with armor. Long before Victoria's time the armor had vanished,
but in memory of the olden customs each man carried a bow in one hand
and had arrows stuck through his belt. As soon as the Queen appeared
they began to perform their ancient office, walking close beside the
carriage all the way through the town.

In this journey the Queen and Prince Albert were received by various
noblemen, but the most picturesque greeting was at the home of Lord
Breadalbane at Taymouth. As they drove up to the castle, the gates were
thrown open, and there stood their host in a Highland dress, at the
head of a company of Highlanders, who were gorgeous in the
bright-colored tartan of the Campbells. Pipers were playing on the
bagpipes, salutes were fired, the soldiers and the crowd of country
folk cheered over and over again. When the royal guests went into the
house and were escorted up the wide stone staircase long lines of
Highlanders in kilts stood on both sides of the hall and the stairway.
It is no wonder that the Queen wrote in her journal that it seemed like
the old feudal times. In the evening the gardens were illuminated.
There were no electric lights then, but she says there was "a whole
chain of lamps along the railing, and on the ground was written in
lamps, 'Welcome, Victoria--Albert.'" Bonfires were kindled on the tops
of the hills, and fireworks were set off. Then the bagpipes began to
play, torches were brought on the lawn in front of the house, and by
their wild and flaring light the Highlanders danced the gayest,
merriest reels that can be imagined. The visitors spent several days in
this charming place. A ball was given for them, but the Queen seems to
have enjoyed much more heartily the quiet drives that she took about
the country, the row up the lake, with two pipers sitting in the bow of
the boat, piping and singing weird Gaelic boat songs; and perhaps most
of all, the little picnics they had and the walks that they took, for
there was no one to stare at them, and they roamed about in perfect
freedom, guarded only by two Highlanders who, according to the ancient
custom, followed them with drawn swords wherever they went.

[Illustration: The Queen in 1845.
(_From a painting by John Partridge._)]

During the next two or three years, the Queen and Prince Albert seized
every opportunity for travel, short though their journeys had to be.
They visited not only several of the lordly mansions of England, but
they also spent a few days in Belgium and made a short stay at the
court of the French King. In 1844, they went again to Scotland, and
this time "Vicky," as they called the Princess Royal, was old enough to
go with them. There were two more children in the royal nursery by this
time, and the Queen wrote in her journal that "Alice and the baby and
good Bertie" came to bid the travelers farewell. She was quite
delighted that "Vicky" stood at the window of a little inn and bowed to
the people outside. One of her hosts on this visit to Scotland was the
Duke of Argyll. She describes in her journal his son, the two-year old
Marquis of Lome, and calls him "such a merry, independent little
child."

One of the disadvantages of being a sovereign is that the simplest acts
are looked upon as being of political significance. Victoria wished to
meet the French King, to whom Prince Albert was distantly related, and
she did not wish to talk politics. On her visit to France she was
interested in seeing the King's barge and its many oarsmen in white,
with red sashes; in the royal chapel, the first Roman Catholic church
that she had ever entered; in the little picnic that the King ordered
in the forest; in the picturesque white caps of the peasant women,
their bright-colored aprons and kerchiefs; and she noted even the tone
of the church bells, and said that it was much prettier than that of
the bells in England. She enjoyed her visit heartily; but far away in
Russia the keen-eyed Emperor Nicholas was watching her movements, and
he was not quite pleased. "The government of Turkey will soon fall to
pieces," he said to himself, "and if it does, France would like to
secure a piece of that country. If England should help her, she might
be able to do so, and this visit looks as if England and France were
becoming too friendly." The result of the Czar's meditations was that
word was sent to the Queen that he was on his way to visit her and
might be looked for at once. Queen Victoria had expected him to come
the following year, but he liked to make visits in this sudden fashion,
and there was nothing to do but to prepare for him as best she could in
forty-eight hours, for she had no longer time in which to make ready.

The Queen had not been especially anxious for the visit, she feared
there would be "constraint and bustle;" but she soon found that quiet,
simple ways of living were most pleasing to her guest, and she wrote to
King Leopold, "He is very easy to get on with." His greatest interest
was in military matters, and he was so much of a soldier that he said
he felt without his uniform almost as if he had been skinned. He was
taken to a review, of course, and this he thoroughly enjoyed. "Won't
you allow me to ride down the line," he asked the Queen, "so I can see
my old comrades?" Down the line he went, and was greeted everywhere
with enthusiastic cheers. When the Duke of Wellington appeared, the
crowd began to hurrah for him, for the man who had won the battle of
Waterloo was the nation's idol. "Please don't, please don't," he said,
riding along close to the crowd. "Don't cheer for me; cheer for the
Emperor."

This military Emperor had his own ideas about what the bed of a soldier
should be, even if the soldier was at the head of an empire, and before
he took possession of his bedroom at Windsor Castle, he had his
camp-bed set up, and sent to the stables for straw to stuff the
leathern case that formed his mattress.

The Emperor was delighted with his visit, and when the Queen invited
him to come again, he said rather sadly: "You do not know how difficult
it is for us to do such things." Then he kissed the royal children and
the hand of the Queen, and made his farewells. The Queen kissed him, as
sovereigns are expected to do at the beginning and end of a state
visit, and the reception of the mighty Czar was over. "By living in the
same house together quietly and unrestrainedly, I not only see these
great people but know them," said the Queen as simply as if she herself
were not one of the "great people."




CHAPTER VIII

A HOME OF OUR OWN


It is very delightful to live in palaces and entertain kings and
emperors; but Queen Victoria's palaces belonged to the English nation
and not to herself, and, as has been said, their royal tenants had to
suffer many inconveniences because they were not at liberty to manage
their own housekeeping as they chose. "If we only had a home of our
own!" said the Queen and Prince Albert to each other, and at last they
decided to buy one. They talked the matter over with Sir Robert Peel,
whom they had come to look upon as a faithful friend, and he told them
of a beautiful estate which was for sale.

This property was situated on the Isle of Wight. It was far enough from
London to assure them of privacy, and it was so near that there need be
no delay in matters of government. In this charming place there were
trees and valleys and hills, a wide stretch of sea-beach, with the
woods growing almost to the water's edge; and, best of all, the royal
family could walk and drive and wander about without feeling that they
were on continual exhibition. There was a palace at Brighton which the
Queen had sometimes occupied for the sake of being near the sea; but
Brighton had become so much of a city, and the houses had clustered so
closely about the palace, that there was no longer any view of the
ocean from the lower windows, and no member of the royal family could
go outside of the grounds without being followed by inquisitive crowds.
At Osborne, as the new purchase was named, there was perfect freedom.
Perhaps the "grown ups" of the household appreciated the liberty
indoors quite as much as that out of doors, for here there were no
"departments" to consult, and if a pane of glass was broken, there was
no need of sending over the kingdom for the signatures of five men
before it could be mended.

The house was pretty, but it was too small, and a new one had to be
built. Prince Albert made all the plans for it, and he was as eager as
the Queen to get into a home of their own. Nevertheless even in his
eagerness he did not forget the good of others. The longer the work of
building and beautifying the grounds lasted, the better it was for the
workmen; and so when harvest time came, he discharged large numbers of
his men, saying: "Work in the fields now; then, when the harvest is in,
come to me, and you shall have work here again."

The cost of the house came from the Queen's own purse, from the regular
grant made her by Parliament, though most sovereigns have called upon
the nation to build whatever dwellings they thought desirable. The
people of the kingdom were pleased to hear the English Court called the
most magnificent in Europe, and many statesmen expected that when a new
palace was to be built or a royal guest to be entertained, the
sovereign would ask Parliament for a special grant of money to pay the
expense. Frequently far more was expected of members of the royal
family than their purses could provide, and then came debts. King
Leopold had not been able to live within his grant, and the Duke of
Kent had left indebtedness at his death. The little Princess, who had
not been allowed to buy a box until she had the money to pay for it,
meant, now that she was on the throne, to carry out the principle on
which she had been brought up. The first thing that she did was to pay
her father's debts, and while living in as much splendor as her people
desired, she managed her income so well that she could afford to build
a palace if she chose. Prince Albert heartily approved of this wise
economy, and he carried out the same plan in managing the farm of the
new estate; he spent lavishly in improving the land, but unlike most
"fancy farmers," he made his costly improvements so skillfully that
they were paid for in the generous increase in crops.

When the new house was done, there was a joyful homecoming. As the
Queen passed through the door, one of the maids of honor threw an old
shoe after her, "to bring good luck," she said. To the Prince, entering
into the new home brought memories of his childhood in Coburg, and
after the first dinner he said, "We have a hymn in Germany for such
occasions. It begins:

    "Bless, O God, our going forth,
    Bless Thou, too, our coming in."

So it was that the new house was opened. Not only the grown folk, but
the merry little company of princes and princesses, were very happy in
it whenever a few days could be spared for its pleasures. As they grew
older, a Swiss cottage was built for them, and this was _their_ house.
There was a charming little kitchen, with a cooking stove, so that the
girls could try all sorts of experiments in the cooking line; and happy
they were when they could persuade their father and mother to partake
of a "banquet" of their own preparing. The boys had a forge and a
carpenter's bench, where they built small boats and chairs and tables
and wheelbarrows. Every child had a garden, and there he raised not
only flowers, but fruit and vegetables. In this little paradise the
children did what they liked, but they were shown the best way of doing
it. A gardener taught them how to manage their gardens, and whenever
their vegetables were a success, they either gave them away or sold
them at market price to the royal kitchen. Prince Albert himself taught
the boys how to use tools, and helped them to begin a museum of
insects, minerals, and all sorts of curiosities like the one that he
and his brother Ernest had had in Coburg when they were boys.

Not only at Osborne, but wherever the royal children were, they were
brought up as simply as the Queen herself had been. Whatever material
was bought for their clothes had to be shown to the Queen, and if it
was rich or expensive, she would refuse to allow it to be used. As soon
as the princes and princesses were old enough, they were taught to take
as much care of their clothes as if they had been a poor man's
children. One of their nurses wrote that they had "quite poor
living--only a bit of roast beef and perhaps a plain pudding;" and she
added, "The Queen is as fit to have been a poor man's wife as a queen."
Baron Stockmar was consulted on all nursery questions, and he said that
it was more difficult to manage a nursery than a kingdom.

The Queen tried to make her children understand that they were no
better than other children just because they were princes or
princesses, and they were obliged to behave with perfect courtesy to
the servants of the palace as well as to kings and emperors. It is said
that once upon a time two of the children thought it very amusing to
take possession of the brushes and blacken the face of a woman who was
cleaning a stove; but when the Queen mother discovered their prank, she
took the small culprits by the hand and led them to the woman's room
and made them apologize most humbly. The little Princess Royal "Vicky"
was so independent a young lady that she would sometimes break through
her mother's teachings. The story is told that one day a sailor lifted
her on board the royal yacht, saying as he sat her down, "There you
are, my little lady." "I'm a princess I'm not a little lady," the child
retorted; but the watchful mother was listening, and she said, "That is
true. Tell the kind sailor that you are not a little lady yet, but that
you hope to be some day." Occasionally this willful little Princess
preferred to bear a punishment rather than give up her own way. The
Queen and the Prince addressed Dr. Brown as "Brown," and the small
child followed their example. "You will be sent to bed if you do that
again," said the Queen, but the next morning when Dr. Brown appeared,
the little girl said with special distinctness: "Good morning, Brown,
and good night, Brown, for I'm going to bed, Brown," and, with her
saucy little head high in the air, she marched off to bed.

Happy as the Queen and the Prince were in their home life, one subject
in connection with her husband always troubled the loving wife, and
that was the annoying question of precedence. She wrote of him in her
journal: "He is above me in everything really, and therefore I wish
that he should be equal in rank to me." In England she could "put the
Prince where she wished him to be," but Parliament had given him no
rank, and therefore out of England some sovereigns, like King Ernest,
positively refused to grant him any honors that were not due to the
younger son of the Duke of Coburg; and when precedence was accorded
him, the Queen had to express gratitude as for a personal favor to
herself. Unknown to the Prince, she had a long talk on the subject with
Baron Stockmar.

"I wish him to have the title of King Consort," she said earnestly.

"A king consort without the authority of a king would be a novelty,"
replied the Baron, "and the English people do not like anything for
which there is no precedent. Queen Anne's husband was never called
king."

"But Queen Anne's husband was stupid and insignificant," declared the
Queen. "There has never been a case like ours before. Albert and I
reign together. He is sovereign as much as I. We discuss all matters
and decide together."

"True," admitted the Baron, "but the constitution does not provide for
such a condition of affairs. I will talk with Peel about it."

Peel felt as Stockmar did, that it was not wise to propose such a
title. The subject arose again some years later, and the shrewd Baron
wrote to the Prince in his usual straightforward fashion: "Never
abandon your firm, powerful position to run after butterflies. You have
the substance; stick by it." The title was never given him, but it was
true that he had "the substance." The Queen no longer met her Ministers
alone; the Prince was always with her to help and suggest. Whenever
either she or the Prince spoke to the Council the word "I" was not
used; it was always "We think so-and-so should be done."

Not only the Council but the whole country were gaining in knowledge of
the Prince's wisdom and devotion to the good of the kingdom, and in
1847 a valued mark of appreciation was given him in his election as
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, one of the greatest honors
that could have been bestowed upon him. The Queen was delighted,
because she knew that the position was not given out of compliment to
her, but was something that he himself had earned. Soon after the
election, came the installation. The magistrates and Yeomanry went to
the station to meet the Queen, and then marched before her into the
town. She was escorted into the Great Hall of Trinity College and led
to an armchair which stood on a platform under a canopy. Soon after she
had seated herself, the new Chancellor entered at the farther end of
the hall, followed by the long line of university dignitaries. He wore
a robe of black and gold, so long that it had to be held up by two
gentlemen. When he stood in front of the armchair that represented the
throne, he made a low bow and delivered his address. "The situation was
almost absurd for us," said the Queen afterwards, but the Prince read
his address with perfect command of his countenance and the Queen was
quite serious until she caught his eye for a moment at the end of the
speech. She half smiled, but in an instant she was again the dignified
sovereign, and she declared with a little emphasis that brought forth
shouts of applause, "The choice which the university has made of a
Chancellor has my most entire approbation."

Not long afterwards the new Chancellor and his royal wife paid another
visit to Cambridge. It was a little muddy, and the Queen hesitated a
moment before getting out of the carriage. Instantly one of the
students threw his gown upon the ground for her to step on, and others
followed his example.

When Victoria thought of her husband and her children, she was
supremely happy, but when she thought of the different kingdoms of
Europe, and even of her own realm, there was much in 1847 and 1848 to
make her unhappy. All Europe was restless and uneasy. Revolt had broken
out in Italy, France, Germany, and other countries. The reigning
sovereigns in most of these kingdoms were related to her either by
blood or by marriage, and she could but feel grief for their trials,
and, in some instances, fear for their safety. Indeed, the King and
Queen of France had to flee to England and they spent the remainder of
their lives at Claremont. In Victoria's own realm, there was trouble.
Ireland was suffering from a terrible famine. Thousands of Irish were
dying of either starvation or fever. In England there was no
starvation, but everyone felt the hard times more or less. Those who
had money did not dare to invest it, because business was so unsettled
that they were afraid of loss. As capital was not invested, there was
little work to be had, and the poor suffered severely. The rich as well
as the poor felt the general stagnation. Greville said that his income
was only half the usual amount, and even in royal palaces strict
economy was practiced.

There was a special reason for great uneasiness in London. According to
the laws at that time, no one could become a member of the House of
Commons who did not own land enough to receive from it an annual income
of $1500. This law had been made in the belief that a man who owned
land would be more interested in the welfare of his country than a man
who had none. Thousands of workingmen were not allowed even to vote.
When work was plenty, and they were comfortable and busy, they did not
think so much about their rights; but when work failed, they began to
say to one another: "This is all the fault of the laws. If everyone
could vote, and if poor men as well as rich men could become members of
Parliament, laws would be made for the good of the whole nation and not
merely for the landowners."

These men held meetings to discuss such matters, and they concluded to
send in a petition to Parliament, setting forth their wrongs and
demanding that changes should be made. The plan was explained in what
was called the People's Charter, and therefore its supporters were
spoken of as Chartists.

No one would have objected to having as many petitions sent to
Parliament as the house would hold, but among the people were many
hot-headed persons who had much to say about "oppression" and
"revolution." The crowds sometimes became noisy and turbulent, and one
evening some of them rushed wildly toward Buckingham Palace. The only
harm that they did was to break some street lamps; and when their
leader was arrested by the police, he made no resistance, but began to
cry. Nevertheless, people felt very uneasy, and when it was reported
that on the 10th of April the petition would be presented by 1,000,000
men, there was much alarm in the city. Shops were barricaded, weapons
were put where they could be caught up in a moment, and old muskets
that had not been used for half a century were brought down from the
garrets and put in order for the riots that were feared. The Duke of
Wellington, as commander-in-chief of the army, made very wise
preparations. There was no display of soldiers or cannon, but
Buckingham Palace and the public buildings were quietly filled with
armed men, and gunboats were brought up the river. The Queen had shown
again and again that she was no coward, and she would have stayed in
London, but her Ministers persuaded her to take her three-weeks'-old
baby to Osborne House. All London trembled when the 10th of April
arrived; but when night came, those who had feared most laughed
heartiest. The whole affair had ended in a few thousand men starting
for Parliament with the petition. "You cannot cross the bridge in
mass," said the police, and the Chartists went home meekly, sending
their petition in cabs.

The Queen had long wished to go to Ireland, and in 1849 she and the
Prince and the four older children went to that country in the yacht
_Victoria and Albert_. Now, however indignant the Irish might be
at England's rule of their country they would not give the Queen any
but the most cordial greeting; and when the yacht sailed into the mouth
of the River Lee, the people of the place called Cove of Cork asked
that she would step ashore, if only for a moment. "We wish to change
the name of our town," they said, "so that it may mark the place where
the Queen first set her foot on Irish soil." The flag was run up on
which was written the word "Cove," but as soon as the Queen had gone
back to the yacht, the flag was dropped, and another was run up marked
"Queenstown."

The _Victoria and Albert_ went on to Cork, and the party also visited
several other places in Ireland. Wherever they went, the crowds pressed
to the water's edge with cheering and shouts of welcome. Cannon were
fired and bells were set to ringing. Every little cottage had its flag,
or at least a wreath of flowers and evergreens. All were interested in
the royal children, and at Kingstown an old lady cried out: "Oh! Queen
dear, make one of them Prince Patrick, and all Ireland will die for
you."

When the Irish visit had come to its end, and the Queen was about to
leave for England, the crowds on the shore cheered her more wildly than
ever, and both the Queen and the Prince climbed the paddlebox and waved
their handkerchiefs again and again. "Go slowly," ordered the Queen,
and the boat moved very slowly along, keeping close to the pier. The
crowds cheered with more enthusiasm than before, and three times a
return was given to their salute by lowering the royal standard. One of
the Queen's party said: "There is not an individual in the town who
does not take the Queen's going on the paddlebox and lowering the royal
standard as a personal compliment to himself."

The year following the visit to Ireland the Queen's seventh child was
born, a boy.

"Now we are just as many as the days of the week," cried the brothers
and sisters joyfully.

"But which of us shall be Sunday?" asked one.

"The new baby," answered Princess "Vicky" decidedly, "because he's just
come, and we must be polite to him and give him the best."

The little boy was named Patrick, as the old woman in Ireland had
suggested, but his first name was Arthur, for the Duke of Wellington,
on whose eighty-first birthday he was born.

The days of the Queen were full of joys and sorrows that came almost
hand in hand. Her home life was perfectly happy, but her duties as a
sovereign took much time that she would have gladly given to her
family. "It is hard," she said, "that I cannot always hear my children
say their prayers." She had the warmest, most devoted friends, but in
the six years preceding 1850, she had lost several who could never be
replaced. Sir Robert Peel and Lord Melbourne had died, the opposing
Ministers who had both won her confidence and gratitude; and the "good
Queen Adelaide," who had loved the little Princess Victoria as if she
had been her own child, was also gone. The sorrow which Prince Albert
felt at the loss of his father had been to his wife a grief almost as
deep; and both she and the Prince were saddened by the loss of the
Coburg grandmother, who loved him so that she was almost heartbroken on
his leaving her to make his home in England, and called piteously after
his carriage, "Oh, Albert, Albert!" The three who had been nearest to
the Queen in her childhood were living, her mother, Dr. Davys, and
Baroness Lehzen. The kind, scholarly clergyman she had made Bishop of
Peterborough, and she saw him from time to time. After the marriage of
the Queen the Baroness Lehzen returned to her friends in Germany, but
the busy sovereign found time to send her long and frequent letters.

The losses of the Queen were many, but with Prince Albert by her side,
she felt that she could bear whatever came; and it was a great
happiness to her that the better he was known in the country, the more
highly the nation thought of him. They could hardly help esteeming him,
for he seemed never to have a thought of himself; all was for the Queen
and for her people. For several years he had had a plan in his mind for
a great industrial exhibition. When he first laid the scheme before the
public, the people were wildly enthusiastic. Then, as the difficulties
arose, there was much criticism. The building would cost $1,000,000,
and subscriptions were slow. _Punch_ brought out a cartoon inscribed,
"Please to remember the Exposition." It represented a boy holding out
his cap for pennies Under the picture was written:

    "Pity the sorrows of a poor young Prince ----
      Whose costly scheme has borne him to your door;
    Who's in a fix--the matter not to mince--
      Oh, help him out, and commerce swell your store."

Prince Albert laughed heartily at the cartoon, added it to his
collection, and worked all the harder for the exposition.

There was much opposition to admitting foreign exhibits, for many
English manufacturers had a wild fancy that the sight of them would
prevent the English from patronizing home products. "All the villains
of the Continent will be here," declared the grumblers. "They will
murder the Queen and begin a revolution." In Parliament, one of the
members invoked the lightning to fall from heaven and destroy the
half-finished building. Nevertheless, enormous masses of goods were
constantly arriving, and the mighty structure continued to rise. It was
made of iron and glass, and was like an enormous greenhouse. Thackeray
wrote of it:

        "And see, 'tis done!
    As though 'twere by a wizard's rod,
    A blazing arch of lucid glass
    Leaps like a fountain from the grass
        To meet the sun."

The Crystal Palace, the people called it, and no better name could have
been given. It stretched out one thousand feet in length, and part of
it was one hundred feet high, so high that two elm trees which had been
growing on its site grew on in freedom under its glass roof. The
ironwork was painted a clear, bright blue. There were scarlet hangings,
fountains, statues, banners, tapestries, flowers, palms, everything
that could make it bright and beautiful.

May 1, 1851, had been named as the day of opening. In the royal family
the day began with birthday gifts for the little Arthur--toys from the
parents, a clock from the Duchess of Kent, and, strange presents for a
baby, a bronze statuette and a beautiful paper-knife from the Prince
and Princess of Prussia. Long before noon, the Queen, the Prince, and
the two older children drove to the Crystal Palace. As they entered,
there was a flourish of trumpets, followed by tremendous cheering. The
Queen was radiant with happiness as she walked down the broad aisle
with her husband. She wore a pink silk dress of Irish poplin, and on
her head was a diamond tiara. She led by the hand the Prince of Wales,
a bright, handsome little fellow. The Princess Royal wore a white
dress, and on her head was a wreath of roses. She held her father's
hand. The cheers grew louder and louder, then the deep tones of the
organ broke in upon them. The music of two hundred instruments and six
hundred voices followed, leading the thousands present in the National
Hymn. After this the Prince left the side of the Queen, and, returning
at the head of the commissioners, he read her the formal report. She
made a short reply. The Archbishop of Canterbury offered up prayer, and
the wonderful "Hallelujah Chorus" resounded through the lofty arches.
While this was being sung, a Chinese mandarin, who had been walking
about most perfectly at his ease and quite indifferent to the gazing
crowds, now took his stand before the Queen and made a very profound
obeisance. He proved to be of considerable use a little later, for when
the long procession of distinguished Englishmen and foreigners was
formed, it occurred to someone that China was not represented, and the
dignified mandarin was taken possession of as an addition to the train.
He made no objections, but marched along with his former tranquillity,
thinking apparently that all foreigners were treated in such manner by
those remarkable people, the Englishmen.

The Duke of Wellington was in the procession and the walk around the
building was to him a triumphal progress, for the women waved their
handkerchiefs and kissed their hands, while the men cheered and
shouted, "The Duke! The Duke!" In the midst of all his glory, he did
not forget his little year-old namesake and godson and later in the
day, his eighty-second birthday, he called at Buckingham Palace with a
golden cup and some toys of his own selection for the little boy.

So ended what Victoria called "the proudest and happiest day of my
life, a thousand times superior to the coronation." In her journal she
wrote: "Albert's name is immortalized, God bless my dearest Albert, God
bless my dearest country!"




CHAPTER IX

NIS! NIS! NIS! HURRAH!


Few men in England worked as hard as Prince Albert, the uncrowned King.
If a corner stone of a school, a hospital, or a public building was to
be laid, a missionary society to be formed, some new docks to be
founded, a museum to be opened, Prince Albert must be present. He must
attend naval reviews, councils to discuss reforms at Cambridge, dinners
of scientific men, and first meetings of societies to aid superannuated
servants. He must not only be seen, but he must be heard, for he was
expected to make a speech on every occasion. In fact, whenever he
opened the door of his own rooms, some delegation seemed to be waiting
to ask him to attend a meeting and make a speech.

All these demands upon his time took him away from the Queen, and every
absence made her lonely. She wrote to King Leopold: "You cannot think
how forlorn I am when he is away; all the numerous children are as
nothing. It seems as if the whole light of the house and home were
gone." Prince Albert never let a day pass during any of these absences
without writing to her. Once when he went to an important meeting of
scientific men, he sent back the same day a little note that said: "I
have locked myself in to send you two lines as a token of my life and
love. You will be feeling somewhat lonely and forsaken among the two
and a half millions of human beings in London, and I too feel the want
of only one person to give a world of life to everything around me."
The following day he sent her another letter, although it could reach
her only two hours before his own arrival. However pressing his
business might be, he always found time to write a word to her. One of
these notes read:

"Your faithful husband, agreeably to your wishes, reports:

"1. That he is still alive;

"2. That he has discovered the North Pole from Lincoln Cathedral, but
without finding either Captain Ross or Sir John Franklin;

"3. That he has arrived at Brocklesby, and received the address;

"4. That he subsequently rode out, and got home quite covered with
snow, and with icicles on his nose;

"5. That the messenger is waiting to carry off this letter, which you
will have in Windsor by the morning;

"6. Last, not least (in the dinner-speeches' phrase), that he loves his
wife, and remains her devoted husband."

In the midst of all these engagements, the home life and the education
of the children were not neglected. Lord Melbourne and Baron Stockmar
had been consulted in regard to tutors and nursery arrangements as
earnestly as on important political actions. Bishop Davys lived so
simply that the Queen could not disturb him by a royal visit, but
whenever she passed through Peterborough, she had her train delay so
that he could come to her, and she could talk with him about the
children and have his advice in regard to their training and their
future. Lessons were important matters in the royal family, and if the
governess was ill, either the Queen or the Prince heard the children
recite, so that there should be no loss. There is a story that when a
clergyman, who was hearing them say the catechism, remarked, "Your
governess has taught you very thoroughly," they cried, "Oh, mamma
always teaches us our catechism." She was interested in every detail of
their lives, and when the man who made the clothes of the sailors on
the _Victoria and Albert_ made a tiny sailor suit for the little Prince
of Wales, she seemed as pleased as if one suit a year was the limit of
the royal purse.

[Illustration: Queen Victoria; Prince Albert; Victoria, Princess
Royal; Albert Edward, Prince of Wales; Prince Alfred; Princess Alice;
Princess Helena.
(_From painting by F. Winterhalter, 1848._)]

Besides the calls of home and state, many other responsibilities fell
upon the sovereign of England. In the latter part of 1851, trade was
very dull in London, and the Queen decided to give a great fancy ball
at Buckingham Palace so that sales might be increased. All the guests
were asked to come in the costume of the time of the Stuarts, and this
was so gay and picturesque that the ballroom must have been a most
brilliant sight. The Queen wore a _gray dress_, but it was hardly as
simple as one would expect from those two words, for it was glittering
with gold and silver lace, while clusters of diamonds flashed forth
from bows of rose-colored ribbon. The front of the dress opened to
display a cloth-of-gold stomacher and underskirt made gorgeous with
large emeralds. Strings of pearls were braided in with her hair, and
upon her head she wore a small crown of diamonds and emeralds. Her
gloves and shoes were heavily embroidered with gold. The costume of the
Prince was a veritable rainbow, for he was all aglow in an orange coat,
with its sleeves turned up with crimson velvet, breeches of crimson
velvet, and stockings of lavender silk. This was not all by any means,
for there were pink epaulets, pink satin bows, gold lace, a silver
baldric, and a hat with long white ostrich feathers.

The Queen and the Prince retained their seats while the guests entered,
each one making a low bow in passing. No one would have thought a royal
ball complete without "the Duke," and he appeared in the dress of a
Stuart general, his scarlet coat adorned with gold lace and point lace,
and its sleeves slashed with white satin. Blue velvet trunks, crimson
silk sash, white hat with blue plumes, and gold lace wherever there was
room for it, completed his costume. So much he would concede to the
state ball, but he utterly refused to appear in the long curls of the
Stuart period, and in spite of all his gay trappings, he was still the
stern old commander.

Another great ball given by the Lord Mayor of London followed this one,
and it is no wonder that Queen and Prince were glad to leave London for
a little rest. This time and many other times they went to Scotland.
They loved Osborne, but the Prince was feeling the strain of his
intense work, and the physicians thought that the air of the mountains
would be better for him than that of the sea. Therefore they went to
Balmoral, a charming little gray castle that they had bought. It stood
on the banks of the swiftly flowing River Dee, in the midst of hills
and forests. The life at Balmoral was far more simple than that of many
non-royal families. Of course a Cabinet Minister was always in
attendance, and messengers with boxes of state dispatches were
continually coming and going; but there was much greater freedom than
the Queen could enjoy elsewhere. In the early years at Balmoral, the
English court consisted of the Queen, the Prince, their four children,
the two teachers, and four other persons, secretaries and ladies in
attendance.

At Balmoral they climbed mountains, searched for crystals and
cairngorms, took long walks through the woods, made little picnics far
up in the hills and built a cairn, or great pile of stones, each person
placing one in turn, to mark the new ownership of the place. At dinner,
the Prince wore the Scotch dress, and the Queen often wore over her
shoulder a scarf of Stuart plaid. While the Prince was out shooting in
the morning, she frequently ran about among the cottages, chatting
easily and comfortably with the cottagers, comparing the height and
weight of the latest royal baby with the latest baby of the
neighborhood, going to the little stores in the village to buy dresses
for poor people and toys for their children. On Sunday she went to the
kirk like a true Scotchwoman, and one day she wrote in her journal
enthusiastic praise of Dr. McLeod's sermons, because they were so
"simple and eloquent," she said. She was never pleased to have a
minister pay her any special attention in his sermons; she liked to
have him look upon her as only one more of his people; but she wrote
that when Dr. McLeod prayed for her and the Prince, and then said
"Bless their children," it gave her "a lump in the throat."

In their everyday life the royal family were Scotch when they were in
Scotland. The English children of the palace wore kilts and tartans,
they played in the brooks with the Scotch children of the cottages; and
the Princess Royal of England walked into a wasps' nest and met the
same fate that would have befallen any little Scotch girl who had done
the same thing. A Highland dancing master and a fiddler were engaged to
come to Balmoral and teach the Queen and her court how to dance
Scottish reels and strathspeys. One evening, after an early dinner, the
court set off for a fourteen-mile drive to see a Scotch ball at a
neighboring castle. It must have been a weird and beautiful sight. The
dancing floor was out of doors, and all around it stood Highlanders in
their gay plaids, holding blazing torches, while seven pipers provided
the music. One of the reels was danced by eight Highlanders, each
bearing a torch. Another interesting sight was the sword dance. In this
two swords crossed were laid upon the ground, and the performer must
dance around them without touching them.

As in the case of Osborne, it was soon apparent that the pretty little
gray castle was not large enough for the Queen's housekeeping. "Every
bed in the house was full," wrote Mr. Greville when he had been
spending a night at Balmoral. A new house was decided upon, and when
the corner stone was laid, there was one of the little family
celebrations that were so delightful to both Queen and Prince. The sun
shone brightly on the stone, as it hung over the place that it was to
occupy. The servants of the castle stood in a semicircle on one side,
and the workmen behind them. The royal family and their guests came out
of the house together and took their places on the opposite side. A
clergyman offered up a prayer for a blessing on the work and on the new
home. A parchment giving the date on which the stone was laid was
signed by every member of the royal family and put into a bottle,
together with the current coins of the country. The bottle was sealed
and placed in the cavity; the architect gave the Queen a trowel to
spread the mortar; and the stone was lowered. The Queen then struck the
stone with a mallet, and said: "I now declare that this corner stone is
laid." She poured oil upon it in token of plenty, and wine in token of
gladness; the pipers played; the workmen had a feast and a dance; and
the new house was begun.

When the house was partly done, the builder came to Prince Albert and
said:

"The price of materials has risen so greatly that keeping this contract
will ruin me."

"Tell me just what the prices are now and what they were when we made
the contract," said the Prince. The builder made a rapid list and gave
it to him.

A few days later, the Prince sent for the builder and said:

"I find that you are right, and so I have burned my copy of the
contract. I will be the builder myself, and if you will superintend the
work of building, I will pay you the same amount that you expected to
make on the contract."

Only a few days after one of the simple, merry evenings at Balmoral, a
telegram broke into the happiness of the household, saying that the
Duke of Wellington was dead. "One cannot think of this country without
the Duke," wrote the Queen. "Not an eye will be dry. He was Britain's
pride, her glory, her hero, the greatest man she had ever produced." A
public funeral was given him by order of Parliament. His body lay in
state in a great hall whose walls were heavily draped with black,
relieved only by the banners that he had captured in battle. Guardsmen
as motionless as statues stood at intervals along the passage, leaning
upon their muskets, which rested, muzzles down, on the door. On the
coffin lay the Duke's sword and his cocked hat, and around the bier
stood officers on guard, whose scarlet uniforms shone out of the
darkness in the light of the tall wax candles that outlined the bier.
Finally the body of the Duke was borne to St. Paul's on an iron
gun-carriage, followed by the dead commander's horse with its empty
saddle and by a long line of soldiers representing every regiment.
Thousands of people lined the street through which the funeral
_cortege_ marched. They stood with bared heads and in such perfect
silence that not a sound was heard but the steady tramp of feet and the
roll of the funeral drums. So it was that the great soldier was buried
amid the grief of the nation.

Never was he needed more, for the sound of war was coming near. The
Emperor Nicholas, whom the Queen had called so "easy to get along
with," proved to be somewhat less easy than he had been when on a
visit. He had declared that he should protect the Christians in Turkey
from the outrages of the Turks; but France and England believed that
what he was really aiming at was to get possession of Constantinople.
If he succeeded in this, no ship could enter the Black Sea against his
will, and it would not be impossible for him to gain control of the
Asiatic lands then ruled by Great Britain. If this came to pass, Russia
would be far more powerful than any other state in Europe. This was the
belief of England and France, and they wished to oppose him.

The Queen was always against war, but when it was finally declared,
early in 1854, she did everything in her power for the success of
England. When the first regiments that were ready to go to the Crimea
marched through the courtyard of Buckingham Palace, she and the Prince
stood on the balcony as enthusiastic as the troops. Then she hastened
to Osborne to say farewell to the warships that were starting for the
Baltic. Prince Alfred had already made up his mind to be a sailor, and
the Duke's little namesake was destined to follow the Duke's example
and be a soldier, but they were as yet only small children, and the
Queen exclaimed, "How I wish I had two sons in the army now and two in
the navy!" Nothing that affected the war was too great or too small for
her to notice, and she had a definite opinion on every subject.

"Your Majesty," said Lord Aberdeen, the Prime Minister, "it is proposed
to have a day of humiliation and fasting for the success of our arms."

"I approve most heartily of a day of prayer," declared the Queen, "but
not of calling it a day of humiliation. We are not humiliated. It is
not our wickedness, but the selfish ambition and want of honesty of the
Emperor which have brought on this war. We believe that our cause is
just, and that we are contending for what is right."

"But it has long been the custom to call such days times of fasting and
prayer," the Prime Minister suggested.

"We will thank God for the blessings we have enjoyed," said the Queen,
"and ask His help and protection, but it is my particular wish that we
call the day one of prayer and supplication."

The war was begun, and during the two years following, no one in the
land suffered more intensely than the Queen. A powerful nation is
always inclined to expect that its enemies may be crushed at a blow,
but Russia was not so easily crushed.

The Queen was prepared for battles lost and battles won, but not for
blunders and poor management; and to a woman as prompt and as careful
of details as she, such faults were unpardonable. Before many months
came the report of the Charge of the Light Brigade, which Tennyson has
made famous in his poem. This useless charge by which six hundred men
were sent to attack an army was caused by a mistake. "Someone had
blundered." Thousands of copies of the poem were printed and sent to
the soldiers who were besieging Sebastopol.

The Queen was in constant anxiety. Telegrams were false and misleading,
and if one brought good news in the morning, she dared not rejoice lest
it should be contradicted before night. It was then that the work of
the "special correspondent" began, for a physician who was at the scene
of the war sent letters to the _London Times_, and for the first time,
the people at home knew the daily life of their soldiers.

The story told in the columns of the _Times_ was a narration of
terrible suffering, which was all the worse because so much of it
was unnecessary. It does not seem possible that such stupid blunders
could have been made. Food was sent that was not fit to eat. A whole
shipload of much-needed shoes braved the storms of the Atlantic and
Mediterranean--and proved to be all for the left foot! Clothes,
blankets, and medicines in generous quantities lay in the holds of
English vessels off Balaklava Bay, while men were dying for the lack
of them. Shiploads of cattle arrived at Balaklava, and instead of
being driven to the front, where there was sore need of beef, they
were killed at once, and then came a long delay in arranging for
transportation. The trouble was that it was no one's business to
transport the stores, and no one had the right to interfere. The
hospitals were so inefficient that nine-tenths of the men who died,
perished of disease and mismanagement, and not from the bullets of the
Russians.

When such news as this reached England, the whole country was aroused,
but it was helpless. There was no time to change the organization of
the conflicting "departments," and the Minister of War finally decided
to do exactly what the Romans used to do in times of great difficulty:
he appointed a dictator, with full power to go to the Crimea and do
precisely as she thought best in making arrangements for the sick and
wounded soldiers. This dictator was a woman named Florence Nightingale.
She had a large fortune and a beautiful home, but she cared more for
helping the sick than for living in luxury. For more than ten years she
had been studying nursing, not only in England, but in France and
Germany. Late in 1854 she went to the Crimea, taking forty-two nurses
with her. It was no small task that she had undertaken, for in a short
time ten thousand sick men were in her charge. The sanitary
arrangements of the camp and the hospital were all in her hands. She
was a gentle, modest woman, by nature shy and retiring, but where the
comfort of her soldiers was concerned, she would never yield a point to
anyone. "She had a voice of velvet and a will of steel," they said of
her; and as she walked down the long aisles of the hospitals--in one of
them the rows of beds stretched along for nearly two and a half
miles--the poor sufferers kissed her very shadow. It was of her that
Longfellow wrote:

    "And slow, as in a dream of bliss,
    The speechless sufferer turns to kiss
    Her shadow, as it falls
    Upon the darkening walls."

Meanwhile, the Queen was doing all in her power for the soldiers and
their families. A Patriotic Fund was begun, and it soon reached
$5,000,000. The "Soldier's Daughter" and her older girls sewed and knit
for the army, the Prince of Wales, who was now thirteen years of age,
painted a picture to be sold for the fund--no small contribution, for
it brought nearly three hundred dollars--and the two older Princesses
talked, as they sat knitting, about Miss Nightingale, and wished they
could go to the Crimea and work by her side. At the opening of
Parliament, the Queen began her speech bravely, but when she spoke of
the war, her self-control failed her, and she struggled through the
sentences as best she could with her eyes full of tears.

News of victories came, but nothing could be decisive except the
capture of Sebastopol. "If we could only take Sebastopol!" she was
always saying to herself, and one of her children said to a general who
was starting for the Crimea, "Do hurry and take Sebastopol, or it will
kill mamma." In September, 1855, the royal family and the Duchess of
Kent were at Balmoral, when late one evening on the third day after
their arrival, two telegrams were brought in, one for the Queen, and
one for the Cabinet Minister.

"Good news," exclaimed the Queen. "This tells the details of the
destruction of the Russian ships."

"But I have still better news," said the Minister. "Mine reads,
'Sebastopol is in the hands of the allies.'"

"Come and light the bonfire," cried Prince Albert, and he started up
Craig Gowan, the hill opposite the house, where material for a bonfire
had been piled up nearly a year before in the hope that Sebastopol
would fall before the Queen had to return to London.

The gentlemen of the court hastened after the Prince, in full evening
dress as they were. The little Princes were awakened and hurriedly
dressed, and they followed after their father. The servants followed,
the keepers, the workmen, the whole population of the village. The
fires blazed out and shone on all the peaks round about. The people in
the valleys knew what it meant, and they too hurried to the top of the
hill. There was cheering, dancing, shouting, playing of bagpipes, and
firing of guns. "It was a veritable witches' dance," declared the
Prince when he came down. He was soon followed by the rest of the
people, and when they were under the Queen's window, they sang to the
music of the bagpipes, they fired guns, and then they cheered the
Queen, the Prince, the Emperor of France, and last they gave a
deafening "Nis! nis! nis! hurrah, for the fall of Sebastopol!"

It would seem as if this was excitement enough for one month, but four
days later, the young Prince Frederick William of Prussia came to
Balmoral to make a visit; and before the visit had lasted two weeks,
there was a pretty little scene on the mountain side when he gave
Princess "Vicky" a piece of white heather, the emblem of good fortune,
and contrived to make it clear to her that the best fortune which could
happen to him would be the gift of her hand. A few days before this,
the father and mother and their guest had agreed that nothing should be
said to the Princess for six months, but the secret had found its way
out.

The Princess Victoria had always been Baron Stockmar's special
favorite, and she as well as her father wrote their good friend at
once, and sent him the news that the kindly old match-maker had been
waiting for since the Princess was a little child, for such a marriage
would make a strong alliance between England and Prussia, the two great
Protestant powers of Europe. Prince Albert wrote, "The Prince is really
in love, and the little lady does her best to please him. Come to us
soon. We have so much to talk over." A little later, he wrote again of
his hope that he should soon hear the children say, "Do you know, papa,
that the Baron is in his room below?" He closed, "We positively must
have some talk face to face."

The Princess was to be confirmed in the spring, and until that event
was past, nothing was to be said in public of the engagement. The
marriage was not to take place until at least a year after the
confirmation, but Prince Albert felt that the time was far too short
for the preparation that her future position would make desirable; and,
busy man as he was, he set apart an hour every evening to talk with her
on historical topics, and listen to the papers which she prepared on
subjects that he had given her. In the spring came her confirmation,
which was preceded by an examination in the catechism held in the
presence of her father and mother, the Duchess of Kent, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury.

This betrothal of the eldest daughter brought to the Queen mingled
feelings of pleasure and pain; pleasure, because the alliance with
Prussia, so desirable an arrangement for both countries, was to be
brought about by a marriage that promised the happiness of her
daughter; pain, because that marriage was the first break in the family
circle. Nevertheless, in joy or in sorrow, the public life of the
sovereign must go on. Many of the soldiers who had been severely
wounded were sent home. The Queen had often visited them in the
hospitals, and one day she said to her Minister:

"Those brave men ought to have medals that they can hand down to their
children, and I have ordered a number to be made."

As the day appointed for the distribution of the medals drew near, the
Minister asked if she would have them sent to the men.

"No," replied the Queen with decision, "I want to put those medals into
their hands myself. I feel as if those men were my own children."

It was a pitiable company of sufferers that she met. There were men
with deep red scars, men with empty sleeves, men tottering up to her on
crutches to touch the hand of their Queen. Many of them would not give
up their medals to be marked with their names, lest they should not
receive again the very ones that the Queen had given them. One man was
wheeled up in a chair. He had lost one leg and the foot from the other,
but he had refused to give up the command of his battery till the fight
was over, and had given his orders as calmly as if he had not been
touched.

"Such bravery as that," cried the Queen, with tears in her eyes, "calls
for more than a medal, and you shall be one of my aides-de-camp."

"That pays me amply for everything," he replied. The Queen wrote the
account of this incident to King Leopold. "One must revere and love
such soldiers as those," she added.

She was never weary of visiting the hospitals and camps. As the
regiments returned from the Crimea in the spring and summer of 1856,
there were reviews without end. On one occasion she reviewed eighteen
thousand troops. She was dressed in the uniform of a field marshal,
with a dark blue skirt; and as she rode down the front and returned by
the rear, the thousands of men presented arms, and the bands of twenty
regiments gave her a joyful greeting. Then she rode to a little mound
from which she watched her troops as they filed past her.

There was no limit to the enthusiasm and loyalty which were aroused by
the presence of the Queen. One review was held in a pelting rain. The
evolutions were spoiled, and the men had every reason to feel gloomy
and disappointed but the Queen saved the day, for she rose in her
carriage and made them a warm-hearted little speech of welcome that was
like a flash of sunshine. When she closed with, "I thank God that your
dangers are over, while the glory of your deeds remains," there was a
wild outburst of cheers. The men waved their hats, their sabers,
anything and everything that would wave, and shouted till the hills
echoed.

The sailors were no less loyal. During this same summer, there was a
superb naval review off Spitshead which the Queen witnessed from the
royal yacht. Two hundred and forty ships of war were assembled, but
that was not all, for the Queen's suite alone consisted of thirty
steamships, and there were many hundred private steamboats and sailing
vessels. Every foot of the shore that would give a view of the warships
was crowded with spectators, and they had a sight well worth the
seeing. Ships and steamers were beautifully decorated with flags and
crowded with guests. The men-of-war were drawn up in a double line, and
the royal yacht steamed slowly along between them. Every vessel manned
its yards and fired a royal salute as the Queen passed. The most
enthusiastic cheering echoed and reechoed. Then came a mimic naval
attack on Southsea Castle, and the brilliant day was at an end.

One thing more the Queen planned to do for her soldiers, and that was
to give a badge of special honor to those who had been especially
distinguished by some deed of rare bravery. This badge was the Victoria
Cross, which was then bestowed for the first time. With it went a
pension of fifty dollars a year. More than one hundred thousand people
assembled in Hyde Park to see the sixty-two chosen heroes receive their
Crosses. The Queen was now in the scarlet jacket of the army. Prince
Albert rode on one side of her and Prince Frederick William on the
other side. She remained on horseback during the whole ceremony,
leaning forward as one brave fighter after another was led up to her,
and pinning the Cross on his breast.

The woman whose battles had been, not with Russians, but with
mismanagement and inefficiency, lingered in the Crimea until she had
seen every soldier leave for home, then she herself returned as quietly
as if she had been on a pleasure trip. She seemed to have entirely
forgotten that thousands of men in England would have been lying in
Crimean graves had it not been for her; but the men remembered, and
England gave her such a welcome as even the Duke of Wellington had
hardly received. She was an honored guest at Balmoral. Everyone was
longing to do something for her, but what should it be? "Make her a
gift," said the people, "and let her do with it as she will." Two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars was raised by popular subscription
and presented to her. She did with it as she would; she endowed schools
for the training of nurses to carry on the work that she loved.




CHAPTER X

THE ROYAL YOUNG PEOPLE


Many people had thought that the Russians hoped to get control of
India. If they had succeeded in doing so, the Queen would have been
saved the sorrow that came to her from a revolt of her Indian troops
which was known as the Sepoy Mutiny. The commanders of the troops were
English, but most of the rank and file were either Mohammedans or
Hindus. The Mohammedans looked upon the cow as sacred, and the Hindus
regarded the hog as unclean, therefore, when cartridges were given them
greased with a mixture of tallow and lard, the soldiers of both peoples
were very angry. Another trouble was that the English government had
declared that no one should lose his property on account of any change
in his religious belief, and this decree aroused the wrath of the
native priests. The revolt was one of the most fearful events known in
history, for even women and children were murdered as brutally as if
the Sepoys had been wild beasts.

January, 1858, was the time that had been set for the marriage of the
Princess Royal, and although India was not entirely subdued, the Sepoys
were so nearly under control that England could join heartily in the
wedding rejoicings. Buckingham Palace was crowded with guests, so many
princes and princesses that when they went to the theater, they made,
as the Queen said, "a wonderful row of royalties." "Macbeth" and three
other plays were performed in honor of the occasion. For a week, eighty
or ninety persons sat at the Queen's dinner table every day. There were
operas, dinner parties, dances, concerts, and a great ball at which one
thousand guests were present.

When the wedding gifts began to arrive, the large drawing room of the
palace became a veritable fairyland, as table after table was piled
with presents. "Fritz," as the family called Prince Frederick William,
had brought to his bride a necklace of pearls, which the Queen said
were the largest she had ever seen. This was only the beginning. The
Princess and her mother went for a little walk in the palace garden,
and when they came in, there were more tables and an entirely new
display of gifts; they went to their own rooms, and when they returned,
still more gifts had arrived. There were pictures, candelabra, diamond
and emerald bracelets, brooches, necklaces, everything in the shape of
jewelry that can be imagined, and, what especially pleased the
housewifely tastes of the Queen, there were quantities of needlework
from many ladies of the kingdom, for the Princess was a special
favorite, and rich and poor were eager to send her some token of their
love. The young girl was in ecstasies; then she remembered that going
with "Fritz" meant leaving her father and mother, and she burst into
tears.

At the end of the festal week came the wedding day. The Queen said, "I
felt as if I were being married over again myself, only much more
nervous," and when just before the ceremony, she was daguerreotyped
with "Fritz and Vicky," she trembled so that her likeness was badly
blurred.

Early in the morning the bells began to ring, but long before their
first peal, thousands were out in the streets, too excited to sleep or
even to remain in their homes. The procession was formed just as it had
been eighteen years before at the marriage of the Queen, and the long
line of carriages drove from Buckingham Palace to the Chapel Royal of
St. James. Trumpets were blown, banners were waved, and the whole city
reechoed with the shouts of the merrymakers. The Queen bowed to her
people as graciously as ever, but she could not forget for a moment
that her oldest daughter was about to leave her, and she wrote
afterwards, "The cheering made my heart sick within me."

The procession was even more beautiful than that on the wedding day of
the Queen, because in this one there were so many children. First came
the members of the royal family, the Duchess of Kent nearest to the
Queen and her children, looking very handsome in her gown of violet
velvet trimmed with ermine. Then came the Prime Minister bearing the
sword of state. He was followed by "Bertie," who was now a tall young
man of sixteen, and "Affie," the sailor boy of fourteen, both in
Highland costume. Everyone was looking for the Queen, and she came
directly after her two older sons. She was resplendent in a moire skirt
of lilac and silver with a long train of lilac velvet, and was all
ablaze with diamonds. The two little boys, the namesake of the Duke of
Wellington, and Leopold, who was not yet five years old, walked one on
either side of their mother. They as well as the older boys were
brilliant in Stuart plaid, which made a glowing contrast with the lilac
velvet. Behind the Queen walked hand in hand the three royal girls,
Alice, who was fifteen, and the two younger ones, Helena and Louise.
They were in pink satin with cornflowers and marguerites in their hair.
The nine royal children were present, with the exception of baby
Beatrice, who was not yet one year old. The Queen and the royal family
took their places in the "Royal Closet," a room opening into the
chapel.

[Illustration: Westminster Abbey.]

All the guests had assembled long before the entrance of the
procession, and now they were all watching eagerly for the Prince of
Prussia and the Princess Royal of England. The Prince, in his dark blue
uniform, looked thoroughly a soldier. He made a profound bow to the
Queen, knelt in prayer for a few minutes, then stood waiting to receive
his bride. After the gorgeous colors worn by those who had preceded
her, the white moire dress and the wreath of orange blossoms and myrtle
made the Princess look very childlike. She walked between her father
and King Leopold, her train borne by the eight young girls who were her
bridesmaids. They were in white tulle with pink roses. Among the roses
were sprigs of white heather, for even in the excitement of this
wedding season, the Queen did not forget her Scottish home.

The Prince was much more calm than the Archbishop of Canterbury, for
the clergyman was so nervous that he left out some passages from the
marriage service. At the moment that the ring was put on the finger of
the bride, the cannon were fired as at the marriage of the Queen; but
now the people of Germany must not be forgotten, and as the first gun
sounded, a telegram was sent to Berlin. The last words of the service
were read, "The Lord mercifully with his favor look upon you," and the
"Hallelujah Chorus" burst forth, followed by Mendelssohn's "Wedding
March," as the bride and bridegroom went forth from the chapel hand in
hand.

All London was keeping holiday, and throngs had gathered about
Buckingham Palace, ready to greet the returning party with most
tumultuous applause. The honeymoon was to be spent at Windsor, and the
Eton boys, who always claimed a share in royal rejoicings, dragged the
royal carriage from the railroad station to the castle.

A few days later came the final good-bys, and these were much harder
than if the bride had not been of the royal family, for kings and
queens can make few visits. It was a very tearful time, "a dreadful
day," wrote the Queen. "I think it will kill me to take leave of dear
papa," the bride had said to her mother, but the moment of parting had
to come. The snow was falling fast, but all the way to the wharf at
Gravesend were beautiful decorations and crowds of people, and on the
pier were companies of young girls wearing wreaths and carrying flowers
to strew before the feet of the bride. "Come back to us if he doesn't
treat you well," called a voice from the crowd, and the steamer moved
slowly away from the wharf. Prince Albert watched it for a few minutes,
then returned to the Queen, who was lonely in her great palace, so
lonely that even the sight of baby Beatrice made her sad, reminding her
that only a few hours before the little one had been in the arms of the
beloved eldest daughter.

"The little lady does her best to please him," Prince Albert had
written on the day of the Princess's engagement; but now she had
thousands of people to please, and the father and mother at home waited
anxiously for letters and telegrams and reports of friends to know what
welcome the Germans had given to their daughter, for so much of her
future comfort among them depended upon the first impression that she
made. "Dear child," wrote Prince Albert to her, "I should have so liked
to be in the crowd and hear what the multitude said of you." He had
already received a proud and jubilant telegram from "Fritz,"--"The
whole royal family is enchanted with my wife." The Princess Hohenlohe,
the Queen's beloved half-sister, wrote from Berlin, "The enthusiasm and
interest shown are beyond everything. Never was a princess in this
country received as she is."

Later in the year, the royal father and mother contrived to make a
fortnight's visit to Germany, and found the "Princess Frederick
William" "quite the old Vicky still." Prince Albert's birthday was
celebrated during their stay. The children at home were also
celebrating it with the Duchess of Kent. They recited poems and played
their pieces of music and exhibited the pictures that they had drawn.
Several days earlier, they had all sent birthday letters to Germany,
and these letters were given a prominent place on the "presents table."
The Queen's gift to her husband was a portrait of baby Beatrice, done
in oil. The Princess did not forget the Scotch home that she loved, and
among her gifts to her father was an iron chair for the Balmoral
garden.

The farewells had to be said much too soon. Then came the return to
England and the other children. They were growing up fast. The Prince
of Wales was at Oxford, not idling his time away, but working so hard
that the irrepressible _Punch_ called him "A Prince at High Pressure."
Alfred, who was now fourteen, had just passed his examination and
received his midshipman's appointment. The examiners would have been
satisfied with fifty correct answers, but the Prince had presented
eighty; and when his father and mother landed at Osborne, there he
stood on the wharf in his naval cadet's uniform, half-blushing, and
looking as happy as a boy who was not a prince would have looked after
coming out of a three-days' examination with flying colors. Several
months earlier, Prince Albert had watched him reef a topsail in a
strong breeze, and said it almost took his breath away to see him "do
all sorts of things at that dizzy height."

The circle of children soon began to widen, for early in 1859 Princess
"Vicky" became the mother of a boy, and the Queen, not yet forty years
of age, was a grandmother. The child was named Frederick William Victor
Albert. Ever since her marriage, the Princess had kept up a constant
correspondence with home. She wrote her mother every day, sometimes
twice a day, telling all the little events of her life. To her father
she sent every Monday long letters on general topics, and he always
sent a reply two days later. No one knew better than he the
difficulties that lay before her in making her home in a foreign
country, and often his letters gave her bits of advice that had come
from his own experience. Sometimes they were little pictures of home
life. Once he told her of a "splendid snowman" that the children had
made, with a yellow carrot for a nose and an old hat of "Affie's" on
his head. After the birth of Frederick William Victor Albert, the
letters from Germany never forgot to tell the latest news about the
little German baby; and the English letters quoted the sayings of baby
Beatrice, whom Prince Albert called "the most amusing baby we ever
had." One day he wrote of this little one, "When she tumbles, she calls
out in bewilderment, 'She don't like it, she don't like it.' She came
into breakfast a short time ago with her eyes full of tears, moaning,
'Baby has been so naughty, poor baby so naughty,' as one might complain
of being ill or of having slept badly."

While Buckingham Palace had still its merry group of children, the two
older sons, "Bertie" and "Affie," were on their way across the ocean.
Prince Alfred was making a voyage to the Cape of Good Hope, and the
Prince of Wales was going to Canada. During the Crimean War, the colony
had raised and equipped a regiment to aid the mother country, and had
most urgently invited the monarch to visit her lands in the west; but
because of the exposure and fatigue it was not thought wise for her to
accept the invitation. Canada had then asked that one of the Princes
should be appointed governor. They were far too young for any such
position, but the promise was made that the Prince of Wales should
visit the colony. In the spring of 1860 it was decided that he should
go early in the autumn.

The Prince was delighted with the expedition, and was ready to be
pleased with whatever came to hand. In Newfoundland a ball was given
for him, and he danced not only with the ladies of the official circle,
but with the wives and daughters of the fish-merchants, and had the
tact to make himself liked by all. "He had a most dignified manner and
bearing," said the wife of the Archdeacon. "God bless his pretty face
and send him a good wife," cried the fishermen. His visit to Canada was
not all amusement, for he had the usual royal duties to perform. He
opened an exhibition, laid the last stone of the Victoria Bridge over
the St. Lawrence, and laid the corner stone of the new parliamentary
buildings at Ottawa. No fault could be found with his manner of
attending to such duties, but he won the hearts of the people less by
laying corner stones than by such bits of boyishness as singing with
the band one day when they chanced to play some of his favorite airs.
He saw Blondin walk across Niagara Falls on a tight-rope. "I beg of
you, don't do that again," he said earnestly to the performer. "There
is really not the least danger; I would willingly carry you over on my
back," replied Blondin, but the Prince did not accept the offer.

When Mr. Buchanan, President of the United States, heard that the
Prince of Wales was coming to Canada, he wrote to the Queen, inviting
the Prince to visit him at the White House, and assuring her that her
son would receive a very cordial greeting from the Americans. The city
of New York meant to have a royal visit all to herself, and therefore
sent a special invitation for him to come to that city.

The United States showed no lack of interest in the young man.
Reporters from the leading American papers followed him about in
Canada; and when he crossed to Detroit, he found the whole city
illuminated, and the streets so crowded that he had to slip into his
hotel by the side entrance. He visited the grave of Washington, and
planted a tree by the tomb of the man who had prevented him from
becoming the ruler of all North America. His visit to the White House
lasted for five days, and at its close, President Buchanan wrote to the
Queen: "In our domestic circle he has won all hearts."

In New York a ball was given for him which he enjoyed; but he was far
more enthusiastic over a parade of the New York Fire Department. Six
thousand firemen in uniform turned out one evening, all with lighted
torches except those who manned the ropes. A delightful trait in both
his parents was their feeling that honors shown them were not merely
actions due to their position, but were marks of courtesy and kindness;
and the Prince showed this same characteristic, for at the review he
cried with grateful delight, "It is splendid, and it's all for me,
every bit for me!"

On the Prince's return voyage he was so delayed by contrary winds that
two warships were sent out to search for him. He reached home late in
November, and on his return a letter was written to President Buchanan
by the Queen, expressing her gratitude for the kindness shown her son
and speaking very warmly of the friendship between England and the
United States.

While the Prince of Wales was receiving the honors of the western
continent, the midshipman brother was on his way to South Africa. When
he landed at Cape Town, the English governor accompanied him on a short
tour through the English possessions, during which he laid the first
stone of the famous breakwater in Table Bay. He was cheered and feasted
and received with all the honors that could be devised so long as he
was on land; but when he returned to his vessel, he was no longer
treated as a prince; for on shipboard he was simply a midshipman and in
no wise different from the other naval cadets. When the chief of an
African tribe came to visit the ship, he saw the young Prince
bare-footed and helping the other midshipmen to wash the decks. The
chief went away wondering, and a little later, he and his councilors
sent to the English a most interesting letter. It read:

"When the son of England's great Queen becomes subject to a subject,
that he may learn wisdom, when the sons of England's chiefs and nobles
leave the homes and wealth of their fathers, and with their young
Prince endure hardships and sufferings in order that they may be wise
and become a defense to their country, when we behold these things, we
see why the English are a great and mighty nation."

When the two brothers returned to England, they found that their sister
Alice had followed the example of the Princess Royal and had become
engaged. The fortunate man was Prince Louis of Hesse. Prince Albert
wrote to his daughter in Germany of "the great Alician event," saying,
"Alice and Louis are as happy as mortals can be."

Not long after these cheerful times, a deep sorrow came to the loving
heart of the Queen. In the midst of the days that were so full of care
for her children, her home, and the duties of state not only in
England, but also in Africa and Asia, the constant thought of the Queen
had been her mother's comfort. When the daughter could not be with her
mother, letters were sent every day, and frequently several times a
day, and nothing was neglected that could add to the Duchess's ease and
happiness. For some time she had not been well, and in the spring of
1861 came the dreaded summons to her bedside. In a few hours she was
gone. "Oh, if only I could have been near her these last weeks!" wrote
the Queen to King Leopold.

Save the sovereign herself, there was no woman in England whose death
would have affected the whole country so deeply. Statesmen recalled the
days when the Duchess of Kent was left alone in a strange land, without
means, disliked by the reigning king, and weighed down by the
responsibility of educating a child to stand at the head of the nation.
In the character of their sovereign, they saw proof of the able,
devoted, conscientious manner in which this sacred duty had been
performed; and the address of sympathy sent by Parliament to the
sorrowing Queen was as sincere as if it had been written by a personal
friend, and not by a body of lawmakers. "It is a great sorrow to me not
to have Feodore with me now," wrote the Queen to King Leopold; but
neither he nor the Princess Hohenlohe was able to be present at the
last services.

"I cannot imagine life without her," said the Queen sadly; but
nevertheless, life had to go on. Others may sometimes stop to mourn,
but the duties of a sovereign may not be neglected even for sorrow. A
new cause of anxiety had arisen that came nearer home than even the
sufferings of the Crimean soldiers. War had broken out in the United
States, and the supply of cotton to England was rapidly diminishing. If
the cotton supply failed entirely, the mills of England would have to
stop; many thousands of spinners and weavers would have no work; and
the sufferings of the manufacturing districts would be intense. The
government made an earnest effort to increase the amount of cotton
imported to England from India; but the emergency was so sudden that
even during the first few months of the war, there were many honest,
hard-working people in England who were sorely in need.

When autumn came, the Queen was free to go for a little while to the
beloved Balmoral for the rest and quiet which she so greatly needed.
The simple life of the Highlands did more for her than anything else
could have done. On this visit, Prince Albert, the Queen, the Princess
Alice, Prince Louis of Hesse, with Lady Churchill and General Grey in
attendance, went on two of what the Queen called "Great Expeditions,"
that is, trips of two or three days by carriage and by pony. To the
Queen these trips were as fascinating as they were novel. The party
tried to keep their identity a secret, and sometimes they succeeded:
Prince Albert and the Queen called themselves _Lord_ and _Lady
Churchill_: the real Lady Churchill was now _Miss Spencer_, and General
Grey became _Dr. Grey_. They were as excited as children in a new
game over playing their parts properly, and the struggles of the two
men-servants to remember not to say "Your Majesty" and "Your Royal
Highness" amused them immensely. "The lady must be terrible rich,"
whispered an awe-struck woman to one of the servants, "for she has so
many gold rings on her fingers." "And you have many more than I," said
the aggrieved monarch to Lady Churchill. Two or three times they stayed
all night at little village inns. The Queen wrote in her journal that
at one of them the bedroom given to her and the Prince was hardly more
than large enough for the bed, but she found no fault with it, and
called it "very clean and neat." The dinner was "nice, clean, and good"
according to her description, for this sovereign of Great Britain, with
several magnificent palaces of her own, was so ready to be pleased with
what was done for her that she could be contented in the tiny inn of a
Highland village. At a second inn, which seems to have been
particularly poor, she admits that there was "hardly anything to eat,"
but closes her account less like the ruler of millions than like a half
amused and half disappointed little schoolgirl, "No pudding and no fun.
We soon retired."

The efforts to avoid being "found out" were like a continual frolic.
The royal party trembled when they heard the distant sound of a drum
and fife, but felt safe again on being told by a little maid at the inn
that it was "just a band that walked about twice a week." Sometimes
they came to tiny villages where they were "suspected;" and at last, on
getting up one morning, they heard the tread of somewhat irregular
marching, led by a drum and fife and bagpipe. There was no escape then,
for they were found out at last. A company of volunteers was drawn up
in front of the door to do them honor; the women of the village stood
by with bunches of flowers in their hands; and the landlady was
glorified by a black satin dress with white ribbons and orange
blossoms. There was nothing to do but to bow with all gratitude and
drive away as fast as possible.

Such a woman was Victoria of England, ready to be pleased with the
smallest things, praising what was good, saying little of what was not
good, and enjoying every little pleasure with a childlike zest and
simplicity. And yet, this gentle little lady understood so perfectly
her rights and duties as monarch of Great Britain that when her
Secretary of Foreign Affairs persisted in being quite too independent
in his methods of transacting business, she did not hesitate to write
to him the following very definite sentences:

    "The Queen thinks it right, in order to prevent any mistake for the
    future, to explain what it is she expects from the Foreign
    Secretary. She requires:

    "1. That he will distinctly state what he proposes in a given case,
    in order that the Queen may know as distinctly to what she has
    given her royal sanction.

    "2. Having once given her sanction to a measure, that it be not
    arbitrarily altered or modified by the Minister. She expects to be
    kept informed of what passes between him and the Foreign Ministers,
    before important decisions are taken, based upon that intercourse;
    to receive the foreign dispatches in good time, and to have the
    drafts for her approval sent to her in sufficient time to make
    herself acquainted with their contents before they must be sent
    off."

It is worth noting that the royal lady who wrote this epistle had
sufficient self-control to delay for five months forwarding it to the
offending Secretary, hoping that his methods would be amended and that
so severe a rebuke would become unnecessary.




CHAPTER XI

THE QUEEN IN SORROW


It had certainly become clear to all her Ministers that Victoria was no
mere figurehead, for while she yielded if their judgment was against
her, yet she never failed to have an opinion and a reason for her
opinion. In 1861, the fact that both she and Prince Albert were able to
think for themselves and had come to a wise conclusion proved to be a
matter of the utmost importance to two countries, England and the
United States. Everyone in England was thinking about the war in
America. The English government had declared that England would be
neutral, that is, it would do nothing to assist either the United
States or the seceded States. The United States Government was
indignant at this declaration, because it spoke of the seceded, or
Confederate States, not as if they were rebelling against the
government, but as if they were an independent power. The Confederate
States, however, were much pleased, and thought it quite possible that
England might be persuaded to help them. Their chief argument
was--cotton. These States were the ones that raised cotton, and with
the United States warships blockading their ports, there would be
little chance for cotton to reach England. Would not England, then,
help the seceders, put an end to the war, and have all the cotton that
her mills wished to use?

The Confederates decided to send two men, named Mason and Slidell,
across the ocean for aid, the first to England, the second to France.
It was not easy to get away from a southern port, but they contrived to
escape to Havana, and from there they went on board a British mail
steamer named the _Trent_. They supposed that all difficulties were
over when they were once on board a British vessel; but before the
_Trent_ had been out twenty-four hours, a United States warship fired a
shot across her bows. The _Trent_ was not armed so that she could make
any resistance, therefore she stopped, and Lieutenant Fairfax was sent
aboard with a strong guard of marines.

"My orders from Captain Wilkes are to ask to see the list of your
passengers," he said.

"That list cannot be shown," was the reply of the English captain.

"I am here to arrest Messrs. Mason and Slidell," Lieutenant Fairfax
stated, but the Captain only bowed.

"It is well known to the United States authorities that they are
attempting to make their way to Europe as envoys from States in
rebellion against the government," said the Lieutenant, "and,
therefore, I demand their surrender."

Then Commodore Williams, who was in charge of the mail, said
indignantly:

"The two gentlemen are passengers in a British vessel which is carrying
the mail from one neutral port to another. On board this ship I
represent her Majesty's government. This thing is an outrage, and I
tell you that you and your North shall suffer for it. Does your Captain
Wilkes do this on his own responsibility or on that of your
government?"

"On his own," was the reply.

"It is an insult to England and a violation of international law,"
declared the Commodore; but nevertheless the men were seized and
carried to Boston.

When the news of this action reached England, there was wild
excitement. Troops were sent to Canada at once. The Canadian harbors
were frozen, and England had to ask permission of the United States to
land them at Portland, Maine. Permission was granted, and no one seemed
to see how amusing such a request was. Thousands of Englishmen were
ready to declare war upon the United States without a moment's delay.
Fortunately governments move more slowly than individuals, and war
could not be declared without first asking whether the United States
had given authority for the seizure or approved of it. Mr. Slidell's
wife and daughter had gone on to England in the _Trent_; and they
said Captain Wilkes did not claim to have any government authority, and
that the United States would probably set the envoys free as soon as
they reached Washington. The Prime Minister did not believe such would
be the result, and he wrote a somewhat curt demand to the United States
for an apology and the freedom of the two men.

Neither the Queen nor the Prince Consort, for that title had been
granted to Prince Albert long before, was satisfied with this paper,
and the following morning he wrote a statement to be sent to the Prime
Minister to the effect that the paper ought to mention the friendship
between the two countries and the hope and expectation of England that
the United States would say the seizure was not done by government
authority. Prince Albert and the Queen read the statement over
together. She made two or three small changes in the wording, then
copied it and sent it to the Prime Minister. He admitted at once that
the Queen and the Prince were in the right, and wrote another dispatch
to send to the United States, saying, of course, that an apology and
the surrender of the men were expected, but wording the demand in a
most courteous and friendly manner.

In the United States, as soon as President Lincoln heard of the
capture, he said, "This won't do. Captain Wilkes is exercising the
'right of search,' and we fought England in 1812 on that very ground.
Those men must be given up." There were thousands, however, who were so
excited that they were ready to fight anybody for anything or for
nothing, and if the Prime Minister's first dispatch had been sent, it
would have been hard to prevent hostilities; but in so moderate a
request for fairness, even the most hot-blooded could find little
excuse for demanding a declaration of war.

So it was that Prince Albert and the Queen saved the two countries from
bloodshed, and if the Prince had done nothing else in his twenty-one
years of acting as chief adviser to the Queen, that one act would have
been glory enough. But when one remembers the vast number of matters
which he had to consider, it does not seem as if one man's mind could
have held them all. Laying corner stones, unveiling statues, presiding
over learned societies, guiding the education of his children, planning
palaces, and managing large estates--all this was but a small part of
his labors. He carried out reforms in the navy, he studied on
commercial treaties between England and other countries, he reorganized
the army, he wrote on improved methods of agriculture, he constructed
better national defenses, he kept himself well informed concerning the
condition of the United States, India, South Africa, and every country
of Europe. After twenty-one years of such intense work as this, it is
no wonder that he was exhausted. He rarely spoke of his weariness; but
here and there in his letters and in his conversation with the Queen, a
word was dropped that showed how weak and tired he felt. He slept
little, yet he never thought of sparing himself, and he wrote the
letter about the _Trent_ affair with a very feeble hand. "I could
hardly hold my pen while writing," he told the Queen, and at last he
admitted that he was thoroughly miserable.

Then came day after day of illness. Sometimes the Prince would listen
to his wife or his daughter Alice while they read him one of Scott's
novels; once he asked for music a long way off, and a piano was brought
into another room so that the Princess Alice could play his favorite
_chorale_. Sometimes he was confused and recognized no one. "We are
much alarmed," said the physicians, "but we do not give up hope." Every
day found him a little weaker, and soon the evening came when, as the
Queen bent over him and whispered, "It is your own little wife," he
could not speak, he could only bow his head and kiss her, and in a
little while he was gone.

At midnight the mournful tolling of the great bell of St. Paul's spread
the sorrowful news through the city of London, and the telegraph told
the children of the royal family who were away from England of the loss
that had befallen them.

The Princess Victoria was not alone, for her husband and her child were
with her to give her comfort; but far away in the warm climate of
Cannes was Prince Leopold, the delicate little boy of only eight years,
with not one of his own family beside him. The child was already
grieving sorely over the death of the gentleman in whose charge he had
been when the telegraph brought the news of his crushing loss. "Oh,
mamma, mamma," he cried. "Do take me to mamma. I want my mother. I want
my mother."

The warmest sympathy was felt for the sorrowing Queen in her own land
and in all lands. Even from some chiefs in New Zealand came an address,
which began:

"Oh, Victoria, our mother, we greet you! All we can now do is to weep
with you, oh, our good mother, who have nourished us, your ignorant
children of this island, even to this day."

Every honor that could be shown was given to the dead Prince Consort.
The Queen chose a sunny spot at Frogmore for the beautiful mausoleum
that was to be built for the body of the one who had been dearest to
her of all the world. Seven years earlier, she had said, "Trials we
must have, but what are they, if we are together?" but now the time had
come when she must bear alone whatever might befall her. Her greatest
comforter was the Princess Alice, the girl of eighteen, who seemed no
longer a merry young girl, but a sympathetic, self-controlled woman.
She and the other children went with the Queen to Osborne, and there
passed the first three months of the lonely woman's sorrow. King
Leopold and the Princess of Hohenlohe came to her; but the weight of
her grief was hers alone, and no one could lessen it.

Crushed as she was by suffering, she did not cease to feel for others.
Within a month after the death of the Prince, a terrible colliery
accident occurred by which many lives were lost, and the Queen sent at
once a generous gift and the message, "Tell them that the Queen's own
misery only makes her feel the more for them." In her own heartbreak,
she could not neglect the state business, whose delay would cause many
difficulties, but she could not bear to meet others than her children
and a few of her nearest friends. Again it was the Princess Alice upon
whom she and the whole country relied, and this girl of eighteen went
back and forth between the sovereign and the Ministers with such
strength of mind, such thoughtfulness and tact, that the whole realm
was amazed and grateful.

It would have been a comfort to the loving mother if she could have
kept her oldest son with her during those sad months; but, even to
lessen her loneliness, she would not break in upon the plans that his
father had made for him. It had been decided that he should travel in
the Holy Land, and not many weeks after the death of the Prince, he set
out with Dean Stanley and others for the East.

[Illustration: Balmoral Castle.]

It had long been the custom in the royal family to spend at Balmoral
the Queen's birthday, in May, and the birthday of the Prince, in
August, and even during this sad year of 1862, the usual May visit was
made. Hard as it was for the Queen to go without the Prince to a place
that had been so dear to him, there was comfort for her in going among
the cottagers. She loved the Scotch because, while they had a profound
respect for her, they had also respect for themselves, and would talk
with her without the subservience that she disliked. She taught her
Scotch tenants to look upon her as a friend to whom they might come for
help in time of trouble. In sickness they were encouraged to send to
the castle for whatever they needed. When the Queen went to London, she
did not forget them, and whenever a marriage or a death or the arrival
of a new baby occurred among her Balmoral people, it was reported to
her at once.

During the last visit of the Prince Consort to Balmoral, the husband of
one of the cottagers was very ill, and the Queen was continually
sending him delicacies from her own table, and not always by the hands
of servants, for the Princess Louise was often her messenger. The story
is told of the young girl's taking some dainty from one of the pockets
of her jacket and asking, "Can't he eat this?" and then, when the wife
shook her head sadly, of her taking something else from another pocket
and saying, "Surely, he can eat this." The husband died, and when the
Queen arrived at Balmoral on this first visit without the Prince, she
went at once to see the widow. Both women burst into tears.

"I ask your pardon," said the cottager humbly. "I ought not to cry in
your presence."

"Oh, it does me good," replied the Queen in the midst of her own tears.
"I am so thankful to cry with someone who knows just how I feel. It was
all so sudden, so sudden."

This visit to Balmoral was in May, and in July the brave-hearted Queen
gave away her chief comforter, for she did not think it right to allow
the marriage of the Princess Alice to be postponed longer. Many
preparations for it had already been made before the illness of the
Prince. The Highlanders were all interested in the marriage, for the
Princess Alice was a great favorite among them; and in the autumn of
1861, many wedding gifts had been made by the Princess to the
cottagers, for in the Queen's family it was the custom to make presents
as well as receive them at the wedding seasons.

The marriage took place at Osborne. The day which all had expected to
be so bright and happy was sad and lonely for the want of the dead
Prince. There was no rejoicing, for everything was so associated with
him that no one could be merry. Even the wedding dress of the bride was
of lace whose pattern he himself had chosen.

In a few days Prince Louis and the Princess Alice left England for
their German home. According to what had become a custom among the
Queen's children, the Princess wrote to her mother almost every day.
Her life in Darmstadt was far more simple than the Queen's had been
immediately after her marriage. The usual time of rising was half-past
seven or a little earlier. Coffee was drunk at eight, and generally the
next two hours were spent out of doors in riding or walking. From ten
to twelve, the Princess wrote or worked with her private secretary, and
some time in the morning she read the newspapers, an occupation which
she called "a great bore." Breakfast took the time between twelve and
one. At two, people began to come to call upon her. Dinner was at four.
After dinner came a little leisure, then a drive "somewhere for tea."
By half-past ten the day was over. The Princess lamented that she had
so little time for her music and drawing, and when she was away from
the city, she made many sketches, but she was in a wooded country, "And
the trees are my misfortune," she said, "as I draw them so badly."
After a few months, the twelve-year-old brother Arthur went to visit
her. He was a bit of home, and she was delighted to have him. "He has
won all hearts," she wrote to the Queen, "and I am so proud when they
admire my little brother." When September came, the Princess and her
husband went to Thuringia to meet the Queen; and there, much to the
Queen's pleasure, it was decided that her daughter and Prince Louis
should spend the winter in England, though the Princess with her ready
sympathy wrote that she should regret not remaining in Germany for the
one reason that the people would feel her absence so much. "They are
most kind," she added, for she shared the feeling of her mother that
the devotion of the people was not a thing that they could demand, but
was a personal kindness shown to them.

On this visit to the Continent, Queen Victoria spent a few days in
Belgium with King Leopold; and while she was with him, a young girl was
invited to be his guest whom she was especially desirous of meeting.
Her name was Alexandra, and she was the eldest daughter of the heir to
the throne of Denmark. She had grown up in the quaint old palace in
Copenhagen within hearing of the murmur of the sea. When summer came,
she was taken to a delightful house in the woods, where she had dogs
and ponies and flowers and long walks through the forest; and when
friends came from the town, there were picnics and boating and all
sorts of good times. Indeed, every day was a kind of picnic, for in the
country home the family almost lived out of doors, and there were
always her two brothers and three sisters for company.

The life of the children was merry and happy, but it was even more
simple than that of the little girl who went from Kensington to the
throne of England, both because the father and mother believed that it
was best for children to live simply, and also because, especially
during the children's earlier years, there was not much money to throw
away in luxuries. The little girls put on their nicer dresses, which
perhaps their mother had made, when they were going out; but as soon as
they came back and were ready to play, the street dresses were
exchanged for something more substantial. The children had learned when
they were very young that they could not have everything they wanted
and that they must be obedient and helpful and punctual. If they were
not ready for a meal or for their lessons, they were often sent to
their rooms as a punishment. Those rooms had to be in perfect order,
for each daughter was required to take care of her own. As they grew
older, they were taught to do many things for themselves. If one of
them wanted a new dress and her rather slender allowance would not pay
the dressmaker, she knew how to make it for herself; and if a new hat
was wanted, she could trim it.

This was the way in which the young girl had grown up who was going to
visit the Queen of Great Britain when her first year of sorrow was
drawing to its close. This was no ordinary visit, for several persons
were very anxious that the Queen should like the Princess. They need
not have feared. Everyone who met Alexandra loved her, for this bright,
cheerful young girl carried sunshine wherever she went, and it shone
upon even the lonely heart of the sorrowful Queen.

There had been a great deal of discussion about who would be the bride
of the Prince of Wales, and not a little scheming among no lesser
people than some of the great dignitaries of Europe; for there were
several young princesses whose parents would have been glad to form an
alliance with the heir of England's crown. But while the schemers were
scheming, the Prince was forming a very definite opinion of his own. At
the home of his grand-aunt, the Duchess of Cambridge, he saw one day a
portrait of a very beautiful young girl.

"And who is that?" he asked his cousin, the Princess Mary.

"That's Alix," was the reply, "and she is the dearest girl in all the
world. You know that grandfather left his palace of Rumpenheim to his
six children and asked them to meet there every two years. We all go,
and now there are twenty or more of us cousins, but Alix is the
prettiest and sweetest and dearest of us all. You must have seen her,
for she came to visit me when she was ten years old, and she went to a
children's party at Buckingham Palace."

Boys of twelve do not always remember little girls of ten. The Prince
of Wales did not say whether he had forgotten "Alix" or not, but while,
in 1861, the officials were talking about several other European
princesses as well as the Princess Alexandra, he was making it clear to
his father and mother that _she_ was the one whom he wished to see.
Princess "Vicky" always had her own opinions, and she too had been
charmed by the lovely Danish Princess. "Come and visit me, and you
shall see her," she wrote. The Prince went to Germany, the Princess was
on her way to Rumpenheim, and nothing was easier than to arrange a
meeting. Prince Albert wrote, "The young people seem to have a warm
liking for each other." Some months after the death of Prince Albert,
the two met again; next followed the little visit to Queen Victoria,
and the loving welcome to the young girl who then became the betrothed
of the Prince of Wales.

Denmark was delighted, and England was no less happy. Prince Christian
soon carried his daughter to London to visit Queen Victoria; and then
came a busy time, for all the wedding trousseau except the lingerie was
to come from England. Princess Mary was delighted to help in selecting,
and probably the Prince of Wales had now and then a word to say. While
this was going on in England, scores of women in Denmark were cutting
and stitching the finest of linen and embroidering on every article a
crown and the initials of their beloved Princess. The whole land
subscribed to give her a generous dowry, and then the wedding presents
began to come. There were many of great value, of course, for all the
courts of Europe were interested in the marriage; but the Princess
cared most for the gifts that came from her own people, who knew her
and loved her. Among those tokens there was a painting of her brothers
and sisters in a group, a pair of shoes embroidered in gold from the
shoemakers of Copenhagen, and some vases from the villagers who lived
near the summer home in the forest. The Danish king gave her a necklace
of diamonds and pearls, and King Leopold sent her a most beautiful
dress of Brussels lace. At the end of the last sermon that she heard in
her own church, the pastor, who had known her from babyhood, gave her a
loving benediction and farewell.

The wedding was to be in England, and in February of 1863 the young
bride with her father and mother and brothers and sisters went aboard
the royal train. The Queen had sent to Antwerp her own _Victoria and
Albert_, the yacht that had so often carried happy people, and after a
few days' rest at King Leopold's court, the party crossed the Channel
with a little squadron of British men-of-war as escort. As they neared
the English coast, the water swarmed with every kind of vessel that
would float, from a steamship to a rowboat, for everyone was eager to
see the young girl whose beauty had been heralded throughout the
kingdom. There was one boat which had the right of way, and soon the
Prince of Wales was meeting his bride and giving her a hearty,
old-fashioned kiss that satisfied even the hundreds of spectators. Her
dress would seem to-day exceedingly quaint, but it must have been
wonderfully becoming. It was of mauve poplin, made very full, for those
were the days of hoop-skirts. Over it she wore a long purple velvet
cloak with a border of sable, and her lovely face was framed in a white
"poke" bonnet trimmed with rosebuds.

As soon as she had landed the difficulties began; for the people who
had been waiting for hours to see the face that they had heard was the
prettiest in the world meant to see it, and they thronged about her
carriage in such determined crowds that the police were helpless. There
is a story that one inquisitive youth actually twisted his head between
the spokes of her carriage wheels to get a glimpse of her in some way;
and the legend says that the Princess herself helped him out of his
dangerous position. Addresses were presented before she had fairly set
her feet upon English soil, one of them signed by the eight hundred
Eton boys. Whenever there was a moment's delay, some delegation was
always waiting, ready to make a speech of welcome. There were rockets
and bonfires and salutes from vessels and forts, and, fascinated as she
was, the young girl was thoroughly tired before she was safe at Windsor
Castle.

A week later the royal wedding was celebrated in St. George's Chapel.
The Prince was in the long flowing purple velvet mantle of the Order of
the Garter, which made a rich contrast with the white lace and satin
and orange blossoms of his bride. She was loaded with jewels, for the
gifts of the Queen, the Prince, and the city of London must all be
treated with respect. In her bouquet were sprigs of myrtle that had a
history, for they had come from a bush grown from the myrtle in the
bridal bouquet of the Princess "Vicky." There was more jewelry that was
of special interest, for while the Prince was satisfied with a plain
hoop of gold for the wedding ring, the guard was set with stones the
initials of whose names formed the word, "Bertie,"--beryl, emerald,
ruby, turquoise, jacinth, emerald. The lockets that he gave to the
bridesmaids were made after a new fashion, for they were wrought of
crystal, and in each were the initials "A. E.--A." intertwined in a
design drawn by the Princess Alice. These letters were made of diamonds
and coral to display the red and white of the Danish flag.

There was all the brilliancy and gorgeousness that can be imagined, for
it was the wedding of the heir to the British crown. There were
heralds, drummers, and trumpeters, all in quaint and handsome costumes.
The gleam of gold, the flash of diamonds, and the burning glow of
rubies made the Chapel a wilderness of color and brightness. Very
slowly the beautiful Princess and her bridesmaids moved up the long
aisle to the altar, too slowly for the comfort of Prince Arthur and his
brother Leopold in their Highland dress, for the small German nephew
had been put under their care, and the naughty little Frederick William
Victor Albert bit their bare legs whenever they told him to be quiet.

The whole floor of the Chapel was radiant with beauty and aglow with
happiness, but in the "Closet," up above the heads of the joyous
throng, stood the Queen of England in the deepest mourning, glad in the
gladness of her eldest son and in her love for the maiden who was his
choice, but with the sorrow at her heart that forbade her to share in
the rejoicings of her people.




CHAPTER XII

THE LITTLE FOLK


In the midst of all the royalties that were present at the wedding of
the Prince of Wales were the two great novelists of the realm,
Thackeray and Dickens; but Tennyson, the Poet Laureate, was not there.
Again "someone had blundered," and his invitation had been missent.
Both the Queen and Prince Albert felt a sincere admiration and
reverence for the poet, and the Prince had asked the favor of an
autograph with far more hesitation than most schoolboys would have
shown. This is the way in which he made his very modest petition:

"Will you forgive me if I intrude upon your leisure with a request
which I have thought some little time of making, viz., that you would
be good enough to write your name in the accompanying volume of the
'Idylls of the King'?" Prince Albert was very fond of the "Idylls," and
when, only a month after his death, Tennyson brought out a new edition
of the poems, it contained a beautiful dedication, which began:

    "These to his memory--since he held them dear."

The lines do not sound as if the poet felt obliged to write them
because he had been appointed Laureate, but rather as if he meant every
word that he wrote. In this dedication he speaks very earnestly of
Prince Albert's wisdom and ability and unselfishness, and gives us the
exquisite line which everyone quotes who writes of the Prince Consort:

    "Wearing the white flower of a blameless life."

The following year, just before the wedding of the Prince of Wales,
Tennyson wrote a welcome to the bride, beginning:

    "Sea-kings' daughter from over the sea,
                                            Alexandra!
    Saxon and Norman and Dane are we,
    But all of us Danes in our welcome of thee,
                                            Alexandra!"

The Queen was much pleased with the poem and said, "Thank him very
warmly, and tell him with how much pleasure I have read the lines, and
that I rejoice the sweet and charming bride should be thus greeted."

There is a story that when the Danish Princess was a very young girl,
she and three of her girl friends sat together in the forest talking of
what they should like to do when they were grown up.

"I want to be famous," said one. "I want to paint a picture that
everyone will go to see, or to write a book that all Denmark will be
eager to read."

"If I could do just what I liked," declared the second, "I would travel
all over the world; so I will wish to be a great traveler."

"I want to be rich," said the third, "and then I can travel whenever I
choose, and buy all the books I choose without having to write them,
and all the pictures I choose without having to paint them. But what do
you want, Alix?"

The Princess Alix had been thinking, and she answered slowly, "If I
could have just what I wanted, I would choose that everyone who saw me
should love me."

However it was with the others, the Princess Alexandra surely had her
wish, for everyone who met her seemed to love her. The Queen called her
"the fairy," and so great a dignitary as Dean Stanley thought of her in
the same way, for after he had had a long talk with her in the corner
of the drawing room, telling her how the service of the Church of
England differed from that of the Danish Church, he wrote in his diary,
"She is as charming and beautiful a creature as ever passed through a
fairy tale." "The little gem of Denmark is the pet of the country,"
declared the newspapers. The unbounded admiration that had been shown
to Queen Victoria in the early days of her reign was given to
Alexandra. When the Queen came to the throne, young girls who were
small and had fair hair and blue eyes were happy. _Now_, it was bliss
to have any feature that resembled the Danish Princess. She had a
custom of letting two curls of brown hair fall on each shoulder, and
straightway English fashions demanded that every girl should wear four
curls hanging on her shoulders. For months London was at the height of
gayety. The Princess represented her royal mother-in-law at the drawing
rooms of the season; no easy task, for so many ladies attended the
first that it took four long hours for them to pass the throne. All
this time the Princess Alexandra and the Princess Alice stood to
receive them, except for one little resting time of twenty minutes.
There were receptions and most magnificent balls, at which all the
dignitaries tried their best to make themselves agreeable to the young
Princess.

Of course the Queen had no heart for these festivities, but she was
glad to have the people pleased, and for one of the most elaborate
entertainments she sent decorations and furnishings from Buckingham
Palace. The Princess Alice and Prince Louis were with her for several
months before the marriage of the Prince of Wales; and only three or
four weeks after the great event, a little Hessian granddaughter was
born at Windsor Castle. The chaplain of the Hessian court came to
England for the christening of the wee maiden. The usual number of
names was given her, but the first two were Victoria Alberta.

In the autumn the Queen made the customary visit to Balmoral; but only
a few days after her arrival she took an evening drive that put her
into a great deal of danger, for the carriage turned over, and the
Queen, the Princess Alice, and "Lenchen," as the Princess Helena was
called, were thrown out. Brown, the Queen's favorite Highland
attendant, had little regard for court manners at any time, and less
than ever in this predicament. He called out, "The Lord Almighty have
mercy on us! Who did ever see the like of this before! I thought you
were all killed." The Queen had fallen on her face, and was somewhat
bruised. Princess Alice, with her usual calmness, held a lantern so
that the men could see to cut the horses free. Then while the driver
went for help, the monarch of Great Britain sat in the road wrapped up
in plaids and using the floor of the carriage for a back. The Princess
had brought her page along, a Malay boy whose father had presented him
to a traveler in return for some kindness, and little "Willem" sat in
front with one lantern, while Brown held another. It was a strange
situation, a Queen, with thousands of soldiers at her command, sitting
in a broken carriage waiting for horses and guarded by one Highlander
and a little black boy. She wrote in her journal for that day: "People
were foolishly alarmed when we got upstairs, and made a great fuss. Had
my head bandaged and got to bed rather late."

This soldier's daughter could make little of pain, but she could not so
easily put away sorrow. Every place about Balmoral reminded her of
something that Prince Albert had said or done, and she could not bear
that his presence should be forgotten. On the summit of a hill which
they had often visited together, she built a great cairn, on which was
inscribed, "To the beloved memory of Albert, the great and good Prince
Consort; raised by his broken-hearted widow, Victoria R."

She was touched and grateful when the citizens of Aberdeen wished to
put up a statue of the Prince, and asked her to be present at the
unveiling. It was nearly two years since his death, but she had not yet
taken part in any public ceremony, and she dreaded to have the morning
come. When it did come, however, she wrote in her journal the words
that were the keynote of her courage in meeting difficulties, "Prayed
for help and got up earlier." The rain poured, but the streets of
Aberdeen were thronged with people. Out of sympathy with her grief,
there was no cheering, and no band playing. For more than twenty-five
years she had never appeared on public occasions without both cheering
and music; and although she appreciated the thoughtful sympathy of the
people, the silence only made the contrast greater between the past and
the present. The exercises began with an address to the Queen by the
Lord Provost. She handed him a written reply. Then he knelt before her;
her Minister gave her a sword; and touching the Provost with it on each
shoulder, she said "Rise, Sir Alexander Anderson." _Mr._ Anderson had
now become a knight, and would be called Sir Alexander all the rest of
his life. After this little ceremony, the bunting was drawn away from
the statue, and what the Queen called a "fearful ordeal" was at an end.

The one upon whom the Queen depended most was Princess Alice. She often
went on little picnics or drives "because Alice advised." The Princess
and Prince Louis spent as much time in England as possible, and when
they were in Germany the letters of the Princess gave her mother a
great deal of pleasure. They were full of the details of her daily
life, some of which might have come from a palace and some from a
cottage. One described a gift just received from the Empress of Russia,
"a splendid bracelet;" and a few days later, the young mother wrote
exultantly that the baby looked about and laughed. This young
housekeeper was deeply interested in all the details of her home. She
was grateful to her Queen mother for the big turkey pie and the other
good things that arrived at Christmas time; and she wrote of her
various little dilemmas, ranging all the way from a half-hour's hunt
for a pen just after a journey to the whirl of making the dining room
into a bedroom to accommodate a guest. One morning she wrote "in the
midst of household troubles," as she said, for the Emperor and Empress
had just sent word that they were coming to breakfast with her, and
"Louis" was out. But of all the bits of home life in her letters, those
about the children--for in a year and a half there was also a little
Elizabeth--must have given the most pleasure to the royal Grandmamma.
On one page the Princess described some political complication between
kingdoms, and on the next was the astounding news that little Victoria
could get on her feet by the help of a chair and could push it across
the room. Before long, she was walking out with her father before
breakfast, with her independent little hands in her jacket pockets.
Money was not especially plenty in the home at Darmstadt, and the
Princess mother wrote at one time of the little Elizabeth's wearing
Victoria's last year's gowns, and at another said that she had just
made seven little dresses for the children. With a German father and an
English mother, the little Victoria spoke at first a comical
combination of German and English, and she announced one day, "Meine
Grossmama, die Konigin, has got a little vatch with a birdie."

There was also a little boy in England who was taking much of the
Queen's attention, the baby son of the Prince of Wales. He was born at
Frogmore House, and as all the clothes provided for him were at
Marlborough, he fared no better for raiment at first than if he had
been born in a cottage. The loss was made up to him, however, when he
was christened; for then he was gorgeous in a robe of Honiton lace, the
same one in which his father had been christened, while over the robe
was a cloak of crimson velvet with a lining of ermine. Nothing could be
too rich and costly, for some day, if he lived long enough, he would
wear the English crown. One matter in which the royal family were most
economical was in regard to names, for they used the same ones over and
over. This little boy was named Albert, for his English grandfather;
Victor, for the Queen; Christian, for his Danish grandfather; and
Edward, for his father. Princess "Alix" was as eager to be with her
precious baby as the Queen had been to stay with her children, and she
looked like a mischievous child when she had succeeded in slipping away
from some grand company long enough to give baby "Eddie" his bath and
put him to bed.

The little Princess Beatrice was scarcely more than a baby herself, but
she seems to have felt all the responsibility of being aunt to so many
small people. When she was hardly more than three years old, Princess
"Vicky's" second child was born, and then Prince Albert wrote of the
little girl to his eldest daughter, "That excellent lady has now not a
moment to spare. 'I have no time,' she says when she is asked for
anything. 'I must write letters to my niece!'"

Around her and across the Channel were children in whom she was most
warmly interested, but the Queen's own childhood was rapidly growing
more distant, not only by the passing of time, but also by the death of
those who were most closely associated with her early days. Bishop
Davys died in 1864, and in 1865 the death of King Leopold occurred. He
was well called "the wisest king in Europe," and more than one dispute
between kingdoms had been left to him for settlement. He knew all the
royal secrets, and he made a judicious and kindly use of his knowledge.
Ever since the Queen's accession he had aided her with his counsel, and
now there was no one to whom she could look for disinterested advice.
In that same year the assassination of President Lincoln occurred. The
Queen was not satisfied with a formal telegram of regret; she wrote a
letter, not as the sovereign of England to the wife of the President,
but as one sorrowing woman to another, expressing her warm sympathy.

Few people realized how much severe mental labor the Queen had to
endure. Often in the course of a single year many thousand papers were
presented to her, and of these there were few to which she did not have
to give close thought. For twenty-one years she had discussed
everything with Prince Albert, and when they had come to a conclusion,
he would, as in the _Trent_ affair, write whatever was necessary.
Then they would read the paper together and make any changes that
seemed best. After his death, the Queen had to do all this work alone.
She could wear the Kohinoor diamond, and she could build a
million-dollar palace if she chose, but there were few persons in the
kingdom who worked harder than she. What belonged strictly to matters
of state was more than enough for one person, but besides this there
were schools, hospitals, and bazaars to open, prizes to distribute and
corner-stones to lay. Then there were entertainments, fetes,
receptions, balls, etc., frequently in behalf of some good object,
whose success was sure if it could be said that the Queen would be
present. The Prince and Princess of Wales could not lessen the weight
of the public business that pressed so heavily upon the Queen, but they
could relieve her from the strain of these public appearances, and this
they did. They were both beloved by the people, but after the Queen had
lived for five years in retirement, some of her subjects began to
complain.

"What has she to do," grumbled one, "but to wear handsome clothes, live
in a palace, and bow to people when she drives out?"

"Yes," declared another, "she has nothing to do. Parliament makes the
laws, and she just writes her name."

"She's good to her cottagers in the Highlands," said a Londoner, "but
she ought to care a little for the merchants here in London. Everybody
likes the Princess, but the Queen's the Queen, and there never were
such sales as when she was giving her fancy-dress balls."

"She thinks of nothing but her own sorrow," said another. "She has lost
all sympathy with the people."

This last speech was made at a public meeting. Mr. John Bright, the
"great peace statesman," was present, and he replied to it. His closing
words were, "A woman who can keep alive in her heart a great sorrow for
the lost object of her life and affection is not at all likely to be
wanting in a great and generous sympathy for you."

Little by little the Queen learned the feelings of her people, and
she soon published a response which must have made the grumblers feel
ashamed. She said she was grateful for their wish to see her, but so
much was now thrown upon her which no one else could do that she was
overwhelmed with care and anxiety, and did not dare to undertake
"mere representation," lest she should become unable to fulfill the
duties which were of real importance to the nation. Some months
later, she wrote of herself in a private letter: "From the hour she
gets out of bed till she gets into it again, there is work, work,
work--letter-boxes, questions, etc., which are dreadfully
exhausting."

The Queen wished sincerely not only to do what was best for the people,
but also to please them. She could not go to balls and theaters, but
early in 1866 she determined to open Parliament in person. The London
world rejoiced. They tried to imagine that the old days had come again,
and they put on their jewels and their most splendid robes. All the way
to the Parliament Building the streets were full of crowds who shouted
"Long live the Queen! Hurrah for the Queen!" In the House of Lords
there was a most brilliant assembly. Silks rustled and jewels sparkled
as all rose to welcome the sovereign. As she entered, the Prince of
Wales stepped forward and led her to the throne. The royal
Parliamentary robes with all their glitter of gold and glow of crimson
were laid upon it, for the Queen wore only mourning hues, a robe of
deep purple velvet, trimmed with white miniver. On her head was a Marie
Stuart cap of white lace, with a white gauze veil flowing behind. The
blue ribbon of the Garter was crossed over her breast, and around her
neck was a collar of diamonds. All the radiant look of happiness with
which those were familiar who had seen her on the throne before, was
gone. She was quiet and self-controlled, but grave and sad. Instead of
reading her speech, she gave it to the Lord Chamberlain. At its close,
she stepped down from the throne, kissed the Prince of Wales, and
walked slowly from the room.

[Illustration: Houses of Parliament.]

The Queen's two daughters, Helena and Louise, had attended her in
opening Parliament. This must have been a little embarrassing for the
older one, inasmuch as the Queen's address declared that the royal
permission had been given for the Princess Helena to marry Prince
Christian of Schleswig-Holstein; but members of the royal family cannot
always consult their own feelings. When they rule different countries,
it is not always easy for them even to remain friendly. The fact that
the Queen, her daughters, and her Danish daughter-in-law were as fond
of one another at the end of 1866 as they were at the beginning of 1864
is proof that the English royal family were very harmonious. Trouble
had arisen between Denmark and the German states in regard to the
duchies of Schleswig-Holstein, and in 1864 war had broken out between
the little kingdom of Denmark and the united powers of Prussia and
Austria. Both countries were anxious to win the help of England.
Princess "Vicky" and Princess Alice naturally sympathized with the
German states; while Princess Alexandra's affection was of course with
her own home land, which had now become her father's kingdom. The
Emperor of France did not wish to have the German states increase in
power, and he was ready to help Denmark, provided England would stand
by him. England was willing, but England's sovereign would not hear to
any talk of war with Germany, and the Ministers hesitated to act
against her decided opposition. Of course the Danish Princess was
grieved that the Queen would not consent to help her beloved country.
Bismarck was the German statesman who was pushing on the war, therefore
he was the man who was most abhorrent to the Princess of Wales. There
is a story that the Queen had promised the little Beatrice a present,
and that when she asked, "What shall it be?" the wee maiden, who had
been carefully tutored by her sister-in-law, replied demurely, "Please,
mamma, I'd like the head of Bismarck on a charger."

Two years later, there was a still more difficult condition of affairs
in the Queen's family, for now that Prussia and Austria held the
Schleswig-Holstein duchies, it was a question to which of the two
powers they should belong; and to complicate matters even more,
Princess Helena had married Prince Christian. Prussia and the north
German states held together, and Austria joined the forces of the south
German states. Prince "Fritz" belonged to the north and Prince Louis to
the south, and therefore the husbands of the two English Princesses
were obliged to fight on opposite sides. The war lasted for only seven
weeks, but it was an anxious time for Queen Victoria, who shared so
fully in the troubles of her daughters. Princess Alice's two little
girls were sent to England to be safe in her care, but in the midst of
the war, a third little daughter was born. The boom of the distant guns
was heard as she lay in her cradle in Darmstadt. Wounded men were being
brought into the town, and the residents were fleeing in all
directions. By and by the end came, and then the little dark-eyed baby
was named Irene, or peace. Never before had a child so many godfathers,
for when Prince Louis said farewell to his cavalry, he delighted them
by asking the two regiments, officers and men, to be sponsors to his
little girl.




CHAPTER XIII

MOTHER AND EMPRESS


While the German wars were going on the Queen was thinking for her
country as a sovereign and feeling for her children as a mother. In the
midst of all the claims upon her, she had one aim that she never
forgot, and that was to make her country understand and appreciate the
talents and character of Prince Albert. She concluded to have a book
prepared that should tell the story of his life, for she felt that no
one who really knew him could fail to honor him. When the first volume
was published, even her children were surprised that she should tell
matters of her own private life so fully; but she loved and trusted her
people, and she was as frank with them as she would have been with an
intimate friend.

The year after this book was brought out, the Queen herself became the
author of a book, "Our Life in the Highlands." It is made up of
extracts from the journal which she always kept. "Simple records," she
calls them, but they often give charming pictures of the merry times at
Balmoral. Sir Arthur Helps aided her in preparing the book for the
press. "He often scolds me," she said, "because I am careless in
writing; but how could he expect me to take pains when I wrote late at
night, suffering from headache and exhaustion, and in dreadful haste?"
She arranged to have Sir Theodore Martin complete the life of the
Prince, and she spent much time in arranging her husband's papers and
letters for him to use. She generally chose the selections to be
inserted, and she read every chapter as it was written.

About her own authorship the Queen was very modest, and when she sent a
copy of her book to Dickens, she wrote in it, "From the humblest of
writers to one of the greatest." At Sir Walter Scott's home, she was
asked to write her name in his journal; and, although she granted the
request, she wrote in her own journal, "I felt it a presumption in me."
When Carlyle met her, he said, "It is impossible to imagine a politer
little woman; nothing the least imperious, all gentle, all sincere;
makes you feel too (if you have any sense in you) that she is Queen."

Her being Queen gave her a peculiar power over the marriages of her
children, for they were not legal unless she gave her formal consent.
Early in 1871 she was called upon again to exercise her right, for far
up in the hills about Balmoral there was a momentous little interview
between the Princess Louise and the Marquis of Lorne. "Princess Louise
is so bright and jolly to talk with," one of the Scotch boys had said
of her when she was a very young girl, and this Scotch Marquis was of
exactly the same opinion.

The Queen had guessed before how matters stood with her daughter and
the gentleman whom she had once called "such a merry, independent
child." The young man had proved his independence by asking for the
hand of the Princess, inasmuch as it was three hundred years since a
member of the royal family had married a subject, but the Queen paid no
attention to tradition. She felt sure that the Marquis would make her
daughter happy, and that was enough. Most of her subjects agreed with
her; and one of the newspapers said jubilantly, "The old dragon
Tradition was routed by a young sorcerer called Love."

The wedding was celebrated at Windsor. It was a brilliant scene, of
course, and if all the gentlemen were arrayed as vividly as the Duke of
Argyll, the father of the bridegroom, the ladies did not monopolize
gorgeousness of attire. The Duke was a Scottish chieftain, and he
appeared in Highland dress. His kilt and the plaid thrown over his
shoulders were of the gay Campbell tartan. His claymore, a broad
two-handed sword, was at his side, and in front there hung from his
belt a sporran, or deep pouch made of skin with the hair or fur on the
outside. His dirk sparkled with jewels. Altogether he might have
stepped out of some resplendent assemblage of the middle ages. After
the wedding breakfast, the bride laid aside her white satin and Honiton
lace and arrayed herself in a traveling dress of Campbell plaid. The
carriage door was closed, and the young couple drove away for Claremont
in a little shower of white slippers, accompanied, according to
Highland tradition, by a new broom, which was sure to bring happiness
to the new household.

The Queen's daughters were now in homes of their own except the
Princess Beatrice, a merry little girl of fourteen, who had been
radiantly happy in her new pink satin at her sister's wedding. The
Queen was devoted to her children, but it would have been easier for
her to pass through the next few years if she had been all sovereign
and not woman. War broke out between France and Germany, and both
Prince "Fritz" and Prince Louis were in the field. Anxious as she was
for them, she was even more troubled for the Princess Alice, who was
really in quite as much danger as if she had been in the army. For
several years she had been deeply interested in lessening the
sufferings of the poor in times of illness; and in providing trained
nurses for wounded soldiers. While this war was in progress, she not
only went to the hospitals daily, but she brought the wounded men to
her own house and cared for them herself. She was exposed over and over
again to typhus fever and other diseases, but she seemed to be entirely
without fear. One of her friends describes seeing her help to lift a
soldier who was very ill of smallpox.

Princess Alice little thought of what value her skill in nursing would
be to her own family, but near the end of 1871, the Prince of Wales was
taken ill with typhoid fever, and her help was of the utmost value. It
was just ten years before that Prince Albert had died of the same
disease, and to the anxious Queen every day was an anniversary. She
hastened to the home of the Prince at Sandringham, and when she saw how
ill he was, she sent at once for the other members of the family. The
days passed slowly. One day he seemed a little better, and there was
rejoicing, as the telegraph flashed the news not only over England, but
to Canada, India, to every part of the world. Then came a day of
hopelessness. The Queen mother watched every symptom. "Can you not save
him?" she pleaded; and all the physicians could answer was, "You must
be prepared for the worst. We fear that the end is near."

Bulletins were sent out to the public every hour or two. All London
seemed to tremble with fear and anxiety. Stores were open, but there
was little of either buying or selling. Day and night the citizens
crowded the streets in front of the newspaper offices. They talked of
no one but the Prince.

"He's a good boy to his mother," said one, "and she'll miss him
sorely."

"He's living yet, God bless him, and perhaps after all he'll mend,"
declared another of more hopeful spirit.

"Did you ever hear that when he was a little chap and his tutor was
going to leave him, the young man couldn't go into his room without
finding a little present on his pillow or perhaps a note from the
little boy saying how much he should miss him?"

"It'll kill the Queen," said one man. "The poor woman's had all she can
bear, and she'll never go through this."

"And the Prince's boy's but eight years old," declared another.
"There'll be a regent for ten years, and no one can say what harm will
come to the country in that time."

So the days passed. The fourteenth of December came, the anniversary of
the day on which the Prince Consort had died. The Prince breathed and
that was all. The people about the offices were hushed. Everyone
dreaded to hear the next message, but when it came, it said "Better."
London hardly dared to rejoice, but the Prince continued to gain, and
at last the Queen joyfully granted the wish of her people and appointed
a Thanksgiving Day. The special service was held at St. Paul's Church,
and there were many tears of joy when the Queen walked up the nave
between the Prince and the Princess of Wales.

After the religious ceremony was over, the guns roared out the delight
of the people, and a wild excitement of happiness began. At night St.
Paul's was illuminated, and everyone was jubilant. The Queen was deeply
touched and pleased with the warm sympathy shown by her subjects, and a
day or two later she sent a little letter to be published in the papers
to tell them how happy they had made her.

Only two days after this letter was written, there was a great alarm,
for when the Queen went out to drive a young fellow sprang towards the
carriage and aimed a pistol at her. He was seized in a moment and
proved to be a half-crazed boy of seventeen whose pistol had neither
powder nor bullet. Most of the Queen's personal attendants were
Highlanders, and one of them, John Brown, had thrown himself between
her and what he supposed was the bullet of an assassin. Both the Queen
and Prince Albert were always most appreciative of faithful service,
and looked upon it as something which money could not buy. She had been
thinking of having special medals made to give to her servants who
deserved a special reward, and she now gave the first one to John
Brown. With the medal went an annuity of $125.

John Brown seemed to have no thought but for the Queen. To serve her
and care for her was his one interest. He cared nothing about court
manners, and was perhaps the only person in the land who dared to find
fault with its sovereign to her face. Statesmen would bow meekly before
her, but the Scotchman always spoke his mind. He even ventured to
criticise her clothes. The Queen never did care very much for fine
raiment, and in her journal where she narrates so minutely as to
mention the fact that a glass of water was brought her, she describes
her dress merely as "quite thin things." John Brown thought nothing was
good enough for his royal mistress. "What's that thing ye've got on?"
he would demand with most evident disapproval, if a cloak or gown was
not up to his notion of what she ought to wear; and this Queen, who
knew so well what was due to her position, knew also that honest
affection is better than courtly manners, and kept Brown in close
attendance. She built several little picnic cottages far up in the
hills, where she and some of her children would often go for a few days
when they were at Balmoral. There is a story that when she was staying
at one of these cottages, she wished to go out to sketch. A table was
brought her, but it was too high. The next was too low, and the third
was not solid enough to stand firmly. So far John Brown had not
interfered, but now he brought back one of the tables and said bluntly,
"They canna make one for you up here." The Queen laughed and found that
it would answer very well.

One cannot help wondering what Queen Victoria's guests thought of her
attendant's blunt ways, but they must have often envied her his honest
devotion. In 1872 and 1873 she had several very interesting visitors.
One of them was David Livingstone, the African explorer.

"What do the people in the wilderness ask you?" queried the Queen.

"They ask many questions," he replied, "but perhaps the one I hear
oftenest is, 'Is your Queen very rich?' and when I say 'Yes,' they ask,
'How rich is she? how many cows does she own?'"

Other visitors were a group of envoys from the King of Burmah, a
monarch with such strict regard for what he looked upon as royal
etiquette that he would not allow the British representative to come
into his presence unless the indignant Englishman took off his shoes
before attempting to enter the audience room. His letter to the Queen
began with the flourishes that would be expected from so punctilious a
potentate: "From His Great, Glorious, and Most Excellent Majesty, King
of the Rising Sun, who reigns over Burmah, to Her Most Glorious and
Excellent Majesty Victoria, Queen of Great Britain and Ireland." He
sent among other gifts a gold bracelet which must have been of more
value than use, for it weighed seven pounds.

The guest who made the greatest sensation was the Shah of Persia. For
more than two months he was on his way to England, and the nearer he
came, the more wild were the fancies that people had about him. The
newspapers were full of stories about his dagger, whose diamonds were
so dazzling, they said, that one might as well gaze at the midday sun.
They told amazing tales about the pocket money which he had brought
with him, some putting the amount as $2,500,000, others as $25,000,000.
"When he walks about, jewels fall upon the ground," one newspaper
declared. "He wears a black velvet tunic all sprinkled with diamonds,
and he has epaulets of emeralds as big as walnuts," romanced another.

The curiosity seekers were disappointed when he appeared, though it
would seem as if he had enough jewelry to make himself worth at least a
glance, for up and down his coat were rows of rubies and diamonds. He
wore a scimitar, and that, together with his belt and cap, was
sparkling with precious stones, while his fingers were loaded with
rings.

The Queen came from Balmoral to welcome him. Whether she gave him the
formal kiss that was expected between sovereigns, the accounts do not
state, but all sorts of entertainments were arranged for him, a great
ball, a review of artillery, an Italian opera, and many other
amusements. He was much interested in the review, and the troops must
have been interested in him, for he rode an Arab horse whose tail had
been dyed a bright pink. At this review one of the newspaper stories
proved very nearly true, for a member of the Persian suite fell from
his horse and really did scatter diamonds about him on the grass. After
a visit of a little more than two weeks, the Shah bade farewell to
England. Before his departure there was an exchange of courtesies
between himself and the Queen. She made him a knight of the Garter, and
he made her a member of a Persian order which he had just instituted
for ladies. The Queen gave him a badge and collar of the Garter, set in
diamonds; and he returned the gift by presenting her with his
photograph in a circle of diamonds.

In the midst of this entertainment and display, the tender heart of the
Queen was more than once deeply grieved by the death of dear friends.
The cherished Feodore, the Princess Hohenlohe, died; then the Queen
lost Dr. McLeod, the Scotch clergyman who had so helped and comforted
her in her troubles. Hardly two months had passed after his death
before heart-broken letters came from Darmstadt. Princess Alice had
been away for a short time, counting the hours before she could be with
her children again. At last she was at home with them and happy. The
two little boys were brought to her chamber one morning, and as she
stepped for a moment into the adjoining room, one of them, "Frittie,"
fell from the window to the stone terrace, and died in a few hours. The
heart-broken mother longed to go to her own mother for comfort in her
trouble, but she could not leave her home, neither could the Queen come
to her.

Warm, tender words of sympathy came from England, from a Queen mother
who well knew what sorrow meant. "Can you bear to play on the piano
yet?" she asked some three months after the accident; for it was long
after the death of Prince Albert before she herself could endure the
sound of music. Princess Alice replied, "It seems as if I never could
play again on that piano, where little hands were nearly always thrust
when I wanted to play. Ernie asked, 'Why can't we all die together? I
don't like to die alone, like Frittie.'"

While the heart of the Queen was aching with sympathy for her daughter,
she had also to attend to arrangements for the marriage of her sailor
son "Affie," now Duke of Edinburgh, with the daughter of the Emperor of
Russia. She herself could not go to the wedding at St. Petersburg, but
she asked Dean Stanley to go and perform the English ceremony; for as
the bride was a member of the Greek Church, there was a double rite. To
Dean Stanley's wife she sent a mysterious little parcel containing two
sprigs of myrtle, and with it a letter which asked her to put them into
warm water, and when the wedding day came, to place them in a bouquet
of white flowers for the bride. The myrtle had grown from the slip in
the bridal bouquet of the Princess Royal, and in the five marriages of
royal children that had preceded this one, each bride had carried a bit
of the bush.

When the bride reached Balmoral, a company of volunteers in kilts were
waiting to receive her. Just beyond were the tenants on the Queen's
estate, all in their best clothes. The pipers were present, of course,
and the best clothes of the Queen's pipers were well worth seeing. The
kilt was of Stuart plaid, and the tunic of black velvet. Over the
shoulder was a silver chain from which hung a silver powder horn. The
bag for the pipe was of blue velvet. Ornaments were worn wherever there
was a place for them, but the only jewels were cairngorms, and they
were always set in silver. The shoes had heavy silver buckles. The
bride and all her royal friends drove to the castle, where their health
was drunk by a merry company. The end of the Queen's account of this
reception of royalty sounds delightfully simple and homelike. "We took
Marie and Alfred to their rooms downstairs," she says, "and sat with
them while they had their tea."

In so large a family as that of the Queen there was always a birth or a
marriage, a coming or a going. Not long after the marriage of his
brother Alfred, the Prince of Wales left England to spend some months
in India. This journey was not a pleasure trip, it had a state purpose,
and that was to pay honor to the native princes who had aided the
English in their efforts to govern India. The Prince was well
accustomed to being received with cheering and the firing of guns, but
his Indian reception was something entirely new. At one place
twenty-four elephants painted in different colors trumpeted a greeting.
In another, which was ruled by a lady, the sovereign met him, but she
could hardly be said to have made her appearance, for her face was
thickly veiled. At still another he was carried up a hill in a superb
chair made of silver and gold. There was a boar hunt, an antelope hunt,
and an elephant fight; there was a marvelously beautiful illumination
of surf; there were addresses presented by people of all shades of
complexion and all varieties of costume, often so magnificent that some
one called the wearers "animated nuggets."

This visit of the Prince of Wales was followed by the Queen's
assumption of the title of Empress of India. There was a vast amount of
talk about the new title, for many English thought that it was foolish
and childish to make any change. On the other hand, "Empress" was the
proper title for a woman who ruled over many kings, even kings of
India. There were stories afloat that one reason why the Queen wished
to become an Empress was because the Russian Princess, who was the
daughter of an Emperor, had claimed precedence over the English
Princesses, who were only the daughters of a Queen. However that may
be, the title was formally assumed in 1876. It was proclaimed in India
with all magnificence. Sixty-three princes were present to hear the
proclamation. There were thousands of troops and long lines of
elephants. A throne that was a vision of splendor was built high up
above the plain; and on this sat the viceroy of the Queen, who received
the honors intended for her.

Queen Victoria was much pleased with the new title, and soon began to
sign her name "Victoria, R.I.," for "Regina et Imperatrix," to all
documents, though it had been expected that she would affix it to her
signature only when signing papers relating to India. Another title
which she enjoyed was that of "Daughter of the Regiment." The Duke of
Kent had been in command of the "Royal Scots" at the time of her birth
and therefore they looked upon her as having been "born in the
regiment." In the autumn of this same year she presented them with new
colors, and there was a little ceremony which delighted her because it
was evidently so sincere. There was first a salute, then marching and
countermarching, while the band played old marches that were her
favorites, among them one from the "Fille du Regiment," to hint that
she belonged especially to them. Then there was perfect silence. Two
officers knelt before her, and she presented them with the new colors,
first making a little speech. The Royal Scots were greatly pleased,
because in her speech she said, "I have been associated with your
regiment from my earliest infancy, and I was always taught to consider
myself a soldier's child." In spite of her many years' experience in
making short speeches and of her perfect calmness in public in her
earlier years, the Queen was never quite at ease in speaking to an
audience after Prince Albert died, and she said of this occasion, "I
was terribly nervous." She never ceased to miss the supporting presence
of the Prince, and she wrote pitifully of her first public appearance
after his death, "There was no one to direct me and to say, as
formerly, what was to be done."

The Queen was soon to feel even more lonely, for late in the autumn of
1878 there came a time of intense anxiety, then of the deepest sorrow.
Princess Alice's husband and children were attacked by diphtheria.
"Little Sunshine," as her youngest daughter was called in the home,
died after three days' illness. The mother hid her grief as best she
could that the other children should not know of their loss. Three
weeks later, she too was taken with the same disease, and died on the
seventeenth anniversary of her father's death. Little children and poor
peasant women of Hesse were among those who laid flowers on her bier
and shared in the grief of the sorrowing monarch across the Channel.

The Queen had built a cairn at Balmoral in memory of the Prince
Consort. Others had been built from time to time, one rising merrily
with laughing and dancing to commemorate the purchase of the estate;
others erected to mark the date of the marriage of the sons and
daughters of the house. To these a granite cross was now added to the
memory of the beloved daughter, "By her sorrowing mother, Queen
Victoria," said the inscription.

So it was that the happy circle of sons and daughters was first broken;
so it was that the years of the Queen passed on, full of the joys and
sorrows that seemed to come to her almost hand in hand.




CHAPTER XIV

THE JUBILEE SEASON


With the exception of Prince Alfred, the Queen's children had married
according to the German proverb, "The oldest must leave the house
first." The next in age was Prince Arthur, or the Duke of Connaught. He
married in 1879 Princess Louise of Prussia with the usual magnificent
display at St. George's Chapel. The real home welcome, however, was
awaiting them at Balmoral, where they arrived a few months later. When
the train came to a standstill, there stood the Queen and Princess
Beatrice, with the Royal Scots for a guard of honor. The Queen gave the
bride a bouquet of heather, and they set off for the castle. At the end
of the Balmoral bridge was an arch of moss and heather with a motto in
flowers, "Welcome to Balmoral." There stood the castle guests, and
there were all the tenants, the women in their Sunday clothes, the men
in kilts, and the pipers playing their best and loudest, while the
children tossed flowers into the carriages and shouted their welcome.

Of course a cairn had been begun in honor of the marriage, and two or
three days later the happy party went to visit it, the Queen on her
pony and the others walking. There was a speech of congratulation made,
and the health of the young people was drunk. "The health of the
Princess Beatrice ought to be drunk," Brown declared, and that was done
with so many cheers that even the dogs objected to the tumult and began
to bark. After the cheering, each one of the party walked up to the
cairn and laid a stone upon it. One of the stones in the foundation was
already marked with the names of the Duke and Duchess and the date of
their marriage.

Three years later St. George's Chapel was again ablaze with the
splendor of another royal wedding, that of Prince Leopold, the eighth
child of the Queen, to Princess Helene of Waldeck-Pyrmont. In the
evening a state banquet was given, and some of the guests were much
amazed when, just before the Queen was to rise from the table, her two
Scotch pipers in their full Highland costume appeared at the door and
marched twice around the room, playing merry Scottish airs.

The home of the newly married couple was to be at Claremont, the place
where the little Princess Victoria had so enjoyed herself. It had been
granted to King Leopold when he married Princess Charlotte, but on his
death it again became the property of the Crown. The Queen now bought
it for the King's namesake. She had given to her son the title of Duke
of Albany, and some of the superstitious among her subjects shook their
heads at that, for so many who had borne the title had met with
misfortune or even with early death.

The wedding celebrations were hardly over before the Queen's thoughts
were centered upon Egypt. The Khedive of Egypt was a great borrower,
and to fill his ever empty purse he had offered England some seven
years previously his shares in the Suez Canal for $20,000,000. England
had been very ready to buy them and also to guarantee that people who
had loaned money to this spendthrift should not lose their interest. In
1882 some of the Khedive's subjects rebelled against him and got
control of the government. To maintain taxation and so pay the promised
interest, England must support the Khedive and put down the rebels.

The Queen hated war as badly as her predecessor Elizabeth, but as soon
as she saw that it was necessary, she had no patience with delay or
poor preparation. She sent directions continually to the War Office,
now about arms, now about blankets or food or the comforts that would
be needed in the hospitals. She never had the slightest sympathy with
indecision or lack of promptness, and the moment that she thought of
something that ought to be done for her soldiers, she sent a message to
the Minister of War. During one day she sent him seventeen.

[Illustration: Windsor Castle.]

The troops sailed. Telegrams were frequent, and on a Monday morning in
September there came to Balmoral one marked "Very secret." It was
written in cipher and said, "Determined to attack the enemy with a
large force on Wednesday." There could be no report of the battle for
two days at least, but the Queen and her family tried hard to be brave
and cheerful. More than once the Queen slipped away from them to pray
that her son might return to her in safety, for the Duke of Connaught
was in Egypt in command of a brigade. Wednesday morning a telegram
came, "The army marched out last night." A second arrived a little
later, "The enemy has been routed at Tel-el-Kebir, but fighting is
going on." "Louischen," the wife of the Duke, was with the Queen. They
could think of nothing but the husband and son, far away beside the
Nile. Any moment might be the fatal one. They almost fancied they could
hear the boom of the cannon. Never was a morning so long, but at last
the word came, "A great victory; Duke safe and well; led his brigade to
the attack." The Queen hurried to find "Louischen," and threw her arms
about her neck. "How glad and proud and thankful we can be!" she
exclaimed with tears, not of sorrow but of joy.

That afternoon the Duke of Albany and his wife arrived, and then there
was a double rejoicing. After the drinking of healths of bride and
bridegroom, John Brown stepped forward and said, "Ladies and gentlemen,
let us join in a good Highland cheer for the Duke and Duchess of
Albany; may they live long and die happy!" and then there was such
cheering as made the woods and hills ring.

Twenty-six years before, when word had come of the fall of Sebastopol,
a bonfire had been lighted on the top of Craig Gowan, and now there was
another in honor of the Egyptian victory. It was very dark, but no one
cared for that. The two princesses and many of the people in the house
walked up to the top of the hill with the pipes playing jubilantly.
There the bonfire was lighted, and the Queen watched from the windows
and listened to the pipes and the cheering. When the princesses came
down, they all had a little supper together "in Louischen's room."

With all these family celebrations, indeed with almost every action of
the Queen's life, John Brown was closely associated. In private and in
public he was the attendant of his sovereign, ever on the watch to save
her, not only from danger, but from the least annoyance. On one
occasion, the Queen's carriage stopped in a village after dark, and
curious people thronged about. One man actually held up a lantern to
get a plainer view of her face, but all that met his eyes was the
rugged, determined features of John Brown, for the faithful man had
calmly put himself between the Queen and her inquisitive subject. On
another occasion, a woman pushed up to the carriage and stood leaning
upon the wheel and staring at the Queen. John Brown thought it a waste
of courtesy to be gentle with such a person, and he growled "Be off
with you!" like an angry policeman to a crowd of troublesome
ragamuffins. In 1883 this faithful servant died. There could hardly
have been a time when the Queen had more need of him, for by a fall on
the staircase at Windsor she had become unable to walk or even to
stand.

During the months of her lameness, she prepared for publication a
volume of extracts from her journal for 1862 to 1882. The dedication
read, "To My Loyal Highlanders, and especially to the memory of my
devoted personal attendant, John Brown." She was as modest about this
book as about the first one, and with the copy that she presented to
Tennyson she sent an almost shy little note saying, "Though a very
humble and unpretending author, I send you my new book, which perhaps
you may like to glance at. Its only merit is its simplicity and truth."

The Queen's lameness did not prevent her from making her usual spring
visit to Balmoral in 1884, but the most unusual precautions were taken
to insure her safety. Within two or three years the Emperor of Russia
had been assassinated, and in London several attempts had been made
recently to blow up public buildings with dynamite. Generally when the
Queen traveled, her time-table was known, and people were at every
station to give her welcome. An engine was always sent before the train
to make sure that the road was clear, but this time, however, the
time-tables were kept secret, and no spectators were allowed to gather
at the stations. Men were usually at work on the road, averaging one to
every half-mile. These men were now supplied with flags to wave as the
train came in sight. If the engineer saw a white flag, he knew the way
was clear for half a mile; but if the red one was waved, he knew there
was danger or some obstruction ahead, and that he must stop at once.

The Queen was still so much of an invalid that she could stand only a
few minutes when the day came that she had to be told of the sudden
death of her youngest son. He was the only one of the nine children who
had not been strong, but the Queen loved him all the better for his
sufferings. He was much like his father in mind, and she had hoped that
he would be able to act as her private secretary. Even when he was ill,
he was so merry and unselfish that all who saw him loved him. He never
seemed to realize that there was anything in him to call out their
affection and he once said very simply, "I can't think why people
should always be so kind to me."

The Queen felt that the joy had gone from her life, but she sent to her
people the message, "I will labor on as long as I can for the sake of
my children and for the good of the country I love so well."

The government of her country gave her little pleasure at that time,
for in spite of all that she could do, grave trouble was arising from
what she believed was the mistaken course of her Ministers. Egypt had
been pacified three years before, but there was revolt in the Soudan. A
man named Mohammed had gone about among the wild Arabs declaring, "I am
the prophet who was to follow the great Mohammed. For twelve hundred
years the world has been awaiting me. Come and fight under my banner."
Thousands rose to join him, and Mohammed, or the Mahdi, as he was
called, led them against the Khedive. That ruler was helpless to
repulse them. England was responsible for the good order of his
country, and the Ministers debated the question long and seriously,
what to do in Egypt.

"Let us send troops to the Soudan and suppress the rebellion," advised
one.

"That is what the Queen wishes," said another, "but it may be that the
Soudan is not worth so many lives as would be wasted in conquering the
rebels."

"It is not," declared another positively. "Let us attempt nothing but
to keep the Mahdi out of Egypt."

"But what of our English and Egyptian garrisons in the Soudan?" That
was a grave question, and a long discussion followed. The government
then in power was ready to do almost anything to avoid war. The Queen
looked upon the matter differently. She was now no girl of eighteen,
she was a woman with nearly fifty years' experience in dealing with
nations civilized and nations uncivilized. She believed that it was
best to hold on to the Soudan; but since her Ministers were determined
to abandon it to the revolters, she saw that the only thing to do was
to lose no time in confronting the Mahdi with an army so overwhelmingly
superior to his own forces that he would not dare to attack the
garrisons.

The Ministers did not agree with her. "General Gordon has already shown
that he knows how to manage the people of the Soudan," they said, "and
he will be able to persuade the Mahdi to let the garrisons go free."

"With an army to support him, yes," said the Queen; "but alone, no."

Nevertheless, General Gordon was sent to cross the desert almost alone.
In spite of all that the brave commander could do, the Mahdi could not
be persuaded to let the garrisons go, and soon the envoy himself was
shut up in Khartoum. "Help us," he pleaded with England. "Send us
troops." Still the government delayed, in spite of the Queen's
warnings. No help came, and General Gordon then sent a messenger to beg
private parties in the British colonies and the United States for money
to organize a relief expedition; but the messengers were captured and
put to death. The Queen urged and insisted that relief should be given,
and the people insisted with her. Troops were sent at last, and they
hastened on till they were only a mile and a half from Khartoum. But
they were forty-eight hours too late, for the city had fallen, and
General Gordon had been slain.

Queen Victoria was a constitutional monarch. She had stood firmly by
her Ministers ever since the Bedchamber Plot of the first year of her
reign; but she was also a woman, a loving, tender-hearted woman, and
she wrote to General Gordon's sister a letter in which sympathy for her
loss and indignation for the "stain left upon England" were mingled.
She said:

    "DEAR MISS GORDON,

    "How shall I write to you, or how shall I attempt to express what
    I feel! To think of your dear, noble, heroic brother, who served
    his country and his Queen so truly, so heroically, with a
    self-sacrifice so edifying to the world, not having been rescued!
    That the promises of support were not fulfilled--which I so
    frequently and constantly pressed on those who asked him to go--is
    to me grief inexpressible."

General Gordon's diary was found and sent to his sister. Its last entry
was, "I have done my best for the honor of our country. Good-by." His
Bible was presented by his sister to the Queen. It was placed on a
cushion of white satin in an exquisite casket of carved crystal with
silver mountings. "This is one of my greatest treasures," the Queen
often said, as she sadly pointed it out to her friends.

The Queen was aroused from her sorrow over what she ever looked upon as
a disgrace to her country by the approaching marriage of Princess
Beatrice to Prince Henry of Battenberg. Their wedding was quite
different from those of the other royal children, for it was celebrated
at the country church near Osborne. No one knew how to manage a royal
wedding in a little village church, and there were all sorts of
momentous questions to be settled before the arrangements were
complete. It all came out well in the end, however. There was not room
for quite so many royalties as usual, but the wedding day was a
delightful holiday for the people of the Isle of Wight, for there were
fireworks, bands, a dinner and a dance for all the tenants and servants
on the estate, and a most beautiful display of sailing vessels and
steamers. Tennyson's home was on the Isle of Wight, and the Queen sent
him a charmingly informal invitation to the wedding. "It would give me
the greatest pleasure," she wrote, "if you would come over for the
wedding in our village church, but I fear you won't do that? But pray
come and see me when all is quiet again." Tennyson did not attend the
wedding, but the Princess must have counted among her choicest gifts
his message, "To the royal bride the old poet sends his blessing." This
marriage alone of all those in the royal family was not to bring
separation, for it was agreed that the Princess and Prince Henry should
remain with the Queen.

This Queen and Empress had now been on the throne for nearly half a
century, and throughout her dominions there was a feeling that so rare
an event ought to be celebrated with fitting magnificence. The Jubilee
feeling was in the air. Every town and every little village wished to
mark the time by something that should remain as a lasting memorial.
Libraries, hospitals, and museums were founded, and parks were
purchased and thrown open to the public. Memorial clocks, statues,
schools, and towers sprang into being in every corner of the land, and
in all the colonies. "God Save the Queen" was sung in Hindustanee on
the shores of Asia and in Hebrew in the synagogues of London. Addresses
of congratulation and loyalty came in by the score; representatives of
all the colonies flocked to England, as sons and daughters hastened
homeward to a family gathering.

The part to be taken in the celebration by associations, cities, and
kingdoms had all been planned when it occurred to the editor of one of
the London newspapers that nobody had remembered the children. "Let us
give the boys and girls of London a feast and an entertainment in Hyde
Park," he suggested. "You can't do it," declared the grumblers. "It is
a foolish, wicked scheme. There will be a crush, accidents will happen,
and hundreds will be injured." Nevertheless, people subscribed so
generously that soon all the money needed had been provided. When the
children came to the Park, they were taken in groups to great tents;
and when they came out, each one had a paper bag which contained "a
meat pie, a piece of cake, a bun, and an orange." Their little hands
must have been full, for besides the eatables, each one received a
little medallion portrait of the Queen and a Jubilee mug. The mugs saw
hard service among the thirsty little folk, for all day milk, lemonade,
and ginger beer were free to every child who presented his empty mug.
The children were amused by all sorts of games and shows. Dukes and
princes and representatives of powerful kingdoms came to see the good
time; and at last the Queen herself came and gave a special greeting,
not to the grown folk, but every word of it to the children. Long
before bedtime had come, every one of the twenty-seven thousand small
people was safe in his own home, and the grumblers grumbled no more.

June 21, 1887, was "Jubilee Day." Fifty years had passed since the
young girl had been aroused from her sleep to hear that she was Queen
of a mighty nation; and now, in all the glory of her half century of
successful sovereignty, she was to go to Westminster Abbey to thank God
for his help and protection.

She now represented, not a kingdom, but an enormous empire, and every
corner of it wished to do her honor. The streets of London were spanned
by triumphal arches. They were made into a fairyland of flowers,
banners, drapings of silk and velvet and tapestry. Staging for seats
had been put up all along the route, and every seat was filled.
Fabulous prices were paid for a house, a window or even a few square
inches on a rough plank. Thousands of people had been out since sunrise
to secure a place to see the grand procession; and at last it came in
sight, moving slowly toward the multitude that waited all a-tremble
with excitement and with devotion to the noble woman who was the symbol
of home and country.

First came the carriages containing the dark-faced princes of India,
robed in cloth of gold, and shaded with turbans glittering with
priceless jewels. Many carriages followed, filled with kings, queens,
crown princes, and grand dukes. There were equerries, aides-de-camp, an
escort of Life Guards, and a guard of honor composed of princes riding
three abreast, the Queen's sons, grandsons, sons-in-law and
grandsons-in-law. Towering up among them was the superb figure of
Prince "Fritz," Crown Prince of a united Germany. His uniform was of
pure white, his helmet of burnished steel, and on it was the Prussian
eagle with outspread wings. At last the woman for whom all were waiting
came in sight. The splendid robes of her coronation were fifty years
behind her, but even in her plainer dress she looked every inch a
queen. The Princess Alexandra and the Crown Princess of Germany were
with her. For twenty-five years the sovereign had so rarely appeared in
public that to her subjects this was more than a mere royal procession,
it was the coming back to them of their Queen. A great wave of devotion
and loyalty swept over the hearts of the throng. "Not _the_ Queen, but
_my_ Queen," they said to themselves, and such a greeting was given her
as few monarchs have received.

The Abbey had been filled long before. Rich strains of music were
coming from the organ. There was a moment's silence, then the silver
trumpets of the heralds were blown, and the church resounded with
Handel's march from the "Occasional Oratorio." The Queen entered. She
was preceded by archbishops, bishops, and deans, all in the most
elaborate vestments of their offices. The guard of royal princes walked
slowly up the nave, three abreast, the Prince of Wales and his two
brothers coming last. Slowly the Queen to whom all the world was doing
honor, ascended the steps of the throne. The vast assemblage was
hushed, and stood for a moment with heads bowed in reverence.

A short, simple service followed of praise and thanksgiving. Then her
sons and daughters, who had been grouped around the Queen, came forward
one at a time to bow before her and kiss her hand. As they rose, she
gave each of them a kiss, not of state, but of warm, motherly affection
that in this crowning moment of her career could not be satisfied with
the restrictions of ceremony.

That evening there were fireworks and illuminations in all the
principal cities. England shone literally from shore to shore, for a
beacon fire was lighted on Malvern Hills, and in a moment, as its
distant gleam shone on other hills, other beacons blazed, till from
Land's End to the Shetland Islands it was rejoicingly written in
letters of fire that for fifty years the realm had been under the rule
of a pure and upright womanhood.

At last the day was fully ended. "I am very happy," said the Queen; and
well she might be, for this day had shown her that she was sovereign,
not only of the land and its treasures, but of the loving hearts of her
subjects.




CHAPTER XV

THE QUEEN AND THE CHILDREN


There had been only one drawback to the Queen's happiness during the
Jubilee rejoicings, and that was the poor health of her favorite
son-in-law, the Crown Prince of Germany. In the procession he had
looked superbly well and strong, but his throat was giving him so much
trouble that he remained in England the rest of the year, hoping that a
change of climate would do him good.

Everyone loved "Our Fritz," as he was called in Germany, both his own
countrymen and the English. His father, the Emperor, was over ninety
and so feeble that he could not possibly live many months. Ever since
that summer day on the hills of Balmoral when the Prince had given the
sprig of white heather to the maiden of his choice, the Queen had hoped
that Germany would unite under one emperor and that Prince Frederick
William would become its ruler. The German states had united, and it
was clear that the German throne would soon fall to her daughter's
husband; but the physicians declared that his disease was incurable.

For several months the whole world watched for news of the beloved
Emperor and his equally beloved son. Early in 1888 the Emperor died,
and Queen Victoria's ambition of thirty years had come to pass; her
daughter was Empress of Germany. But it was a sad accession to a
throne, and the Queen forgot all about her ambitious hopes in her
daughter's grief and her own. Hardly a day passed that she did not send
some message of sympathy to the sorrowing wife. In three months the end
came. The Emperor "Fritz," whose sufferings had been none the less
because he sat on a throne, was dead. His son, the Frederick William
Victor Albert who had given his young uncles so much trouble at the
wedding of the Prince of Wales, now wore the German crown; but the
Queen, instead of rejoicing in her daughter's being Empress of Germany,
could only try as best she might to help her bear her loneliness.

No one, whether Princess Royal or Highland cottager, ever appealed to
the Queen for sympathy in vain. She was always especially interested in
the sick. In her Jubilee year, the women of England made her a present
of $375,000, and she gave almost all of it to found an institute which
should provide trained nurses for the poor in their own homes. When
injured soldiers returned to England, she was never weary of going to
see them, of walking down the long rows of beds, saying to one man, "I
am afraid you are in great pain," to another, "England owes much to her
brave soldiers." If she only asked "Where were you wounded?" or looked
at a sufferer with that peculiarly sweet smile of which everyone spoke
and which the photographers could never catch, he was content. Some of
the hospital patients almost believed that her coming would cure them.

"Oh, it does hurt so," sobbed one little girl in a ward for children,
"but if the Queen would only come and see me, I know I'd be well."

"Perhaps she will," said the nurse.

"No," cried the little one. "She went right by the door."

Somehow word was carried to the Queen that a little girl who had been
terribly burned was crying to see her.

"Is there another ward that I have not visited?" she asked.

"Yes, Madam," answered the Doctor, "but it is at the extreme end of the
hospital."

"Never mind," replied the Queen. "I will go and see the child."

After this visit the little girl who had been so honored was the envy
of all the other children as she told over and over her story of the
royal visit. "She came down just to see me," said the little one, "the
Doctor told me she did. She put her hand right on my forehead and she
said, 'I have a little granddaughter about as old as you, and I hope
you will soon be able to run about as she does.' And then she said
'Good-by,' and she said, 'I shall come to see you again.' I wish she
would come to-morrow."

All her life Queen Victoria was fond of children. She liked even the
little boy who declared stoutly, "No, I don't like you because you cut
Mary Queen of Scots' head off." When she first became Queen, she always
managed to have some little folks staying in the palace as visitors,
and the ninth child of her own family was just as welcome as the first.
In all the displays that were made at her various receptions, she was
never more pleased than when throngs of children were gathered together
to greet her. She knew how to please children, and when she went to
visit a school for boys, she won their hearts by requesting the master
to give them an extra week's holiday. She never could bear to
disappoint a child. One day when she was driving very rapidly, she
caught sight of a little boy by the roadside looking much grieved
because he had tried to throw a bunch of flowers into her carriage, and
it had fallen into the road. "Drive back," she ordered, and the
carriage with its four horses and driver and attendants was turned
back. "Will you give me those pretty flowers?" she asked, and the
little boy with tears on his cheeks suddenly became the happiest little
fellow in the Highlands, as he shyly handed her the rather dusty
bouquet. The children of the Balmoral tenants knew that she would never
forget her promises, and if she said a toy was coming to them at
Christmas, it was as sure to come as the day itself. When the little
daughter of the minister in the village nearest to Balmoral was born,
the Queen asked that she might be named Alexandrina Victoria for
herself. Many gifts were sent to the little namesake, but perhaps the
one that pleased her most was the tall sugar ornament from the Queen's
birthday cake which the Queen herself brought over to the home of the
tiny damsel and presented to her.

As the many grandchildren began to circle around Queen Victoria, she
had a warm corner in her heart for everyone. She always wore a bracelet
with a place for a miniature, and here the picture of the "new baby"
was put, to remain until there was a newer baby whose little portrait
should take its place. The numerous grandchildren and great-grandchildren
were taught to greet her with the utmost respect, and little boys who
could hardly walk would make a bow to her or kiss her hand as gravely
as any grown-up courtiers. There the ceremony ended, and the good times
began.

Of all the groups of children there were some to whom she was
especially devoted. The daughters of the Princess Alice, as she was
always called in England, she cared for almost as if they were her own.
They made her long and frequent visits, and, little as the Queen cared
for handsome clothes, she saw to it that when these orphan
granddaughters were to be married, they should have all sorts of fine
apparel and many beautiful jewels.

The children of whom she saw most during the last years of her life
were those of Princess Beatrice. Two of them were born at Balmoral,
first, a little Victoria Eugenie, the first child of the royal family
born in Scotland for three hundred years. The tenants felt that this
child was really their own, and they put their shillings together and
bought her a very handsome cradle. They were all invited to come to the
castle and see the baby, and a carriage was sent for any who were too
feeble to walk. When the second child, a boy, was born, Craig Gowan
again blazed with a bonfire. The pipers played, and all the people on
the estate lighted their torches and marched up to the top of the hill
for a dance.

It is to be hoped that the Princess Beatrice did not have as much
difficulty in managing her own children as she did when she was six
years old in commanding the obedience of Prince Frederick William of
Germany and his sister. She is said to have gone to Dr. McLeod,
declaring indignantly, "Just think, my nephew William and my niece
Elizabeth will not do as I bid them and shut the door, and I am their
aunt! Aren't they naughty?"

One little grandchild who was especially dear to the Queen was the son
of her son Leopold, who died so suddenly. The Duke of Albany commanded
the "Seaforth Highlanders," and after his death the little Duke was
looked upon as their commander. The story is told that when he was six
years old, he was allowed to "review" his troops. Very seriously he set
about it, wearing a uniform made just like that of the tall
Highlanders. He had been carefully taught how to give some of the
orders, and he piped them out as gravely as if the fate of a battle
depended upon his words. He was delighted to see how promptly the men
obeyed him, and he felt quite like a grown man; but he too had to obey
as implicitly as his soldiers, and when he made a boat of a scrubbing
brush belonging to a tenant, and it floated off down the river, the
small boy was taken straightway to a village store to buy another and
pay for it with his own pocket money.

With so many children in whom she was interested the Queen might well
have been forgiven if she had forgotten a few of them at Christmas, but
such a thing never occurred; and even when the birthdays came around,
they were never overlooked. She always had a little pity for her own
lonely childhood, and she was very fond of giving her children and
grandchildren feasts and entertainments that they could enjoy together.
Dancing bears were brought to Windsor to perform for the children;
Punch and Judy often gave them a merry hour; and once at least a monkey
was "commanded" to appear before the Queen with his owner and the
hand-organ. Where other people "invited," the Queen "commanded."
Performers were very ready to obey, for besides the price paid them by
the palace commissioner, the Queen almost always made them a personal
gift of money or jewelry. Moreover, it was an excellent advertisement
for them to perform before the royal family. Among other performers
Buffalo Bill and his troupe were commanded to Windsor to show her
Majesty and the little people what wild life on the plains of America
used to be.

Once at Balmoral the Queen commanded a circus to perform before her. It
was only a little circus, and the proprietor must have been almost
overwhelmed with amazement and delight, but he made ready and set out
for a field near the castle. The "Battenberg children" and the little
folk from the other two castles which the Queen had built near Balmoral
were summoned to come to the show. The little Alexandrina Victoria was
invited, and word was sent to all the tenant children. The circus
began. The children were happy, and even the performing donkey did so
finely that the Queen wished to buy him. Unfortunately he was only a
borrowed donkey and could not be sold; but after this fortunate day, it
is very likely that whenever he entered the sawdust ring, he was
announced as "Donkey in Special to Her Majesty the Queen of Great
Britain and Ireland and Empress of India."

The Queen was never bored by these little entertainments, for with all
her dignity, she had, as her husband said of his eldest daughter, "the
brain of a statesman and the heart of a child." When the circus came to
Balmoral, she watched it for two long hours, and was apparently as much
amused as her small grandchildren; and when the organ-grinder and his
monkey were at Windsor, the Queen laughed as heartily as any of the
children as the little creature tried his best to find a way into the
castle.

When the Queen was amused, she was very much amused, and sometimes she
found it as hard to keep from laughing outright as any young girl. One
who was present describes the reception of an embassy from one of the
Oriental countries when it was all the Queen could do to "keep a
straight face." On the English side everything was very ceremonious,
for it was desirable to pay special courtesy to the strangers. The
embassy, too, wished to show extreme respect, but no one guessed how
they would do it. They entered, and after making all sorts of strange
gestures, they "suddenly bowed themselves, apparently as men struggling
with acute internal pain, and squeezed their hands together between
their knees." The Queen was as motionless as a statue, her face
becoming more and more grave as the formalities proceeded. The moment
the envoys had left the room, however, she broke down and laughed till
her eyes were full of tears. "But I went through it," she cried to her
ladies. "I did go right through it."

The Queen was no less kind to her servants than to children; but just
as her children were taught to obey her, so her servants were required
to give her prompt and excellent service. "I can't afford to be kept
waiting," she would say, whether the delinquent was a servant or a
court lady. "If I am to get through my work, I mustn't have my moments
frittered away." After the housekeeping was once fully in her own
hands, there was little more of the irregular, negligent management
that had formerly prevailed. Everyone employed had his work and was
responsible for its being well done. It is said that she even made use
of the ancient expedient of housekeepers whose dusting has not been
properly done, and that with her own royal forefinger she once wrote
her name on a dusty cabinet. The next day the dust was still there, and
then she wrote under her own name that of the servant who was in fault.
When the poor girl discovered that she had been reproved by the Queen
of Great Britain and Empress of India, she was so overwhelmed with
alarm that she ran away. It is a pleasant ending to the story to know
that the royal mistress sent for her to come back. The Queen's rule was
very strict, but if trouble came to any of her attendants, she was as
sympathetic as if she had been one of their own family. She wanted them
to have plenty of amusement, and when in 1886 a great exhibition was
going on in London, she gave to her Balmoral servants an invitation to
spend ten days at Windsor Castle to see the exhibition and the other
sights of the city. The Queen demanded the best of service, but when it
was given, she never felt that money alone would pay for it, and she
was honestly grateful to those who served her well. She had to meet so
many strangers that it was a pleasure to her to have familiar faces in
her household. When new attendants were to be employed, she was always
glad to have members of the families that already served her; and at
the death of John Brown, she gave his place to one of his cousins, who
was already in her employ. When her servants were ill or unable to
work, she always cared for them, and saw to it that they had a
comfortable home for their old age.

The life of the Queen was gradually becoming very regular in some
respects, and especially in the way that she divided her year. For a
long time she had made two visits to Balmoral each year, one in the
spring and one in the autumn. She made also three visits to Osborne and
spent a week or more in London. The rest of her time was given to
Windsor and to her "vacation," which she spent somewhere on the
Continent. It is hardly fair to say that she had a vacation, for
wherever she went, one of her Ministers accompanied her and the
ever-present dispatch boxes followed her. At Balmoral the "Queen's
Messenger" arrived about six o'clock every morning with his box of
papers. These were arranged by the secretary in such a way as to save
her all unnecessary trouble. About ten, she entered upon the government
business of the day, reading, thinking, signing papers, and writing. At
half-past two the messenger set out for London.

But this was not all her work with the pen, for the royal family
carried on a vast amount of correspondence with the Queen. As nearly as
possible, she wished to hear from each one of them every day, not the
kind of letter that says, "I am well and hope you are the same," but
letters that told what the writers were doing, and what they thought of
the events in which they took part. The Queen could not answer all
these communications, of course, but if there was need of her advice or
sympathy, she never failed to write; and those of her letters that have
been made public are charmingly frank and sincere and full of most
tender affection.

Her own marriage had been so happy that in the marriage of her
descendants she paid little attention to whether a proposed alliance
would be of advantage to the kingdom; the chief question in her mind
was whether the young people would be happy together. Two years after
the Jubilee, the eldest daughter of the Prince of Wales married the
Duke of Fife. According to English custom, the daughter of a Prince is
not a peer, but a commoner, and although a title is usually given her,
it is only by courtesy and not by right. The Princess Louise, then, was
a commoner, but by marrying a Duke she became a duchess, and would have
the right to precede her sisters if they did not also marry dukes or
men of higher rank. One other privilege that she acquired was that, if
she was accused of any crime, she could demand to be tried by a jury
composed of peers.

In 1891 came the fiftieth anniversary of Queen Victoria's marriage, her
"Golden Wedding," as her children tenderly called the day. They gave
her a prayer book in which was written a stanza given them by Tennyson:

    "Remembering him who waits thee far away,
    And with thee, Mother, taught us first to pray,
    Accept on this, your golden bridal day,
          The Book of Prayer."

Through the sorrowful memories that thoughts of her own wedding
aroused, the Queen was looking forward with much pleasure to a marriage
that she hoped would take place. Next to the sovereign herself and the
Prince of Wales, the interest of the English centered upon "Prince
Eddie," the Duke of Clarence and Avondale, for after his father, he
would wear the English crown, and the whole country was waiting to see
whom he would choose for his wife. Princess Mary of Cambridge, who had
always been a warm friend of Princess Alexandra, had married the Duke
of Teck. Their daughter Mary was the choice of the Duke of Clarence,
and late in 1891 the engagement was announced. Only a month passed
before the Duke was taken ill, and in a few days he died. There was a
deep and general mourning, for "Prince Eddie" was greatly loved; but to
the Queen there was the loss not only of the first child of her
first-born son, but of the heir to her crown. She wrote to Tennyson,
"Was there ever a more terrible contrast, a wedding with bright hopes
turned into a funeral?"

The English people grieved for the loss of "Prince Eddie," whom
Tennyson called "so princely, tender, truthful, reverent, pure," and
they were sad for the young Princess, "Princess May," as she was always
called, for her merry disposition and good heart had made her a general
favorite. She said of herself that when she was a child, she was "very
naughty, very happy, and very uninteresting," but the people who knew
her did not agree that she was either naughty or uninteresting. She and
the children of the Prince of Wales were old playfellows and the best
of friends. Time passed on, and it began to be whispered that a
marriage would take place between Princess May and Prince George, the
second son of the Prince of Wales. He was now the heir to the throne,
and the people were glad that Princess May would some day become their
Queen.

Prince George, or the Duke of York, had spent some years of his life at
sea, for before he was twelve years old he entered the navy. The other
midshipmen were on the watch to see whether he would put on airs
because he was the Prince of Wales's son, but he soon showed himself
ready to take part in whatever came up, and no more favor was shown him
than to any other young sailor. Like his uncle, the Duke of Edinburgh,
he was called the Sailor Prince. After his marriage to Princess May had
taken place, and the young pair were on their way to Sandringham, they
found arches built over the road, and on one was "God bless our Sailor
Prince."

A loss which in her daily life touched the Queen even more nearly than
that of the Duke of Clarence, was that of Prince Henry of Battenberg.
In 1895 the Africans of Ashanti revolted against British rule, and
forces were sent to suppress them. Prince Henry wished to serve. "I
have been brought up as a soldier," he said, "and now is my time to
show what I can do." The Queen was not willing to have him go, but he
did not give up. "England is my adopted country," he urged. "I belong
to her regular army, and I ought to help protect her interests; and for
the sake of my children I ought to establish my position." Even the
Princess Beatrice could not deny that this was true, and at last the
Queen yielded. The service of the Prince was short, for not many weeks
after reaching Africa, he was sent home ill of fever, and died on the
voyage. The Queen suffered with her daughter, for the bright, merry
ways of the Prince had been a real delight to her. "I have lost the
sunbeam of my household," she said sadly. One by one she was losing
those who were dear to her, but in every trouble the love of her
subjects was her great comfort, and this love was soon to be manifested
even more clearly than at the Jubilee of 1887.




CHAPTER XVI

THE CLOSING YEARS


One autumn day in 1896 vast numbers of telegrams were sent to Queen
Victoria, not only from the English colonies, but from almost all the
countries of the world. They were full of congratulations on the length
of her reign; for now she had been on the throne longer than any other
English ruler, and longer than any one who had ever ruled on the
Continent except Louis XIV. No European monarch who had been on the
throne at her accession or even ten years after her accession was still
reigning. She had seen change of government, assassination, revolution,
in other kingdoms, but the monarchy in England had stood firm and was
much stronger than when she became Queen.

[Illustration: Her Majesty, Queen Victoria.
(_From a photograph by A. Bassano._)]

England would not permit such an event as this to pass without a
celebration. Preparations for the "Diamond Jubilee" to mark Victoria's
sixty years of sovereignty were commenced many months before the time
appointed. More than a million strangers were expected to be in London
during the two weeks of the festivities, and the hotel-keepers began to
plan how to feed them. Non-perishable foods were brought thousands of
miles, and fields of vegetables were bought before they were planted.
Next to something to eat, the visitors would wish for a place to see,
and owners of houses standing on the route to be taken by the
procession expected to get more for a single window than the usual rent
of a house for a year. The tenants of these houses were given notice to
quit, and as the time drew near, those who refused to leave were put
out by force. These removals were called "Jubilee Evictions."

Not everybody was busy with plans for money-making. There was an
enormous amount of decorating going on. "V. R." was everywhere and in
all sorts of materials, from cut glass and gold to red calico. There
were roses, lions, crowns, unicorns, wreaths, banners, and pictures of
the Queen at every turn. The route which the procession was to follow
wound past the homes of the poor as well as those of the rich, and even
the poorest found means to brighten the dingiest abode with a bit of
color.

As June 22, 1897, drew near, troops from every British colony began to
be seen in the streets of London. Uniforms of red, white, yellow,
brown, green, blue, and all kinds of minglings and mixtures decorated
the city. There were so many Chinese, Africans, and Hindus, brown
people, yellow people, and white people, from every part of the world,
that one might almost wonder whether there would be room in the streets
for the Londoners, if they should attempt to leave their homes. It
looked as if it might be a little difficult to leave some of the
houses, for scaffoldings had been built in front of them, and sometimes
even far above the roofs, so that as many seats as possible might be
rented. The procession was to follow a route six miles long, and so
many high scaffolds had been raised that the march would be like a
journey through a canyon whose sides were all aglow with every kind of
decoration that could be imagined; for the people seemed to feel that
the brighter their hangings were, the more loyal they were showing
themselves to be, and the result was gorgeous if not always beautiful.

In the colonies the day was being celebrated, and telegrams of loyalty
and congratulation were coming to the Queen by the score. As she passed
through the doors of Buckingham Palace at eleven o'clock, she sent to
every colony the message: "From my heart I thank you, my beloved
people. May God bless you." Then she entered her carriage and passed
on, escorted by kings, princes, long lines of seamen, masses of British
troops and masses of colonial troops. The long cavalcade went on slowly
to Temple Bar, the old entrance to the city. There the Queen paused,
and the thousands in line paused. The Mayor, most imposing in his long
velvet cloak, presented her with the sword of London in token of the
city's homage. She touched the sword in acceptance, and the procession
moved on.

The second stop was at St. Paul's. The eight cream-colored horses were
reined up before a superb mass of color and glitter, for on the steps
of the church were ambassadors, bishops, archbishops, judges, and
musicians, flashing with diamonds, gleaming in cloth of gold, gorgeous
in the red, blue, and pink hoods of the universities, and all framing
in a great square of white-robed little choir-boys. Prayer was offered,
the Te Deum was chanted, "God Save the Queen" was sung, and thousands
of people wiped their eyes as they joined in "Praise God from whom all
blessings flow." The benediction was pronounced and the procession
turned slowly away. And as the tread of the horses sounded again on the
pavement, the Archbishop forgot his magnificent canonicals, he forgot
everything except that he was an Englishman and that Victoria was his
Queen, and he led the whole ten thousand people in three tremendous
cheers for their sovereign.

That night everything was illuminated that could be illuminated; and,
as in 1887, beacon fires flashed from hill to hill and from headland to
headland. The Prince of Wales suggested that the best memorial of the
day would be a general subscription to pay the debts of the principal
hospitals, and in a great sweep of generosity $3,750,000 was promptly
subscribed. The Princess of Wales wrote to the Lord Mayor of London,
expressing her interest in the poor of the city, and gifts amounting to
$1,500,000 were made at once for their benefit. The rejoicing went on
for a fortnight. There were reviews of soldiers and of battleships,
there were concerts, exhibitions, and dinners for the poor. One part of
the celebration was the manufacture of a mammoth cake by the same firm
that made the coronation cake. This Jubilee cake weighed five hundred
pounds, and five hundred more was added to it in frosting and sugar
ornaments. Around it was a great wreath of sugar roses. A lofty tower
of sugar rose from within the wreath with many monograms, medallions,
crowns, lions, unicorns, angels of fame and of glory blowing great
sugar trumpets; and at the very top was the angel of Peace with white
and shining wings.

It would have been a source of deep happiness to the Queen if peace
could have prevailed throughout the empire during those last years of
her life, but in 1899 war arose between the English and the Boers of
South Africa. As usual, she hoped to the last that there would be no
war, but when she saw that it must come, she had no patience with the
least delay in sending troops, and she urged re-enforcing the army so
that the war might be ended as soon as possible. She was not satisfied
with acting through others; she wanted to do something for the men
herself with her own hands, and she set to work to knit caps and
comforters to be sent them. When Christmas came, she distributed toys
and candy among the soldiers' children; and, remembering that "Men are
only boys grown tall," she sent 100,000 boxes of chocolate to her
soldiers at the front. When the wounded and the ill were brought home,
she often went to the hospitals, and she had many convalescents come to
visit her at Windsor.

In this African war the Irish troops had shown such bravery that the
heart of the Queen was completely won. She said to her Ministers:

"I have decided to pay a visit to Ireland to thank those brave
Irishmen."

The Ministers were delighted to have her make the visit, but they
remembered that she had not been in Ireland for forty years and that
the Irish felt they had little reason to love the English government.
"It will be only wise to have an escort of cavalry around your
carriage," they suggested.

"No," she answered. "I am their Queen, and they are my people. If I
showed any distrust of them, they would think I deserved to be afraid
of them."

_Punch_ published a picture of Hibernia kissing the hand of the
sovereign and saying: "Sure, your Majesty, there's no place like home,
and it's at home you'll be with us."

The Queen was right in trusting herself without fear to the people of
Ireland; for however they might feel toward the English government,
they would show nothing but respect to the English Queen who had made
herself the guest of their country.

She landed at Kingstown and was received with all due form by the Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland; but the more ceremonious reception was awaiting
her at Dublin, where elaborate preparations had been made. The Lord
Mayor and the other officials of the city were all in their long red
robes heavily trimmed with fur. Attendants in black velvet and silver
lace followed them, one holding a great basket of flowers high up, so
that all the people could see it. A table, richly draped with silk, was
placed before the Mayor. On the table was a blue satin cushion, and on
the cushion was a golden casket. The casket was lined with
pearl-colored silk strewn with shamrocks embroidered in blue, and in
the casket were the keys of the city, and an address to the sovereign.

Of course these were not real keys of a real gate, for Dublin has no
gates, but in order to carry out the interesting old ceremony, tall
gates and towers of painted canvas had been erected, and as the Queen
and her escort drew near, a trumpeter from the highest watchtower blew
three resounding blasts and cried:

"The Athlone pursuivant is at the gates."

"With what message does he come?" asked the Lord Mayor.

"He is the bearer of a request from the Queen of Great Britain and
Ireland," replied the trumpeter.

"He may enter."

The pursuivant entered, and the Lord Mayor demanded:

"With what message do you come to the gates of the city of Dublin?"

"I bear the request of the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland that she
may enter her city of Dublin," he replied.

"Open the gates and admit the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland,"
commanded the Lord Mayor.

The pursuivant galloped back; the gates were flung wide open; the
Household Cavalry dashed through; and then came the Queen. The Lord
Mayor presented the beautiful casket and made his address; the Queen
handed him a written reply; the Lady Mayoress presented the basket of
flowers; and the Queen had been formally received as the guest of the
nation.

This three-weeks' visit to Ireland was one of the Queen's "vacations,"
but it was hardly a restful time, for she visited hospitals, orphan
asylums, schools, and convents; she received delegations of nurses and
doctors, and entertained the prominent people of the country. She went
to the Zoological Gardens and made the acquaintance of a baby bear, and
two baby lions, who were just as cross as if she had not been their
lawful sovereign. She took drives about the city and the country; she
reviewed troops; and finally she accepted an invitation to review
thirty thousand school children. In this review, she was much amused
when one small child called out, "Sure, you're a nice old lady!" One
school was delayed, but in order not to disappoint the children, the
Queen arranged a little reception for them later in the day.

The visit to Ireland had given the Queen pleasure, but the continued
fighting with the Boers was a grief to her, and in the summer of 1900
she had to meet trouble that touched her even more nearly in the death
of her son Alfred, Duke of Connaught. The Duchy of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha
had asked him to become its ruler, and the Duke of Albany had been
appointed his successor. This Duke of Albany, who had reviewed his
regiment of Highlanders when he was six years of age, was now sixteen,
and in two years more he would sit on a throne.

So the years of the Queen passed on with their joys and sorrows. Her
visit to Ireland took place in 1900. For four or five years previous to
this date she had suffered so much from rheumatism that it was hard for
her to walk, and in the house she was generally moved about in a
wheeled chair. The door of her special car was widened so that the
chair could be taken in easily. Two years before going to Ireland, her
eyes began to trouble her. "Use black ink and a broad pen" were the
instructions she gave to her Ministers; but even though her sight grew
faint, she would not lay down the task that she felt was her own.

Toward the end of 1900 she seemed less strong than usual. "You must
save yourself in every possible way," ordered the physicians, "and you
must not write more than is absolutely necessary." Christmas was near,
but this year her greetings to each member of her family were written
for her. Letters and telegrams were read to her, but her interest in
all matters was as strong as ever, and her judgments were as rapid and
sagacious. She met Lord Roberts on his return from South Africa and
questioned him closely about all the details of the war. Two or three
days later, when she awoke in the morning, she seemed very weak, and
her speech was less clear than usual. Telegrams were sent to the
members of her family. Germany was in the midst of an enthusiastic
celebration of the two hundredth anniversary of the establishment of
the Prussian monarchy; but Emperor William said: "It is my sorrow and
my nation's sorrow. Let the festivities cease." He left his kingdom and
hastened to England. On the day after his arrival, January 22, 1901,
Queen Victoria, with her children and grandchildren about her, passed
quietly away.

The Queen had never liked the gloomy trappings of funerals, and long
before this she had bidden that about her own there should be no touch
of the somber and sorrowful. The room in which she lay was hung with
deep red. There were palms and flowers around it, and about the bier
were many tall white candles. The ermine-lined robe of the Garter was
laid upon her coffin together with the flag of the country that she had
loved. Grenadiers stood motionless, two at the head and two at the
foot, keeping guard about her with bowed heads and arms reversed.

So she lay in her own home at Osborne until the day of the funeral was
come. No hearse was driven to her door, for the soldier's gun-carriage
was to bear the soldier's daughter to her resting place. The bier was
covered with ruby velvet. Over it was thrown a pall of white satin with
heavy edge of gold and the royal arms in each corner. On this was laid
the royal standard, the crown, the insignia of the Garter, and the
golden orb of empire which she had carried in her hand at her
coronation. In white and gold, the emblems of purity and royalty, she
went forth from her home for the last time. Her children and
grandchildren, princes and princesses, walked slowly behind her down
the long avenue of trees, whose branches shown out clear and distinct
against the bright blue of the sky. At the water's edge, the
gun-carriage was drawn on board the yacht _Alberta_. Followed by the
_Victoria and Albert_, the _Osborne_, and the massive _Hohenzollern_ of
the Emperor William, the little yacht moved through the mighty lines of
warships, English, German, and French, whose cannon thundered out their
last salute.

This was the farewell of the navy. That night the yacht with its
precious burden lay quietly in harbor; and in the morning the body of
the Queen was placed on the train to be carried to London. There houses
that so lately had been all aglow with the colors of gladness were now
draped with purple and white. Throngs were in the streets, but they
stood in perfect silence, the men bareheaded, and every woman with some
badge of mourning. Slowly the gun-carriage was drawn through the city,
followed first by the two sons of the Queen with the German Emperor,
then by her other relatives, by members of the royal family in Europe,
and troops representing every branch of the army. The navy was also
present in a guard of honor of sailors, and it was they who were called
upon to perform a last service for their Queen. At Windsor the horses
of the gun-carriage had become uneasy, and in a moment, with hardly a
word of command, they were unharnessed, and the sailors themselves drew
the gun-carriage to the castle. That afternoon the funeral rites were
observed in St. George's Chapel with words of prayer and the strains of
music that the Queen herself had chosen. The herald made solemn
proclamation that Queen Victoria was dead and that her oldest son,
Edward VII., was King of Great Britain and Ireland and Emperor of
India.

On the following morning the body of the Queen was borne to the
beautiful mausoleum at Frogmore which she had erected for Prince Albert
nearly forty years before. Muffled drums were beaten; sad, sweet
funeral marches were played by the martial bands; and so, through the
long avenues lined with soldiers, the procession moved onward. At
Frogmore, the bands were hushed, and the Highland pipers, walking
before the coffin, played the weird, mournful strains of the "Lament of
the Black Watch." Prayer was said, earth from the Mount of Olives was
dropped softly upon the coffin, and the Queen was laid to rest beside
her beloved Prince.

Next morning the flowers were faded, the flags were no longer at
half-mast, the stores and offices were opened, and life went on as
before; but in the homes of England those who had known and loved the
Queen were talking of her tenderly and thoughtfully. "She always did
what she believed was right," said some. "She was always sorry for
those who suffered," said others; and some repeated reverently the
words of the Scottish pastor who had known her so well:

"I admire her as a woman, love her as a friend, and reverence her as a
Queen."


THE END




American Heroes and Heroines

By PAULINE CARRINGTON BOUVE Illustrated, 12mo Cloth, $1.25

This book, which will tend directly toward the making of patriotism in
young Americans, contains some twenty brief, clever and attractive
sketches of famous men and women in American history, among them Father
Marquette, Anne Hutchinson, Israel Putnam, Molly Pitcher, Paul Jones,
Dolly Madison, Daniel Boone, etc. Mrs. Bouve is well known as a writer
both of fiction and history, and her work in this case is admirable.

    "The style of the book for simplicity and clearness of expression
    could hardly be excelled."--_Boston Budget._


The Scarlet Patch

The Story of a Patriot Boy in the Mohawk Valley

By MARY E. Q. BRUSH, Illustrated by GEORGE W. PICKNELL, $1.25

"The Scarlet Patch" was the badge of a Tory organization, and a loyal
patriot boy, Donald Bastien, is dismayed at learning that his uncle,
with whom he is a "bound boy," is secretly connected with this
treacherous band. Thrilling scenes follow in which a faithful Indian
figures prominently, and there is a vivid presentation of the school
and home life as well as the public affairs of those times.

    "A book that will be most valuable to the library of the young
    boy."--_Providence News._


Stories of Brave Old Times

Some Pen Pictures of Scenes Which Took Place Previous to, or Connected
With, the American Revolution

By HELEN M. CLEVELAND, Profusely illustrated, Large, 12mo, Cloth, $1.25

It is a book for every library, a book for adults, and a book for the
young. Perhaps no other book yet written sets the great cost of freedom
so clearly before the young, consequently is such a spur to patriotism.

    "It can unqualifiedly be commended as a book for youthful readers;
    its great wealth of illustrations adding to its value."--_Chicago
    News._


For sale by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers,

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., BOSTON




Famous Children

By H. TWITCHELL, Illustrated, $1.25

We have here a most valuable book, telling not of the childhood of
those who have afterwards become famous, but those who as children are
famous in history, song, and story. For convenience the subjects are
grouped as "Royal Children," "Child Artists," "Learned Children,"
"Devoted Children," "Child Martyrs," and "Heroic Children," and the
names of the "two little princes," Louis XVII., Mozart, St. Genevieve,
David, and Joan of Arc are here, as well as those of many more.


The Story of the Cid

For Young People

By CALVIN DILL WILSON, Illustrated by J. W. KENNEDY, $1.25

Mr. Wilson, a well-known writer and reviewer, has prepared from
Southey's translation, which was far too cumbrous to entertain the
young, a book that will kindle the imagination of youth and entertain
and inform those of advanced years.


Jason's Quest

By D. O. S. LOWELL, A.M., M.D., Master in Roxbury Latin School,
Illustrated, $1.00

Nothing can be better to arouse the imagination of boys and girls, and
at the same time store in their minds knowledge indispensable to any
one who would be known as cultured, or happier than Professor Lowell's
way of telling a story, and the many excellent drawings have lent great
spirit to the narrative.


Heroes of the Crusades

By AMANDA M. DOUGLAS, Cloth, Fifty full-page illustrations, $1.50

The romantic interest in the days of chivalry, so fully exemplified by
the "Heroes of the Crusades," is permanent and properly so. This book
is fitted to keep it alive without descending to improbability of cheap
sensationalism.


For sale by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers,

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., BOSTON






End of Project Gutenberg's In the Days of Queen Victoria, by Eva March Tappan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN THE DAYS OF QUEEN VICTORIA ***

***** This file should be named 35576.txt or 35576.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/5/7/35576/

Produced by Bethanne M. Simms and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
