The Project Gutenberg EBook of Personal Recollections of Chickamauga, by 
James R. Carnahan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Personal Recollections of Chickamauga
       A Paper Read before the Ohio Commandery of the Military
       Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States

Author: James R. Carnahan

Release Date: March 15, 2011 [EBook #35581]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RECOLLECTIONS OF CHICKAMAUGA ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  PERSONAL RECOLLECTIONS
  OF
  CHICKAMAUGA.

  A PAPER
  --READ BEFORE--
  The Ohio Commandery of the Military Order
  --OF THE--
  Loyal Legion of the United States,


  BY COMPANION
  JAMES R. CARNAHAN,
  _Late Captain 86th Regiment Indiana Volunteer Infantry_,
  January 6, 1886.


  CINCINNATI:
  H. C. SHERRICK & CO.
  1886.




Personal Recollections of Chickamauga.


COMPANIONS:

Said an eminent artist, as he stood and gazed on the picture his mind,
genius, and hand had wrought--a picture so wonderful in its grandeur, and
in the vividness with which the subject was portrayed, "I have painted for
eternity." His picture was but the portrayal of his thoughts, his vision,
as the subject had impressed him, and by his act he gave it life, and it
spoke, and will ever speak to mankind. So have each of us painted in and
upon our minds, pictures of the exciting scenes through which each passed,
and of which he was a part, that transpired in our Country from April,
1861, to the close of the war in 1865. Wonderful, grand, heroic pictures
they were that were painted day by day through those years. On the brain,
the mind, the memory of each of us were they painted, not with the
graceful curves, the evenly drawn lines, and pleasing blending of colors
given by the professional artist in the quiet of his studio, but in the
alarm that came in the sudden midnight attack of armed hosts, the bursting
of the tempest of battle in the early dawn, or it was made in vivid
coloring as the sun went down and closed a day of carnage and death. The
lines are heavy and deep-shaded; the figures stand out as living, moving
men and horses; the guns, and cannon, and trappings seem to be real, not
painted things. Pictures these are that all time cannot efface, nor is
there one of us to-day that would, if he could, blot them out of
existence.

The busy marts of trade may shut them out for a while, but ever and anon,
in the crowded thoroughfare and in the rush and throng of men, a face
meets us that brings to the mind, like a sudden flash of light in the
darkness, scenes where that face met your gaze in the storm of battle, the
eye all ablaze in the excitement of the hour. A voice comes to your ears
out of the noise and turmoil of the crowded city. That voice arrests your
steps and causes the heart to leap and throb as it has not done for years.
There is a veil over the picture, or it has grown dim from the dust and
heat and rush of the great metropolis. But there is something in the tones
of that voice that sets you to brushing away the dust from the picture;
for you know there is a picture somewhere obscured, and at last it stands
out with wondrous vividness on the canvas of your memory, and you see,
back through more than a score of years that have passed since that
picture was painted, him whose voice you have just heard as he cheered on
his men to victory, or rallied his brave comrades for another daring
effort to stem the tide of battle that was going against us. And with that
voice and face in mind, you see, not the comrades, the companions that
gather about us to-night, with beard and hair grizzled and gray, with
steps that are halting and lame, but the boys and associates of our
boyhood days, with elastic step, and eyes bright with the vigor of young
manhood. If these pictures do not come to you with the sun at meridian,
they come to you at "low twelve," as in your dreams you see the columns
move out with flying flags and waving banners. You see the dusty roads
over which you marched, the streams at which you slacked your thirst;
mountain and plain, river and forest, come and go. The scene changes, and
you see the lines set in battle array, and follow in your dream from the
first shot of the skirmishers on through the various figures of that
wondrously faithful battle picture, on and on, until in a shout of
victory, or a command for a charge in the heat of the contest, you
suddenly waken and realize that you were viewing the pictures you helped
to paint on the great canvas of our Nation's history.

It is said that no two persons see the same rainbow, and it is especially
true that each officer or soldier sees a different picture of the same
battle. Each had his special duty to perform, each was to know nothing
except as conveyed to him in brief but forcible orders. Theirs only to
meet duty and perform it intelligently and bravely; theirs to see nothing
except such matters as might come within their observation in the narrow
compass of their duties with company, regiment, or command. Each,
according to his nature, painted or had painted on his mind each varying,
shifting scene through those battles--scenes of battles lost and battles
won.

To-night I propose to give, not a detail of the orders that were issued,
nor to give minutely the various movements made, but only to give you the
impressions, pictures, if you will, that were made on my mind, and as
thoroughly engraven on the tablets of my memory as if written thereon with
an engraver's pen, of that battle that took the Army of the Cumberland
into Chattanooga, and though by most considered a defeat and disaster, was
in fact the battle that made it possible for us to occupy Chattanooga and
hold it.

Leaving Murfreesboro in June, 1863, we had marched to McMinville, Tenn.,
and had there spent the summer as one of the out-posts of Gen. W. S.
Rosecrans' army, while the remainder of his army advanced toward
Chattanooga. Leaving McMinville when the time had fully come for the final
advance, we marched to join the remainder of the army at Bridgeport. When
we reached Bridgeport, however, we found the army had crossed the
Tennessee River and was pushing on toward Chattanooga, and followed on.
Our first view of Chattanooga was had as our division, Van Cleve's, of
Crittenden's Corps--the 21st--passed around the point of Lookout Mountain,
where it touches the Tennessee River down below the town opposite Moccasin
Point. There seemed nothing specially inviting to us in the little old
town off to our left; in fact, the invitation came to us to go in another
direction. Obeying the order we there received, we hastened away up the
valley toward Rossville, and on toward Ringgold, in pursuit of Bragg, who
was at the time reported to be retreating before Rosecrans' army. On we
pushed, joining the remainder of our corps and the cavalry at Ringgold.
It was a delightful march; the roads were smooth, the weather was perfect,
the enemy kept out of our way, and, in fact, we felt as though now there
would be no more serious fighting. Had we not driven the Confederate army
out of Kentucky, had whipped it at Stone River, and driven it all the way
down from Murfreesboro, and out of their stronghold--Chattanooga--and were
yet in pursuit? Certainly the war would soon be over. So the men thought
and talked. When we reached Ringgold, we found, for some reason not
clearly defined in words, that we would not advance any further in that
particular direction. In fact, it was deemed advisable that our corps
should advance (?) over the same route by which we had come, back up into
Lookout Mountain valley. Two weeks in that pleasant early autumn of 1863
we spent somewhat after the manner described in the old song, we

  "Marched up the hill, and then marched down again."

We made a reconnoissance now here, now there, each time becoming more and
more convinced that Gen. Bragg was in no very great hurry to get away, and
speedily end the war; in fact, we became fully persuaded that he preferred
to remain in our immediate front; nay, more, we were fast making the
discovery that the enemy was for some reason becoming more and more
aggressive. The reconnoissance that was made by the Third Brigade of Van
Cleve's Division on Sunday, September 13th, beyond Lee & Gordon's mills,
developed the fact that the enemy's lines were stronger than ever before,
and that all our efforts to dislodge him were in vain. That the
Confederates were receiving reinforcements could not be longer doubted,
and that a battle was imminent was now apparent to all; just where or
when, whether our army would make the attack or be attacked, were the
unsolved questions of the problem. Each day, as it came and passed, seemed
to bring to all a more certain conviction that the conflict, when or
wheresoever it should come, would be a most terrible one. In this
uncertainty, and with certain feverish restlessness that is always
engendered in anticipation of a battle, the 21st Corps lay about Crawfish
Springs and Lee & Gordon's mills. Extra ammunition had been issued to the
troops as a precaution against any emergency that might arise. Each
company officer had received orders to keep his men in camp; the horses of
the artillery stood harnessed; everything seemed to be in readiness, come
what might. Such was the condition of affairs with our portion of the army
on Friday, the 18th of September, 1863. The forenoon of that day had been
spent in general talk, both among officers and among men, on the now
all-absorbing question as to the probabilities of a battle. Our brigade,
the Third, commanded by Col. Geo. F. Dick, of the 86th Indiana, lay near
Crawfish Springs. We had just finished our noon-day meal and pipes were
lighted, and we were preparing to spend the hours of the afternoon as best
we might, when we caught the sound of a distant artillery shot off toward
Ringgold. This proved to be the first shot of what was so soon to be the
battle of Chickamauga. The shots grew in number, and more and more
distinct. It required but little time for each officer and soldier to take
in the situation and realize the condition of affairs. We knew from the
sounds that were borne to us that the army of Gen. Bragg had ceased to
retreat and to act on the defensive, and was now advancing upon our army.
This action was proof that the enemy had been largely reinforced, and now
felt itself not only able to meet us in battle, but confident in its
ability to defeat and put us to rout, and to recover all they had lost.

Not much time was given for thought or talk before our brigade was ordered
to "fall in," and we were moved out down to the left, and past Lee &
Gordon's mills, to the relief of our hard-pressed cavalry, now falling
back onto our main army. How urgent the need of assistance to our cavalry
we soon learned as we saw them coming in wounded and broken, riderless
horses, ambulances filled with wounded and dying--all coming together told
how fierce the onslaught that had been made on them, and they who were yet
unwounded were contesting, with all the bravery and stubbornness that men
could, every part of the distance that lay between us and the enemy. Our
lines were formed, and we moved forward, checking the enemy's advance for
the day. Our skirmish line and pickets were strengthened, and our brigade
remained on duty through the night, and listened to the ominous sounds
that came to us through the darkness, the distant rumbling of artillery
wheels, the sound now and then of axes, all telling us of the preparations
that were being made, and the perfecting of plans for the terrible contest
of the morrow.

In the early morning of the 19th we were relieved from duty, and were sent
back toward Lee & Gordon's mills, into an open field, there to prepare our
breakfasts and get such sleep and rest as we could, until such time as our
services would be demanded. The sun had scarcely appeared when a shot was
heard over on the right of our line; in a short time another, as if one
army or the other were feeling its way. Soon another shot, which brought
an answering shot; then came the opening artillery duel that seemed to
shake the very earth. From this, shots came from all along our lines,
showing that the enemy had got well into position along our entire front
during the night. Now the firing increases on our right, and between the
artillery shots we catch the sound of musketry; stronger and stronger the
contest grows, and nearer, too, for now comes one continuous roar of
artillery from the right, and volley after volley of musketry tells that
the two armies have come together in the first charges of the battle. The
contest gathers in strength, starting down from the right, on it comes to
the lines in our front, and on past us toward the left, until at length it
becomes one commingled roar of artillery and rattle of musketry from right
to left. We see none of the lines engaged, but it must be that the Union
army is holding its position against the furious charges that are being
made upon it. A lull for a few moments comes in the contest, and you hear
only scattering shots along the line; but looking off to our front,
through an opening in the trees, could be seen, crossing the ridge, the
marching columns of the enemy as they moved toward our left, preparatory
to the terrible work of that Saturday afternoon. Again the sound of the
contest begins to gather and grow in strength. It comes on like the blasts
of the tornado, sounding louder and louder, growing stronger and stronger
until it comes in a great rush and roar of sound, before which those who
hear and are not of it stand in awe and look each the other in the face,
but dare not speak. Over on the right it again breaks forth, and with
renewed strength rolls on down the lines, growing fiercer and fiercer, and
louder and louder, as additional forces are brought into the contest,
until it reaches the extreme left, when backward it would sweep again to
the right, only again to go rolling, and jarring, and crashing in its fury
as backward and forward it swept. It was as when the ocean is lashed to
fury by the tempest, when great rolling waves come chasing one the other
in their mighty rage, until they strike with a roar upon the mighty cliffs
of stone, only to be broken and driven back upon other incoming waves as
strong, or stronger, than they had been, so came to our ears the sound of
that mighty tempest of war--volley after volley of musketry rolling in
waves of dreadful sound, one upon the other, to which was added the deep
sounding crash of the artillery, like mighty thunder peals through the
roar of the tempest, making the ground under your feet tremble as it came
and went, each wave more terrible than the former.

It was evident to those of us who listened that the enemy was making
desperate efforts to overwhelm and break our lines.

Through that forenoon--and oh, how long it seemed--we waited outside the
contest, and heard that mighty, that terrible tornado of war as it raged
in our front and all about us, and saw the constantly moving columns of
the enemy's infantry, with flying flags, and saw battery after battery as
they moved before us like a great panorama unfolding in the opening to
which I have referred. We had been sent back, as I have said, to rest
after a night on duty, but rest there was none. The guns were stacked in
line, and the battery attached to our brigade stood just in the rear of
us, with horses hitched to guns and caissons, ready to move any instant.
Now and then a stray shot or shell would fly over us, and strike in the
ground or burst in the air, to our rear.

Our men grow restless, that restlessness that comes to men in that most
trying of all times in the life of a soldier, when he hears the battle
raging with all the might of the furies about him, when he can now and
then catch the sound of the distant shouts that tell that the charge is
being made, and can hear above the shouts the rattling, tearing, shrieking
sound of the volleys of musketry, and the shot and shell and canister of
the artillery that tells too well that the charge is met, and that great
gaps are being made in the lines; that men and comrades are being maimed,
and wounded, and killed. In such moments as these, when you see and hear,
but are not a part of the battle, men grow pale and lose their firmness,
their nerve; then it is they realize that war is terrible. They are
hungry, but they cannot eat; they are tired but they cannot sit down; they
lay prone upon the ground, but that is worse than standing, and they rise
again; you speak to them, and they answer you as one who is half asleep;
they laugh, but it is a laugh that has no joy in it. The infantrymen stay
close to their muskets; the artillerymen, drivers, and gunners stand close
to their posts of duty in a terrible, fearful state of nervous unrest.
These men whom you thus see on that fearful September afternoon are not
lacking in all true soldierly qualities; their bravery had been tested on
other fields--at Donelson, at Shiloh, at Perryville, and at Stone River
they met the enemy in the hottest of the battle with all the bravery and
firmness of the Roman, and now when the time shall come for them to be
ordered to the aid of their comrades, they will not be found wanting. Thus
hour after hour has passed for us in this fearful state of anxiety and
suspense. No tidings from the front; we only know that the battle is
fearful, is terrible.

Noonday has passed, when suddenly from out the woods to our front and left
onto the open field, dashes an officer, his horse urged to its greatest
speed toward our command. The men see him coming, and in an instant they
are aroused to the greatest interest. "There comes orders" are the words
that pass from lip to lip along that line. Without commands the lines are
formed behind the gun stacks; the cannoneers stand by their guns; the
drivers stand with hand on rein and foot in stirrup, ready to mount. How
quick, how great the change at the prospect of freedom from the suspense
of the day. The eye lights up, the arm again grows strong, and the nerves
are again growing steady; every head is bent forward to catch, if
possible, the first news from the front, and to hear the orders that are
to be given. All now are roused: there is to be no more suspense; it is to
be action from now and on until the battle shall close. Nearer and nearer
comes the rider; now you catch his features, and can see the fearful
earnestness that is written in every line of the face. He bends forward as
he rides, in such haste he is. The horse he rides seems to have caught the
spirit of the rider, and horse and rider tell to the experienced soldier
that there is to be work for us; that the urgency is great, and that the
peril is imminent.

How much there is of life, of the soldier's life, that cannot be painted
on canvas or described in words; it is the inexpressible part--the face,
the eye, the swaying of the body, the gesture of the hand, the movement of
the head, as the officer, the soldier, feels that his comrades are in
deepest peril, and that unless help comes, and comes quickly, all hope is
gone. He speaks not a word, but his appearance speaks in thunder tones.
Companions, you, and each of you, have seen just such times and such
faces. Such was the face, and such the action of that staff officer that
afternoon of September 19, 1863; and every soldier, as he saw him, read
that face and form as though it were an open book--yes, and read it in all
its awful, dreadful meaning--and, reading, realized their full duty. He
reaches our line, and is met by our brigade commander, Col. Geo. F. Dick,
as anxious to receive the orders as he is to give them. The command comes
in quick, sharp words: "The General presents his compliments, and directs
that you move your brigade at once to the support of Gen. Beard. Take the
road, moving by the flank in 'double quick' to the left and into the
woods, and go into line on the left of Gen. Beatty's brigade. I am to
direct you. Our men are hard pressed." The last sentence was all that was
said in words as to the condition of our troops, but it told that we had
read aright before he had spoken.

Scarce had the order been delivered when the command to "take arms" is
heard along the line, and to drivers and cannoneers to mount. It scarcely
took the time required to tell it for our brigade to get in motion, moving
off the field, the artillery taking the wagon road, the infantry
alongside. It was a grand scene as we moved quickly into place, closing up
the column and waiting but a moment for the command. The guns are at a
right shoulder, and all have grown eager for the order, "Forward." The
bugle sounds the first note of the command. Now look along that column;
the men are leaning forward for the start; you see the drivers on the
artillery teams tighten the rein in the left hand, and, with the whip in
the uplifted right arm, rise in their stirups; and as the last note of the
bugle is sounded, the crack of the whips of thirty-six drivers over the
backs of as many horses, and the stroke of the spurs, sends that battery
of six guns and its caissons rattling and bounding over that road, while
the infantry alongside are straining every nerve as they hasten to the
relief of the comrades so hard pressed. The spirits of the men grow higher
and higher with each moment of the advance. The rattling of the artillery
and the hoof beats of the horses add to the excitement of the onward rush,
infantry and artillery thus side by side vieing each with the other which
shall best do his part. Now, as we come nearer, the storm of the battle
seems to grow greater and greater. On and yet on we press, until reaching
the designated point, the artillery is turned off to the left on to a
ridge, and go into position along its crest, while the lines of the
infantry are being formed to the right of the road over which we have
just been hurrying. Our lines are scarcely formed, and the command to
move forward given, when the lines which are in advance of us are broken
by a terrific charge of the enemy, and are driven back in confusion onto
our line--friend and foe so intermingled that we cannot fire a shot
without inflicting as much injury on our men as upon the enemy.

Our artillery, on the crest of the ridge back of us, have unlimbered and
gone into action, and their shell are now flying over our heads into the
woods, where the enemy's lines had been. Confusion seems to have taken
possession of our lines, and, to add to it, the lines to our right have
been broken and the enemy are sweeping past our flank. The order is given
to fall back on line with the artillery. Out of the wood, under the fire
of our cannon, the men hasten. Now on the crest of that ridge, without
works of any kind to shelter them, our troops are again hastily formed,
and none too soon. Down the gentle slope of that ridge, and away to our
right and left and front stretches an open field, without tree or shrub to
break the force of the balls. In our front, and at the edge of the field,
two hundred yards away, runs the road parallel with our lines; beyond the
road the heavy timber where the Confederate lines are formed, and well
protected in their preparations for their charge. Scarce had our lines
been formed when the sharp crack of the rifles along our front, and the
whistling of the balls over our heads, give us warning that the advance of
the enemy has begun, and in an instant the shots of the skirmishers are
drowned by the shout that goes up from the charging column as it starts
down in the woods. Our men are ready. The 7th Indiana Battery--six
guns--is on the right of my regiment; Battery M, 4th U. S. Artillery, is
on our left. The gunners and every man of those two batteries are at their
posts of duty, the tightly drawn lines in their faces showing their
purpose there to stand for duty or die. Officers pass the familiar command
of caution along the line--"Steady, men, steady." The shout of the
charging foe comes rapidly on; now they burst out of the woods and onto
the road. As if touched by an electric cord, so quick and so in unison
was it, the rifles leap to the shoulder along the ridge where waves the
stars and stripes. Now the enemy are in plain view along the road covering
our entire front; you can see them, as with cap visors drawn well down
over their eyes, the gun at the charge, with short, shrill shout they
come, and we see the colors of Longstreet's corps, flushed with victory,
confronting us. Our men recognize the gallantry of their foe, and their
pride is touched as well. All this is but the work of an instant, when,
just as that long line of gray has crossed the road, quick and sharp rings
out along our line the command "Ready," "Fire!" It seems to come to
infantry and artillery at the same instant, and out from the rifles of the
men and the mouths of those cannons leap the death-dealing bullet and
canister; again and again, with almost lightning rapidity, they pour in
their deadly, merciless fire, until along that entire ridge it has become
almost one continuous volley. Now that Corps that had known little of
defeat begins to waver; their men had fallen thick and fast about them.
Again and yet again the volleys are poured into them, and the artillery on
our right and left have not ceased their deadly work. No troops can long
withstand such fire; their lines waver, another volley and they are broken
and now fall back in confusion. The charge was not long in point of time,
but was terrible in its results to the foe.

Along the entire line to our right and left we can hear the battle raging
with increased fury. We are now on the defensive; and all can judge that
the lull in our front is only the stillness that forbodes the more
terrible storm that is to come. A few logs and rails are hastily gathered
together to form a slight breastwork. Soon the scattering shots that began
to fall about us gave us warning that our foe was again moving on us.
Again we are ready, now laying behind our hastily-prepared works. Again we
hear the shout as on they come with more determination than before; but
with even greater courage do our men determine to hold their lines. The
artillery is double shotted with canister. Again the command, "Fire!" and
hotter, fiercer than before the battle rages along our front. Shout is
answered with shout, shot by shots tenfold, until again our assailants
break before our fire and are again forced back. But why repeat further
the story of that Saturday afternoon. Again and again were those charges
repeated along our line, only to be hurled back--broken and shattered. It
did seem as though our men were more than human. The artillerymen worked
as never before. Their guns--double shotted--had scarce delivered their
charges, and before the gun could complete its recoil, was caught by
strong arms, made doubly strong in that fever heat of battle; was again in
position, again double shotted, and again fired into the face of the foe.
The arms bared, the veins standing out in great strong lines, the hat or
cap gone from the head, the eye starting almost from the socket, the teeth
set, the face beaded with perspiration, balls falling all about them,
those men of the 7th Indiana Battery and Battery M seemed to be
supernaturally endowed with strength. Their comrades of the infantry vied
with them in acts of heroism, and daring, and endurance. They shouted
defiance at the foe with every shot; with face and hands begrimed in the
smoke and dust and heat of the battle; with comrades falling about them,
the survivors thought only of vengeance. All the horses on two of the guns
of the 7th Indiana Battery are shot down; another charge is beginning;
those two guns might be lost; they must be gotten back. Quick as thought a
company of infantry spring to the guns, one hand holding the rifle, the
other on the cannon, and with the shot falling thick and fast in and about
them, drag the guns over the brow of the ridge and down into the woods,
just in the rear of our lines, and hasten back again to take their places
in line, ready to meet the on-coming charge. An artilleryman is shot down;
a man from the infantry takes his place and obeys orders as best he can.
When the charge begins our men are lying down. Now, in the midst of it, so
great has become the excitement, so intense the anxiety, all fear and
prudence vanishes, and the men leap to their feet, and fire and load, and
fire and load, in the wildest frenzy of desperation. They have lost all
ideas of danger, or the strength of the assailants. It was this absolute
_desperation_ of our men that held our lines. A soldier or officer is
wounded; unless the wound was mortal or caused the fracture of a limb,
they had the wound tied or bandaged as best they could, some tearing up
their blouses for bandages, and again took their places in the lines
beside their more fortunate comrades. Each man feels the terrible weight
of responsibility that rests on him personally for the results that shall
be achieved that day. It is this thought, this decision, this purpose and
grand courage that comes only to the American Citizen Soldier, who
voluntarily and with unselfish patriotism stands in defense of principle
and country, that makes such soldiers as those who fought in our ranks
that day. On through the afternoon until nightfall did that furious storm
beat against and rage about us.

Near night, Gen. J. J. Reynolds, who commanded that portion of the line
immediately on our left, informed us that the lines to our right and left
had been broken, and directed that we should fall back to the range of
hills in our rear; and so, reluctantly, our men fell back after an
afternoon in which they had helped to hold at bay the flower of the "Army
of Northern Virginia" and of the Confederacy; and though suffering
terribly in loss of men, our portion of the line had not lost a flag nor a
gun.

A night of pinching cold with but little sleep illy fitted us for the duty
that was to be ours after the Sabbath morning's sun should rise. With the
morning and our hastily prepared breakfast came the question, everything
then being so still, "Will there be fighting to-day? This is Sunday." If
there had been a faint hope that the army would rest on its arms that
bright Sabbath morning, it was of short life, for soon the order came for
an advance; and when it came there were no laggards found. Soldiers never
obeyed more promptly, nor with more ready spirit than was that order
obeyed. We had learned during the evening and night from various sources
that the battle of Saturday had gone hard with some portions of our lines
where the enemy had massed his troops most heavily, and our men joined in
the desire to retrieve all that had been lost. We moved out in line of
battle with our skirmishers advanced, passing over a portion of the field
that had been so hotly contested the day before. Soon the shots of the
skirmishers warn us that work is before us; nor is it long until the
skirmishers have pushed to their furtherest limit, and the line of battle
joins them. The command for the charge is given, and, with a shout that
might have come from ever-victorious troops, we dash upon their lines.
Stubborn is the resistance, but impetuous and determined is the charge,
comrade cheering comrade on--on with a fury that cannot be withstood; the
air filled with leaden hail; men falling about us on every side; but on
and on they push until at last the enemy's lines are broken, and we follow
in hot pursuit, driving them back until they reach a line of
reinforcements. Again the battle rages; now with redoubled lines they
charge upon us, and the very earth shakes under our feet from the terrible
discharge that comes from artillery massed in our front. Shells are
shrieking in the air and bursting over our heads; great limbs are torn
from the trees and fall with the broken shells about us. Soon our lines
are weighed down with the terrible onslaught, and we are driven back over
the same ground over which we had just come. Again our lines are rallied,
and reformed, and strengthened; and again we charge to recover the lost
ground. Four times that Sunday forenoon did our lines sweep down over that
ground, and as many times were we driven back, until the ground was almost
covered with friend and foe--the blue and the gray lying side by side,
wounded, dying, and dead. Coming to us even in the heat and excitement of
the battle, it was a terrible and sickening sight to see that battle field
that day. As often as our lines were broken and driven back, so often did
they rally and renew the attack, until again broken and forced back,
turning and firing into the face of the foe as they went, until some
soldier or officer would stop, and, with a brave and determined purpose,
swear that there he would stand or die, as he turned his face once more to
the enemy; and from that stand, so desperately and fearlessly made,
calling on his comrades to "fall in," our lines would, almost as if by
magic, be built out to right and left. Those coming back would of their
own volition halt and face about, and those who had passed beyond would,
as soon as they found the line was reforming, hasten to rejoin it. But
words would fail to tell of the many acts of heroism displayed on that
field that day. How men fought singly from behind trees, in groops of from
two to a dozen, desperately fighting, hoping against hope. The very
desperation and fury with which these scattered few would fight--checking
the enemy, detaining him, and giving us time to reform our broken
lines--surpassed the stories of Napoleon's old guard. Flanked by the
enemy, our lines would change front under the murderous fire of a foe
greatly superior in numbers, and again confront him in the new direction.
From hastily constructed breastworks we fought now on this side, now on
that. No man was there who did not realize that we were greatly
outnumbered; yet no one thought of ultimate defeat. Chickamauga was a
battle where officers and men were all and each alike--heroes of the
noblest type. If never before, on that battle field of Chickamauga, men of
the North and men of the South, Union and Confederate, learned that no
imaginary lines separating North from South, or marking the boundary of
States, make any difference in the spirit of courage, bravery, and daring
of the American soldier, once he believes he is fighting for a principle,
be that principle right or wrong. If one is more impetuous, the other will
endure longer; if one is proud of his section, the other loves his whole
country more. The two, united as they should be and will be, combine the
elements and qualities of an army on whose banners might be emblazoned the
one word "Invincible."

On and on through all the morning and late into the afternoon had the
battle raged, now advancing, now retreating, so evenly did the honors
rest, that now both armies seemed willing to rest on their arms. Gradually
the firing began to die away, and soon almost ceased on our portion of
the line. Late in the afternoon we commenced a movement by the flank, but
so confused had we become in our bearings that we did not realize that it
was to be anything more than a mere change of position for a renewal of
the conflict, when after a short while we found ourselves out of the noise
and din of the battle field on the road filled with our troops, and
marching with them down past Rossville toward Chattanooga. Then it was
that we learned that Chickamauga was, _not a defeat_, but what seemed at
the time a great disaster to the Union Army. And such it really was in
point of munitions of war that were lost, and the great numbers of Union
soldiers that fell wounded or dead. But a defeat it was not; and had the
battle been fought at Chattanooga instead of Chickamauga, Chattanooga
would have been lost to us, and disaster overwhelming and crushing would
have been the fate of the Army of the Cumberland. Had we halted at
Chattanooga instead of marching out to Chickamauga, even though McCook had
been with us, we might have had Vicksburg reversed.

I do not believe there was a man who remained in the front fighting on the
Sunday of Chickamauga who thought of defeat, so little do they who are in
the line know of the actual state of affairs in active army life.

We bivouacked around Rossville on Sunday night, and as we gathered in
groops about our camp-fires that night, we talked of the scenes of the day
or mourned the loss of the comrades who had fallen, and all discussed the
probabilities of the morrow on another field, confident of ultimate
success. The morning found our portion of the army moving back toward
Chattanooga, our campanies and regiments intact, except for the actual
losses of the battle field. Through the afternoon of that day we listened
to the distant rumble and roar of the guns of the 14th Army Corps,
sounding like the last mutterings of a great storm that had spent its
strength, and was drawing to a close from shere exhaustion. As proof of
the fact that Chickamauga was not a defeat, we have the fact that Gen.
Geo. H. Thomas, one of the grandest heroes and noblest men developed by
the war, was able with a single corps to hold the entire army of Bragg at
bay until our lines were established in and about Chattanooga. Nor was
Bragg's army able to follow up the advantage gained at Chickamauga. He had
been able only to check our further advance, but not to drive us back from
Chattanooga. The bravery of our men at Chickamauga was fully equaled by
their patience and endurance of the siege of Chattanooga--a siege for two
long months that were full of all that goes to make the soldier's life
something to be dreaded, except for a noble and holy cause.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Personal Recollections of Chickamauga, by 
James R. Carnahan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RECOLLECTIONS OF CHICKAMAUGA ***

***** This file should be named 35581.txt or 35581.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/5/8/35581/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
