The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lost Mountain, by Mayne Reid

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Lost Mountain
       A Tale of Sonora

Author: Mayne Reid

Illustrator: Édouard Riou

Release Date: March 21, 2011 [EBook #35649]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOST MOUNTAIN ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




The Lost Mountain
A Tale of Sonora
By Captain Mayne Reid
Published by George Routledge and Sons, London.
This edition dated 1885.

The Lost Mountain, by Captain Mayne Reid.

________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
THE LOST MOUNTAIN, BY CAPTAIN MAYNE REID.



CHAPTER ONE.

IN WANT OF WATER.

"_Mira!  El Cerro Perdido_!"  (See!  The Lost Mountain!)

The man who thus exclaims is seated in a high-peak saddle, on the back
of a small sinewy horse.  Not alone, as may be deduced from his words;
instead, in company with other men on horseback, quite a score of them.
There are several wagons, too; large cumbrous vehicles, each with a team
of eight mules attached.  Other mules, pack animals, form an _atajo_ or
train, which extends in a long line rearward, and back beyond this a
drove of cattle in charge of two or three drovers--these mounted, as a
matter of course.

The place is in the middle of a vast plain, one of the _llanos_ of
Sonora, near the northern frontier of this sparsely inhabited state.
And the men themselves, or most of them, are miners, as might be told by
certain peculiarities of costume, further evinced by a paraphernalia of
mining tools and machinery seen under the canvas tilts of the wagons.
There are women seen there too, with children of both sexes and every
age; for it is a complete mining establishment on the move from a
_veta_, worn out and abandoned, to one late discovered and still
unworked.

Save two of the party all are Mexicans though not of like race.  Among
them may be noted every shade of complexion, from the ruddy white of the
Biscayan Spaniard to the copper-brown of the aboriginal, many being
pure-blooded Opata Indians, one of the tribes called _mansos_ (tamed).
Distinctive points of dress also, both as to quality and cut, denote
difference in rank and calling.  There are miners _pur sang_--these in
the majority; teamsters who drive the wagons; _arrieros_ and _mozos_ of
the mule train; _vaqueros_ with the cattle; and several others, male and
female, whose garb and manner proclaim them household servants.

The man who has called out differs from all the rest in costume as in
calling, for he is a _gambusino_, or professional gold-seeker.  A
successful one, too; since he it is who discovered the _veta_ above
spoken of, in the Great Sonora Desert, near the border-line of Arizona.
"Denounced" it as well--that is, made declaration and registration of
the discovery, which, by Mexican law, makes the mine his own, with
exclusive right of working it.  But he is not its owner now.  Without
sufficient means to undertake the _exploitation_, he has transferred his
interest to those who can--Villanueva and Tresillian, a wealthy mining
firm, long established near the town of Arispe, with all their
_employes_ and a complete apparatus for excavating, crushing, and
amalgamating--furniture and household gods added--are _en route_ for the
new-found lode, with high hopes it may prove a "bonanza."  It is their
caravan that is halted on the plain, for to halt it has come at a hail
from the _gambusino_ himself, acting as its guide.

He is some distance in advance of the wagons with two other horsemen, to
whom his speech is particularly addressed.  For they are the chiefs of
the caravan--the masters and partners of the mining company composing
it.  One of them, somewhat over middle age, is Don Estevan Villanueva, a
born Mexican, but with features of pure Spanish type, from his
Andalusian ancestry.  He is somewhat the senior of the two, and senior
partner of the firm, the junior being Robert Tresillian, an Englishman,
and native of Cornwall.

Up to that moment there had been anxiety on the countenances of both, as
on those of their followers, indeed more, a look of gravest
apprehension.  Its cause is apparent; a glance along the line of
animals--ridden horses as well as draught and pack-mules--clearly
proclaiming it.  All show signs of distress, by sides hollowed in, necks
outstretched and drooping, eyes deep down in their sockets, and tongues
protruding from lips that look hot and dry.  No wonder!  For three days
they have not tasted water; and the scant herbage of the plains, on
which they have been depasturing, is without a particle of moisture.  It
has been a season of drought all over Sonora, not a drop of rain having
fallen for months, and every stream, spring, and pool along their route
dried up.  Little strange, then, the animals looking distressed, and no
more that the minds of the men are filled with gloomy fears as to what
might be before them.  Another three days, and it may be death to most,
if not all.

Just in like proportion are their spirits uplifted on hearing the
exclamation of the _gambusino_.  Well know they what it means--good
grass and abundance of water.  All along has he been telling them of
this, picturing the "Lost Mountain," or, rather, a spot by its base, as
a very Paradise of a camping-place.  No want of water there, he has
said, however dry the season or long-continued the drought; no fear of
animals being famished, since not only is there a spring and running
stream, but a lake, surrounded by a belt of meadow-like land, with grass
thick, succulent, and green as emeralds.

"You're sure it's the Cerro Perdido?"

It is Don Estevan who thus doubtingly interrogates, his eyes fixed on a
solitary eminence seen afar over the plain.

"_Si_, senor," affirms the guide, "sure as that my name's Pedro Vicente.
And I ought to be sure of that, from what my mother told me; the old
lady in her life never getting over her anger at the cost of my
christening.  Twenty silver _pesos_, with a pair of church candles--big
ones, and of best wax!  All that for only handing down to me my father's
name, he being Pedro, and a poor _gambusino_ as myself!  _Carramba_!
The _padres_ are the veriest extortioners--levy black-mail more
rigorously than either footpad or highwayman."

"_Vaya, hombre_!" rejoins Don Estevan.  "Don't be so hard upon the poor
priests.  And as for the expense your mother was put to in celebrating
your baptismal rites, that's all past and gone.  If you were poor once,
you're now rich enough to care nothing for such a trifle as twenty
dollars and a couple of wax candles."

The senior partner speaks truth, as any one who had seen Pedro Vicente
three months before, seeing him now, would say.  Then was he sparely
clad, in garments of faded hue, tattered and dust-stained; his mount the
scraggiest of mustangs--a very Rosinante.  Now bestrides he a horse of
best blood and shapely proportions, in a deep tree-saddle of stamped
leather, with ornamental housings; his own body bedight with all the
glittering adornments peculiar to that special Mexican dress known as
"_ranchero_," picturesque as any in the world.  His lucky find of gold,
still in its matrix of quartz--_madre de oro_, as the Mexican miners
call it--with its transference to Villanueva y Tresillian, has given him
sufficient of this same metal with the mint stamp on it for all matters
of comfort, costume, and equipment.

"Oh! bother your christening and candles," puts in the Englishman, with
a show of impatience; "we've something more serious to think about.
You're quite sure, Senor Vicente, that yonder eminence is the Cerro
Perdido?"

"I've said," laconically and somewhat gruffly answers the guide, showing
slightly nettled at the doubt cast on his affirmation, and by one he
supposes a stranger to the country and its ways--in short, a "_gringo_."

"Then," pursues Tresillian, "the sooner we get to it the better.  It's
ten miles off, I take it."

"Twice ten, _caballero_, and a trifle over."

"What!  Twenty miles?  I can't believe that."

"If your worship had been roaming about these _llanos_ as long as I
have, you could and would," rejoins the guide, in quiet confidence.

"Oh! if you say so, it must be.  You seem to know, Senor Vicente; and
should, from all I've heard of your skill as a path-finder.  That you're
good at finding gold we have the proofs."

"_Mil gracias_, Don Roberto," returns the _gambusino_, with a bow, his
_amour propre_ appeased by the complimentary speech; "I've no doubt
about the distance, for I'm not trusting to guesswork.  I've been over
this ground before, and remember that big _palmilla_."  He points to a
tree at some distance, with stout stem, and a bunch of bayonet-like
leaves on its summit--a species of _yucca_, of which there are several
straggled over the plain, but this one taller than any.  Then adds, "If
your worship doubts my word, ride up to it, and you'll see a P and V
carved in the bark, the initials of your humble servant.  It was done to
commemorate the occasion of my first setting eyes on the Cerro Perdido."

"But I don't doubt your word," says Tresillian, smiling at the odd
memento in such an out-of-the-way place; "certainly not."

"Then, senor, let me assure you that from it to the mountain is all of
twenty miles, and we'll do well if we get there before sun-down."

"In which case, the sooner we start for it the better."

"Yes, Pedro," adds Don Estevan, speaking to the gold-seeker in a
friendly, familiar way.  "Ride back and give the order for resuming
route.  Tell the teamsters and all to do their best."

"At your worship's command," returns the _gambusino_, with a bow, and
wave of his broad-brimmed hat raised high over his head.

Then, pricking his horse with a spur having rowels full five inches in
diameter, he canters off towards the caravan.

Before reaching it he again uncovers, respectfully saluting a group
which has not yet been introduced to the reader, though possibly the
oddest, with the individuals comprising it, the most interesting of all
the travelling party.  For two of them are of the fair sex--ladies--one
middle-aged and of matronly aspect, the other a girl late entered upon
her teens.  Only their faces and the upper portion of their forms are
visible, for they are inside a sort of palanquin--the _litera_ of
Mexico, used by grand dames on long journeys, and roads over which
carriages cannot be taken.  The face of the older lady, with dark
complexion and features of Andalusian type, is still attractive, but
that of the younger one strikingly beautiful; and between the two is a
strong family resemblance, as there should, since they are mother and
child--the Senora Villanueva and her daughter.

The _litera_ is borne between two mules, attached to shafts fore and
aft, in charge of a strapping fellow in velveteen jacket, and
_calzoneras_, _botas_ of stamped leather, and _sombrero_ of black glaze,
with a band of silver bullion round it.  But there is a fourth personage
comprising the group, unlike all the others, and bearing no resemblance
to any of the wayfarers save one--the Englishman.  To him the youth--for
young he is--shows the likeness, unmistakable, of son to father; and
such is the relationship between them.

Henry Tresillian, just turned seventeen, is a handsome fellow,
fair-haired, of bright complexion, and features delicately chiselled,
still aught but effeminate in their expression; instead, of a cast which
proclaims courage and resolution, while a figure tersely knit tells of
strength and activity equal to anything.  On horseback, he sits bending
over in his saddle with face to the curtains of the _litera_.  There may
be eyes inside admiring him; and the expression of his own tells he
would fain have it so.  But all their eyes, late full of gloom, sparkle
delightedly now.  The Lost Mountain has been sighted; their fears are
over, and so soon will be their sufferings.

"_Anda! adalante_!"  (advance) shouts Pedro Vicente.

His words echoed rearward along the line, followed by other cries, with
a creaking of wheels and a cracking of whips, as the wagons once more
got into motion.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE "COYOTEROS."

The moving miners are not the only travellers making for the Cerro
Perdido on this same day.  Just as they have sighted it, approaching
from the south, another party is advancing towards it from the north,
though not yet within view of it, from being farther off, with a swell
of the plain interposed.

Very different in appearance, and, indeed, almost in every respect, is
this second band from that already introduced to the reader; in count of
men outnumbering the latter by more than treble, though in bulk as a
moving mass far inferior to it.  For with it are no wagons, nor wheeled
vehicles of any kind; no mule train nor cattle drove.  Neither are they
encumbered with women and children, least of all a _litera_ and ladies.
All men, and every one of them on horseback, each bearer of his own
baggage, as well he may be, so little and light it is.  Their sole
_impedimenta_ consist of a few trifling commodities, chiefly provision
wallets, with water gourds (_xuages_) strapped over their shoulders or
tied to the wither-locks of their horses.  Equally unobstructive is
their garb, few of them having other articles of dress than a
breech-clout, leggings, and moccasins, with a rolled-up blanket or
_serape_ in reserve.  The exceptions are some half-dozen, who appear to
exercise authority, one especially holding command over all.

His insignia are peculiar; a coat of arms that would puzzle all the
heraldic colleges of Christendom.  Nor does he wear it on his shield,
though one he carries.  It is borne on his naked breast of bronze black,
in a tattooing of vivid red; the device, a rattlesnake coiled and
couchant, with tail and head erect, jaws wide agape, and forked tongue
protruding ready to strike.  Beneath are other symbols equally eloquent
of anger and menace; one in white, set centrally, well known all over
the world--the "death's head and crossbones."

It need hardly be said that he, embellished with this savage
investiture, is an Indian, and his following the same.  Indians they
are, of a tribe noted for bloodthirstiness beyond all others of their
race; for they are the Wolf-Apaches, or Coyoteros, so called because of
mental and moral attributes which liken them to the _coyote_--jackal of
the Western world.

Unaccompanied by their women and children, as unencumbered with baggage,
proclaims them on a warlike expedition--a _maraud_; their arms and
equipments telling of the same.  They carry guns, and long-shafted
lances with pennons attached, that no doubt once waved above the heads
of Mexican _lanzeros_.  Pistols too, some even having revolvers, with
rifles of latest pattern and patent; of which by their way of handling
them they well know the use.  If civilisation has taught them nothing
else, it has how to _kill_.

They are marching along, not in ruck, or straggling crowd, but regular
formation, aligned in rank and file, "by twos."  Long since have the
Horse Indians of both prairie and pampa learnt the military tactics of
their pale-faced foes--those special to cavalry--and practise them.  But
nowhere with more ability and success than in the northern states of
Mexico--Tamaulipas, Chihuahua, and Sonora--where Comanches, Navajoes,
and Apaches have charged in battle line, breaking that of their white
adversaries, and scattering them as chaff.  "Indian file," oft used as a
synonym for "single file," is a march formation long since abandoned by
these Transatlantic Centaurs, save where the nature of the ground makes
it a necessity.

None such exists on the open _llano_, where this Apache band is now; and
they might move in a column or extended line, if willing it; but
numbering scant two hundred, they prefer the double file.  Unlike the
miners, in their three days' traverse of a waterless desert, they have
been making way through a district with which they are familiar;
acquainted with all the camping-places--every stream, spring, and pond--
so they have not suffered from want of water.  Nor are they likely now,
since their course lies along the banks of a creek--a tiny rivulet, yet
running, despite the continued drought.  It is a branch of the Rio San
Miguel of the maps--locally known as the Horcasitas--and they are
descending it southward, thirst having no terrors for them.

Just as the sun is about to set they catch sight of the Cerro Perdido.
To them it is not known by that name, but _Nauchampa-tepetl_.  Somewhat
strange this, pointing to an affinity known to exist between the Indians
of Northern Mexico and the Aztecans of the South.  In the language of
these last the mountain Perote bears the same designation, the "Cofre"
usually attached being synonymous with "Nauchampa," both signifying
chest, or box.  For the Cerro Perdido, viewed from certain points, bears
a quaint resemblance to this, as does also the summit of Perote.

Neither philology nor ethnography is in the minds of this band of
redskins; their thoughts are dwelling on a subject altogether
different--robbery and murder.  For they _are_ on the maraud; their
objective point the towns on the Horcasitas.

Just now, however, as they sight the Cerro, another question occupies
them: whether it be prudent or possible to continue on to it without
halting for the night.  Some say Yes, but most No.  It is still good
twenty miles off, though appearing scarce ten.  In the diaphanous
atmosphere of the Sonora tableland distances are deceptive, as Pedro
Vicente has said.  But the native inhabitants, above all the aborigines,
are aware of this, and reckon accordingly.  Besides, the Coyoteros, like
the _gambusino_, have been over the ground before, and are familiar with
every foot of it.  So distance has nought to do with their discussion,
save as it affects the capability of their horses.  Since morning they
have made fifty miles, and are fagged; twenty more would be killing work
for them.  And the twenty to Nauchampa-tepetl will be a nice distance to
their next day's noon halt.

The question of continuing on is at length decided in the negative, by
him of the grotesque heraldry dropping down from his horse, and
proceeding to picket the animal on the grass.  As his example has the
force of a command, all the others follow it, and camp is quickly
formed.  A simple affair this; only the tethering out of their steeds,
and stripping them of such caparison as they carry.  Then follows a
search for dry faggots, and the kindling of a fire; not for warmth, but
cooking.  There is a bit of butchering to precede; these redskinned
rovers having their commissariat on the hoof--this in the shape of some
spare horses driven along _en caballada_.  A knife drawn across the
throat of one lets his blood out in a torrent, and he drops down dead,--
to be skinned and cut up in a trice, the pieces impaled upon sticks and
held over the blaze of the fire.

But the hippophagists avail themselves of other comestibles of a
vegetable kind; seeds from the cones of the _pinon_, or edible pine, and
beans of the _algarobia_--trees of both sorts growing near.  Enough of
both are collected and roasted, to form an accompaniment to the
horseflesh.

Fruit they find too on several species of cactus; the best of them on
the _pitahaya_, whose tall rigid stems, with limbs like the branches of
a candelabrum, tower up around their camp.  So, in the desert--for it is
such--they are enabled to end their dinner with dessert.  To provide
something for breakfast besides, a viand rare and strange, but familiar
to them, a branch of their tribe--the "Mezcaleros"--making it their
staple food, even to deriving their tribal appellation from it.  For it
is the mezcal plant, one of the wild species of magueys (_Agave
Mexicana_).  The central core, from which radiate the stiff spinous
blades, is the part eaten, and the mode of preparing it is now made
manifest in the Coyotero camp.  Several plants are torn out by the
roots, their leaves hacked off, and the skin of the core itself cut
away--leaving an egg-shaped mass of white vegetable substance, large as
a man's head, or a monster mangold-wurzel.  Meanwhile, a hole has been
"crowed" in the ground, pit-shaped, its sides fended by flat stones,
with a like pavement at the bottom.  Into this red coals are flung, nigh
enough to fill it; an interval allowed for these to smoulder into ashes,
and the stones become burning hot.  The mezcals, already wrapped up in
the horse's skin late stripped off, red side inward, along with some
loose pieces of the flesh, and the bundle is lowered down into the
improvised oven, then all covered over with a coat of turf.  Thus buried
it is left to bake all night, and in the morning will afford them a meal
Lucullus need not have disdained to partake of.

The Coyoteros, well sure of this, go to sleep contentedly and without
care; each rolled-up in his own wrap, his couch the naked earth,
canopied by a star-bespangled sky.

In that uninhabited and pathless wilderness, or with paths only known to
themselves, they have little fear of encountering an enemy; and as
little dream they that within less than two hours' gallop of their
camping-ground is another camp occupied by the foes of their race, too
few to resist their attack.  Knew they but this, there would be a quick
uprising among them, a hasty springing to horse, and hurried ride
towards Nauchampa-tepetl.



CHAPTER THREE.

A RUSH FOR WATER.

Meanwhile, with many a crack of whip and cry of "_Anda!"  "Mula
maldita_!" the miners have been toiling on towards the Lost Mountain.
At slow pace, a crawl; for their animals, jaded and distressed by the
long-endured thirst, have barely strength enough left to drag the wagons
after them.  Even the pack-mules totter under their loaded _alparejas_.

Viewing the eminence from the place where they had pulled up, the mine
labourers, like the Englishman, had been inclined to doubt the guide's
allegation as to the distance.  Men whose lives are for the most part
spent underground, are as sailors ashore when above it, oddly ignorant
of things on the surface, save what may be learnt inside a liquor
saloon.  Hence their unbelief in Vicente's statement was altogether
natural.  But the mule and cattle-drivers knew better, and that the
_gambusino_ was not deceiving them.

All come to this conclusion ere long, a single hour sufficing to
convince them of their mistake; at the end of which, though moving
continuously on, and making the best speed in their power, the mountain
seems far off as ever.  And when a second hour has elapsed, the
diminution of distance is barely perceptible.

The sun is low down--almost touching the horizon--as they get near
enough to the Cerro to note its peculiar features; for peculiar these
are.  Of oblong form it is; and, viewed sideways, bears resemblance to a
gigantic catafalque or coffin, its top level as the lid.  Not smooth,
however, the horizontal line being broken by trees and bushes that stand
in shaggy silhouette against the blue background of sky.  At all points
it presents a _facade_ grim and precipitous, here and there enamelled by
spots and streaks of verdure, wherever ledge or crevice gives plants of
the scandent kind an opportunity to strike root.  It is about a mile in
length, trending nearly north and south, having a breadth of about half
this; and in height some five hundred feet.  Not much for a mountain,
but enough to make it a conspicuous object, visible at a great distance
off over that smooth expanse of plain.  All the more from its standing
solitary and alone; no other eminence within view of it, neither
_sierra_ nor spur; so looking as if strayed and _lost_--hence the quaint
appellation it bears.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"At which end is the lake, Senor Vicente?" asks the elder Tresillian, as
they are wending their way towards it; he, with Don Estevan and the
guide, as before, being in advance of the wagon train.

"The southern and nearer one, your worship.  And luckily for us it is
so.  If it were at the other end, we'd still have a traverse of a league
at least before reaching it."

"How's that?  I've heard that the Cerro is only a mile in length."

"True, senor, that's all.  But there are rocks strewn over the _llano_
below, for hundreds of yards out, and so thick we couldn't take the
wagons through them.  I suppose they must have fallen from the cliffs,
but how they got scattered so far, that puzzles me, though rocks have
been the study of my life."

"So they have, Pedro," put in Don Estevan.  "And you've studied them to
some purpose.  But let us not enter into a geological discussion now.  I
feel more concerned about something else."

"About what, your worship?"

"Some memory tells me that Indians are accustomed to visit the Cerro
Perdido.  Though I can see no sign of human being about it, who knows
but there might be?"

This is said after examination of the plain all along the base of the
mountain through a field-glass, which Don Estevan habitually carries on
his person.

"Therefore," he continues, "I think it advisable that some five or six
ride ahead--those who are best mounted--and make sure that the coast is
clear.  In case of redskins being there in any formidable numbers, the
knowledge of it in time will enable us to form _corral_, and so better
defend ourselves should we be attacked."

Before becoming a master miner, Don Estevan had been a soldier, and seen
service on the Indian frontier, in more than one campaign against the
three great hostile tribes, Comanches, Apache, and Navajo.  For which
reason the _gambusino_, instead of making light of his counsel,
altogether approves of it--of course volunteering to be himself of the
reconnoitring party.

In fine, there is another short halt, while the scouts are being
selected; half a dozen men of spirit and mettle, whose horses are still
strong enough to show speed, should there be Indians and pursuit.

Of the half-dozen, Henry Tresillian is one; he coming up quick to the
call.  No fear of his horse giving out, or failing to carry him safe
back if pursued, and whoever the pursuers.  A noble animal of Arab
strain it is, coal-black, with a dash of dun-colour between the hips and
on either side of the muzzle.  Nor shows it signs of distress, as the
others, notwithstanding all it has come through.  For has not its young
master shared with it every ration of water served out along the way,
even the last one that morning?

In a few minutes the scouting party is told off, and, after receiving
full instructions, starts onward.

The elder Tresillian has made no objection to his son being of it;
instead, being rather proud of the spirit the latter is displaying, and
follows him with admiring eyes as he rides off.

Still another pair of eyes go after him, giving glances in which pride
and fear are strangely commingled.  For they are those of Gertrudes
Villanueva.  She is proud that he, whom her young heart is just learning
to love, should possess such courage, while apprehensive of what may
come of it.

"_Adelante_!" calls out the _mayor-domo_, who has chief charge of the
caravan; and once more there is a vigorous wielding of whips, with an
objurgation of mules, as the animals move reluctantly and laboriously
on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In twenty minutes after, all is changed with them.  Horse and hybrid--
every animal in the train--have raised head and pricked up ears, with
nostrils distended.  Even the horned cattle to rearward have caught the
infection, and low loudly in response to the neighing of the horses and
the hinneying of the mules.  There is a very _fracas_ of noises, like a
Bedlam broke loose, the voice of the _mayor-domo_ rising above all as he
cries out,

"_Guarda, la estampeda_!"

And a "stampede" it becomes, all knowing the cause.  The animals have
scented water, and no longer need whip-lash or cry to urge them on.
Instead, teamsters and _arrieros_ find it impossible to restrain them,
for it were a struggle against Nature itself.  Taking the bits between
their teeth, and regardless of rein, horses, mules, all rush
simultaneously and madly forward, as if each had a score of gadflies
with their venomous probosces buried deep in its body.

A helter-skelter it is, with a loud hullaballoo, the heavily-laden
wagons drawn over the ground as light-like and with the velocity of
bicycles, and making noise as of thunder.  For now, near the mountain's
foot, the plain is bestrewed with stones, some big enough to raise the
wheels on high, almost to overturning the vehicles, eliciting agonised
cries from the women and children inside them.  No more are Indians
thought of for the time; enough danger without that, from upsets, broken
bones, indeed death.

In the end none of these eventualities arise.  Luckily--and more by good
luck than guiding--the wagons keep their balance, and they within them
their places, till all come to a stand again.  While still tearing on,
they see before them a disc of water lit up by the last rays of
departing sunlight, with half a dozen horsemen--the reconnoitring
party--drawn up on its edge, in attitude of wonder at their coming after
so soon.

But their animals, still in rush, give no opportunity for explanation.
On go they into the lake, horses, mules, and cattle mingled together;
nor stop till they are belly-deep, with the water up over their
nostrils.  No more neighing nor lowing now, but all silent, swilling,
and contented.



CHAPTER FOUR.

EL OJO DE AGUA.

Morning dawns upon the Lost Mountain, to disclose a scene such as had
never before been witnessed in that solitary spot.  For never before had
wagon, or other wheeled vehicle, approached it.  Remote from town or
civilised settlement, leagues away from any of the customary routes of
travel, the only white men having occasion to visit it had been hunters
or gold-seekers, and their visits, like those of angels, few and far
between.  Red men, however, have sought it more frequently, for it is
not far from one of their great war-trails--that leading from the Apache
country to the settlements on the Horcasitas, so serving these savages
as a convenient halting-place when on raid thither.  The reconnoitring
party, sent in advance of the caravan, had discovered traces of their
presence by the lake's edge; but none recent, and nothing to signify.
There were no fresh tracks upon the meadow-grass, nor the belt of naked
sand around the water, save those of wild animals that had come thither
to quench their thirst.

In confidence, therefore, the miners made camp, though not negligently
or carelessly.  The old _militario_ had seen too much campaigning for
that, and directed the wagons to be drawn up in a _corral_ of oval
shape, tongues and tails united as the links of a chain.  Lone-bodied
vehicles, the six enclose a considerable space--enough to accommodate
all who have need to stay inside.  In case of attack it could be still
further strengthened by the bales, boxes, and _alparejas_ of the
pack-mules.  Outside the animals were staked, and are still upon their
tethers, though without much concern about their running away.  After
the long traverse over the dry _llanos_, and the suffering they have
endured, now on such good grass, and beside such sweet water, they will
contentedly stay till it please their masters to remove them.

Fires had been kindled the night before, but only for cooking supper; it
is summer, and there is no discomfort from cold--heat rather.  And now
at dawn the fires are being re-lighted with a view to _desayuna_, and
later on breakfast; for, though the caravan had unexpectedly run short
of water, its stock of provisions is still unexhausted.

Among the earliest up--nay, the very first--is Pedro Vicente.  Not with
any intention to take part in culinary operations.  _Gambusino_ and
guide, he would scorn such menial occupations.  His reasons for being so
early astir are altogether different and twofold; though but one of them
has he made known, and that only to Henry Tresillian.  Overnight, ere
retiring to rest, he had signified his intention to ascend the Cerro in
the morning--soon as there was enough of daylight to make the ascent
practicable--in hopes of finding game both of the furred and feathered
sorts, he said.  For in addition to his _metier_ as guide to the
caravan--being a skilled hunter as well as gold-seeker--he holds
engagement to supply it with venison, or such other meat commodity as
may fall to his gun.  For days he has had but little opportunity of
showing his hunter skill.  On the sterile tract through which they have
been passing birds and quadrupeds are scarce, even such as usually
inhabit it having gone elsewhere in consequence of the long-continued
drought.  All the more is he desirous to make up for late deficit, and
at least furnish the table of the quality with something fresh.  He
knows there are game animals on the mountain--a _mesa_, as already said,
level-topped, with trees growing over it, besides water; for there is
the fountain's head, source of the stream and lake below.  On the night
before, he had spoken of wild sheep as likely to be found above, with
antelopes, and possibly a bear or two, also turkeys.  Now, in the
morning, he is sure about these last, having heard them, as is their
wont before sunrise, saluting one another with that sonorous call from
which they derive their Mexican name, _guajalote_.

These confidences he has imparted to Henry Tresillian, who is to
accompany him in the chase, though not from any view of inspiring the
latter with its ardour.  There is no need; the young Englishman being a
hunter by instinct, with a love for natural history as well, and the
Lost Mountain promises rich reward for the climbing, in discovery as in
sport.  Besides, the two have been _compagnons de chasse_ all along the
route; habitually together, the fellow-feeling of huntership making such
association congenial.  So, early as is the Mexican afoot, he beats the
English youth by barely a minute of time; the latter seen issuing forth
from one of the tents that form part of the encampment, just as the
former has crawled out from between the wheels of a wagon, under which,
rolled-up in his _frezada_, he had passed the night.

With just enough light to identify him, Henry Tresillian is seen to be
habited in shooting coat, breeches, and gaiters, laced buskins, and a
tweed cloth cap; in short, the costume of an English sportsman--
shot-belt over the shoulders, and double-barrel in hand--about to attack
a pheasant preserve, or go tramping through stubble and swedes.  The
_gambusino_ himself wears the picturesque dress of his class and
country; the gun he carries being a rifle, while the sword-like weapon
hanging along his hip is the ever-present _machete_--in Sonora sometimes
called _cortante_.

As, overnight, the programme had been all arranged, their interchange of
speech at present has only reference to something in the way of
_desayuna_ before setting out.  This they find ready and near; at the
central camp fire now blazing up, where several of the women, "whisks"
in hand, are bending over pots of chocolate, stirring the substantial
liquid to a creamy froth.

A _taza_ of it is handed to each of the "_cazadores_," with a "_tortilla
enchilada_," accompanied by a graceful word of welcome.  Then, emptying
the cups, and chewing up the tough, leatherlike maize cakes, the hunters
slip quietly out of camp, and set their faces for the Cerro.

The ascent, commenced almost immediately, is by a ravine--a sort of
gorge or chine worn out by the water from the spring-head above and
disintegrating rains throughout the long ages.  They find it steep as a
staircase, though not winding as one; instead, trending straight up from
its debouchment on the plain to the summit level, between slopes, these
with grim, rocky _facade_, still more precipitous.  Down its bottom
cascades the stream--a tiny rivulet now, but in rain-storms a torrent--
and along this lies the path, the only one by which the Cerro can be
ascended, as the _gambusino_ already knows.

"There's no other," he says, as they are clambering upward, "where a man
could make the ascent, unless with a Jacob's ladder let down to him.
All around, the cliff is as steep as the shaft of a mine.  Even the wild
sheep can't scale it, and if we find any on the summit--and it's to be
hoped we shall--they must either have been bred there, or gone up this
way.  _Guarda_!" he adds, in exclamation, as he sees the impulsive
English youth bounding on rather recklessly.  "Have a care!  Don't
disturb the stones; they may go rattling down and smash somebody below."

"By Jove!  I didn't think of that," returns he thus cautioned, turning
pale at thought of how he might have endangered the lives of those dear
to him; then ascending more slowly, and with the care enjoined upon him.

In due time they arrive at the head of the gorge, there stopping to take
breath.  Only for an instant, when they proceed on, now no longer in a
climb, the path thence leading over ground level as the plain itself;
but still by the rivulet's edge, through a tangle of trees and bushes.

At some two hundred yards from the head of the gorge they come into an
opening, the Mexican as he enters it exclaiming:

"_El ojo de agua_!"



CHAPTER FIVE.

LOS GUAJALOTES.

The phrase, "_ojo de agua_" (the water's eye), is simply the Mexican
name for a spring; which Henry Tresillian needs not to be told, being
already acquainted with the pretty poetical appellation.  And he now
sees the thing itself but a few paces ahead, gurgling up in a little
circular basin, and sending off the stream which supplies the lake
below.

In an instant they are upon its edge, to find it clear as crystal, the
_gambusino_ saying, as he unslings his drinking-cup of cow's horn,

"I can't resist taking a swill of it, notwithstanding the gallons I had
swallowed overnight.  After such a long spell of short-water rations,
one feels as though he could never again get enough."  Then filling the
horn, and almost instantly emptying it, he concludes with the
exclamation "_Delicioso_!"

His companion drinks also, but from a cup of solid silver; vessels of
this metal, even of gold, being aught but rare among the master-miners
of Sonora.

They are about to continue on, when lo! a flock of large birds by the
edge of the open.  On the ground these are--having just come out from
among the bushes--moving leisurely along, with beaks now and then
lowered to the earth; in short, feeding as turkeys in a pasture field.
And turkeys they are, the Mexican saying in a whisper:

"_Los guajalotes_!"

So like are they to the domestic bird--only better shaped and every way
more beautiful--that Henry Tresillian has no difficulty in identifying
them as its wild progenitors.  One of superior size, an old cock, is at
their head, striding to and fro in all the pride of his glittering
plumage, which, under the beams of the new-risen sun, shows hues vivid
and varied as those of the rainbow.  A very sultan he seems, followed by
a train of sultanas and their attendants; for there are young birds in
the flock, fledglings, that differ in appearance from the old ones.

Suddenly the grand satrap erects his head, and with neck craned out,
utters a note of alarm.  Too late.  "Bang--bang!" from the
double-barrel--the sharper crack of the rifle sounding simultaneously--
and the old cock, with three of his satellites, lies prostrate upon the
earth, the rest taking flight with terrified screeches, and a clatter of
wings loud as the "whirr" of a threshing machine.

"Not a bad beginning," quietly observes the _gambusino_, as they stand
over the fallen game.  "Is it, senorito?"

"Anything but that," answers the young Englishman, delighted at having
secured such a good bottom for their bag.  "But what are we to do with
them?  We can't carry them along."

"Certainly not," rejoins the Mexican.  "Nor need.  Let them lie where
they are till we come back.  But no," he adds, correcting himself.
"That will never do.  There are wolves up here, no doubt--certainly
coyotes, if no other kind--and on return we might find only feathers.
So we must string them up out of reach."

The stringing up is a matter which occupies only a few minutes' time;
done by one leg thrust through the opened sinew of the other to form a
loop; then the birds hoisted aloft, and hung upon the up-curving arms of
a tall _pitahaya_.

"And now, on!" says the _gambusino_, after re-loading guns.  "Let us
hope we may come across something in the four-legged line, big enough to
give everybody a bit of fresh meat for dinner.  Likely we'll have to
tramp a good way before sighting any; the report of our guns will have
frighted both birds and beasts, and sent all to the farthest side of the
_mesa_.  But no matter for that.  I want to go there direct, and at
once, for a reason, _muchacho_, I've not yet made known to you."

While speaking, an anxious expression has shown itself on the
_gambusino's_ face, which, taken in connection with his last words,
leads Henry Tresillian to suspect something in, or on, his mind, beside
the desire to kill game.  Moreover, before leaving the camp he had
noticed that the Mexican seemed to act in a manner more excited than was
his wont--as if in a great hurry to get away.  That, no doubt, for the
reason he now hints at; though what it is the young Englishman cannot
even give a guess.

"May I know it now?" he asks, with some eagerness, noting the grave
look.

"Certainly you may, and shall," frankly responds the Mexican.  "I would
have told you sooner, and the others as well, but for not being sure
about it.  I didn't like to cause an alarm in the camp without good
reason.  And I hope still there's none.  After all it may not have been
smoke."

"Smoke!  What?"

"What I saw, or thought I saw, yesterday evening, just after we arrived
by the lake's edge."

"Where?"

"To the north-east--a long way off."

"But if it was a smoke, what would that signify?"

"In this part of the world, much.  It might mean danger; ay, death."

"You astonish--mystify me, Senor Vicente.  How could it mean that?"

"There's no mystery in it, _muchacho_.  Where smoke is seen there should
be fire; and a fire on these _llanos_ is likely to be one with Indians
around it.  Now do you understand the danger I'm thinking of?"

"I do.  But I thought there were no Indians in this part of the country,
except the Opatas; and they are Christianised, dwelling in towns."

"True, all that.  But the Opata towns are far from here, and in an
entirely different direction--the very opposite.  If smoke it was, the
fire that made it wasn't one kindled by Opatas, but men who only
resemble them in the colour of their skin--Indians, too."

"What Indians do you suspect?"

"_Los Apaches_."

"Danger indeed, if they be in the neighbourhood."  The young Englishman
has been long enough in Sonora to have acquaintance with the character
of these cruel savages.  "But I hope they're not," he adds, trustfully,
still with some apprehension, as his thoughts turn to those below.

"That hope I heartily echo," rejoins the Mexican, "for if they be about,
we've got to look out for the skin of our heads.  But come, _muchacho
mio_!  Don't let us be down in the mouth till we're sure there _is_ a
danger.  As I've said, I'm not even sure of having seen smoke at all.
It might have been a dust-whirl, just as I noticed the thing, the
_estampeda_ commenced; and after it the rush for water, which of course
took off my attention.  When that was over, and I again turned my eyes
north-eastward, it was too dark to distinguish smoke or anything else.
I then looked for a light all along the sky-line, and also several times
during the night--luckily to see none.  For all I can't help having
fears.  A man who's once been prisoner to the Apaches never travels
through a district where they are like to be encountered without some
apprehension.  Mine ought to be of the keenest.  I've not only been
their prisoner, but rather roughly handled, as no doubt you'll admit
after looking at this."

Saying which, the Mexican opens his shirt-front, laying bare his breast;
on which appears a disc, bearing rude resemblance to a "death's head,"
burnt deep into the skin.

"They gave me that brand," he continues, "just by way of amusing
themselves.  They meant to have further diversion out of it by using me
as a target, and it for a centre mark at one of their shooting matches.
Luckily, before that came off, I found the chance of giving them
leg-bail.  Now, _muchacho_, you'll better understand my anxiety to be up
here so early, and why I want to push on to the other end.  _Vamonos_!"

Shouldering their guns, they proceed onward; now at slower pace, their
progress obstructed by thick-growing bushes and trees, with _llianas_
interlacing.  For beyond the spring there is neither stream nor path,
save here and there a slight trace, often tortuous, which tells of the
passage of wild animals wandering to and fro.  The hunters are pleased
to see it thus; still more when the Mexican, noting some hoof-marks in a
spot of soft ground, pronounces them tracks of the _carnero cimmaron_.

"I thought we'd find some of the bighorn gentry up here," he says; "and
if all the caravan don't this day dine on roast mutton, it'll be because
Pedro Vicente isn't the proper man to be its purveyor.  Still, we
mustn't stop to go after the sheep now.  True, we've begun the day
hunting, but before proceeding farther with that, we must make sure we
shan't have to end it fighting.  Ssh!"

The sibillatory exclamation has reference to a noise heard a little way
off, like the stroke of a hoof upon hard turf, several times rapidly
repeated.  And simultaneous with it another sound, as the snort or bark
of some animal.

"That's a _carnero_, now!" says the Mexican, _sotto voce_; as he speaks,
coming to a stop and laying hold of the other's arm to restrain him.
"Since the game offers itself without going after, or out of our way, we
may as well secure a head or two.  Like the turkeys, it can be strung up
till our return."

Of course his _compagnon de chasse_ is of the same mind.  He but longs
to empty his double-barrel again, all the more at such grand game, and
rejoins, saying, "Just so; it can."

Without further speech they stalk cautiously forward, to reach the edge
of another opening, and there behold another flock--not of birds, but
quadrupeds.  Deer they might seem at the first glance, to eyes
unacquainted with them; and for such Henry Tresillian might mistake
them, but that they show no antlers; instead, horns of a character
proclaiming them sheep.

Sheep they are, wild ones, different from the domesticated animal as
greyhound from dachshund.  No short legs nor low bodies theirs; no bushy
tails, nor tangle of wool to encumber them.  Instead, coats clean and
smooth, with limbs long, sinewy, and supple as those of stag itself.
Several pairs of horns are visible in the flock, one pair spirally
curving much larger than any of the others; indeed, of such dimensions,
and seeming weight, as to make it a wonder how the old ram, their owner,
can hold up his head.  Yet is it he who is holding head highest; the
same who had snorted, hammering the ground with his hoof.

He has done so, repeatedly, since; the last time to be the last in his
life.  Through the leafy branches, cautiously parted, shoots out a
double jet of flame and smoke; three cracks are heard; then again there
is dead game on the ground.

This time, however, counting less in heads; only one--that carrying the
grand curvature of horns.  Alone the leader of the flock has fallen to
the second fusillade, killed by the rifle's bullet.  For the shot from
the double-barrel, though hitting too, has glanced off the thick
felt-like coats of the _carneros_ as from a corslet of steel.

"_Carrai_!" exclaims the _gambusino_, with a vexed air, as they step up
to the fallen quarry.  "This time we haven't done so well--in fact,
worse than nothing."

"But why?" queries the young Englishman, in wonder at the other's
strange words and ways, after having made such a big kill.

"Why, you ask, senorito!  Don't your nostrils tell you?  _Mil diablos_!
how the brute stinks!"

Truth he speaks, as his hunting companion, now standing over the dead
body of the bighorn, can well perceive--sensible of an offensive odour
arising from it as that of ram in the rutting season.

"What a fool I've been to spend bullet upon him!" continues the Mexican,
without awaiting rejoinder.  "Nor was it his great bulk or horns that
tempted me.  No; all through thinking of that other thing, which made me
careless which of them I aimed at."

"What other thing?"

"The smoke.  Well, it's no use crying over spilt milk nor any to bother
more about the brute.  It's only fit food for coyotes; and the sooner
they get it into their bellies the better.  Faugh!  Let us away from
it."



CHAPTER SIX.

A HOMERIC REPAST.

Early as are the white men astir, yet earlier are the red ones.  For the
Coyoteros, like the animal from which they derive their tribal name, do
more of their prowling by night than by day.  Moreover, it is the sultry
season, and they design reaching Nauchampa-tepetl before the sun gets so
high and hot as to make travelling uncomfortable.  Even savages are not
averse to comfort; though these are now thinking more about that of
their horses than their own.  They are on an expedition that will need
keeping the animals up to their best strength; and journeying in the
noon hours would distress and pull them down.

So nearly an hour before dawn declines itself they are up and active,
moving about in the dim light, silent as spectres.  Silent, not from any
fear of betraying their presence to an enemy--they know of none likely
to be near--but because it is their habit.

What they first do is to shift the picket-pins of their horses, or give
greater length to the trail-ropes, in order that the animals may get a
bite of clean fresh grass, that on which they were tethered throughout
the night being now trampled down.

Next, they proceed to take care of themselves--to fortify the inner man
with a bit of breakfast.  No fire is needed for the cooking it, and none
is kindled.  The _mezcal_ and horse-meat pie has been baking all the
night; and now, near morning, they know it will be ready--done to a
turn.  It but needs the turf lifted off their primitive oven, and the
contents extracted.

Five or six, detailed for the task, at once set about it; first taking
off the top sods, now calcined and still smoking.  Then the loose mould,
which the fire has converted into ashes, is removed with more care.  It
is hot, and needs handling gingerly; but the savage _cuisiniers_ know
how, and soon the black bundle is exposed to view, the hide now hairless
and charred, but moist and reeking.  It still adheres sufficiently to
bear hoisting out, without fear of spilling the contents; and at length
it is so lifted and carried to a clean spot of sward.  Then cut open and
spread out, there is displayed a steaming savoury mass, whose appetising
odour, borne upward and outward on the fresh morning air, inspires every
redskin around with delightful anticipations.

And not without reason either.  To say nothing of the baked horseflesh--
by many _gourmets_ esteemed a delectable dish--the corn of the _mezcal_,
treated thus, is a viand palatable as peculiar.  And peculiar it is,
bearing resemblance to nothing I either know or can think of.  In
appearance it is much like candied citron, with a sweetish taste too,
only firmer and darker in colour.  But while eating it the tongue seems
penetrated with a thousand tiny darts; a sort of prinkling sensation,
quite indescribable, and, to one unaccustomed to it, not altogether
agreeable.  In time this passes away; and he who has made the experiment
of eating _mezcal_ comes to like it exceedingly.  Many grand people
among the whites regard it in the light of a luxury; and as such it has
found its way into most Mexican towns--even the capital itself--where it
commands a high price.

With the Apache Indians, as already said, it is a staple food, even
giving their tribal name to one branch of this numerous nation--the
Mezcaleros.  But all eat of it alike, and the Coyoteros, _en bivouac_,
show, by their knowledge of how to prepare it, that baked _mezcal_ is
noways new to them.

At the word "ready!" they gather around the hot steaming mass; and,
regardless of scorched lips or tongues, set upon it with knife and
tooth.

Soon the skin is cleaned out, every scrap of its contents eaten.  They
could eat the hide too, and would, were there a pinch.  But there is
none such now, and it is left for their namesakes, the coyotes.

A smoke follows the Homeric repast, for all American Indians are
addicted to the use of the nicotian weed.  They were so before the
caravels of Columbus spread sail on the Haytian seas.

Every Coyotero in camp has his pipe and pouch of tobacco, be it genuine
or adulterated; this depending on how their luck has been running, or
how recent their latest raid upon some settlement of the palefaces.

Pipes smoked out and returned to their places of deposit, all are afoot
again.  Nothing more now but to draw picket-pins, coil up trail-ropes,
mount, and move off; for their horse caparison, scant and easily
adjusted, is already on.

The chief gives the order "to horse," not in words, but by example--
springing upon the back of his own.  Then they ride off, as before, in
formation "by twos," each file falling into rank as the line lengthens
out upon the plain.

Scarce is the last file clear of the abandoned camp-ground ere this
becomes occupied by animated beings of another kind--wolves, whose
howling has been heard throughout all the night.  Having scented the
slaughtered horse, these now rush simultaneously towards it, to dispute
the banquet of bones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shortly after leaving the camp the marching redskins lose sight of the
Cerro.  This is accounted for by a dip in the plain, with a ridgelike
swell beyond, which runs transversely to their course.  The hollow
continues for several miles before the mountain will be again in view;
but, well knowing the way, they need not this to guide them.  Nor are
they in any particular hurry.  They can reach their intended
halting-place by the lake long ere the sun becomes sultry, there to lie
up till the cool hours of evening.  So they move leisurely along, and
with a purpose--to spare the sinews of their horses.

They talk enough now, loudly and laughingly.  They have slept well, and
breakfasted satisfactorily; besides, it is broad daylight, and no danger
to be apprehended, no fear of hostile surprise.  For all that they keep
their eyes on the alert through habitude, every now and then scanning
the horizon around.

Soon they see that which gives them something serious to speak about.
Not upon the horizon, nor anywhere upon the plain, but up in the heavens
above it--birds.  What of them?  And what in their appearance to attract
the attention of the Coyoteros?  Nothing, or not much, were the birds
other than they are.  But they are vultures, black vultures of two
sorts--_gallinazos_ and _zopilotes_.  Nor would the Indians think of
giving them a second glance were they soaring about in their ordinary
way, wheeling in circles and spirals.  But they are not; instead,
passing overhead in straight onward flight, with a quick, earnest plying
of wings, evidently making for some point where they expect to stoop
upon carrion.  Scores there are of them, straggled out in a long stream,
but all flying in one direction--the same in which the savages are
themselves proceeding--towards Nauchampa-tepetl.

What can be drawing the vultures thither?  This the question which the
Indians ask one another, in their own formularies of speech; none able
to answer it, save by conjecture.  Without in any way alarming, the
spectacle excites them; and they quicken their pace, eager to learn what
is attracting the birds.  It should be something more than dead antelope
or deer, so many are tending towards it, and from so far.  For their
high flight, straight onward, tells of their having been for some time
keeping the same course.

Hastening on up the slope of the swell, the dusky horsemen once more
catch sight of the mountain, there to see what brings them to an abrupt
halt--a filmy purplish haze hanging over its southern end, more
scattered higher up in the sky.  Is it fog rising from the water they
know to be there?  No: smoke, as their practised eyes tell them after
regarding it a moment.  And with like celerity they interpret it, as
proceeding from the fire, or fires, of a camp.  Other travellers,
anticipating them, are encamped by Nauchampa-tepetl,

Who?  Opatas?  Not likely.  Sons of toil--_Indicos mansos_--slaves, as
these the _bravos_, their kindred only in race, scornfully call them--
the Opatas keep to their towns, and the patches of cultivation around
them.  Improbable that they should have ventured into that wilderness so
far from home.  More likely it is a party of palefaces; men in search of
that shining metal which, as the Apaches know, has often lured their
white enemies into the very heart of the desert, their own domain, and
to destruction--themselves the destroyers.  If the smoke of those camp
fires they now see be over such a party, then is it doomed--at least so
mentally resolve the red centaurs, hoping it may be thus.

While still gazing at the blue cloud, taking its measure, and discussing
the probabilities of who and what sort of men may be under it, another
appears before their eyes; this whiter and of smaller size--a mere puff
suddenly rising over the crest of the _mesa_, and separating from it as
it drifts higher.

From the fire of a gun, or guns, as the Coyoteros can tell, though not
by any crack of one having reached their ears, since none has.  In the
rarefied atmosphere of the high-lying _llanos_ the eye has the advantage
of the ear, sounds being heard only at short distance.  They are still
more than ten miles from the mountain, and the report of a cannon,
discharged on its summit, would be barely audible to them.

Still staying at halt, but keeping to their horses, the chief and others
in authority enter into consultation.  And while they are deliberating
on the best course to be pursued, still another puff of smoke shoots up
over the _mesa_, similar to that preceding, but at a different point.
It aids them in coming to conclusions; for now they are sure there is a
camp of palefaces by the pond; and they above are hunters who have gone
up to get game, which the Indians know to be there in abundance.

But what sort of palefaces?  Of this they are not sure.  Knowing it to
be a miners' camp, they would ride straight on for it, in gallop.  But
it may be an encampment of _soldados_, which would make a difference.
Not that the Coyoteros are afraid to encounter Mexican soldiers--far
from it.  Rather would they rejoice at finding it these.  For their
tribe, their own branch of it, has an old score against the men in
uniform; and nothing would please them better than an opportunity to
settle it.  Indeed, partly to seek this, with purposes of plunder
combined, are they now on the _war-trail_.  Only in their mode of action
would there be a difference, in the event of the encampment turning out
to be occupied by _soldados_.  Soldiers in that quarter should be
cavalry, and to approach them caution would be called for, with
strategy.  But these red centaurs are soldiers themselves--veterans,
skilled, cunning strategists--and now give proof of it.  For the time
has come for them to advance; which they do, not straight forward nor in
single body, but broken into two bands, one facing right, the other
left, with a design to enfilade the camp by approaching it from opposite
points.  Separating at the start, the two cohorts soon diverge wide
apart, both making for the mountain, but with the intention to reach its
southern end on different sides.

If the black vultures, still in streaming flight above, have hopes of
getting a repast there, they may now feel assured of its being a
plenteous one.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

LOS INDIOS!

Parting from the despised carcase of the ram the hunters press onward,
the younger with mental resolve to return to it, come back what way they
will.  Its grand spiral horns have caught his fancy: such a pair would
grace any hall in Christendom; and, though he cannot call the trophy his
own, since it fell not to his gun, he intends appropriating it.

Only for a brief moment does the young Englishman reflect about them; in
the next they are out of his mind.  For, glancing at the Mexican's face,
he again sees that look of anxious uneasiness noted before.  It had
returned soon as the exciting incident of the sheep-shooting was over.
And knowing the cause, he shares it; no more thinking about the chase or
its trophies.

They say but little now, having sufficient work to occupy them without
wasting time in words.  For beyond the opening where the _carneros_ were
encountered, they find no path--not so much as a trace made by animals--
and have to make one for themselves.  As the trees stand close, with
_lianas_ interlacing, the Mexican is often compelled to use his
_machete_ for hewing out a passage-way; which he does with an
accompaniment of _carrambas_! thick as the underwood he chops at.

Thus impeded, they are nearly an hour in getting through the
_chapparal_, though the distance passed is less than the half of a mile.
But at length they accomplish it, arriving on the _mesas_ outer edge,
close to that of the cliff.  There the tall timber ends in a skirting of
low bushes, and their view is no longer obstructed.  North, east, and
west the _llano_ is under their eyes to the horizon's verge, twenty
miles at least being within the scope of their vision.

They aim not to scan it so far.  For at a distance of little more than
ten they observe that which at once fixes their glance: a dun yellowish
disc--a cloud--with its base resting upon the plain.

"Smoke, no--but dust!" exclaims the _gambusino_, soon as sighting it;
"and kicked up by the heels of horses--hundreds of them.  There can be
nothing else out there to cause that.  Horses with men on their backs.
If a _caballada_ of wild mustangs, the dust would show more scattered.
_Indios, por cierto!  Carra-i_!" he says in continuation, the shade on
his brow sensibly darkening, as with a quick glance over his shoulder he
sees real smoke in that direction.  "What fools we've been to kindle
fires!  Rank madness.  Better to have eaten breakfast raw.  I myself
most to blame of any; I should have known the danger.  By this they'll
have spied our camp smoke--that of our shots, too.  Ah, _muchacho_!
we've been foolish in every way."

Almost breathless from this burst of regret and self-recrimination, he
is for a while silent; his heart beating audibly, however, as with gaze
fixed on the far-off cloud, he endeavours to interpret it.  But the dark
cloud soon becomes less dense, partially dispersed, and under it appears
something more solid; a clump of sombre hue, but with here and there
sparkling points.  No separate forms can as yet be made out; only a
mass; but for all that, the _gambusino_ knows it to be composed of
horses and men, the corruscations being the glint of arms and
accoutrements, as the sun penetrates through to them.

"What a pity," he exclaims, resuming speech, "I didn't think of asking
Don Estevan for the loan of his telescope!  If we only had it here now!
But I can see enough without it; 'tis as I feared.  No more hunting for
us to-day; but fighting ere the sun goes down--perhaps ere it reach
meridian.  _Mira_! the thing's splitting into two.  You see, senorito?"

The senorito does see that the dust-cloud has parted in twain, as also
the dark mass underneath.  And now they can distinguish separate forms;
horses with men on their backs, and a more conspicuous glittering of
arms, because of their being in motion.

"Ah, yes!" adds the Mexican, with increased gravity of tone, "_Indios
bravos_ they are, hundreds of them.  If Apaches, as sure they must,
Heaven help us all!  I know what they mean by that movement.  They've
sighted the camp smoke, and intend coming on along both sides of the
Cerro.  That's why they've broken into two bands.  Back to camp, as fast
as our legs can carry us!  We've not a minute--not a second--to lose.
_Vamos_!"

And back for camp they start, not to spend time on the way as when
coming from it, but in a run and rush along the path already opened--
past the dead sheep, past the spring, and the strung-up turkeys, without
even staying to look at these, much less think of taking them along.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The occupants of the miners' camp, men, women, and children, are up and
active now.  Some are at work about the wagons, pouring water over their
wheels to tighten the tyres, loose from the shrinking of the wood;
others have set to mending harness and pack-saddles; while still others,
out on the open plain, are changing the animals to fresh spots of
pasturage.  A small party is seen around the carcase of a bullock, in
the act of skinning it to get beefsteaks for breakfast.

Several fires have been kindled, for the people are many, and have
separate messes, according to rank and vocation.  Around these are the
women and grown girls, some bending over red earthenware pots that
contain chocolate and coffee, others on their knees with the _metate_
stone in front, and _metlapilla_ in hand, crushing the boiled maize into
paste for the indispensable _tortillas_.  The children play by the
lake's edge, wading ankle-deep into the water, plashing about like
little ducks; some of the bigger boys, who have improvised a rude
tackle, endeavouring to catch fish.  In this remote tarn there are such,
as it has an affluent stream connecting it with the Rio Horcasitas--now
nearly dry, but at times having a volume of water sufficient for the
finny tribes to ascend to the lake, into which several species have
found their way.

Within the space enclosed by the wagons--the _corral_--three tents have
been erected, and stand in a row.  The middle one is a large square
marquee, the two flanking it of the ordinary bell shape.  The marquee is
occupied by the senior partner and his senora; the one on the right by
their daughter and an Indian _moza_--her waiting-maid; the third affords
shelter and sleeping quarters for the two Tresillians.

All three are for a time empty, their occupants having stepped out of
them.  As known, Henry Tresillian has gone up to the summit of the
Cerro, and his father is moving about the camp in the company of the
_mayor-domo_, with an eye to superintendence of everything; while Don
Estevan, his wife, and daughter, have strolled out along the lake's edge
to enjoy the refreshing breeze wafted over its water.  The three
promenaders have but made one turn along the sandy shore, and back
again, when they hear a cry which not only alarms them, but all within
and around the camp--

"_Los Indios_!"

It has been sent from above--from the head of the ravine; and everybody
looks up--all eyes raised simultaneously.  To see two men standing on a
projecting point of rock, their figures sharply outlined against the
blue background of sky; at the same time to recognise them as the
_gambusino_ and Henry Tresillian.  Only for an instant are these at a
stand; only to shout down those terrible words of warning; then both
bound into the gorge, and come on at a rush, with risk of breaking their
necks.

At its bottom they are met by an excited, clamorous crowd; surrounded
and assailed by a very tempest of interrogations.  But to these they
vouchsafe no answer beyond that implied in their shout; instead, push on
to where Don Estevan and the elder Tresillian, now together, stand
awaiting them.  The senior partner is the first to speak, addressing
himself to Vicente:

"You've seen Indians, Don Pedro?  Where?"

"Out upon the _llano_, your worship--to north-eastward."

"You're sure of it being Indians?"

"Quite sure, senor.  We were able to make horses with men on them; the
men unlike any with a white skin, but just as those with a red one.
Your worship can take my word for their being Indians."

"I can, and do.  But from what you say, it seems they're still a good
way off.  How far, think you?"

"Ten miles or more, when we came away from the place where we saw them.
They can't be much nearer yet, as we've not been over ten minutes on the
way."

The quick time made by the hunters in return is attested by their
breathing; both with nostrils agape and breasts heaving up and down as
runners at the close of a hard-contested race.

"'Tis well they're at such a distance," rejoins Don Estevan.  "And lucky
your having sighted them before they got nearer."

"Ah! senor, they'll soon be near; for I know they've sighted us--at
least the smoke of our camp, and are already making for it.  Light
horsemen as they don't need long to traverse ten miles--on a plain like
this."

"That's true," assents the _ci-devant_ soldier, with an air of troubled
impatience.  "What do you advise our doing, Don Pedro?"

"Well, for one thing, your worship, we mustn't remain here.  We must
clear out of this camp as soon as possible.  In an hour--ay, less--it
may be too late."

"Your words want explaining, Don Pedro.  I don't comprehend them.  Clear
out of the camp!  But whither are we to go?"

"_Arriba_!" answers the guide, pointing to the gorge, "up yonder."

"But we can't take the animals there.  And to carry up our goods there
wouldn't be time."

"I know it, your worship.  And glad we may be to get ourselves safe up."

"Then we're to abandon all?  Is that what you advise?"

"It is.  I'm sorry I can give no better advice.  There's no alternative
if we wish to live."

"To lose everything," puts in the junior partner, "goods, animals,
machinery!  That would be a terrible calamity.  Surely, Senor Vicente,
we can defend the camp; our people are all well armed."

"Impossible, Don Roberto; impossible were they ever so well armed.  From
what I could make out of the Indian party it numbers hundreds to our
tens, sufficient of them to surround us on every side.  And even if we
could keep them off during daylight, at night they'd crawl close enough
to set the camp on fire.  Wagons, tilts, every stick and stitch of them
are dry as tinder; the very pack-saddles would be ablaze with the first
spark that fell on them."

"But how know we that these Indians are hostile?  After all, it may be
some friendly band; perhaps Opatas?"

"No!" exclaims the _gambusino_ impatiently.  "I saw enough to know
they're not Opatas, nor _mansos_ of any kind; enough to be sure they're
_bravos_, and almost sure, Apaches."

"Apaches!" echo several voices in the surrounding, in tones proclaiming
the dread with which this name inspires the heart of every Sonoreno.
Every man present feels a creeping sensation in the skin of his head, as
though the scalping-knife were being brandished around it.

"They're coming from the direction where Apaches would come," pursues
Vicente.  "Besides, they have no baggage; not a woman or child to be
seen with them.  All men, mounted and armed."

"Indeed, if it be so," rejoins Don Estevan, with brow now darkly
shadowed, "we can expect no friendship from them."

"No mercy either!" adds the gold-seeker.  "Nor have we a right to expect
it, after the treatment they've had at the hands of Captain Gil Perez
and his men."

All know to what Vicente alludes: a massacre of Apache Indians by a
party of Mexican soldiers, after being lured and lulled into false
security by professions of peace--cold-blooded and cruel, as any
recorded in the annals of frontier warfare.

"I've said it.  I'm good as sure they're Apaches," repeats the
_gambusino_, more impressively.  "And it would be madness, sheer
insanity, to await them here.  We must up to the _mesa_."

"But will we be safe there?"

"As in a citadel.  No fortress ever contrived, or made by hand of man,
is strong as the Cerro Perdido.  Twenty men could hold it against as
many hundreds--ay, thousands.  _Carramba_!  We may thank the Virgin for
providing us with such a secure retreat; so handy, and just in the nick
of time."

"Then let us to it," assents Don Estevan, after a brief consultation
with his partner, who no longer opposes the step, though by it they may
lose their all.  "We'll follow your advice, Senor Vicente; and you have
our authority to order everything as it seems best to you."

"I've only one order to give, your worships; that's _arriba_!  Up, all
and everybody!"



CHAPTER EIGHT.

TENDER LEAVE-TAKINGS.

The excitement in the camp, already at full height, now changes to a
quick, confused hurrying to and fro, accompanied by cries of many kinds.
Here and there is heard the terrified scream of a woman, who, babe in
arms, fancies the spear of a savage pointed at her breast, to impale
herself and offspring.

There is a rush for the gorge, up which a stream of human forms is soon
seen swarming as ants up their hill.  And, with a gallantry which
distinguishes the miner as the mariner, the women and children are
permitted foremost place in the upward retreat, assisted by husbands.

Without serious accident all succeed in reaching the summit, where the
women are left, the men who went with them hurrying back below.  It is
hard to part with valuable property and cherished household gods--still
harder to see these appropriated by a hated enemy--and an effort is to
be made for saving what can be saved.  At first they only thought of
their lives; but half a dozen men, who had sprung to their horses at the
earliest moment of alarm, and galloped out beyond the mountain's flank
to get better view, signal back that the Indians are not yet in sight.
So there is still a chance to take up a portion of the camp equipage,
with such goods as are likely to be most needed in the event of their
having to sustain a siege.

"The ammunition and provender first!" shouts Vicente, back again at
camp, with full authority of direction.  "Take up everything that's food
for man and loading for gun.  After that whatever we'll have time for."

Knowing their women now safe, the men work with spirit; and soon a
different sort of stream is seen ascending the gorge: a string of
burden-bearers, continuous from plain to summit; hastily returning down
again, relieved of their loads, to take up others.  Never were bees so
busy.  Some remain below, getting the goods out of the wagons, and
making packages of them, convenient for the difficult transport.  The
bales and boxes--lading of the pack-mules--are broken open, and their
more valuable effects picked out and carried off; so that in a short
space of time not much remains save the mining tools and machinery, with
the heavier articles of house furniture.

Could the Rattlesnake have known of this quick precautionary sacking of
the camp by its owners, he and his would have approached it in greater
haste.  But they are seen coming on now.  The mounted videttes have at
length signalled them in sight, they themselves galloping in at the same
time, and dropping down from their horses.

There is a last gathering up of bundles, which includes the two smaller
tents--the marquee left standing.  Then the final _debandade_; all
turning face towards the gorge, and toiling up it.

No, not all as yet; more than one lingers below.  For the horses must
needs be left behind; impossible to take them up a steep where only
goat, sheep, or clawed creature might go.  And more than one has a
master who parts with it reluctantly.  Regretfully, too, at thought of
its changing owner, and to such owner as will soon enter upon
possession.  Even some of the teamsters and muleteers have an affection
for their mules, the head _arriero_ regarding the whole _atajo_ as his
children, and the "bell-mare" almost as a mother.  Many a long mile and
league has he listened to her guiding bell; its cheerful tinkle
proclaiming the route clear along narrow dizzy ledge, or through deep
defile.  And now he will hear its music no more.

But the ties must be severed, the parting take place.  Which it does,
amidst phrases and ejaculations of leave-taking, tender as though the
left ones were human beings instead of dumb brutes.  "_Caballo--
caballito querido_!" "_Mula-mulita mia_!" "_Pobre-pobrecita_!  _Dios te
guarda_!"  And mingled with these are exclamations of a less gentle
kind--anathemas hurled at the redskins coming on to take possession of
their pets.

At this last Pedro Vicente is among the loudest.  As yet he has had only
half-payment for his late discovered mine, the remaining moiety
dependent on the working it.  And now the crash--all the mining
apparatus to be destroyed--perhaps the purchasing firm made bankrupt, if
even life be left them.  Thinking of all this, and what he has already
suffered at the hands of "_Los Indios_" no wonder at his cursing them.
He, however, is not one of those taking affectionate and sentimental
farewell of their animals.  His horse is a late purchase, and though of
fine appearance, has proved aught but a bargain.  For there are "copers"
in Arispe as elsewhere, and the _gambusino_ has been their victim.
Hence he parts with the disappointing steed neither regretfully nor
reluctantly.  But not with the saddle and bridle; these, of elaborate
adornment having cost him far more than the horse.  So shouldering them,
he too re-ascends, last of all save one.

That one is Henry Tresillian; and very different is the parting between
him and the animal of his belonging.  The English youth almost sheds
tears as he stands by his horse's head, patting his neck and stroking
his muzzle, the last time he may ever lay hand on either.  Nay, surely,
too surely, the last.  And the noble creature seems to know it too,
responding to the caress by a low mournful whimpering.

"Ah! my beautiful Crusader! to think I must leave you behind!  And to be
ridden by a redskin--a cruel savage who will take no care of you.  Oh!
it is hard--hard!"

Crusader appears to comprehend what is said, for his answer is something
like a moan.  It may be that he interprets the melancholy expression on
his master's face--that master who has been so kind to him.

"A last farewell, brave fellow!  Be it a kiss," says the youth, bringing
his lips in contact with those of the horse.  Then pulling off the
headstall, with its attached trail-rope, and letting them drop to the
ground, he again speaks the sad word "farewell," and, turning back on
his beloved steed, walks hurriedly and determinedly away, as though
fearing resolution might fail him.

Soon he commences climbing up the gorge; all the others who have gone
before now nearly out of it.  But ere he has ascended ten steps, he
hears that behind which causes him to stop and look back.  Not in alarm:
he knows it to be the neigh of his own horse, accompanied by the stroke
of his hoofs in quick repetition--Crusader coming on in a gallop for the
gorge.  In another instant he is by its bottom, on hind legs, rearing up
against the rocky steep, as if determined to scale it.

In vain: after an effort he drops back on all fours.  But to rear up and
try again and again, all the while giving utterance to wild, agonised
neighs--very screams.

To Henry Tresillian the sight is saddening, the sound torture, stirring
his heart to its deepest depths.  To escape the seeing--though he cannot
so soon the hearing--he once more turns his back upon the horse, and
hastens on upward.  But when halfway to the head, he cannot resist
taking another downward look.  Which shows him Crusader yet by the
bottom of the gorge, but now standing still on all fours, as if resigned
to the inevitable.  Not silent, however; instead, at short intervals,
giving utterance to that neigh of melancholy cadence, alike proclaiming
discomfiture and despair.



CHAPTER NINE.

"IT'S THE RATTLESNAKE."

On again reaching the summit Henry Tresillian finds his father there
with Don Estevan and most of the men.  These last, under the direction
of the _ci-devant_ soldier, are collecting large stones, and laying them
all round the head of the gorge.

One might fancy them building a breastwork, but nothing of that kind is
their intention, none such being needed.  As Vicente had said, it is a
fortress of nature's construction, stronger than any ever built by the
hand of man, and would defy breaching by all the artillery in the world.
Ammunition is what the stones are being collected for, to be rolled
down the slope in case the enemy should attempt scaling it.  Most of
them have to be brought up out of the gorge itself, as but few lie loose
on the summit.  A work that, with so many and willing hands, takes up
but short time, and soon a ridge appears in horseshoe shape around the
spot where the path leads out upon the level.

Others of the men have gone on to the glade by the spring, where the
women and children are now assembled, the effects brought up from below
lying scattered about them.  Some, still in affright, are moving
excitedly to and fro; others, with greater courage and calmness, have
taken seats on the boxes and bundles.

The senora and her daughter, with the family servants, form a group
apart, the eyes of Gertrude scanning with anxious interrogative glance
each new party as it appears on the edge of the opening.  She has been
told that Henrique is still upon the plain, and fears he may linger
there too long.

As yet no move has been made to set up the tents, or otherwise establish
camp.  There are some who cling to the hope that after all it may not be
necessary.  The Indians have not yet shown themselves at the southern
end, and nothing is known of their character save by conjecture.  As
that is based on but a distant view of them, it is little reliable; and
the guide is directed by Don Estevan to hasten north again, and see what
can be seen further.

This time he takes the telescope with him, and signals are arranged
before starting.  Gun signals, of course: a single shot to say the
Indians are still advancing towards the Cerro; two, that they are near;
a third, denoting their character made out; while a fourth will proclaim
them _bravos_, and of some hostile tribe.

By this it might appear as if the _gambusino_ bore upon his person a
very battery of small arms; while in reality he has only his rifle, with
a pair of single-barrelled pistols of ancient fashion and doubtful fire.
But, as before, he is to be accompanied by Henry Tresillian, whose
double gun will make good any deficiency in the signal shots--should all
four be needed.

This settled, off the two go again on their old track, first passing
through the glade by the _ojo de agua_.  There the English youth tarries
a moment--only a brief one--to exchange a word with the senora, and a
tender glance with Gertrude, whose eyes follow him no longer in fear,
but now all admiration.  She has been told of the strange parting
between him and his favourite steed--her favourite as well--and the
fearlessness he displayed, staying down upon the plain after all the
others had left it.

"Such courage!" she mentally exclaims, as she sees him dash on after the
guide.  "_Dios mio_! he dare do anything."

Proceeding at a run, in less than fifteen minutes' time the videttes
arrive at their former place of observation on the projecting point of
the cliff; and without delay Vicente lengthens out the telescope,
raising it to his eye.  To see, at first view, what justifies their
sounding the first and second signals: the savages still coming on for
the Cerro, and now near!

"Fire off both your barrels!" he directs on the instant; and, without
lowering the glass, "Allow a little time between, that our people mayn't
mistake it for a single shot."

The English youth, elevating the muzzle of his gun, presses the front
trigger, and then, after an interval, the back one, and the shots in
succession go reverberating along the cliff in echo upon echo.

Scarce have these died away when the Mexican again speaks, this time not
only to say the other two signals are to be given, but with words and in
tone telling of even more.  "_Carramba_!" he cries out, "just as I
expected, and worse!  Apaches, and the cruellest, most hostile of all,
Coyoteros!  Quick, _muchacho_!" he continues, still keeping the
telescope to his eye, "pull the pistols out of my belt and fire off
both."

Again two loud cracks, with a few seconds of time between, resound along
the cliff, while the dusky horsemen, now near enough for their
individual forms to be distinguishable by the naked eye, are seen to
have come to a halt, seated on their horses and gazing upward.  But
through the glass Vicente sees more, which still further excites him.

"_Por todos demonios esta El Cascabel_!"  (By all the devils it's the
Rattlesnake!)

"El Cascabel!" echoes the English youth, less puzzled by the odd name
than surprised at the manner of him who has pronounced it.  "Who is he,
Don Pedro?"

"Ah, senorito! you'll find that out too soon--all of us, I fear, to our
cost.  Yes!" he goes on talking, with the telescope still upheld, "'tis
El Cascabel, I can make out the death's head on his breast, original
pattern of that on my own.  He and his made the copy, the brutes burning
it into my flesh in sheer wanton mockery.  _Malraya_! we're in for it
now; a siege till the crack of doom, or till all of us are starved dead.
No hope of escaping it."

"But if we surrender, might they not be merciful?"

"Merciful! surrender to the Rattlesnake!  That would be as putting
ourselves in the power of the reptile he takes his name from.  You
forget Gil Perez and his massacre."

"No, indeed.  But was it Coyoteros he massacred?"

"Coyoteros; and of this very band.  El Cascabel's not like to have
forgotten that; and will now make us innocent people pay for it.  _Ay de
mi_!"

With this final exclamation, uttered in a tone of deep despondence, the
Mexican relapses into silence.  But only for a few seconds longer, to
look through the telescope.  He has seen enough to know all which can be
known, and too truly conjectures what is likely to ensue.

The party of Indians, led by El Cascabel, is again moving onward, and a
sweep of the glass around to the north-west shows the other party making
to turn the mountain on its western side.  The _gambusino_ can count
them now; sees that they number over two hundred, enough to put all hope
of a successful encounter with them out of the question.  As for
retreat, it is too late for that.  Surrounded are the luckless miners,
or soon will be; besieged on the summit of a mountain as within the
walls of a fortress, and as far removed from any chance of succour as
castaways on a desert isle in mid-ocean.



CHAPTER TEN.

AN ENFILADING LINE.

The "stone artillery" has been got together; a huge pile of it, forming
at the same time protecting parapet and battery of guns; the men have
desisted from their work, and having nothing more to do, at least for a
time, stand listening for the signals.  They know that such have been
arranged, without having been told their exact bearing.

But they are soon to learn it; almost instantly after hearing a shot,
and then quick succeeding it another, as the discharges from a
double-barrelled gun.

"The Indians coming on, and near!" says Don Estevan, interpreting to
those around.  "We may look to see them soon yonder."

He nods towards the abandoned camp, a portion of which is visible from
the head of the gorge.

This causes a turning of all eyes in its direction, and on the _llano_
beyond.  But scarce have they commenced scanning it when two other
shots, less loud but with a like interval between, reach their ears,
proceeding from the same quarter.

"The pistols--signals three and four!" mechanically pronounces the
ex-officer of dragoons, his sallow features showing further clouded.
"There's no more to listen for now," he adds.  "Don Pedro was right.
Apaches they must be, and on a marauding expedition--likely for the
towns of the Horcasitas, and, unluckily, we in their way.  Ah, _amigos_!
it's an ill look-out for us; could not well be worse."

But worse it is, as they are yet to learn.  And soon do learn from the
lips of the _gambusino_, who, returning in breathless haste, cries out
ere he is up to them,

"_Los Coyoteros_!  The band of El Cascabel!"

Words of terrible portent, needing no explanation, for they recall to
the minds of all present that sanguinary incident already alluded to.
The dastardly deed of Captain Perez and his ruffianly soldiery is likely
to be retaliated on men, not only themselves guiltless, but every one of
whom has condemned it!  For how can they expect mercy from the friends
and relatives of his murdered victims?  How hope for any distinction or
exception in their favour?  They cannot, and do not, knowing that ever
since that inhuman massacre the Apaches have treated every paleface as a
foe, the Coyoteros killing all prisoners that fall into their hands,
after torturing them.

"You think it's the band of Cascabel?"

It is Don Estevan who questions in rejoinder to the _gambusino's_ brief
but expressive report.

"Think!  I'm sure of it, your worship.  Through this good glass of yours
I recognised that savage himself, knowing him too well.  It enabled me
to make out his _totem_, the pretty device on his breast, of which this
on mine's but a poor copy.  _Mira_!"

While speaking, he unbuttons his shirt-front and draws the plaits apart,
as a screen from some precious picture, exposing to the view of all what
he had already shown to Henry Tresillian.  As most of them remember
having heard of the sepulchral symbol borne by the Coyotero chief, with
that other more appropriate to his name, they now know the sort of enemy
that is approaching, and what they have to expect.  No more among them
is there hope of either friendship or mercy.  On one side, the stronger,
it will be attack hostile and vengeful; on the other, and weaker--
theirs, alas!--it must be resistance and defence even unto death.

Though fully convinced of this, the miners remain calm, with that
confidence due to danger seeming still distant.  They know they are safe
for the time, unassailable, the _gambusino_ having given them assurance
of it.  But they now see it for themselves, and any apprehensions they
have are less for the present than the future.  Sure are they that a
siege is before them, how long they cannot guess, nor in which way it
will terminate.  And there may be chances of relief or escape they have
not thought of.  Hope is hard to kill, and the least hopeful of them has
not yet yielded to despair.  Time enough for that when starvation stares
them in the face, for hunger--famine--is the foe they have most to fear.

But they think not of things so far ahead.  They must first see the
enemy of which their guide has given such awe-inspiring account; and,
with glances sent abroad and over that portion of the plain visible to
them, they await his appearance on it.

Nearly another hour elapses without any enemy seen.  The horses and
mules have got over their late excitement, and are again tranquilly
depasturing, some having waded into the lake to cool their hoofs, still
hot after their long _jornada_.  But none wander away from the proximity
of the camp; the only animals out on the plain being prong-horn
antelopes, a herd of which, on their way to the water too, has been
deterred approaching it by the presence of huge monsters unknown to
them--the wagons.  But these have not hindered the approach of the
black-winged birds; instead, attracted them, and a large flock is now
around the abandoned camp, some wheeling above, others at rest on the
ground or perched upon the rock-boulders which bestrew it.  A crowd,
collected on the spot where the ox had been butchered for breakfast,
contest possession of its offal.

All of a sudden, and simultaneously, a movement is perceptible among the
animals, birds as quadrupeds, the wild as the tame.  The prong-horns
with a snort raise their heads aloft as if they saw or scented some new
danger, then lope off at lightning speed.  The vultures take wing, but
only rise a little way into the air, to soar round in circles; while the
horses, mules, and horned cattle, as if seized by a frenzy of madness,
rush excitedly about, wildly neighing and bellowing, at each instant
threatening to break away in stampede.

"They smell redskin," knowingly observes the _gambusino_, who is among
the rest watching their movements.  "Yes; and we'll soon see the ugly
thing itself.  _Chingara_! yonder it is."

He has no need to point out either the thing or the place.  The eyes of
all are now on it; the head of a dusky cohort just appearing round the
eastern projection of the Cerro, becoming elongated as file after file
unfolds itself.  They are still afar off--at least a league--nor is
their line of march directed towards the mountain, but westward, as
though they intended turning it.

No such manoeuvre is meant, however, as the miners, forewarned by their
guide, are already aware.  His words are made good by their seeing soon
after another dark line developing itself on the _llano_, at a like
distance off, but coming from the opposite direction.

"The party that went west about," says the _gambusino_, half in
soliloquy; "cunning in them to make a complete surround of us.  I
suppose they thought we were but horsemen, and might get away from them.
If they'd seen our wagons, it would have saved them some trouble.
Well, they see everything now."

No one makes rejoinder, all intently gazing at the two marching bands,
now with eyes on one, then quickly transferred to the other.  The
portion of the plain visible is sextant-shaped--the view on either side
cut off by the flanking ridges of the ravine--and from each side the
string of savage horsemen is continuously lengthening out.  Not rapidly,
but in slow leisurely crawl, as if confident they had already secured
the enfiladement of the camp.  With a thicker concentration near the
head of each, and a metallic sparkle all along their line--the sheen of
their armour under the rays of the meridian sun--they appear as two huge
serpents of antediluvian age, deliberately drawing towards one another
either for friendship or combat.

In due time their front files come together, near the central part of
the sextant; though the rear ones are still invisible;--how many of
these no one knows, save approximately.  Enough, however, are already in
sight to make a formidable array, and put all thought of conflict with
them out of the question.  The miners but congratulate themselves on
their fortune in finding that secure place of retreat, which will enable
them to shun it.  Grateful are they to their guide for making it known--
and they have reason.  If within their late camp instead of where they
now are, the hours of their life would be numbered--perhaps to count
only minutes.  At the best they could but save bare life for a time, but
nothing to comfort or sustain it.

All this they have come to comprehend thoroughly as they continue to
watch the movements of the Coyoteros, and see the cordon these have
drawn around them.  But for some minutes there is no movement at all,
the bands after uniting having come to a halt, the files making
quarter-wheel, so as to face the Cerro--all done as by trained cavalry
on a parade-ground!  And for a while they stay halted, the change of
front giving their alignment a thinner look.  But at the central point
is a thicker clump, without military formation, on which Don Estevan
directs his telescope.  To see half a dozen of the mounted savages face
to face with one another, earnestly, excitedly gesticulating.  After a
look through it, he tenders the glass to the _gambusino_, who may better
understand what they are about.

"El Cascabel and his sub-chiefs in consultation," pronounces the latter,
soon as sighting them.  "It's plain they're puzzled by seeing wagons
where never were such before.  Like as not they think we're _soldados_,
and that makes them cautious.  But they'll soon know different.  _Por
Dios_! they know it now.  They're coming on!"



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

A CAMP WITHOUT OCCUPANTS.

The _gambusino_ has guessed everything aright, if words spoken in the
confidence of knowledge can be called guesses.  True they prove, to the
spirit as the letter; for it is just that unaccustomed spectacle of
wheeled vehicles with their white canvas covers that caused the Indians
to keep their deploying line so far aloof, and bring it to a halt for
deliberation.  Notwithstanding their being masters of all that desert
country, lords of the _llanos_, they themselves do not always traverse
it without difficulties to encounter and dangers to dread.  The wagons
proclaim the camp occupied by white men; and knowing these to be
ordinary travellers, miners on the move, or _commerciantes_ on a trading
expedition to the frontier towns, the Coyoteros would little regard
them--certainly not enough to have made that long _detour_ with so much
delay in approaching them.  But it may be a _military_ encampment; and
if so, will need to be dealt with differently--hence their unwonted
caution.

Soon as the two bands became conjoined, El Cascabel had summoned his
sub-chiefs around him, to take their opinions upon this point.  For
among Indians the head chief is not armed with despotic authority, but
must submit his intended course of action to the approval of his
following, even when on the _maraud_.  And as the _gambusino_ rightly
conjectured, this it was which occupied them at that temporary halt.

A question without difficulty, and soon decided.  In the negative as
regarded the camp being occupied by soldiers.  Were it so, men in
uniform would be observable around it; whereas none such are seen.  Nor
human form of any kind; only animals--horses, and mules, with horned
cattle commingled--all careering madly about as if masterless, or
escaped from their masters' control.

This might seem an odd circumstance, yet it does not to the savages.
From experience they know that all animals belonging to the palefaces
become affrighted at their own proximity--often to break from their
fastenings, however secure.  Such a scare is likely what they see now.

All the more does it assure them they will not have to deal with
_soldados_.  These would have their horses under better discipline,
would indeed by this time be on their backs, at least some of them.

Satisfied of its being a camp of civilians, at a signal sent along their
line the red horsemen make a move forward, their files becoming thicker
as the cordon contracts into nearer and narrower curve.  Still they
advance slowly, not through fear or want of confidence, but because they
feel sure their enfiladement is complete, and their victims enclosed.
But another idea rules their cautious approach.  A splendid prize is
before them in that large _ca Callada_, and to ride hurriedly in might
lead to the loose animals breaking through their ranks, and scattering
off over the plain, with after difficulty of capturing them.  For just
then they might have enough to do with their owners.  Besides, there can
be no surprise.  The occupants of the camp, whoever they be, must have
seen them long since, and are watching them now, though not one of
themselves can be seen.  Nothing so strange in this; they are inside the
wagon enclosure, screened by the ridge of _alparejas_ that form a sort
of breastwork around it.  And the ruck of frightened animals rushing to
and fro between further prevents view of them.  The more reason for
deliberate approach, this attitude of the white men telling of an
intention to stand upon the defence.

Becoming convinced of this, the Indians give up thought of immediate
attack.  They will wait for the night's darkness to give them a better
opportunity; and when at such a distance as they deem beyond longest gun
range, they again come to a halt.

They would dismount, holding their horses in readiness; and some are
already on the ground.  But before all alight, a word is sent along
their circular line, ordering them up again.  Something has transpired
to give cause for a change of purpose.

Soon they know what, seeing that the camp animals have retreated back
beyond the wagons up into an embayment of the cliff, where they stand in
a clump, cowering and still showing scare, but at rest.  It is not that,
however, which has made the Coyoteros re-mount, but because their view
of the camp now being clear they still cannot see human beings in or
around it.  With eyes bent in keenest quest between the corralled
wagons, through the spokes of their wheels, all along the periphery of
pack-saddles, nothing in the shape of human form or face can they make
out.  Yet the sun is in their favour, and if such was there they could
not fail seeing it.  Puzzled are the savages now, and for the first
time--since it is the first time for them to have such an experience.
For the moment it even mystifies them, and thoughts of the supernatural
come creeping into their minds.  They know Nauchampa-tepetl to be a
place of weird repute, so figuring in many a record and legend of their
race.  And now to see a camp there, a camp of the palefaces, with every
appointment appertaining, wheeled vehicles drawn up in _corral_ with a
grand tent inside--for the marquee, still standing, is conspicuous
through a break between the wagons--with all the animals that should be
there, and yet no man, no one seeming to own or control them, that is
certainly strange, to the point of astonishment--even awe!

And for a time it so affects the savage warriors, their chief not
excepted.  But only for a time.  Notwithstanding his ghostly
coat-of-arms, El Cascabel is but little the slave of superstition; and,
after a moment's reflection, feels satisfied there are palefaces in the
camp, though invisible to the view of him and his.  In that, as the
reader knows, he is wrong; but right in the way he takes to test it.

It may seem the veriest _grotesquerie_ here to introduce that venerated
weapon, known as the "Queen Anne musket," yet the truthfulness of this
record requires its introduction.

For strange as it may appear, this historical piece, with all its
imperfections, has found its way to every corner of the world; even into
the hands of the Apache Indians.  How they became possessed of it needs
but a word of explanation, which is, that they had it--took it--from
their hereditary enemies, the Mexicans--from the _infanterio_ of that
nation, armed with the old condemned "Queen Anne's" of London Tower
celebrity.

Leaving this necessary digression, and returning to the Coyoteros--more
especially to their chief, we hear him call out to those of his
followers who carry the ancient firelock, giving them orders to advance
some paces and send shots into the white man's camp.

Dismounting, they do so, aiming at the wagons and tent inside, so
correctly that their big bullets, an ounce in weight, are seen to hit
the mark.  But without effect following, any more than if their shots
were meant for the _facade_ of cliff beyond, whose rocks echo back the
reports of the antiquated pieces, as if in hilarious mockery.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE CHASE OF CRUSADER.

By El Cascabel's orders, repeatedly are the big muskets re-loaded and
fired into the _corral_, till every wagon has had a bullet through it,
and the tent is pierced in several places.  But all with the same
effect, the shots eliciting no other response than their own echoes.
Now the Indians know for sure that the camp is unoccupied; and, but for
their foreknowledge of the topography of the place, would be mystified
indeed.  But most of them have themselves been on the summit of
Nauchampa-tepetl, and their eyes turn interrogatively towards it.
Thither the white men must have retreated, leaving everything below.

They see nothing, however; not as much as a face.  For Don Estevan has
directed those by the head of the gorge to keep well under cover, in
hopes of tempting the savages to an ascent in the face of his formidable
battery.

But the Coyotero chief is too astute for that, knowing, moreover, that
there is no chance for the despised enemy to escape him.  Wrathful he is
withal, at having been in a way outwitted, angry at himself for having
made the surround so slowly.  It will cost him a siege, he knows not how
long, interfering with the expedition to the Horcasitas, perhaps to its
abandonment.  But there is some compensation in the plunder so
unexpectedly come upon, and from what he sees it should be an ample one.
Six large wagons with a grand _tienda--litera_ also--visible, to say
nothing of the numerous animals, a travelling party so well-appointed
should also have commodities in correspondence, promising a rich prize.

The camp is good as captured already; but instead of hastening on to
take possession, he proceeds slowly and systematically as ever; for
nothing can be gained by speed now, and some thing may be lost--the
loose animals.  They are still crowded up in the embayment between the
cliffs, but with heads aloft and ears apeak, neighing, snorting, and
restless, as if about to make a break.

"Leave aside arms, all--guns, and spears!" commands the chief.  "Get
ready the _riatas_!"

All together drop down from their horses, those who carry spears
sticking them upright in the ground, those with firelocks laying them
along it.  Any _impedimenta_ of baggage and accoutrements are also
pulled off and flung beside.  Then they vault back upon their animals,
each with but his trail-rope carried in coil over the left arm, to be
used as a _lazo_.

Thus disencumbered and equipped, they at length advance, not for the
camp, but the _caballada_; but ere they can close up the mouth of the
cove the white men's animals become more affrighted than ever, and make
the burst they had been threatening--horses, mules, and oxen all
together.  With a noise of thunder, the ground echoes the tread of their
hundreds of hooves, as in frenzied madness they rush out for the open
plain.  Little chance would there be of their reaching it but that the
Indian horses catch the stampede, too, many of them becoming
unmanageable.  The enfilading line is broken, and through its riven
ranks the camp animals sweep as a hurricane.  One is in the lead--a
large horse, coal-black, on whom many an Indian had set eye, with _lazo_
ready for his capture.  Crusader it is, his neigh heard above all
others, as, with head on high, mane tossed, and tail streaming afar, he
dashes at the severed line; again uttered, as it were exultingly, when,
having cleared it, he sees no enemy before him.  Half a dozen nooses are
flung at and after him, all ill-directed; all fall short, and slide from
his glistening flanks, while as many disappointed cries follow him in
chorus.

All is scamper and confusion now; the surround has failed, the stampede
taken place, and the stampeded animals, such as succeeded in getting
off--for not all went clear--can only be captured after a chase.  But
the Indian horses quickly get over their scare, and are laid on the
pursuit till a stream of them stretches out on the _llano_.  Fresher and
in better condition than the camp animals, these are soon overtaken and
noosed, now one, now another, till at length only a single horse is seen
beyond the pursuing line.

Followed still, but so far beyond it, at each bound widening the
distance, that a pair of eyes watching the chase, at first
apprehensively, now sparkle with delight.  For they are the eyes of his
own master, Henry Tresillian, standing on the _mesa's_ summit behind a
screening tree.

Half a score of the savages still continue the pursuit, among them their
chief himself.  For he would give much to be the owner of that matchless
steed, and now strains his own to the utmost.  All in vain.  Crusader
forges farther and farther away, till he is but a speck upon the plain.
Then the baffled pursuers, one after another, give up discouraged, at
length El Cascabel also coming to a stop, and turning to ride back with
an air of angry disappointment.

The English youth, yielding to a thrill of proud exultation, waves his
cap in the air, giving utterance to a triumphant "Hurrah!"

"I'm so glad he's got away from them," he says, to Vicente, by his side;
"wherever he may go or whatever become of him.  My noble Crusader!  But
wasn't it clever?  Wasn't it grand?"

"Wonderful!" responds the _gambusino_, alike moved to admiration.  "I
never saw horse behave so in all my born life.  _Santissima_! he must be
a witch, if not the _demonio_ himself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Indians, leading back the captured animals, and recovering their
arms, no longer delay entering the camp.  Which, to their chagrin, they
find not only abandoned, but wellnigh despoiled, as if other plunderers
had been there before them!  That much has been carried off, and of
course of the most valuable kind, is evinced by boxes broken open, bales
unroped and the contents extracted, with here and there empty spaces in
the wagons, where evidently something had been stored.  There is little
left for them save the refuse, or effects of a nature to be of no use to
them.  What care they for mining tools and machinery?

More than ever are they angry and regretful of their ill-judged delay;
but vow deadlier vengeance, when the time comes for it.

Still that may not be soon.  The very fashion of retreat shows it to
have been made with deliberation, and that the white men intend standing
a siege, with the hopes and the wherewithal to hold out ever so long.
And they, the Indians, knowing the danger of breasting that steep in the
face of resolute defenders, have no thought of attempting it.  But the
goods that have been carried up must remain there, and sooner or later
fall into their hands.

So consoling themselves, the new occupants of the camp settle down to
the siege, after having secured their animals--both their own and those
they have just come into possession of.  All are put out to grass,
"hoppled" or tethered on trail-ropes.  Then the fires, found
smouldering, are replenished with fresh fuel, and blaze up brightly as
ever, with spits and roasting joints all round them.

This day the Coyoteros dine on beef, instead of their customary diet of
_mezcal_ and baked horseflesh.  And a plenteous repast they make.  Not
for a long time have they had such an opportunity of gormandising.  In
their desert land of Apacheria provisions are scarce--often to
starvation-point; and they now feast gluttonously, as if to make up for
many a fast.

Nor are they without drinkables, though none brought they along with
them.  In a corner of one of the wagons is a cask--which on being tapped
is found to be filled with _chingarita_--a fiery spirit distilled from
the very plant, chief staple of their food--the _mezcal_.  The Coyoteros
know it well, and though they do not themselves distil, they drink it,
and are so fond of it as to wonder why the cask is there, and not also
carried up the mountain!

Drawn out, and rolled to the middle of the _corral_, they dance in
delight around it, repeatedly quaffing from their calabash cups, with
such an accompaniment of noises that the camp, lately occupied by men
and women, might seem to have come into the possession of devils.

And so on till night.  Then demon-like indeed are the forms seen
flitting around its fires, and as much the faces, lit up by the red
glare from blazing fagots of _mezquite_ and _pinon_--both resinous
trees.  Still more the discordant sounds, a chorus of cries and
ejaculations, in mad wild yelling, as of Bedlam broke loose.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

A RETRIBUTIVE SHOT.

It is midnight, and darkness over mountain and plain; pitch darkness,
although there is a moon in the sky.  But she is not visible, obscured
by a bank of thick cumulus clouds, that have rolled up from the
Californian Gulf--portent of an approaching rain-storm.

The savages have gone to rest; or, at all events, brought their noisy
revelry to an end, and silence reigns everywhere around, save now and
then a snort from a miner's horse, or mule, with a stamp of hoof, uneasy
in their new companionship; the half howl, half bark of prowling coyote,
and the wailing of chuck-will's widow--the nightjar of Sonora--hawking
for insects high over the lake.  But no sound of human voice is heard,
nor through the inky blackness can be seen form of man.

Yet not all are asleep, either above or below.  On the plain is a line
of sentries, set at distances apart on the outer edge of the triangular
space where the path goes up; and inside this, by the bottom of the
gorge itself, two other men, though not on sentinel duty.

All Indians, of course; one of the pair by themselves being El Cascabel,
the other a sub-chief, his second in command.  They are there on
reconnoitring purposes, to discover whether it be possible for the
besiegers to make the ascent on a dark night unseen, and so take the
besieged by surprise.

Since settling down in camp the Rattlesnake has reflected, and a thought
is now in his mind making him uneasy.  Not regret for having to forego
his raid on the settlements of the Horcasitas.  Unlikely that the siege
would take up any more time, and the booty alone should be ample
compensation.  For he has made study of the abandoned camp, found every
indication of wealth, and feels sure it late held rich treasures.  They
would reward him for the time lost in beleaguering.  And as to the
revenge, a whole company of miners--nigh a hundred at least--with their
wives and daughters, grand senoras among them too--death to the men, and
captivity to the women--that should satisfy the keenest vengeance.

And perhaps it would his, were he sure of accomplishing it.  He was
before the sun went down, but is not now.  For, since, he has thought of
that which had not then occurred to him or to any of his following.
Might not the miners have sent off a courier back to their own country,
with a demand for help?  If so, it would surely come; in strength
sufficient, and soon enough to raise the siege.  For the head men of the
besieging force now know it will be a prolonged one.  The fragments of
provisions found in the wagons tell of a good store taken out of them
and up.  Game is there in abundance to supplement it, and water
never-failing--a fortress in every way supplied.  Not so strange, then,
the Coyotero chief being nervous at the thought of a courier having been
dispatched.  For one might, without having been seen by him or his.  A
long distance it was from where they themselves must have been first
sighted by those on the mountain.

But for the obscurity, there are those on it who would see himself and
his second now.  By the head of the gorge above a party of miners keep
guard.  They have just come on duty, the relief after a spell of sleep.
For Don Estevan, by old experience, knowing there was no clanger of
Indian attack in the earlier hours, had entrusted the guard-keeping of
these to the more common men.  Between midnight and morning is the time
to "'ware redskin," and the guard of this period, now commenced, has
been confided to a picked party, two of those composing it being Pedro
Vicente and his _fidus achates_, Henry Tresillian.

Guard it can scarce be called, being only a small vidette-picket.  For
there is little fear--scarce a thought--that the Indians will attempt
the ascent, at least not so soon, or without gravely reflecting upon it.

"Perhaps never at all," says the _gambusino_, in confabulation with his
fellow-watchers.  "And why should they?  They must be well aware of the
chances against them.  Besides, having got us as fish in a net, they're
not likely to leap into the water themselves, where they know there are
_tiburones_ (sharks)."

Vicente has had a spell at pearl-diving in the Gulf, hence his simile
drawn from the sea.

"Ay, _tintoreros_--these," he adds, specifying the most dreaded of the
squaline tribe, with hand caressingly rested on one of the large stones
alongside which he is lying.  "I only wish they would try it, the
Rattlesnake leading.  'Twould give me just the opportunity I want to pay
that artist off for the bit of bad engraving--he did on my breast--by
hurling one of these beauties at his head.  _Malraya_!  I may never have
the chance to settle that score--not likely now."

The final words, uttered in a tone of angry disappointed vengeance, are
followed by an interval of silence.  For the new videttes, having just
entered on their duty, deem it wise, before aught else, to make
themselves acquainted with how matters are below.  They are all in
recumbent attitude, _ventre a terre_, behind the parapet of loose
stones.  For having witnessed that long-range practice with the "Queen
Annes," it occurs to them that a big bullet may at any moment come
whizzing up the gorge, and just as well be out of its way.  So elevating
but their eyes over, they look cautiously down.  To see nothing--not
even the plain, nor yet the lake; to hear nothing which proceeds from
human kind; but they know the savages are on the alert, with sentries
aligned below, and for a time continue to listen.

At length, satisfied there is nothing which calls for their vigilance
being kept on the strain, Vicente draws out his _cajoncito_ of corn-husk
_cigarittos_, lights one, and sets to smoking.  His comrades of the
watch do likewise; and the English youth, long since initiated into the
ways of the country, smokes too, only his weed is a Havannah.

Not many minutes are they thus occupied when the _gambusino_, chancing
to turn his eyes south-westward, sees what makes him spit the
_cigaritto_ from his mouth, and gaze intently.  The object is up in the
sky; a slight rift just opened in the bank of cloud, edged
yellowish-white.  The moon must be near it--_is_ near it, and now in it!
for while they are still regarding the blue spot, she shoots suddenly
out from the black, as arrow from bow.

Instantly night's darkness is turned into light as of day; every object
on the _llano_, even the smallest, made visible for miles upon miles, up
to the horizon's verge.  But their eyes go not so far, least of all
those of Pedro Vicente, who at the first flash from the unveiled moon
catches sight of that which arrests his straying glances, fixing them
fast.  Not the line of sentries, though he sees them too; but a pair of
figures inside and closer, up nigh the point where the path steps upon
the plain.  One of them, recognised, rivets his gaze by a token of
identification unmistakable--a death's head in white chalk, which, with
the moon full upon it, gleams conspicuous against a background of
bronze.

"_Carria_!  El Cascabel!" he mechanically mutters, in tone of
exultation; and without saying another word, or waiting another second,
brings his rifle to shoulder, the stock to his cheek, with muzzle deep
depressed.

A blaze--a crack--and the bullet is sped.  A cry of agony from below--
another of anger in voice different--proclaims its course true, and that
the mark aimed at has been hit.

He who fired the shot knows that, by sight as well as sound.  For he
sees--all see--a man reeling, staggering, about to fall, and another
with arms outstretched, as if partly in surprise, partly with intent to
support him.

Only for an instant is the spectacle under their eyes.  For suddenly as
she showed herself, the moon disappears with a plunge into the opaque
clouds, leaving all dark as before.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE "DEATH FANDANGO."

"You think you've killed him?"

It is Don Estevan who interrogates, startled out of his slumber by the
report of the _gambusino's_ gun, which has brought him in hurried haste
to the post of guard.

"Pretty sure of it, your worship," is the rejoinder, in calm confidence.

"We all saw him staggering--he must have gone down," says another of the
videttes, confirmingly.

"If I haven't settled his hash," pursues Vicente, "then a man may get a
bullet through midribs, and live afterwards--a thing not likely.  Or I'm
much mistaken, mine went straight centreways into the white--that sweet
thing I've such reason to remember--unluckily for him painted too
conspicuously."

"It must have been El Cascabel, if you saw that."

"He it was, or I shouldn't have been so quick on the trigger.  Indeed, I
wasn't so confident about the carry of my piece.  'Twas a long shot."

"The bullet may have hit without killing him--spent, and only stunned
him?"

"If your worship feels inclined for a bet, I'll lay big odds that ere
this the Rattlesnake has kicked his last kick, or, to put it more
appropriately, wriggled his last wriggle."

The auditory gathered around the _gambusino_ would laugh at his quaint
words, but ere they give way to the inclination it is checked by other
words quick following in exclamatory tones,

"Bet's off, your worship--too late!  I'm not the man to dishonour myself
by wagering on a certainty.  _Oigate_! you hear that?"

Don Estevan does hear, as the others, sounds ascending from below--human
voices, in that melancholy cadence which tells of lamentation for the
dead.  They come from the direction of the camp, in a wild crooning
wail, now and then a stave, as if coyotes were taking part in the
lugubrious chorus.  At intervals, also, there are other notes,
differently intoned; loud angry ejaculations, the Apache war-cry,
proclaiming vengeance only to be satisfied with blood for blood.

For nearly an hour the infernal _fracas_ is kept up, the volume of voice
continuous, and redoubled by reverberation along the cliffs.  Then it is
abruptly brought to a close, succeeded by a silence mysterious and
ominous in itself.  Can it be that in their insane anger the savages
have resolved upon the ascent, _coute-qui-coute_?  The darkness, dense
as ever, would favour, and might tempt them.

There is enough probability in it to make the videttes more vigilant,
and their numbers are now greater.  After an event of such serious
consequence, most of the people--women and children excepted--are up and
active, moving backwards and forwards between their place of bivouac by
the spring and the ravine's head, all careful not to approach this point
too near.  The big muskets admonish them; though as yet no shot from
one, nor from any other sort of piece, has been fired by the savages.
If they mean assault, it will be by stealth, and in silence.

Hushed, and listening with all ears, the watchers hear nothing; at
least, no sound of a suspicious nature.  But Indians can creep, or
climb, noiselessly as cats--the Coyoteros especially--in this respect
equalling the animal from which they have their name.  And they may be
worming their way up for all, snake-like among the stems of the
_mesquites_ and cactus plants.

"Speaking for myself," says the _gambusino_, after a time, "I haven't
much fear of them trying that trick.  But if you think it worth while,
_camarados_, to give them a hint--and perhaps it may be as well--we can
spare a few of these pebbles."  He points to the collected stones.
"Half a dozen or so will do it."

His _camarades_ comprehend his meaning; and as Don Estevan has returned
to his tent leaving him in command of the picket, they signify their
approval of his design, all desiring it.

On the instant after, a rock pushed over the edge goes crashing down,
breaking off branches, loosening other stones in its way, all in loud
rumbling borne together to the level below.  But they elicit no
response, save the echo of their own noise, no shriek or cry, as if man
were caught and bruised by them.

After a time another is launched, with like result, then another and
another at measured intervals--for they must husband their ammunition--
the watchers all the while without fear that man, red or white, will
face such an avalanche, dangerous as any that ever swept down the slope
of Alps.

At the earliest dawn they desist as soon as they can trust to their
eyes.  And now, scanning the plain below, they see at the bottom of the
gorge only the rocks they had rolled down, with the other _debris_.
Farther out they perceive the line of dusky sentinels, just as they
expected it to be; but no other human form, living or dead.  The
Coyotero chief is dead for all that--carried to the camp of the
palefaces, inside the great tent, where he now lies face upward; the
pale, crepusculous light stealing in to show that hideous device on his
breast, symbol of death itself, no longer a disc of white, but flaked
and mottled red, with a darker spot of ragged edging in the centre where
it was pierced by the _gambusino's_ bullet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Just as the sun begins to show above the horizon's edge, again go up the
crooning cries, but now in more measured strain.  For the savages are
collected in the _corral_, a choice party of them under direction of
their medicine man ranged about the marquee, not standing still, but
circling round and round it in a slow, saltatory step--in short, dancing
the "death-dance."

It is accompanied by chants and incantations, in the voice of the
medicine chief himself, pitched louder than the rest, with a pause at
intervals, to speak eulogies of the deceased, praise of his valour and
virtues, ending in a passionate appeal to his followers to avenge his
death.  They need not the stimulus of such exhortation.  In the eyes of
all vengeance is already glowing, burning, and but flashes a little
angrier as they respond in a vociferous and united yell.

They upon the _mesa_ are not witnesses to this odd ceremony, only a
portion of the camp being within their view.  But ere long they have
another under their eyes--a spectacle equally exciting, and of like
grave portent to themselves.

It takes place out on the open plain by the lake's edge, upon a portion
of the grass ground, all visible from the ravine's head.  The arena is
purposely chosen for the palefaces to be spectators of it, that it may
strike terror to their souls, by giving them a foretaste of what is to
be their fate.  For it is the "_Fandango de crancos_," _anglice_,
scalp-dance.

What they on the mountain first see is some half-score of the savages
issuing forth from the _corral_ and taking their way to the appointed
spot.  They bear with them a long pole painted blood-red, recognisable
as one of the wagon-tongues, drawn to a sharp point at its inner end.
In a trice it is stuck upright in the turf, showing at its top something
very different from the chains late there.  It is the skin of a human
head, with the hair hanging straggled down, light-coloured hair
proclaiming it that of a paleface.  They could crown that pole with
scores of such scalps, many having their leggings fringed with them.
But for the rites of the ceremony to be performed one is deemed
sufficient; and to make it more terribly impressive, the one selected
shows by the silken gloss of the hair with its luxuriance and length to
have been taken from the head of a woman!  There are women looking at it
now, and young girls of different ages.  For all have left the spring
and come forward to the viewing-point.  It is a sight to inspire them
with awe enough of itself, without their being told of a certain and
terrible signification attached to the fact of a _woman's_ scalp being
fixed to the head of that pole instead of a _man's_.  Pedro Vicente
could make it known to them, but does not.

Ere long the ceremonial of vengeful menace commences, the Indians
approaching the ensanguined stake and forming in wide cordon around it;
all of them in full war-paint, a fresh coat of it in their garish
devices of various colours, scarlet and blood-red predominating.  But
there is one common to all, a symbol in white--the same borne by him who
is sleeping his last sleep in the _corral_.  They have but assumed it
for the occasion to do honour to their dead chief.  And a frightful form
of demonstration it is.  Over two hundred men, mahogany-coloured
savages, all naked to the waist, each with a death's head and crossbones
done in white gypsum on the central and prominent portion of his breast!
'Twere enough to awe the heart of any one within their reach or in
their power, and many of the spectators above tremble at beholding the
horrid insignia.

The dance begins, the savages in circle tramping round and round the
pole "how-howing" as they go, at first in slow step and with voice
barely audible.  Soon, however, the one quickens, the other becoming
louder, till the step is a violent bounding, the voice raised to highest
pitch.  Louder and angrier grow the shouts as they turn their eyes
upward to the scalp, and still more violent their gesticulations, arms
in air with weapons whirled above their heads, till at length several
rush at the reddened stake, and hack it down with their tomahawks.  Then
follows a confused struggle for the scalp, in which it is torn to
pieces, all who can appropriating shred or tress, but to spit upon it in
vindictive scorn, while still further rending it!

The demoniac dance is now over; some it has most excited come rushing
towards the ravine, as though they really meant risking an assault.  All
above draw back out of sight, only they appointed for the defence
staying by the stone artillery.  But they are not called upon to hurl
any more down just yet.  Warned by the event of overnight, the savages
think better of it, and before getting too close, come to a stop, and
content themselves with wordy threats and a brandishing of weapons.

But, empty and impotent as is their menacing attitude, it makes deep
impression on those against whom it is directed.  For it tells them they
may never more go down that gorge, or set foot upon the plain below, to
live an hour, if a minute, after.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

NOT LOST YET.

In the great desert land of Apacheria there are Coyoteros and Coyoteros;
some, abject miserable creatures among the lowest forms of humanity;
others, men of fine port, courage, and strength--true Indian warriors.
Of these is the band of El Cascabel, noted for its frequent hostile
expeditions to the settlements of Sonora, as that on which it was bent
when brought up by the Lost Mountain.  So unexpectedly deprived of its
chief, will it continue on that expedition? or lay siege to the party of
travelling miners as he intended doing?  A question asked the miners
themselves of one another, but not after witnessing the scalp-dance.
Then knew they for sure that the siege was to be carried out.  As
further evidence of it, that very afternoon the mules and horses of the
caravan are collected into droves, tied head to tail, and conducted away
from the ground altogether by a number of Indians placed in charge of
them--evidently that there should not be too many mouths on the pastures
around the camp, which, though good, are but of limited extent.  Only
some of the inferior animals, with the beeves, are allowed to remain as
provision for the besiegers.

The miners above have meanwhile been busy getting matters regulated in
their new camp, or bivouac, soon as convinced that the enemy did not
intend assault.  All repair thither, only a limited number of videttes
keeping post by the gorge.  Around the _ojo de agua_ is witnessed a
scene of curious interest.  To the two tents set up on the day before
are being added sheds and arbour-like huts, with such haste that ere
night all are completed, for the cloud of the night before, portending
rain, still covers the western sky, though not a drop has yet fallen.

Just as the last of daylight glimmers over the plain a very drown and
downpour, as if to make up for its long absence.  The sky is all clouded
now, but with clouds at short intervals riven by forking spears of
lightning, while the accompanying thunder is almost continuous.

Under the yellow light the lake glistens as if it was molten gold, while
the rebound upwards from the heavy drops shows something like a golden
spray hanging all over it.  On beyond the out-going stream, late but a
tiny rivulet, has changed to a foaming torrent, madly breaking its way
across the plain; while the in-going rill from the _messas_ summit has
become a series of cascades and cataracts.

The Indians, fearing a stampede by their horses, draw them in from their
picket-pins, hobble, and make them fast round the wheels of the wagons,
but they are still more solicitous about the fine _caballada_ captured
and sent away; for nearly every one of these, with all the mules, has a
pack saddle on its back with the distributed dry goods, and other
desirable articles not taken up the _messa_.  In short, if that pack
drove be lost, they may not have much to reward them for the season's
raid.  They might have sent the wagons along, but aware of the use to
which these are often put by the palefaces, as sleeping-tents, are
noting the approach of the storm, and determine to utilise them in
similar fashion.  That night at least they would need them, and it might
be many more.

So, as the rain falls, lightning flashes, and thunder rolls, there is a
close-packed crowd under the tilt of each, with the big tent full to its
entrance-flap; and still there is not space enough to shield all from
that torrent of the sky, a large number retreating under ledges of the
cliffs that overhang near by.

The miners are all under shelter; they, too, sure of the approaching
storm, having worked hard during the later hours of the day.  The
_messa_ gave them material for wall and roof.  Posts from the indigenous
trees with scantling poles cut from saplings of many kinds, and a thatch
of _cycas_ and other grasslike plants, which abounded on the summit.
Men accustomed as they to handling ropes and gearing, were not long in
running up a house sufficient for shelter, and now every such domicile
is filled to its door-jambs; men, women, and children mingled together,
some standing, some seated on the bundles of goods that, but for their
being inside, would have been lost.  They had thought of that too.

Up to a certain hour the people of quality are all inside one tent,
which shows bright from a light burning inside it: their conversation
is, of course, about the circumstances which surround them.  Who, then,
could talk of any other?  Don Estevan believes that the killing of the
Rattlesnake may be a disadvantage to them rather than otherwise, making
the vengeance of his followers more implacable than at least it should
do.  But he has yet another reason for so believing.  In his own
military expeditions he had become acquainted with El Cascabel's second
in command, a sub-chief, equalling the others in hostility to the
whites, while far excelling him in ability.

But it is too soon yet to discuss such chances.  Rest was the one thing
needed; and at the usual hour for retiring, all, save those detailed for
picket-guard, seek repose.

Just as on the previous night the less experienced stand the first
watches of the night, keeping the rain off with waterproof _serapes_;
only at intervals need they look down, and then, unlike as on the night
before, everything is seen as under a meridian sun, for it is while the
lightning gleams they make their intermittent examination of the gorge
path, cascading stream, trees, and rocks illuminated by it as by a
thousand torches; only towards morning do their blazes become less
frequent, gradually dying out as the rain ceases to fall.  Henry
Tresillian is again on watch duty, having insisted upon it,
notwithstanding the opposition made by the others of his party.  But he
has a reason they do not understand--indeed, he has not communicated it
to them; during the earlier hours of the night he fancied having
observed a dark object far off on the plain, seemingly in the shape of a
horse; but returning several times to look, afterwards he could not see
it again.  Now, on the post midnight watch, at each blaze he runs his
eye around the spot where he fancied the dark object to have been, only
in the very last one to see it again, and make sure it was a horse; but
his ears tell him more than his eyes, for in the dark spell succeeding
the silence of the elements restored he several times hears a neigh,
which he recognises as that of his own horse, Crusader.

And when the day at length dawns he sees the noble animal itself only a
short distance beyond the lower end of the lake, with head upraised and
muzzle pointed up the gorge, as though in a morning salute to himself,



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

AN UNLOOKED-FOR ENEMY.

A thrill of delight sweeps through the heart of the English youth at
beholding Crusader in this attitude, as if the horse said, "You see,
I've not forsaken you."  Satisfaction also to think the animal capable
of making its own way, and finding sustenance in those wilds; for should
it ever be their fate to escape from that mountain, there might be a
hope of horse and master coming together again.  But there is fear
commingled with these feelings, this causing the eyes of Henry
Tresillian to turn with quick glance towards the left, where a small
portion of the camp of the Indians is visible outside the flanking
battlements of rock; every moment he expects to see issue from it a band
of dusky horsemen in start for a new pursuit of his favourite.

Crusader seems to have some anticipation of the same; he stands
restlessly, now glancing up the chine, anon at the corralled wagons with
hundreds of horses around them.  These he regards suspiciously, being
the same with which he had already declined to associate; perhaps he may
be wondering where are the other horses, his companions of the caravan?
Whether or no, he hesitates to approach nearer to the old
camping-ground, steadfastly keeping his place.  Where he stands he is so
nigh his former master that the latter might without any difficulty make
himself heard, and at first the English youth had it on the tip of his
tongue to call out a friendly greeting, but quick reflection showed him
its imprudence.  The very worst thing he could do for the horse's sake.
Crusader would be sure to recognise his voice and respond with a neigh,
which would awake a chorus of yells in the Coyoteros' camp, and at once
set the savages on the alert.

For the last half-hour or more the black horse had been quiet, and there
were several reasons against his being seen.  He was upon the opposite,
or western edge of the stream, which had a fringing of reeds and bushes,
broken in places, but here and there continuous for yards, and behind
one of these clumps he had come to a stand; even in bright day, as it
now nearly is, he would there be invisible to the occupants of the
captured camp.

But if only to water their horses, the Indians will soon be dashing down
to the lake, and then all chance of his remaining longer unobserved will
be at an end.

With gaze more riveted on the horse than ever, for there is something
strange in his behaviour, Henry Tresillian watches him with wondering
eyes, his heart audibly pulsating.  What if they should again get him in
a ring, and this time display more adroitness in hurling their
laryettes?  Crusader might not be so clever on every occasion.

While thus speculating on the result, a noise reaches the ears of the
English youth, as also of others on vidette post, which causes an
instant and sudden turning of their eyes in the opposite direction.
Many voices, indeed, all loud and all in excited tone.  Voices of men,
shrieks of women, and cries of terrified children, all coming from one
place, their new camp by the spring.

The videttes stay not on their post an instant longer, but forsaking it,
rush towards _ojo de agua_.  Sounds inexplicable, mysterious!  What can
be causing them?  The only suggestion attempted is, that the Indians
after all may have contrived to ascend the _messa_ by some secret path
known only to themselves, and are in the act of attacking from the rear.
What other enemy could cause such a scare?  Every voice in the miners'
party is seemingly convulsed with affright.

The young Englishman dashes on ahead, tearing through branches, and
bounding over trunks of prostrate trees.  Vicente, who had brought the
watch with him, is close behind, though he has not such stimulus to
haste, for amidst the _fracas_ of noises, Henry Tresillian hears a sweet
voice calling out his own name in a tone of appeal.

Not till they come to the very edge of the glade do they discover the
cause of all these wild demonstrations, though something seen an instant
or two earlier leads Vicente to conjecture it.  Men, but chiefly boys
and girls, standing on the branches of trees high as they can climb, as
though there to behold some passing spectacle.

"_El orso_!--the grizzly!"

"It must be that," says Vicente, pressing on.  And so it proves.  As the
videttes so mysteriously summoned in see on getting to the nearer end of
the glade which surrounds the spring, at its farther one are two
gigantic animals, one a quadruped, the other to all appearances a biped.
For all, both are four-footed creatures, and the most dangerous to be
encountered in all the desert lands of America.  So utterly are they
regardless of the odds against them that they would advance to the
attack of horse or man, even were there twenty of these together, and
have been known to come shuffling into a well-appointed camp, and make a
grand havoc, ere means may be taken to destroy or eject them.

The Indian tiger or the African lion are not more to be dreaded in their
jungles than is the _ursus ferox_ in the districts it specially affects.

Strange that the pair at the inner end of the glade had not yet shown
signs of any determination to assail the camp; indeed, they seem to be
amusing themselves at the stir their presence has created, or rather as
if making amusement for the surprised people.  He, upon his hams, for it
is the male who has so erected himself, is playing his fore-paws about,
as if engaged in an act of prestidigitation; while his mate, at
intervals also rearing up, seems to be playing the part of juggler's
assistant, the whole spectacle being comical in the extreme.  The
tragical part of it had not yet commenced, and for two reasons.

First, that the grizzly bear seldom makes instant attack, appearing to
enter on the field of battle more by accident than from any
predetermined hostile resolve.  Only after shammering about a while, and
at intervals uttering a snort till their passions get the better of
them, and then woe to man or horse that comes within the hug of their
powerful fore-paws!  With its enormous curving claws, many inches in
length, a grizzly bear has been known to drag the largest ox or horse to
the ground, as a terrier would a rabbit.

Henry Tresillian looks only to the two canvas tents to see the senora
inside one, her face visible through the opening, while Gertrude is
still without by the side of her own father and his.  The young girl
appears behaving herself more bravely than any of the older people
around.  She is inspired with fresh courage at the sight of the English
youth bounding towards her, gun in hand.

By this time others have got out their guns, and a party led by the
_mayor-domo_ is advancing to fire on the bears.  The _gambusino_,
hitherto not having observed this party, now sees it, noting its
intention.  He would frustrate it, and makes the attempt, shouting in
loudest voice, "For your lives, don't draw trigger upon them.  They may
go without--"

Too late; his after-words were drowned by the report of the steward's
great gun, and the male bear came down on all fours, evidently hit, but
as evidently little harmed, his active motions afterwards telling of a
wound he no more regarded than the scratch of a pin.  It perhaps only
tickled him, and his biting at the place might be but to take the itch
out.  It angered him, though, to the highest pitch, for again rising on
his hind legs he swung his head about, snorting continuously, with an
occasional scream which bespoke either pain or vengeance.

There was no sign of intention to retreat on the part of either male or
female, for they seemed to act in concert and with mutual understanding,
this, in the moment after, impelling them to forsake their stationary
spot and come rushing on towards the tents and boothes.  Showing motion
quick enough now, they are soon in their midst, the female instantly
after seizing a boy who in fright had fallen from one of the branches
directly in front of her, and killing the poor lad by a single stroke of
her powerful fore-paw.  He is not unavenged: before she has time to seek
for a second victim the men with guns gather around her, and regardless
of danger, for their blood is now up, go so close that some of their
muzzles become buried in her long shaggy fur.  Then the cracks of eight
or ten guns ring out almost simultaneously, and the she-grizzly comes to
ground.

But the male, the more formidable of the two, is still afoot, and where
are the eight or ten guns to give him his _coup de grace_?  Only four
loaded ones are seen in hand, the majority of the people who have been
able to arm themselves, in their haste, not much over a dozen, having
instinctively rushed towards the bear that was attacking the lad.  But
now the other, having passed that spot, is making for one to be defended
by the four guns in question, that tent inside which are the Senora
Villanueva and her daughter.  No need to say that the defenders are Don
Estevan, Robert Tresillian, his son Henry, and the _gambusino_.  A
formidable defence, nevertheless, since, in addition to their guns, they
carry knives and pistols, the last double-loaded.

They have thrown cloaks and other dark cloths over the tents to make
them less conspicuous, but the bear seems imbued by a vindictive
determination to attack in that very quarter, and straight towards them
comes he.

"Let me fire first, senores," claims Vicente, "and low from my knee my
bullets may turn him sideways, and if so, then your chance, pour in your
broadside, aim just behind the shoulder, halfway down."

Saying which the _gambusino_ drops on one knee, bringing his gun to his
shoulder not an instant too soon, for the huge monster is now within ten
feet of him.  The sharp but full report, with a tuft of hair seen
starting off the bear's right neck well back on the shoulder, tells that
the animal has been hit there, just as Vicente had intended it, his
design being for the others to get flanking shots, which they do, one
and all, the bear instantly slewing round as before to bite the wounded
spot.  This brought his left shoulder to front well spread out, and
making the best of marks, into which was simultaneously poured the
contents of four barrels with twice as many bullets, hitting so close
together as to make an ensanguined irregular disc about the size of a
man's hand.  No pistols nor knives were needed, no supplementary weapons
of any kind, the bear breathing his last ere the reports of the guns had
ceased reverberating along the cliffs.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

CRUSADER CHASED AGAIN.

The scene, all action and excitement, has nevertheless occupied but a
brief space of time: scarce two minutes since the grizzly bears first
showed themselves on the edge of the glade till both lie dead within
it--victims of their own ferocity.

It might have been very different, and under like circumstances nearly
always is.  Many cases are recorded in which half a score of camp
travellers have succumbed to the insane rage of a single grizzly.
Fortunate, too, had been the miners in their shots--no doubt clue to the
short range at which they were fired--for the thick, tough skin of this
animal is almost ball-proof, and one has been known to bear off a dozen
bullets in its body, and carry them about with it afterwards.

The very openness of their danger, with no prospect of escaping it, had
lent to the miners the courage of despair, and so made them more
fearless in their attack; otherwise they would have fired at the enemy
without approaching so near, perhaps to fail.  Enough damage has been
done notwithstanding, and a cry of lamentation succeeds the shots, and
general shouting, as the women gather around the body of that single
victim to the fury of the bears.  Frightfully mutilated it is, showing
parallel tears over the breast--the tracks of claws, all running blood,
and a huge gash by the throat where the first stroke had been given.

"_Esta Pablito Rojas_!" cries a voice, identifying the lad, others
adding in sympathetic chorus, "_Pobre! pobre-ceti_!"

There is one who takes no part in these demonstrations--Henry
Tresillian.  He is in fact no longer in the camp, for soon as the second
grizzly had been disposed of, he started back for the vidette post, and
so abruptly as to make all wonder who were observing him.  Among the
rest Gertrude herself, who thought it strange he should not stay to
speak some words of congratulation.  He but muttered one or two, with
the name of his horse, well known to her, and was off.

Now, from his former point of view, he again beholds Crusader standing
just as left, and still to all appearance unmolested.  It is more than
he expected, but there may be reasons: possibly the shouts and fusillade
above have for a time drawn the attention of the Indians in that
direction.  This will not be for long, and Crusader's master but counts
the moments till he see him assailed and chased.

Nor are they many.  Just after his return to the ravine's head he
observes nigh threescore dusky horsemen move out beyond the flanking
embattlement of rock; not hastily, nor in confusion, but in deliberate
and long deployed line, which stretches afar over the _llano_.

Crusader sees them too, and seems to regard them with indifference; he
has taken to browsing on a piece of rich pasture lying along the
stream's edge, this alone for the time occupying him.  That he is the
objective point of their movement is evident, though none of them are
heading straight towards him, their design being evidently to get around
him.

After all, is he going to let himself be surrounded, and approached in
this easy manner?  Such is the interrogatory which passes among those
watching from above, for the videttes have returned to their post, with
others accompanying them.

One answers it, saying, "It's not at all likely.  He let himself be
taken in a trap!  More like the redskins will find themselves in one
before long.  See! they begin to find it now!"

This, from Pedro Vicente in his old spirit, as he points to the line of
savages far extended.

The files have by this faced westward, but are advancing towards the
stream; now, on nearing it, they are seen to stop abruptly as if in
surprise.  Then, after an instant, all wheel round and ride back
eastward, till getting on their old line, they return at a gallop
towards their camp.  They have discovered the stream to be impassable.

"That horse is the _demonio_ himself," says Pedro Vicente--"neither more
nor less.  He must have known they could not cross the swollen
streamlet, or he'd never have stopped by it as he has done.  But they've
not given him up yet.  No! see: they're going round by the head of the
lake."

Just this they intend, as is seen by their advancing towards the point
where the lake commences by the mouth of the ravine.  They have no
difficulty in crossing its in-going stream, a few minutes after the rain
ceased having reduced this to its normal condition of a tiny rivulet.

And like some dark, disagreeable vision Henry Tresillian sees pass
before his eyes the savage cohort, file after file, one disappearing
after another, till at length no animated form is observable on the
plain below, save that their eyes have been hitherto regarding with
interest.

There is a long interval without event; nearly an hour elapses ere
Crusader shows any sign, his head almost continuously to the grass,
raised only occasionally, as he changes place upon it.  All this time
the Indians are out of sight, with no sound coming from the direction
they had taken.

But at length there is a sound, a startled neigh from the black horse,
who, tossing his crest in air, rears upward with a curving sweep, and
then darts straight away, as if in flight from an advancing enemy--the
enemy seen instantly afterwards as several mounted men disclose
themselves from the western framework of rock, all in a tail-on-end
gallop.

Crusader has taken along the edge of the stream, and follows it in
parallel direction downwards, just as he fled before from the same
pursuers.  There would seem no chance of their overtaking him now; for
he appears to gain distance at every bound, without even straining
himself.  But lo! what is that?

"_Santos Dios_!  They've headed him.  _Milraya_! what a pity!"

It is the _gambusino_ who thus exclaims, seeing other horsemen on the
plain farther points on, all facing towards the stream, evidently to
intercept the chased steed.

Crusader sees them too, for he is now close up to them; but forsaking
the course he has hitherto followed, he makes an abrupt turn and breaks
off westward, continuing this direction in full gallop, till the rocks
hide him from view.

Alike the pursuers thrown round, pass out of sight one after another,
and again that part of the _llano_ resumes its wonted aspect of stern,
savage tranquillity.

For most of those composing the party of spectators the chase had no
particular interest, and only a few of them were gathered around the
point where it could be viewed.  Indeed, but a few heard of Crusader
being seen, the greater and more serious event obscuring that of lesser
note.  And now these few, one after the other, again go back to _ojo de
agua_, to take part in the duties of the day.

But the English youth still stays by the vidette post, with eye
constantly directed on the plain below, and ears listening intently, to
catch any sound that may come from the western side; apprehensively,
too, for he fears to hear shots.

The savages failing to catch the black horse with their laryettes, may
spitefully endeavour to bring him down with their guns.  This, indeed,
is the real clanger his young master has been dreading, and which for
the time engrosses all his thoughts.

Luckily not for long.  Within less than an hour the dusky horsemen, in
twos and threes, come straggling back across the open ground between the
lake's head and their camp, so continuing till the last of them have
returned, all with discomfited air, but none with Crusader as their
captive.  And as no report of gun has been heard, it is more than
probable he has once more eluded them.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

LIFE ON THE LOST MOUNTAIN.

The exciting events above recorded, as occurring in quick succession,
are followed by a period of repose lasting for days.  Alike reigns it on
the mountain summit and around its base; in the camp of the besieged as
of the besiegers.

Withal, in the latter there is no lack of activity; parties go and come
at all hours, but more especially during those of the night.  Scouts
sent out; it may be for many purposes.  But one large detail is observed
on a certain day to make the complete round of the mountain, every here
and there halting with front towards it, as if for minute examination of
its cliffs from base to summit; evidently to be satisfied whether there
be any possible chance for the white men to reach the plain otherwise
than down that chine cut by the watercourse.

While making this _reconnaissance_ they have been narrowly watched by
eyes from above, and as no particular point has been observed to attract
their attention, it is concluded that they deem their pale-faced
prisoners quite secure, only calling for a little patience ere they may
evidently lay hands on them.

The same movement also gives assurance to their intended victims, but of
a kind not so satisfactory.  It tells them how determined their enemy
is, how retentive his grasp, and implacable his vengeance.  All this
with no increased hope on their part of being able to escape him.
Thought of how has not yet taken shape in their minds.  How could it?
So many present facts and fears engrossing them, they have found little
time to reflect on the future.

And a new fear has now arisen which calls for steps to be taken.  There
may be other grizzly bears on the _mesa_, and if so these monsters will
be prowling around the camp to assail it at any instant.  Better they be
met outside at a distance off, there attacked, and if possible
exterminated.

This conclusion come to, Don Estevan gives orders for all to arm, and a
general _battue_ is made over the summit of the Cerro.  Paths are hacked
through the underwood everywhere, laying open many a spot never before
trodden by foot of man.  Strange birds are flushed from their nests, and
strange animals are seen stealing away through the thick tangle of
_llianas_, chiefly of the reptilian order, as armadillos, lizards, the
curious horned frog (_Agama cornuta_), and serpents--most numerous of
all that whose retreat is marked by the defiant rattle which has given
it its name.  Scores of _cascabeles_ are started out of the dead leaves
and branches, their vibratory "skirr" resounding everywhere.

But quadrupeds turn up as well.  At intervals the crack of gun tells of
one shot at, whether killed or no.  Now a wild sheep, now a prong-horn
antelope, or it may be but a hare or rabbit.  The great wolf is also
found there, and his lesser and more cowardly congener, the coyote; but
no more bears--grizzly or other--nor sign of them.  Evidently the two
killed at the camp were the sole monarchs of the mountain.

The day's hunt, for it occupied a whole day, gives satisfaction in more
ways than one.  First, by doing away with all apprehension of danger
from _Ursus ferox_; secondly, by affording a plentiful supply of present
food; and, thirdly, in there being still more on the mountain, giving
proof of the abundance of them.

Nor is the vegetable element lacking, but present in all its varieties
of root, fruit, and berry.  The _mezcal_, whose baked stem forms staple
food for their enemies, grows on the _mesa_.  Its use is known to the
_gambusino_, as others of the miners.  Several sorts of _mezquite_ trees
are found there, whose long pendulous _siliques_ contain seeds which can
be ground into a meal making nutritious bread, while the cones of the
edible pine (_Pinus edulis_)--"_pinon-nuts_" as called--are in quantity
all around.  For fruit there are several varieties of the cactus, with
that of pear-shape, and all the rich juiciness of a pear, the famed
_pitathaya_.  In short, the Cerro Perdido is a very oasis, its
cornucopia peculiar to the desert.  With so bountiful a supply of
provisions the besieged need not fear famine, at least for a long time.
Their resources, carefully husbanded, may last for weeks.

And on time rests their only hope; their sole chance of being rescued
depending on that, by some means or other, their situation may become
known to their friends at Arispe, or their countrymen elsewhere.

But what likelihood of this?  As already stated, the Lost Mountain is
out of the line of all travel and traffic.  Months, a year, nay, years
may elapse ere a wayfarer of any kind stray to it, or near it.  So their
chances of being seen there by friendly eyes, to say naught of their
position being understood, are as those of castaways on a desert isle in
mid-ocean.

And as shipwrecked men they hoist signals of distress.  Any one
approaching that solitary eminence from the south might wonder to see a
flag floating from a tall staff over its southern end, giving it all the
greater resemblance to a fortress with banner waving above.  A tricolour
flag, bearing the symbolic badge of the Mexican Republic--the Eagle upon
the Nopal!  It is that Don Estevan had meant to have erected over the
new mine, now little likely ever to be displayed there.  For now it is
unfolded to tell a tale of threatening disaster, and attract the eyes of
those who may do something to avert it.

But for this dark uncertainty of future there is nothing irksome, not
even disagreeable, in their present life.  On the contrary, it might be
even called pleasant; plenty to eat, plenty to drink, sufficient freedom
of range, a sapphire sky above, with an atmosphere around them whose
heat is tempered by breezes ever blowing, ever laden with the fragrance
of fruit and flower.

And no scene of sombre gloomy silence; instead, one enlivened by the
notes of many wild warblers, both diurnal and nocturnal.  By day the
jarring yet cheering cry of the blue jay and the red cardinal; the
mewing of the catbird, or the "hew-hew" of hawk in pursuit of his
victim.  By night, the more melodious, all incomparable song of the
_czentzontle_--mockingbird of Mexico--oft intermingled with another
song, but little less powerful or sweet, that of the _cuitlacoche_--a
second species of New World nightingale, not so well known.

Life in the odd aerial camp now settles down into a sort of routine,
each day having its separate calls and duties.  The watch is, of course,
kept up, and with no falling off in its vigilance.  For although the
besiegers have not again shown any sign of an intention to try the
assault, who knows what may be in the mind of these subtle savages?

Only at night need there be any fear, and only when it is darkest.  At
other times the vidette duty is a matter of easy fulfilment.

In truth the miners might almost fancy themselves in picnic, having a
happy time of it, halfway between earth and heaven.  But they are not
there by choice, too well knowing its stern necessity.  And this, with
the dark doubtful future, robs them of all zest for enjoyment.  So the
hours pass not merrily, but wearily.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

WHO TO BE THE FORLORN HOPE?

Day succeeds day with no brightening of hopes to those beleaguered on
the Lost Mountain.  Instead, in each something arises to make their
prospects darker, if that were possible.

About ten days after the commencement of the siege the besiegers have
their force increased, a fresh party coming down from the north,
evidently in obedience to a summons, which they who drove off the
captured _caballada_ have carried back.  But for what purpose this
accession of strength, when it is not needed?  They on the ground are
already enough, and to spare.

The miners cannot guess what they have come about, unless it be the
remaining braves of the tribe, to take part in some ceremony over their
fallen chief, or be present when the time arrives for the wreaking of
vengeance.

It has nothing to do with that, however, solely a conception of their
new leader, El Zopilote, who has his reasons for carrying out the raid
down the Horcasitas.  So on the second day after, the besieging party,
instead of being one hundred men the more, is all that the less; at
least two hundred seen to issue forth from the camp, and proceed
southward in full war-paint and panoply, with all their frightful
insignia.  As successive files they move off along the stream's edge, it
might seem as some gigantic serpent commencing its crawl towards prey.
And many on the mountain, with a suspicion of where they are going, have
a pitying heart for those who live on the banks of the lower Horcasitas.

Enough, however, to think of themselves, and each hour more than enough;
for as the days pass circumstances present a still sterner front.  The
supply of provisions, at first seeming inexhaustible, proves to have a
limit.  There are over seventy mouths to feed, which calls for a large
daily quantity.  So one by one the wild quadrupeds give out, the birds
long before these, frightened by the constant chase and fusillade,
forsaking the place altogether.  The store of _tasajo_ and other
preserved meats begins to be drawn upon.  When these come to an end, so
too must all the suspense, all the agonies of that quaint, quasi
imprisonment, to terminate in real captivity, or indeed death itself.

In the tent of Don Estevan some seven or eight of the mining people are
assembled; the two _duenos_ are of course present, with the
_mayor-domo_, the chief engineer, and other heads of departments.  No
need to say the _gambusino_ is among them.  They are there to take
counsel on the events of the day, and the means of the morrow.  Every
night it has been their custom to do so, and on this one--for it is at
night--there is nothing very different to speak of from any other.

Still, Don Estevan has conceived a thought which had not hitherto
occurred to him, and now lays it before the assembled conclave.

"_Caballeros_!  I can think of only one way--poor, doubtful chance it
is--by which we may get rescued.  Some one must contrive to pass their
sentries."

"Impossible!" is the thought of all hearing him, one or two expressing
it in speech.  For of all the things observed as vigorously kept up,
never relaxed for an hour--even a moment--has been that sentinel line
thrown across the plain from flank to flank of the ravine.  All day long
it has appeared there, and all through the night evidently redoubled.

"Pity if it be," rejoins Don Estevan, yielding to what appears the
general sentiment.  "And to think that one word at Arispe would make all
well.  My own brother-in-law, Colonel Requenes, in command there with a
regiment of lancers--they of Zacatecas.  In less than half an hour they
could be in the saddle, and hastening to our relief.  _Ay Dios_! if we
can't communicate with them we are lost--surely lost!"

At this, Robert Tresillian says, interrogatively:

"I wonder how many of our people could find the way back to Arispe?"

Without altogether comprehending what he means, several numbers are
mentioned in a guessing way, according to the estimate of each.  Pedro
Vicente thinks at least thirty could,--certainly all the _arrieros_ and
_vaqueros_.

"What is your idea, Don Roberto?" at length asks the senior partner.

"That all of those who know the way back be mustered, and two taken from
them by lot, who will run the risk of passing the Indian sentries.  If
they succeed, then all may be saved; if on the contrary, it will be but
to lose their lives a little sooner.  I propose that all submit to the
lottery--all who are unmarried."

"I agree with the Senor Tresillian," here puts in the _gambusino_.
"Some of us must contrive to get past them at whatever risk.  For my
part, I'm willing to be one, with any other."

The generous proposal is received with applause, but not accepted,--it
would not be fair; and in fine it is agreed upon, that fate shall
determine who shall be the pair to run the proposed risk--the ceremony
for deciding it to take place on the morrow.

In the morning it comes off soon as breakfast is eaten.  All known to be
eligible are summoned together on a spot of ground apart, and told the
purport of their being so assembled.  No one objects, or tries to evade
the dangerous conscription; instead, there are even some who, like
Vicente, would volunteer for the duty.

For is not one of the _duenos_--the brave Englishman and his son, there
present--both offering themselves as candidates like any of the common
men?

No volunteering, then, is allowed; fortune alone permitted to decide on
whom shall be the forlorn hope.

The quaint lottery, though awe-inspiring, occupies but a brief space of
time.  Against the number of men who are to take part in it, a like
number of _pinon-nuts_ have been counted out, and dropped into a
deep-crowned _sombrero_.  Two of the nuts have been already stained with
gunpowder, the others left in their natural colour; but no one by the
feel could tell which was which.  The black ones are to be the _prizes_.

The men stand in a ring round Don Estevan, with another who is among the
exempt in the centre.  These hold the hat, into which one after another,
stepping from the circle, led forward blindfolded, inserts his hand, and
draws out a nut.  If white, he goes clear; but long before the white
ones are exhausted the two blacks are taken up, which brings the
ceremony to an abrupt end, that deciding all.

They who have drawn the _prizes_ are a muleteer and a cattle drover,
both brave fellows.  They had need be, for this very night they will
have to run the gauntlet of life and death, perhaps ere the morrow's sun
to be no more.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

A FATAL FAILURE.

It is a day of anxious solicitude.  If the night turn out a dark one,
the messengers whom fate has chosen for the perilous enterprise are to
set out on their errand.  They know it is to be a moonless one, but for
all, in the diaphanous atmosphere of that upland plateau, it may be too
clear to make the passing of the Indian sentinels at all possible.

The afternoon begets hope: a bank of heavy clouds is seen rising along
the western sky, which, rolling higher and higher, brings on a downpour
of rain.  It is of short continuance, however--over before sunset, the
clouds again dispersing.  Then the darkness comes down, but for a long
time only in a glimmering of grey, the stars in grand sheen making it
almost as clear if there was moonlight.

The sentinels can be seen in their old places like a row of dark stakes,
conspicuous against the green turf on which they are stationed.  They
are at short distances apart, and every now and then forms are observed
moving from one to the other, as if to keep them continuously on the
alert.

So thus, nigh up to the hour of midnight, and the miners begin to
despair of their messengers being able to pass out--at least, on this
night.

But soon, to their satisfaction, something shows itself promising a
different result.  The surface of the lake has suddenly turned white, as
if under a covering of snow.  It is fog.  Through the heated atmosphere
the lately-fallen rain is rising in vapour, and within its misty shroud
it envelopes not only the lake, but the plain around its edges.  It
rolls over the line of savage watchers, on up between the jaws of the
chine, till in its damp clammy film it embraces the bodies of those who
are waiting above.

"Now's your time, _muchachos_!" says Don Estevan, addressing himself to
those who are to adventure.  "There could not be a better opportunity;
if they can't be passed now, they never can."

The two men are there ready, and equipped for the undertaking.  Young
fellows both, with a brave look, and no sign of quailing or desire to
back out.  Each carries a small wallet of provisions strapped to his
person, with a pistol in his belt, but no other arms or accoutrements to
encumber them.  In subtleness and activity, more than mere physical
force, lie their chances of success.

A shaking of hands with such of their old comrades as are near,
farewells exchanged when they pass over the parapet of loose stones to
commence the descent, with many a "_va con Dios_!" sent after them in
accents of earnest prayerfulness.  Then follows an interregnum of
profound silence, during which time they at the ravine's head listen
with keenest anxiety.

After a few seconds a slight rustling below tells that one of the two
has made a slip, or pushed a stone out of place; but nothing comes of
it.  Then a horse neighs in the distant camp, and soon after another,
neither of them having any significance.  No more the screaming of
wild-fowl at the lower end of the lake, nor the querulous cry of
"chuck-will's widow," hawking high over it.  None of these sounds have
any portent as to the affair in hand, and they, listening, begin to hope
that it has succeeded--for surely there has been time for the two men to
have got beyond the guarded line?

Hope premature, alas! to be disappointed.  Up out of the mist comes the
sound of voices, as if in hail, followed by dubious response, and quick
succeeding a struggle with shots.  Then a cry or two as in agony, a
shout of triumph, and all silent as before.

For the rest of the night they on the _mesa_ sleep not.  Too surely has
their scheme failed, and their messengers fallen victims to it.  If they
were any doubts about this, these are set at rest at an early hour of
the morning.

Sad evidence they have to convince them.  On the spot where the
scalp-dance had taken place a red pole is again erected, as the other
ornamented with the skins of human heads.  But not now to be danced
around; though for a time they, looking from above, think there is to be
a repetition of that savage ceremony.  Soon they are undeceived, and
know it to be a spectacle still more appalling.  From the camp they see
a man conducted, whom they identify as one of their ill-fated
messengers.  Taken on to the stake, he is placed back against it, with
arms extended and strapped to a cross-piece, in a way representing the
figure of the Crucifixion.  His breast has been stripped bare, and on it
is seen painted in white the hideous symbol of the Death's head and
crossbones.

For what purpose all this display? the spectators conjecture among
themselves.  Not long till they have the answer.  They see several
scores of the savages range themselves at a certain distance off, each
gun in hand, one after the other taking aim and discharging his piece at
the human target.  Gradually the disc on the breast is seen to darken,
turning red, till at length not a spot of white is visible.  But long
ere this the head of the hapless victim, drooped over his shoulder,
tells that he is dead.

The cruel tragedy is repeated, showing now what was not known before,
that both the ill-starred couriers had been taken alive.  He brought
forth next is recognisable, by the picturesque dress still on his
person, as the _vaquero_.  But when taken up to the stake he is stripped
of it, the velveteen _jaqueta_ pulled from off his shoulders, his shirt
torn away, leaving his breast bare.  Then with a hurried touch, the
grim, ghastly device is limned upon him, and he is taken up to the pole
as the other.

A fresh fusillade commences, the white gradually showing dimmer, till at
length it is deeply encrimsoned, and the _vaquero_ is a lifeless corpse.

When it is all over, the Coyoteros turn towards the gorge, and looking
up, give utterance to wild yells of triumph, brandishing their weapons
in a threatening manner, as much as to say, "That's the way we'll serve
you all, when the time comes."



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

A PRODIGIOUS LEAP.

Needless to say that the failure of their scheme with such fatal
consequence has deepened the gloom in the minds of the besieged miners,
already dark enough.  Now more than ever do they believe themselves
doomed.  There seems no alternative left but surrender or starvation and
as both are alike certain death, they dwell not on the first.  True,
starvation is not yet so close at hand; they have still provisions--some
of the old caravan stores--sufficient for a couple of weeks, if
carefully served out, while the live stock furnished by the _mesa_
itself has not all been exhausted.  Some animals as yet remain
uncaptured, though how many they know not.

To make sure, another grand _battue_ is set on foot to embrace the whole
summit area.  Every outlying corner and promontory are quartered and
beaten, so that no four-footed creature could possibly be there without
being seen or shot.  The result is a bag, of but small dimensions,
though with large variety; a prong-horn antelope, the last of a band
that had been daily getting thinned; several sage hares, a wolf, and
three or four coyotes.  More of these last were startled, but not
killed, as they have lairs in the ledges of the cliffs to which they
betake themselves, secure from pursuit of hunter.

While the _battue_ is at its height, one large quadruped is put up which
more than any other excites the ardour of those engaged.  It is a
bighorn, or Rocky Mountain sheep, remnant of that flock first found upon
the _mesa_ by Vicente and Henry Tresillian; it is also a ram, a young
one, but with grand curvature of horns.  One after another all the rest
have been made mutton of, and their bones lie bleaching around the camp;
but, though several times chased, this sole survivor has ever contrived
to escape, as though it had a charmed life.  And now again it seems
still under such protection; for at starting several shots are fired at
it, none taking effect; and it bounds on, apparently unharmed, towards
an outlying projection of the plateau.

Those who have emptied their guns follow without staying to re-load; for
they form a line which, deployed crossways, cannot fail to enclose and
cut off its retreat, making escape impossible.  In fine, they effect
this purpose; some, with guns still charged, confidently advancing to
give the animal its _coup de grace_.  They are even aiming at it, when,
lo! a leap upward and outward, with head bent down as one making a dive,
and the bighorn bounds over the cliff.

Five hundred feet fall--shattered to atoms on the rocks below!--this
their thought as they approach the precipice to see the prodigious leap
that must have been taken by the animal in its panic of fear.  One,
however, draws nigh with a different thought, knows there was method in
that seeming madness, and that the _carnero_ sprang over with a design.
Pedro Vicente it is; and with the others soon upon the cliff's brow,
and, gazing below, to their surprise they see no sheep there, dead and
crushed as expected.  Instead, a live one out upon the _llano_, making
off in strides long and vigorous.

Sure of its being the same they had just driven over, all are astounded,
expressing their astonishment in loud ejaculations.  Alone the
_gambusino_ is silent, a pleased expression pervading his countenance,
for that extraordinary feat of the horned creature has let a flood of
light into his mind, giving him renewed hope that they may still be
saved.  He says nothing of it to those around, leaving it for more
mature consideration, and to be discussed in their council of the night.

But long after the others have returned to camp he lingers on the cliff,
treading backwards and forwards along its crest, surveying it from every
possible point of vantage, as though in an endeavour to find out how the
sheep made that extraordinary descent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Another night is on, and, as is their wont, the chief men of those
besieged are assembled in the tent of Don Estevan.  Not discouraged yet,
for there is a rumour among them that some new plan has been thought of
for passing the Indian sentries, less likely to be disastrous than that
which has failed.  It has been the whisper of the afternoon, their guide
being regarded as he who has conceived a scheme.

When all are together Don Estevan calls upon him to declare it, saying,

"I understand, Senor Vicente, you've thought of a way by which a
messenger may yet elude the vigilance of their sentries, and get beyond
them?"

"I have, your worship."

"Please make it known."

"Nothing more simple; and I only wonder at not having thought of it
before.  After all, that would have been useless, for only this day have
I discovered the thing to be possible."

"We long to hear what it is."

"Well, then, senores, it's but to give them the slip.  Going out by the
back door, while they are so carefully guarding the front.  That can be
done by our letting one down the cliff--two, if need be."

"But where?"

"Where the _carnero_ went over."

"What! five hundred feet?  Impossible!  We have not rope enough to reach
half the distance."

"We don't need rope to reach much more than a third of it."

"Indeed!  Explain yourself, Don Pedro."

"I will, your worship, and it is thus.  I've examined the cliff
carefully, where the sheep went over.  There are ledges at intervals; it
is true not wide, but broad enough for the animal to have dropped upon
and stuck.  They can cling to the rocks like squirrels or cats.  Some of
the ledges run downwards, then zigzag into others, also with a downward
slope; and the ram must have followed these, now and then making a
plunge, where it became necessary, to alight on his hoofs or horns, as
the case might be.  Anyhow, he got safe to the bottom, as we know, and
where it went down, so may we."

There is a pause of silence, all looking pleased for the words of the
_gambusino_ have resuscitated hopes that had almost died out.  They can
see the possibility he speaks of, their only doubt and drawback being
the fear they may not have rope enough.

"It seems but a question of that," says Don Estevan, as if speaking
reflectingly to himself.

The others are also considering, each trying to recall how much and how
many of their trail-ropes were brought up in that hasty _debendade_ from
their camp below.

"_Por Dios_! your worship," rejoins the _gambusino_, "it is no question
of that whatever.  We have the materials to make cords enough, not only
to go down the cliff, but all round the mountain.  Miles, if it were
needed!"

"What materials?" demanded several of the party, mystified.

"_Mira_!" exclaims the _gambusino_.  "This!"  He starts up from a bundle
of dry _mezcal_-leaves on which he has been seated, pushing it before
him with his foot.

All comprehend him now, knowing that the fibre of these is a flax, or
rather hemp, capable of being worked into thread, cloth, or cordage; and
they know that on the _mesa_ is an unlimited supply of it.

"No question of rope, _caballeros_; only the time it will take us to
manufacture it.  And with men such as you, used to such gearing, that
should not be long."

"It shall not," respond all.  "We'll work night and day till it be
done."

"One day, I take it, will be enough--that to-morrow.  And if luck attend
us, by this time to-morrow night we may have our messengers on the way,
safe beyond pursuit of these accursed redskins."

Some more details are discussed maturing their plans for the
rope-making.  Then all retire to rest, this night with more hopeful
anticipations than they have had for many preceding.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

A YOUTHFUL VOLUNTEER.

Another day dawns, and as the earliest rays of the sun light up the
Cerro Perdido, an unusual bustle is observed in the camp of the
besieged.  Men are busy collecting the leaves of the _mezcal_-plant,
those that are withered and dry from having their corms cut out days
before; fortunately there are many of these lying all around.  Other
men, armed with rudely-shaped mallets, beat them against the trunks of
trees, to separate the fibre from the now desiccated pulp; while still
others are twisting this into threads, by a further process to be
converted into thick ropes.

It is found that after all not so much will be needed; several lassoes
had been brought up, tied round the bundles of goods; and with these and
other odds and ends of cordage, a rope can be put together full two
hundred feet in length, strong enough to sustain the weight of any man.
So, long before night the lowering apparatus is ready, and, as before,
they await the darkness to make use of it.

Meanwhile Don Estevan, the two Tresillians, and Vicente spend most of
the morning on the cliff where the bighorn went over, surveying it from
every possible point, taking the bearings of its ledges, and estimating
their distances from one another.  They are, as the _gambusino_ had
represented them, a succession of very narrow benches, but wide enough
for a man to find footing; some horizontal, others with a slope
downwards, then a zigzag bringing them lower, till within a hundred feet
from the cliff's base the _facade_ of rocks shows sheer and clear.  Down
to this point all will be easy; and beyond it they anticipate little
difficulty, now that they are sure of having sufficient rope.

While engaged in their reconnaissance, an object comes under their eyes
which they gaze upon with interest.  They are upon the western side of
the _mesa_ not far above its southern point, the plain on that side
being invisible from the camp of the besiegers; and on this, at the
distance of a mile or more, there is a spot of pasture due to a tiny
rivulet, which, filtering off from the side of the lake, becomes
dispersed over a considerable surface, which it moistens and makes
green.

Moving to and fro over this verdant stretch is the object which has
caught their attention--a horse of large size and coal-black colour,
which they know to be no other than Crusader.  They are not surprised at
seeing him there.  Habitually he frequents this spot, which has become
his accustomed pasturing-ground, and more than once had Henry Tresillian
stood on that cliff regarding him with fond affectionate gaze; more than
once, too, had the Indians again gone in chase of him, to be foiled as
before.  There is he still unlassoed, free of limb as the antelopes seen
flitting over the _llano_ around him.

After completing the examination of their precipice, and noting all
details that may be needed to help out their design, they stand for a
time gazing at the horse, his young master with a thought in his mind
which he withholds from the others.  Nor does he communicate it to them
till after their return to the camp, and the question comes up, who are
the ones to be lowered down; for it is thought better that two
messengers should be sent, as company and support to each other.  That
is the question to be decided, and up to this hour all expect it to be
as before--by lottery.

In fine, when the time arrives for settling it, and the eligible ones
are again assembled for drawing lots, a proposal is made which takes
every one present by surprise.  It comes from the youngest of the party,
Henry Tresillian, who says:

"Let me go alone."

All eyes turn upon him inquiringly and in wonder, none more than those
of his father, who exclaims:

"You go alone, my son!  Why do you propose that?"

"Because it will be best, father."

"How best?  I do not understand you."

"Crusader can only carry one."

"Ah!  Crusader--that's what you're thinking of?"

"_Por Dios_!" exclaims the senior partner, "I see what your son means,
Don Roberto; his idea is admirable!"

"Yes," says the English youth in answer to his father; "I've been
thinking of it ever since yesterday.  On Crusader's back I can be at
Arispe days before any foot messenger could arrive there.  Once I had
him between my legs, no fear of Indians overtaking me."

"The very thing!" cries Don Estevan, delighted.  "But, Senor Henrique,
are you sure you can catch the horse?"

"Catch him! he will come to my call.  Once on the plain, and within
hearing of my voice, I've no fear of his soon being by my side."

"But why not let me take him?" puts in Pedro Vicente, as if to spare the
generous youth from undertaking such a risk.  "I know the road better
than you, _muchacho_."

"That may be," returns the other.  "But I know it well enough.  Besides,
Crusader will let no one catch him but myself--much less ride him."

During all this conversation the bystanders regard the young Englishman
with looks of admiration.  Never before have they seen so much courage
combined with intelligence.  And all to be exerted in their favour; for
they have not forgotten the fate of their two comrades, put to death in
such a cruel fashion.  Every one of them fears that the like may befall
himself, should it be his ill luck to draw a black _pinon_ out of the
_sombrero_.

Not the least in admiration is Robert Tresillian himself: his heart
swells with pride at the gallant bearing of the boy, his own son, worthy
of the ancestral name; and when Don Estevan turns to him to ask whether
he objects to the proposal, it is to receive answer:

"On the contrary, I approve of it.  Foot messengers might not reach in
time, if at all.  My brave boy will do it if it can be done; it may be
the means of bringing rescue to us all.  If he fail, then I, like the
rest of you, must submit to fate."

"I'll not fail," cries the impetuous youth, rushing forward and throwing
his arms round his father.  "Fear not.  I have a belief that God's hand
is in it, else why should my noble horse have stayed?  Why is he still
there?"

"_Virgen santissima_!" exclaims Don Estevan in devout tone.  "It would
even seem so.  Let us hope and pray that the Almighty's hand is in it.
If so, we shall be saved."

Henry Tresillian is the hero of the hour, though he has been a favourite
with the people of the caravan all along, doing kind offices to this one
and that one, helping all who needed help.  But now, when they hear he
has volunteered on this dangerous service, as it were offering up his
life for theirs, encomiums are loud on all sides.  Women fall upon their
knees, and, with crucifix in hand, offer up prayers for his protection.
But Gertrude?  Oh, the sad thoughts--the utter woe that strikes through
her heart--when she hears tidings of what is intended!  She receives
them with a wild cry, almost a shriek, with arms outstretched staggering
to the side of her mother for support.

"Mamma, father must not let him go.  He will be lost, and then--then--"

"Have no fear.  Think, _hija mia_, we may all be lost if he do not."

"But why cannot some other go in his place?  There are many who know the
way as well as he, and that brave _gambusino_, I'm sure, would be
willing."

"No doubt he would, dearest; there's some reason against it I do not
quite understand.  We shall hear all soon, when father returns to the
tent."

They do hear the reason; but not any the more to reconcile Gertrude.
The young girl is half beside herself with grief, utterly indifferent as
to who may observe it.  The bud of her love has bloomed into a flower,
and she recks not that all the world know her heart is Henry
Tresillian's.  The cousin left behind at Arispe, supposed to be an
aspirant to her hand, is forgotten.  All are forgotten, save the one now
near, so soon to be cruelly torn away from her.  Neither the presence of
her father and mother, nor that of his father, restrain her in her wild
ravings.  She knows she has their approval of her partiality, and her
young heart, innocent of guile, yields to nature's promptings.

Her appeals are in vain: what must be must be, and she at length resigns
herself to the inevitable.  For Henry himself tells her how it is, and
that no one possibly could take his place.

It is in dialogue between them, just as the twilight begins to cast its
purple shadows over the plain.  For the time is drawing nigh for action,
and the two have gone apart from the camp to speak the last words of
leave-taking.  They stand under a tree, hands clasped, gazing into each
other's eyes, those of the young girl full of tears.

"_Querida_" he says, "do not weep.  'Twill be all well yet--I feel sure
of it."

"Would that I could feel so, Henrique; but, oh! dearest, such danger!
And if the cruel savages capture you.  _Ay Dios_! to think of what they
did with the others!"

"Let them catch me if they can.  They never will if I once get alongside
Crusader.  On his back I may defy them."

"True, I believe it.  But are you sure of getting upon his back?  In the
darkness you may not find him."

"If not, it will be but to return to the cliff and be drawn up again."

This assurance somewhat tranquillises her.  There is at least the hope,
almost certainty, he will not, as the others, be sacrificed to a
fruitless attempt; and, so trusting, she says in conclusion: "Go, then,
_querido mio_.  I will no more oppose it, but pray all night long for
your safety.  I see now it is for the best, and feel that the blessed
Mary, mother of God, will listen to my prayers."

No longer hands clasped, but arms entwined, and lips meeting in a kiss
of pure holy affection, sanctified by parental consent.  Then they
return to the camp, where the final preparations are being made for that
venture upon which so much depends.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

A RIDE IN MID-AIR.

It turns out just such a night as was wished for--moonless, still not
obscurely dark.  Too much darkness would defeat the end in view.  They
need light for the lowering down, a thing that will take some time with
careful management.

But the miners are the very men for such purpose.  Not one of them who
has not dangled at a rope's end in a shaft hundreds of feet sheer down
into the earth.  To them it is habitude--child's play--as to him who
spends his life scaling sea-coast cliffs for the eggs and young of
birds.

It is yet early when the party entrusted with the undertaking assemble
on the edge of the precipice, at the point where the daring adventurer
is to make descent.  Some carry coils of rope, others long poles notched
at the end for fending the line off the rocks, while the _gambusino_ is
seen bearing a burden which differs from all the rest.  A saddle and
bridle it is; his own, cherished for their costliness, but now placed at
the service of his young friend, to do what he will with them.

"I could ride Crusader without them," says the English youth: "guide him
with my voice and knees; but these will make it surer, and I thank you,
Senor Vicente."

"Ah, _muchacho_! if they but help you, how glad 'twill make me feel!  If
they're lost, it wouldn't be for that I'd grudge the twenty _doblones_
the saddle cost me.  I'd give ten times as much to see you seated in it
on the _plaza_ of Arispe."

"I'll be there, _amigo_, in less than sixty hours if Crusader hasn't
lost his strength by too long feeding on grass."

"I fancy you need not fear that, senorito; your horse is one that
nothing seems to affect.  I still cling to the belief he's the devil
himself."

"Better believe him an angel--our good angel now, as I hope he will
prove himself."

This exchange of speech between the two who have long been _compagnons
de chasse_, is only an interlude occurring while the ropes are being
uncoiled and made ready.

Instead of a loop to be passed around the adventurer's body, a very
different mode for his making descent has been pre-arranged.  He is to
take seat in the saddle, just as though it were on the back of a horse,
and, with feet in the stirrups and hands clutching the cords that
suspend it, be so let down.  A piece of wood passed under the tree, and
firmly lashed to pommel and cantle, will secure its equilibrium.

Finally all is ready, and, the daring rider taking his seat, is soon
swinging in mid-air.  Hand over hand they lower him down, slowly,
cautiously, listening all the while for a signal to be sent up.  This
they get in due time--a low whistle telling them that he has reached the
first ledge, though they could tell it by the strain upon the rope all
at once having ceased.

Up it is drawn again, its owner himself, in turn, taking seat in it, to
be lowered down as the other.  Then again and again it is hoisted up and
let down, till half a score of the miners, stalwart men, Robert
Tresillian among them, stand on the bench below.

Now the saddle is detached and fastened on to another rope, when the
same process is repeated; and so on, advantage being taken of the
sloping ledges, till the last is arrived at.

Here it is but a repetition of what has gone before, only with a longer
reach of rope; and here Pedro Vicente takes last leave of the youth who
has become so endeared to him.

In the eye of the _honest gambusino_ there is that not often seen there,
a tear.  He flings his arms around the English youth, exclaiming:

"_Dios te guarda, muchacho valiente_!  (God guard you, my brave lad)."

The parting between the two is almost as affectionate as that between
Henry and his father, the last saying, as he enfolds his son in his
arms:

"God go with you, my noble boy!"  In another moment the daring youth is
once more in the saddle, going down, down, till he feels his feet upon
the plain.  Then stepping out of it, and sending up the preconcerted
signal, he detaches saddle and bridle from the cords, leaving the latter
to swing free.

Shouldering the horse gear with other _impedimenta_, he looks round to
get his bearings, and, soon as satisfied about these, starts off over
the plain in search of Crusader.

He is not the only one at that moment making to find the horse.  From
the Indian camp a picked party has issued forth, urged by the chief.
For the new leader of the Coyoteros longs to possess that now famous
steed as much as did the deceased one.

"Ten of my best mustangs, and as many of my mules, will I give for the
black horse of the paleface.  He who captures him may claim that
reward."

More than once has El Zopilote thus declared himself, exciting the
ardour and cupidity of his followers.  Withal they have chased Crusader
in vain, over and over again, till in their superstitious fancy they
begin to think him a phantom.

But as yet they have never tried to take him by night; and now, having
ascertained the place where he usually passes the nocturnal hours, they
start out in quest of him.

Not rashly nor incautiously; instead, they proceed deliberately, and
with a preconceived plan, as though stalking game.  Their intention is
first to enfilade the animal at long distance off, then contract the
circle, so as to have him sure.

In execution of their scheme, on reaching the western side of the lake,
they divide into two parties.  One moves along the mountain's foot,
dropping a file here and there; the other strikes out over the _llano_,
in a circular line, as it proceeds doing the same.

It is too dark for them to see horse or other object at any great
distance, so they take care that their circle be wide enough to embrace
the stretch of pasture where the coveted animal is known to browse.

Noiselessly they execute the movement, going at a slow walk, lest the
hoof-strokes of their horses may alarm the one they would enclose; and
when the heads of the separated parties again come together, all know it
by a signal agreed upon--the cry of the coyote transmitted along their
line admonishes them that the cordon is complete.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

ONCE MORE UPON CRUSADER.

Henry Tresillian has hardly advanced a hundred yards from the cliff,
when the Indian party, turning northward, passes close to the spot where
he had been let down.  Luckily not so close as to observe the rope still
hanging there, and far enough from himself to hinder their seeing him.
For the obscurity makes it impossible to distinguish objects unless very
near.

Neither sees he them, nor has any suspicion of their dangerous
proximity; and without stop or stay he keeps on towards the point where
he expects to find his horse.

He goes not without a guide.  At the latest hour of twilight he had seen
Crusader about a mile off, in a direction due west; and although the
night is dark, some of the stars are visible, among them the Polar.
With this on his right shoulder he cannot mistake the way, so continues
on in confidence.

He knows he will not need to go groping about, if the horse be still
there, as it is hoped he is: a peculiarly intoned call with a whistle
will bring him up from far as he can hear it.  Many a time has his
master, while hunting on the hills round Arispe, so summoned Crusader to
his side.

He has advanced more than half a mile, and is thinking whether he shall
not give the signal and put an end to all uncertainty.  He should now be
near enough for it to be heard, and it will tell him if the animal be
still there or has wandered away to some other part of the _llano_.  In
the latter case all his labours will be lost, and no alternative left
him but return to the cliff and get hoisted up again.

Still a thought holds him silent.  The activity of the Indians, with
their frequent patrol parties, more by night than by day, has long been
a matter of curiosity and speculation among the miners.  What if such a
party be now out and within hearing?  For he knows that to his voice
Crusader will respond with a neigh, and that might undo all.  Therefore,
curbing his impatience, he proceeds on, silent as a spectre, his glances
directed now this way, now that, endeavouring to penetrate the gloom.

All at once he hears the tramp of a horse, on the instant after seeing
and recognising Crusader.  To his surprise also; for the animal is not
at rest or browsing, but moving excitedly about, every now and then
uttering a snort, as though he scented danger.  His master knows he
himself cannot be the cause of this unlooked-for behaviour.  The horse
is up wind, and could not possibly be aware of his approach.  What,
then, is exciting him?

Wolves--coyotes?  Yes, it must be that; and as a proof of its being so,
just then he hears the whining howl of the jackals simultaneously all
around.

Such a chorus resounding on every side seems odd, the more from its
being heard for but a brief moment, then silence as before.  But Henry
Tresillian stays not to reflect on its oddity.  He fears that the
howling repeated may start Crusader into a stampede, and without further
delay gives him that signal he knows will be answered.  Answered it is,
and instantly, by a neigh sent back in response; and in twenty seconds
after the horse stands face to face with his young master, his velvet
muzzle pressing the latter's cheek.  On one side there are words of
endearment, on the other a low, joyous whimpering, as though the dumb
brute was trying to speak its delight at their being together again.

Crusader opens his mouth to receive the bit, and seems almost to stoop
for the saddle to be thrown over him.  He is caparisoned in a trice; but
just as Henry Tresillian, stooping to tighten the girths, gets the
buckle into its hole, he hears that which causes him to rise erect, and
clutch at the bridle: the sound of hoofs on all sides; horses evidently,
with men upon their backs.  Indians!--they can be no other!

Quick as thought he vaults into the saddle, and sets himself ready to
make a dash.

In what direction?  He knows that which he should take for Arispe.  But
is it open to him?  This he cannot tell, nor, indeed, that any way is
open to him.  For he now hears the tramp of horses all around, and
before he can resolve himself, sees the horses themselves.  It has grown
a little clearer, for the moon is about to rise, and Crusader's neigh
had guided the Indians to the spot.

If he stay, Henry Tresillian is conscious he will soon be encircled by a
crowd with no chance to get clear of it.  Already he sees its ring
closing around him.

But the Indians are still some fifty yards distant, come to a halt;
suddenly and with shouts of surprise, for they have sighted him.  There
is even terror in their accents, with awe in their hearts--awe of the
supernatural.  They supposed themselves making surround of a horse, when
lo! there is a man upon his back, all in keeping with the mysterious
character Crusader has obtained among those who have vainly chased him.

The young Englishman notes their strange behaviour, but without thought
of the cause.  He knows, however, they will not stay long at rest, and,
by the better light, seeing a break in their line, sets his horse's head
for it, gives the word with touch of knee, and springs forward at full
speed, determined to take his chance.

In a dozen strides he is between two of the Coyotero horsemen, when he
feels his bridle arm suddenly drawn back and held tight to his body;
then, with a quick jerk he is lifted clean out of the saddle and flung
with violence to the earth!

Fortunately he is neither stunned nor loses consciousness, but has all
his senses about him; he knows what has happened, and that he is in the
noose of a lasso.  But his right arm is free, and, instantly regaining
his feet, he draws his knife, and, severing the cord in twain, releases
himself.

It would have been to little purpose had his horse been other than he
is.  But the sagacious animal, seeming to comprehend all, instead of
galloping away, has stayed by his side, and in another moment has its
master on its back again.

With to all appearance a clear track before him now, the daring youth
once more makes forward, favoured by the confusion that has arisen among
the savages.  In the dim light they are unable to distinguish the
strange horseman from one of themselves, and their surprise is but
increased with their superstitious terror, both holding them spellbound.
They but cry out, and question one another, without making any effort
to pursue.

Henry Tresillian begins to think himself safe away, when he sees one of
the Coyoteros, who had lagged behind their line, come full tilt towards
him in a gallop as himself.  Before he can check his pace, their animals
meet in violent collision, and the mustang of the Indian is flung back
on its haunches, dismounting its rider.  The man has his gun in hand,
and, seeing a paleface, instinctively raises the piece, taking aim at
him.  But before he can touch the trigger, the English youth has also a
piece levelled--a pistol, which cracks first; and the savage, uttering a
wild agonised yell, staggers a pace or two, and falls backward on the
grass.

With nothing more in his way now, his young master again gives Crusader
the word, and off go they at highest race-course speed.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

UP THE CLIFF AGAIN.

It is some time before the Indians recover from their mystification.  Is
the black horse flesh and blood, or a phantom?

Not until they have closed together and taken counsel of one another is
this question resolved.  The wiser of them affirm that in some way one
of the palefaces must have got down the cliff, caught the horse, and
mounted him.  That the rider, at least, is a mortal being they have
ample evidence in their comrade stretched dead upon the plain by a
bullet.

The sight rekindles all their ire, and shouts of vengeance make the
welkin ring.  But only for a while.  Silence again reigns, and the
hoof-strokes of the retreating fugitive can be heard through the
tranquil calm of the night, stirring them to pursuit.

Away go they in gallop after; but not all, nearly half of them turning
their horses' heads towards the cliff.  For if the white men have let
one of their number down, there should be some sign of it, which they
proceed to search for.

Impossible to depict the feelings of those on the _mesa_, above all, the
ones who have been standing on the ledges to await the result.  They
cannot have themselves hoisted up again till sure their messenger has
either failed or got free, and from the moment of his parting from the
cliff's base, to them all had been uncertainty.  Terrible suspense, too,
from the very first; for although they saw not the Indians passing
underneath, they heard their horses' tread, now and then a hoof striking
against stone, or in dull thud upon the hard turf.  Though they could
not make out what it meant, they knew it was something adverse--hostile.
Horses would not be there without men on their backs, and these must be
enemies.

Listening on, with hearts anxiously beating, they hear that strange
concatenation of cries, the supposed howling of coyotes, all around the
plain.  It puzzles them, too; but before they have time to reflect on it
a sound better understandable reaches their ears--the neighing of a
horse--most of them recognising it as Crusader's, for most are familiar
with its peculiar intonation.

More intently than ever do they listen now, but for a time hear nothing
more.  Only a brief interval; then arise sounds that excite their
apprehension to its keenest--voices of men, in confused clamouring, the
accent proclaiming them Indians.

Robert Tresillian, still standing beside the _gambusino_ on the lowest
ledge, feels his heart sink within him, as he exclaims: "My poor boy!
lost--lost!"

"Wait, senor," says Vicente, with an effort to appear calm.  "That's not
so sure.  All's not lost that's in danger.  If there be a chance of
escape your brave son's the very one to take advantage of it.  _Oiga_!
what's that?"

His question has reference to another chorus of cries heard out on the
plain; then a moment's lull, succeeded by a crashing sound as of two
heavy bodies brought into collision.  After that a shot, quickly
followed by a yell--a groan.

"A pistol!" exclaims the _gambusino_, "and sure the one Senorito
Henrique took with him.  I'll warrant he's made good use of it."

The father is too full of anxious thought to make reply; he but listens
on with all ears, and heart audibly pulsating.

Next to hear the hoof-strokes of a horse in gallop as if going off;
which in a way cheers him: it may be his son escaped.

But then there is more confused clamour, with loud ejaculations--voices
raised in vengeance; and after the trampling of other horses, apparently
starting in pursuit.

What is to be done now?--draw up the rope, and have themselves drawn up?
There seems no reason for their waiting longer.  The messenger is
either safe off, or has been captured; one way or the other he will not
get back there.  So they may as well reascend the cliff.

Besides, a thought of their own safety now forces itself upon them.  A
streak of light along the horizon admonishes them of the uprising moon.
Already her precursory rays, reflected over the plain, begin to lighten
the obscurity, rendering objects more distinct, and they now make out a
dark mass on the _llano_ below, a party of horsemen, moving in the
direction of the _mesa_.

"We'd better pull up, Don Roberto," says the _gambusino_; "they're
coming this way, and if they see the rope it will guide their eyes to
ourselves, and we're both lost men.  They carry guns, and we'll be
within easy range, not over thirty yards from them.  _Por Dios_! if they
sight us we're undone."

Don Roberto makes neither protest nor objection.  By this his son has
either got clear or is captured: in either case, he cannot return to
them.  And, as his companion, he is keenly sensible to the danger which
is now threatening, so signifies assent.

Silently they draw up the rope, and soon as it is all in their hands,
signal to those above to hoist them also.  First one, making it fast
round his body, is pulled up; then the loop is let down, and the other
ascends, raised by an invisible power above.

Four are now on the next ledge, and, by like course of proceeding are
lifted one after another to that still higher, the sloping benches
between helping them in their ascent.  All is done noiselessly,
cautiously; for the savages are now seen below in dark clump, stationary
near the foot of the precipice.

They have reached the last bench, and so far unmolested, begin to think
themselves out of danger,

But alas, no!  The silence long prevailing is suddenly broken by a rock
displaced and rolling down; while at the same moment the treacherous
moon, showing over the horizon's edge, reveals them to the eyes of the
Indians.

Then there is a chorus of wild yells, followed by shots--a very
fusillade; bullets strike the rocks and break fragments off, while other
shots fired in return by those above into the black mass below instantly
disperse it.

In the midst of all, the last man is drawn up to the summit, but when
landed there, they who draw him up see that the rope's noose is no
longer round a living body, but a corpse, bleeding, riddled with
bullets.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

DISTANCED--NO DANGER NOW.

Finding himself clear of the Indians, Henry Tresillian's heart beats
high with hope; no mischance happening, he can trust Crusader to keep
him clear.  And now he turns his thoughts to the direction he should
take.  But first to that in which he is going, for he has galloped out
of the encircling line through the nearest opening that caught his eye.

The foretaste of the moonlight enables him to see where he is--luckily,
on the right track.  The route to Arispe lies south-eastward, and the
lake must be passed at its upper or lower end.  The former is the direct
route, the other around about; but then there is the Indian camp to be
got past, and others of the savages may be up and about.  Still the
wagon _corral_ is two or three hundred yards from the water's edge,
which may give him a chance to pass between unobserved, and, with
unlimited confidence in his horse, he resolves upon risking it.

An error of judgment: he has not taken into account the _fracas_ behind,
with the report of his own pistol, and that all this must have been
heard by the redskins remaining in camp.  It has nevertheless.  The
consequence being that ere he has got half round the upper end of the
lake, he sees the plain in front of him thickly dotted with dark forms--
men on horseback--hears them shouting to one another.  A glance shows
him it is a gauntlet too dangerous to be run.  The fleetness of his
steed were no surety against gun-shots.

He reins up abruptly, and, with a wrench round, sets head west again,
with the design to do what he should have done at first--turn the lake
below.

The _detour_ will be much greater now: he has passed a large elbow of
it, which must be repassed to get around; but there is no alternative,
and, regretting his mistake, he makes along the back track at best
speed.  Not far before finding further reason to be sorry for his
blunder.  On that side, too, he sees mounted men directly before him--
those he had lately eluded.  They are scattered all over the plain,
apparently in search of him, some riding towards the lake's lower end,
thinking he has gone that way.  But all have their eyes on him now, and
place themselves in position to intercept him.  His path is beset on
every side, the triumphant cries of the Coyoteros proclaiming their
confidence that they have him at last--sure to capture or kill him now.
And his own heart almost fails him: go which way he will, it must be
through a shower of bullets.

Again he reins up, and sits in his saddle undecided.  The risk seems
equal, but it must be run; there is no help for it.

Ha! yes, there is.  A thought has flashed across his brain--a memory.
He remembers having seen the camp animals wading the lake through and
through; not over belly-deep.  Why cannot Crusader?

With quick resolve he sets his horse's head for the water, and in a
second or two after the animal is up to the saddle-girths, plunging
lightly as if it were but fetlock-deep.

Another cry from the Indians on both sides--surprise and disappointment
mingled; in tones telling of their belief in the supernatural, and come
back.

But soon they, too, recall the shallowness of the lake, and see nothing
strange in the fugitive attempting to escape across it.  So, without
loss of time, they again put their horses to speed, making to head him
on its eastern shore.

They are as near as can be to succeeding.  A close shave it is for the
pursued messenger, who, on emerging from the water, sees on either flank
horsemen hastening towards him.  But he is not dismayed.  Before any of
them are within shot range he dashes onward; Crusader, with sinews
braced by the cool bath, showing speed which ensures him against being
overtaken.

He is pursued, nevertheless.  The subtle savages know there are chances
and mischances.  One of the latter may arise in their favour; and hoping
it will be so, they continue the chase.

The moon is now up, everything on the level _llano_ distinguishable for
miles, and the black horse with his pale-faced rider is still less than
twenty lengths ahead; so after him they go, fast as their mustangs can
be forced.

Only to find that in brief time the twenty lengths have become doubled,
then trebled, till in fine they see that it is fruitless to carry the
pursuit further.

With hearts full of anger and chagrin, they give it up.  Some
apprehension have they as well.  El Zopilote is not with them; what will
he say on their returning empty-handed? what do?  For it is now no mere
matter of the catching of a horse; instead, more serious--a courier gone
off to bring succour to the besieged.

Down-hearted and dejectedly they turn their horses' heads, and ride back
for Nauchampa-tepetl.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Had the Coyoteros stuck to their faith in the probability of accidents
and continued the pursuit, they might have overtaken Henry Tresillian
after all.  For scarce have they turned backs upon him when a mishap
befalls him, not absolutely staying him in his course, but delaying him
wellnigh an hour.  He is making to regain the road which runs north from
Arispe, at the point where the caravan, forced by want of water, had
deflected from it to the Cerro Perdido.  In daylight he could have
ridden straight to it; for since then from the _mesas_ summit Pedro
Vicente had pointed to guide-marks indicating the spot where his
initials were carved upon the _palmida_.  But in his haste now, amid the
glamour of a newly-risen moon, the messenger has gone astray, only
discovering it when his horse suddenly staggering forward comes down
upon his knees, shooting him out of the saddle.

He is less hurt than surprised.  Never before has Crusader made false
step or stumble, and why now?

A moment reveals the reason: the ground has given way beneath, letting
him down knee-deep into a hole, the burrow of some animal.

Fortunately, there are no bones broken, no damage done either to horse
or rider; and the latter, recovering his seat in the saddle, essays to
proceed.  Soon to be a second time brought to a stand, though not now
unhorsed.  Crusader but lurches, keeping his legs, though again near
going down.

The young Englishman perceives what it is: he is riding through a warren
of the kind well known on the plains of Western America as "a
prairie-dog town or village."  In the moonlight he sees the hillocks of
these marmots all around, with the animals themselves squatting on them;
hears their tiny squirrel-like bark, intermingling with the hoot of the
quaint little owl which shares their subterranean habitations.

Once more at halt, he again bethinks himself what is best to do.  Shall
he ride back and go round the village, or continue on across it, taking
the chances of the treacherous ground?

He listens, soon to become assured that the pursuit has been abandoned,
thus giving him choice to act deliberately, and do as seems best to him.

Around the dog town may be miles, while direct to the other side may be
only a few score yards.  They are often of oblong shape, extending far,
but of little breadth, possibly because of the condition of the ground
and the herbage it produces.

Having ridden into it, he resolves to keep on; but to his great
annoyance and disgust finds it to extend far beyond the limits of his
patience; and as Crusader's hoofs break through the hollow crust, it
becomes necessary to alight and lead him.

At length, however, he is out of it, and again on firm ground, with the
level _llano_ far stretching before him.  But in the distance he
discerns a mountain ridge, trending north and south, lit up by the
moon's light, along which, as he knows, lies the route to Arispe.

"We're on the right road now, my noble Crusader, with no fear of being
followed.  And we must make it short as possible.  The lives of many
depend on that--on your speed, brave fellow.  So let us on."

Crusader responds with one of his strangely-intoned whimperings--almost
speech.  Then stands motionless, till his young master is in the saddle;
after which he again goes off in a gallop, _ventre a terre_.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

IN PAINFUL SUSPENSE.

Than the rest of that night no more anxious time has been spent by the
beleaguered miners.  If their new messenger fail in his errand, then
they can never dispatch another.  No chance for a second one to descend
the cliff, or get down the gorge, for both will be hereafter guarded
more carefully than ever.

All stay awake till morning, listening to every sound below, and doing
what they can to interpret it.  They had heard the cries near the Indian
camp as Henry Tresillian attempted to pass it, those by the ravine's
head hearing them plainer.  Then other cries, as in response, proceeding
from the western side of the lake.

After that a moment of silence, succeeded by a plunging noise, as of a
horse making his way through deep water.  And soon after shouts again,
for a while continuous, terminating in hoof-strokes, at each instant
less distinct, at length dying away in the distance.

But just then they upon the cliff had to listen to other sounds more
concerning themselves.  For it was at this time their presence became
known to the party remaining behind, resulting in that hurried ascent
from ledge to ledge, with the loss of one of their number.

Long after, they see that which renews their excitement, their thoughts
in a conflict between hope and fear.  From the vidette post, around
which they have all gathered, they behold a moving mass, in the early
dawn distinguishable as men on horseback.  It is the party who went in
pursuit of their messenger returning.  But whether they have him with
them or no cannot be told; for they come back in a thick clump, and he
may be in its midst invisible.  Nor is it opened out till they pass
behind the abutment of rock, disappearing from the view of those on the
_mesa_.

By the besieged ones the day is passed with anxiety unrelieved.  For,
although several had hastily proceeded to a point from which a sight of
the Indian camp could be obtained, it was yet too dark to see whether
the pursuers had brought back a prisoner.  And when daylight came, he
might be there without their being able to see him--inside the marquee,
or under one of the wagons.

Gradually, however, their hopes gain the ascendant; for nothing of
Crusader can be seen, and the noble steed, if there, could not well be
hidden away.  Besides, there is no more setting up of that ensanguined
stake, no more firing at a human target, as would likely have taken
place had the pale-faced courier been their captive.  Instead, a certain
restlessness, with signs of apprehension, is observed among themselves
throughout all the day, almost proclaiming his escape.

In Don Estevan's tent it is discussed, and this conclusion come to,
giving joy to all.  But to none as to his own daughter.  All day a prey
to keen, heart-sickening anxiety, how glad is she at hearing the
_gambusino_ say:

"I'm sure the senorito has got safe away, and is now on the road to
Arispe.  Were it not so, we'd have seen him ere this--tied to that
accursed stake and riddled with bullets, as the others.  The brutes
meant doing the same with me; had almost begun it, when, thanks to the
Virgin, there came a slip between cup and lip.  And I think we may thank
her now for giving a like chance to the brave lad.  _Santos Dios_! he
deserves it."

Cheering words to Gertrude, who can scarce resist rushing up to the
speaker and giving him a kiss for them.  Chaste kiss it would be, for
the _gambusino_ is neither young nor handsome.  She contents herself by
saying:

"Oh, sir! if he get safe to Arispe, you shall be paid for your saddle
ten times over.  I'm sure father will not grudge that."

"Saddle, _nina lindissima_!" exclaims Vicente, with a quizzical smile;
"that's nought to me.  I'd be glad to sacrifice a hundred such--ay, a
thousand, if I could afford it, for him you seem so interested in.  His
life's too precious to be weighed in the scale against all the horsegear
in the world."

All signify approval of these generous sentiments, so pleasing to the
youth's father, who tacitly listens.  And the brief dialogue over, they
turn to discussing the chances of relief reaching them, now for the
first time seeming favourable.

"If," says Don Estevan, hopeful as any, "he meet no accident before
arriving at Arispe, then we may count on receiving succour.  There's but
one thing we have to fear--time!  Nor need we fear that, if Colonel
Requenes be there with his regiment.  By ill fortune he may not."

"What reason have you for thinking he may not?" asks Robert Tresillian.

"I recall his telling me, just before we started, that there was a
likelihood of his being ordered to Guaymas, to assist in suppressing a
reported rising of the Yaquis Indians.  If he has gone thither we'll be
no better off than before."

"But the people of Arispe--surely they will not be indifferent to our
situation?"

It is the Englishman who interrogates.

"Ah, true," returns the Mexican, correcting himself, as a reassured
expression comes over his countenance.  "They will not.  I did not think
of that.  I see it now."

"'Tis not for us and ours alone we may expect them to bestir themselves;
but for their own relatives and friends.  Think, _amigo mio_!  There
isn't one of our following but has left some one behind who should rush
to the rescue soon as hearing how things stand."

"You're right, Don Roberto.  Whether the soldiers be there or not.
Arispe and its surroundings can surely furnish force enough to effect
our deliverance.  We must have patience--hope and pray for it."

"Dear husband," here interposes the senora, "you seem to forget my
brother, Juliano, and his three hundred _peones_.  At least half of them
are brave fellows, a match for any savages as these who surround us.  If
Henrique succeed in reaching Arispe, he will go on to my brother's
_hacienda_, soldiers or no soldiers."

This speech from an unexpected quarter further heightens their hopes,
already rapidly rising.  They almost feel as if the siege was being
raised, and themselves about to continue their long-delayed journey.

A like sentiment pervades the people all through the camp.  In every
shed and booth is a group conversing on the same topic, and much in a
similar way; all with trusting reliance on the friends left behind,
confident they will not fail them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

At this self-same hour the feeling in the Coyotero camp is quite the
contrary: instead of confidence, there is doubt, even apprehension.  The
white men's messenger--for they are sure he must have been this--has got
through their lines, clear away, and well do they comprehend the
consequences.

They know the miners come from Arispe--marks on the wagons and other
chattels tell them that--and the paleface courier will be now hastening
thither.  On such a swift steed he will reach it in quick time; and,
with the tale which he has to tell, alike quick will be the response: a
rescuing host in rush for Nauchampa-tepetl.  It may even arrive before
the return of their raiders from the Horcasitas.

Thus apprehensive, on the day and night following the escape of Henry
Tresillian, and for many days and nights after, there is as much, if not
more, anxiety in the camp of the besiegers as in that of the besieged.

The latter fear but famine; the former, fire and sword.



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

FRIENDS IN FEAR.

"Glad to see you, Senor Juliano!  It's not often you honour Arispe with
your presence."

Colonel Requenes is the speaker, he spoken to being a gentleman of
middle age, in civilian costume, the dress of a _haciendado_.  It is Don
Juliano Romero, brother of the Senora Villanueva, the owner of a large
_ganaderia_ or grazing estate, some six or seven miles out of Arispe.

"True," he admits, "nor would you see me now, only that this thing
begins to look serious."

"What thing?" asks the Colonel, half divining it.

"No news from Villanueva, I came to see if _you've_ had any."

"Not a word; and you're right about it's beginning to look serious.  I
was just talking of it to your son there, before you came in."

They are in a large apartment in Colonel Requenes' official residence,
his receiving-room, into which the _ganadero_ has just been ushered; the
son alluded to being there already, a youth of some sixteen summers, in
military uniform, with sabretasche and other insignia proclaiming him an
aide-de-camp.  After greeting his father, he has resumed his seat by a
table on which are several open despatches, with which he seems to busy
himself.

"_Por Dios_!  I cannot tell what to make of it," pursues the _ganadero_;
"they must have reached the mine, wherever it is, long ago.  Time enough
for word to have been brought back.  And my sister not writing to me,
that's a puzzle!  She promised she would soon as they got there."

"And Villanueva himself promised he would write to me.  Besides, the
people, many of them, have left friends behind, relatives out in the
neighbourhood of the old _minera_.  Some of them are in Arispe every
day, inquiring if there be any news of those gone north; so it's clear
they've had no word from them either."

"What do you suppose can be the cause, Requenes?"

"I've been trying to think.  At first I fancied the great drought that's
been, with every stream and pond dried up, might have forced them out of
their way for water, and so lengthened their journey.  But even with
that there's been time enough for them to have reached their destination
long since, and us to have heard of it.  As we haven't, I fear it's
something worse."

"What's your conjecture, Colonel?"

"I'm almost afraid to venture on conjectures, but they force themselves
on me, Don Juliano; and in the one shape you will yourself, no doubt, be
thinking of."

"I comprehend.  _Los Indios_!"

"_Los Indios_," echoes the officer; "just that.  Villanueva told me the
new-discovered _veta_ lies a long way to the north-west, beyond the
headwaters of the Horcasitas.  That's all country claimed by the Apaches
of different bands; as you know, every one of them determinedly hostile
to the whites, especially to us Mexicans, for reasons you may have heard
of."

"I know all that; you allude to the affair of Gil Perez?"

"I do; and my fear is our friends may have encountered these red-handed
savages.  If so, Heaven have mercy on them, and God help them; for He
only can."

"Encountering them would mean being attacked by them?"

"Surely so; and destroyed if defeated: the men butchered, the women and
children carried into captivity."

At this the young aide-de-camp turns round on his chair, his face
showing an expression of pain.  He says nothing, however, but continues
an earnest listener to the conversation.

"Merciful Heaven!" exclaims the _ganadero_, with a groan, "I hope it has
not come to that."

"I hope so too, and don't yet think it has; only that it's probable
enough--too probable.  Still, even if set upon, they would resist; and
when one comes to remember how many there were of them, they ought to
make a stout resistance."

"Many of them," rejoins Don Juliano, "both miners and _vaqueros_, are of
approved valour, and were well armed.  I was at the old _minera_ when
they started off, and saw that for myself."

"Yes, I know; but their holding out would depend on the sort of ground
they chanced to be on when attacked, if they have been attacked.  By
good luck, our mutual brother-in-law is no novice to Indian tactics, but
a soldier of experience, who'll know how to act in any emergency."

"True; but the worst of it is his being embarrassed by having so many
women and children with him; among them, alas! my sister and niece.
_Pobrecitas_!"

Again the young officer shifts uneasily on his chair, the expression of
pain still upon his face.  For he is the cousin whom Gertrude was said
to have forgotten.

"They took a number of large vehicles with them?" says the Colonel,
interrogatively.  "American wagons, did they not?"

"They did."

"How many?  Can you remember?"

"Six or seven, I think."

"And a large pack-train?"

"Yes; the _atajo_ seemed to number about fourscore mules."

For a moment the Colonel is silent, seeming to reflect, then says:

"Villanueva would know how to throw these _carros_ into _corral_, and
with so many pack-saddles ought to make a defensible breastwork, to say
nothing of the bales and boxes of goods.  If not taken by surprise while
_en route_, he'd be sure of using that precaution.  So protected, and
armed as they were, they ought to hold good their ground against any
number of redskins.  The worst danger would be their getting dropped on
in some place without water.  In that case surrender would be the
necessary result, and surrender to Apaches were as death itself."

"_Santissima_! yes--we all know that.  But, Requenes, do you really
think we've to fear their having met such a disaster?"

"I don't know what to think.  I'd fain not fear it, but the thing looks
grave, no matter in what way one views it.  There should have been word
from them several days ago; none coming, what other can be the
explanation?"

"Ay, true; what other?" rejoins the _ganadero_, despondently.  "But what
ought we to do?" he adds.

"I've been considering that for some time, but couldn't make up my mind.
I've made it up now."

"To what?"

"To sending one of my squadrons along the route they took; with orders
to follow it up, if need be, to the new-discovered mine; at all events,
till it be ascertained what hinders our hearing from them."

"That seems the best and only way," returns Don Juliano.  "But when do
you propose your men to start?"

"Immediately--soon as they can be ready.  For such an expedition, most
of the way through a very wilderness, they will need supplies, however
lightly equipped.  But I will issue the order this moment.  Cecilio," to
the aide-de-camp, "hasten down to the _cuartel_, and tell Major Garcia
to come to me at once."

The young officer, rising at the words and clapping on his shako, makes
straight for the outer door.  But before stepping over its threshold, he
sees that which causes him to return instantly to the receiving-room, to
the surprise of those he had left there.

"What is it?" demands the Colonel.

"Look there!"

He points out through the open window over the _plaza_ in front of it.
Springing from their seats and moving up to it, they perceive a young
man on horseback advancing towards the house; his face pale, and with a
wayworn look, his dress dust-stained, and otherwise out of order, the
horse he bestrides steaming at the nostrils, froth clouted, and with
palpitating flanks.

"_Caramba_!" exclaims Colonel Requenes.  "That's young Tresillian, the
son of Villanueva's partner!"



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

TO THE RESCUE.

In an instant after Henry Tresillian is inside the room, warmly received
by both the Colonel and _ganadero_; less so by the young officer, though
the two had been formerly bosom friends.  The coolness of Cecilio Romero
can be easily understood; but in the scene which succeeds, with hasty
questioning, and answers alike hurried, no one takes note of it.

"You bring news--bad news, I fear?" says the Colonel.

"Bad, yes.  I'm sorry having to say so," returns the messenger.  "This
is for you, senor--from Don Estevan Villanueva.  'Twill tell you all."

He pulls a folded paper from under his jacket, and hands it to the
Colonel.

Breaking it open, the latter reads aloud; Romero standing by and
listening, for its contents concern them all.

Thus ran it:

"_Hermano mio_, (brother),

"If Heaven permit this to reach your hands, 'twill tell you how we are
situated--in extreme peril, I grieve to say, surrounded by Apache
Indians, the most hostile and cruel of all--the Coyoteros.  Where and
how I need not specify.  The brave boy who bears this, if successful in
putting it into your hands, will give you all details.  When you've got
them, I know how you will act, and that no appeal from me is necessary.
On you alone depends our safety--our lives.  Without your help we are
lost.

"Estevan Villanueva."

"They shall not be lost," cries the Colonel, greatly agitated--"not one
of them, if the Zacatecas Lancers can save them.  I go to their aid;
will start at once.  Away, Cecilio! down to the _cuartel_!  Bring Major
Garcia back with you immediately.  Now, senorito," he adds, turning to
Henry Tresillian, "the details.  Tell us all.  But, first, where are our
friends in such peril?  In what place are they surrounded?"

"In a place strange enough, Senor Colonel," answers the young
Englishman.  "On the top of a mountain."

"On the top of a mountain!" echoes the Colonel.  "A strange situation,
indeed.  What sort of mountain?"

"One standing alone on the _llanos_, out of sight of any other, 'Tis
known as the Cerro Perdido."

"Ah!  I've heard of it."

"I too," says the _ganadero_.

"Up somewhere near the sources of the Horcasitas.  A singular eminence--
a _mesa_, I believe.  But how came they to go there?  It must be some
way off the route to their intended destination."

"We were forced thither, senor, through want of water.  The guide
advised it, and his advice would have been for the best, but for the ill
luck of the savages chancing to come along that way."

"_Muchacho_, I won't confuse you with further questioning, but leave you
to tell your tale.  We listen.  First have a _copita_ of Catalan brandy
to refresh you.  You seem in need of it."

"There's one needs refreshing as much as myself, Senor Colonel; ay,
more, and more deserves it."

"What one!  Who?"

"My horse out there.  But for him I would not be here."

"Ah! that's your grand steed," says the Colonel, looking out; "I
remember him--Crusader.  He does seem to need it, and shall have it.
_Sargento_!"  This in loud call to an orderly sergeant in waiting
outside, who, instantly showing his face at the door, receives command
to see the black horse attended to.

"Now, _muchacho mio_! proceed."

Henry Tresillian, still speaking hurriedly for reasons comprehensible,
runs over all that has occurred to the caravan, since its departure from
the worked-out mine near Arispe, till its arrival at the Lost Mountain.
Then the unexpected approach of the Indians, resulting in the retreat to
the summit of the Cerro, with the other incidents and events
succeeding--to that, the latest, of himself being lowered down the
cliff, and his after-escape through the fleetness of his matchless
steed.

"How many of the Indians are there?" asks the Colonel.  "Can you tell
that, senorito?"

"Between four and five hundred, we supposed; but they were not all there
when I left.  Some days before half their number went off on a marauding
expedition southward; so our guide believed, as they were dressed and
painted as when on the war-trail."

"These had not returned when you came away?"

"No, Senor Colonel; no sign of them."

"I see it all now, and pity the poor people who live on the lower
Horcasitas.  That's where they were bent for, no doubt.  The more reason
for our making haste to reach the Cerro Perdido.  We may catch these
raiders on return.  _Sargento_!"  This again in call to the orderly, who
responds instantly by presenting himself in the doorway.

"Summon the bugler!  Give him orders to sound the `assembly' at once.
We must start without a moment's delay.  How fortunate those Yaquis kept
quiet, else I would be now operating around Guaymas."

"We must, Requenes.  But will your regiment be enough?  How many men can
you muster?"

"Five hundred.  But there's the battery of mountain howitzers--fifty men
more.  Of course, I take that along."

"And of course I go too," says the _ganadero_; "and, to make sure of our
having force sufficient, can take with me at least a hundred good men,
the pick of my _vaqueros_.  Fortunately they're now all within easy
summons, assembled at my house for the _herradero_" (cattle branding),
"which was to come off to-morrow.  That can be postponed.  _Hasta
luego_, Colonel; I ride back home to bring them; so doubt not my having
them here, and ready for the route soon as your soldiers."

"_Bueno_!  Whether needed or not, it will be well to have your valiant
_vaqueros_ with us.  I'll welcome them."

Instantly after the _plaza_ of Arispe displays an animated scene, people
crowding into it from all parts, with air excited.  For the report,
brought by the young Englishman, has gone forth and all abroad,
spreading like wildfire,--Villanueva and Tresillian, with all their
people, surrounded by savages!  "_Los Indios_!" is the cry carried from
point to point, striking terror into the hearts of the Arispenos, as
though the dreaded redskins, instead of being at an unknown distance
off, were at the gates of their city.

Then succeeds loud cheering as the bugle-call proclaims the approach of
the _lanzeros_, troop after troop filing into the _plaza_, and forming
line in front of their colonel's quarters, all in complete equipment,
and ready for the route.

More cheering as Don Juliano Romero comes riding in at the head of his
hundred retainers; _vaqueros_ and _rancheros_, in the picturesque
costume of the country, armed to the teeth, and mounted on their
mustangs, fresh, fiery, and prancing.

Still another cheer, as the battery of mountain howitzers rolls in and
takes its place in the line.  Then a loud chorus of _vivas_! as the
march commences, prolonged and carried on as the column moves through
the street; the crowd following far beyond the suburbs, to take leave of
it with prayers upon their lips for the successful issue of an
expedition in which many of them are but too painfully interested.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

THE RAIDERS RETURNED.

Another ten days have elapsed, and they on the Cerro Perdido are held
there rigorously as ever; a strong guard kept constantly stationed at
both points where it is possible for them to reach the plain.

In the interval no incident of any note has arisen to vary the monotony
of their lives.  One day is just as the other, with little to occupy
them, save the watch by the ravine's head, which needs to be maintained
with vigilance unabated.

But much change has arisen both in their circumstances and appearance.
With provision wellnigh out, they have been for days on less than half
allowance, and famine has set its stamp on their features.  Pallid,
hollow cheeks, with eyes sunken in their sockets, are seen all around;
and some of the weaker ones begin to totter in their steps, till the
place more resembles the grounds of an hospital than an encampment of
travellers.  They have miscalculated their resources, which gave out
sooner than expected.

In this lamentably forlorn condition they are still uncertain as to the
fate of their messenger, their doubts about his safety increasing every
day--every hour.  Not that they suppose him to have fallen into the
hands of the Coyoteros.  On the contrary, they are convinced of his
having escaped, else some signs of his capture would have been apparent
in the Indian camp, and none such are observed.  But other contingencies
may have arisen: an accident to himself, or his horse, delaying him on
the route, if not stopping him altogether.

Or may it be, as Don Estevan has said, that Colonel Requenes with his
soldiers is absent from Arispe, and there is a difficulty in raising a
force of civilians sufficient for effecting their rescue?

These conjectures, with many others, pass through their minds, producing
a despondency, now at its darkest and deepest.  For at first, in their
impatience, blind to probabilities, they fancied theirs a winged
messenger--a Mercury, who should have brought them succour long since.
That bright dream is passed, and the reaction has set in, gloomy as
shadow of death itself.

Nor seems there to be much cheer in the camp of their besiegers.  They
can look down upon it from a distance near enough to distinguish the
individual forms of the savages, and note all their actions in the open.
Through the telescope can be read even the expressions on their
features, showing that they, too, have their anxieties and
apprehensions; no doubt from the black horse and his rider having got
away from them.

Their scouts are still observed to come and go.  Some are sent
northward, others to the south; the last evidently to look out for the
return of the raiding party gone down the Horcasitas.

Another day passes, and they are seen coming back, at a pace which
betokens their bringing a report of an important nature.  That it is a
welcome one to their comrades in the camp can be told by their shouts of
triumph as they approach.

Soon after they upon the _mesa_ are made aware of the cause, by seeing
the red marauders themselves coming on towards the camp, in array very
different from that when leaving it.  Instead of only their arms and
light equipments, every man of them is now laden with spoil, every horse
besides his rider carrying a load, either on withers or croup.  And they
have other horses with them now--a _caballada_--mules, too, all under
pack and burden.

No, not all.  As the long straggling line draws closer to the Cerro,
they on its summit see a number of these animals bearing on their backs
something more than the loot of plundered houses.  They see women, most
of them appearing to be young girls.

As they are conducted on to the camp, and inside its enclosure, Don
Estevan, viewing them through his telescope, can trace upon their
persons, as their features, all the signs and lines proclaiming utter
despair: dresses torn, hair hanging dishevelled, and eyes downcast, with
not a ray or spark of hope in them.

Others look through the glass, to be pained by the heart-saddening
spectacle; each of the married ones, as he views it, thinking of his own
wife or daughter, in fear their fate may be the same--a fate too horrid
to be dwelt upon in thought, much less to be talked about.

This day they are not permitted to see more.  Twilight is already on,
and night's darkness, almost instantly succeeding, shuts out from their
view everything below.

But if they see not, they can hear.  There are continuous noises in the
camp throughout the rest of the night--cries and joyous ejaculations.
The Coyoteros have made a grand _coup_: much plunder acquired, many
prisoners taken, and pale-faced foes slain, almost to a glut of
vengeance.  They are greatly jubilant, and yield themselves to a very
paean of rejoicing, their boasts and exulting shouts at intervals
reverberating along the cliffs.

It is another night of carousal with them, as that when they first sate
down to the siege; for among the proceeds of their recent maraud are
several pig-skins of _aguardiente_, and this fiery spirit, freely
distributed, excites them almost to madness.

So loud are their yells, so angrily, vengefully intoned, that they who
listen above begin to fear they may at length become reckless, and,
_coute que coute_, risk the assault so long unattempted.  In such
numbers now, feeling their strength, they may hold a little loss light.
Besides, there is still that apprehension from the side of Arispe; it
may further urge them to a desperate deed, which, if not done at once,
must be left undone, and the siege ingloriously abandoned.

These are but the conjectures of the besieged, who, acting upon them,
keep watch throughout the remainder of the night.  Never more wakeful,
seemingly, though never less needed; for up till the hour of dawn, no
assailant is seen approaching the gorge, no sound heard of any one
attempting to scale that steep acclivity.

Of those fearing that they will try, Pedro Vicente is not among the
number.  Endeavouring to give confidence to his doubting companions, he
says,

"I know the Coyoteros too well to suppose them such fools.  Not all the
_aguardiente_ in Sonora will make them mad enough to expose themselves
to our battery of stones.  They don't forget our having it here, and
that we're watching their every movement; ready to rain a storm of rocks
on them if they but come under its range.  So, _camarados_, keep up
heart and courage!  We've nothing more to fear to-day than we had
yesterday.  That's hunger, not their spears or scalping-knives."

Fortified by the _gambusino's_ words, they to whom they are addressed
feel their confidence restored--enough to inspire them with further
patience and endurance.



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

THE RESCUERS EN ROUTE.

"Son! that's the Lost Mountain, is it?"

"It is, Colonel."

"_Gracias a Dios_!  Glad we've sighted it at last.  How far do you think
we're from it, senorito?  Nigh twenty miles, I take it; though it looks
nearer."

"'Tis all of twenty miles, Colonel; so our guide said when we first saw
it from the place."

"I can quite believe it.  On these high plains distances are very
deceptive; but my experience enables me to judge pretty correctly."

The dialogue is between Colonel Requenes and Henry Tresillian; the
latter acting as guide to the expedition _en route_ to release those
imprisoned on the Cerro Perdido.  Others are beside them; Don Juliano
with his son, the young aide-de-camp, and several officers of the staff;
their escort forming an advanced guard.  Not far behind it, the howitzer
battery, followed by the lancer regiment in open order; then Romero's
irregulars, closed by a troop of lancers as rear-guard, completing the
marching column.

All are at halt, brought to it as soon as the Cerro was sighted.  They
have been on march from an early hour by moonlight, and as the sun, now
rising, has lit up the plain afar, the solitary eminence can be clearly
seen.  As may be deduced from the young Englishman's words, the point
they have arrived at is the same where the caravan had temporarily come
to a stop--the very spot itself; for close by is the tree bearing the
initials of the _gambusino_.

"Well, _caballeros_," continues the Colonel, "we've done our best so
far; pray God to good purpose.  Let us hope we're in time.  I wonder how
it is?  What's your thought, Romero?"

"I have none, Requenes--only hopes that they've held out."

"I wish," pursues the Colonel, in half soliloquy, "we but knew for
certain; 'twould make an important difference as to how I dispose of my
force.  Should they be still there--"

"Senor Colonel," interposes the youthful guide, "if you'll let me have a
look through your telescope, I think I can settle that point."

This, as he sees the commanding officer drawing his field-glass from its
case.

"In welcome, senorito.  Here!" and he hands him the telescope.

Instantly it is brought to his eye, and eagerly--his fingers trembling
as they hold it out.  What he hopes to see will tell him that his father
and friends still live; if he sees it not, he will know they are dead;
and _she_, dearer than all, condemned to a fate far worse!

What a change comes over his countenance almost on the instant of his
raising the glass to his eye!  Hitherto grave to apprehension, all at
once it lights joyously up, as from his lips proceed the words, "They're
still on the mountain; Heaven be praised!"

"If it be so, Heaven deserves praise--all our thanks.  But how know you,
senorito?"

"By the flag!"

"What flag?"

"Take the glass, Colonel; look for yourself."

Receiving back the telescope, and adjusting it to his sight, Requenes
levels it at the Lost Mountain.

"At the nearest end, up on the summit," pursues Henry Tresillian,
instructingly, "you'll see it.  It is the flag of Mexico.  Don Estevan
intended to have raised it over his new mine, and had it hoisted yonder
in the hope it might be seen by some white men, and lead to our
situation being made known.  It has proved of service now; telling us
our friends are still in the land of the living.  If they were not it
wouldn't be there."

"You're right, senorito, it wouldn't.  And it is there--I see it!--yes,
can even make out the national insignia--the eagle and nopal.  We may
thank Heaven, indeed."

"And we do!" exclaims the _ganadero_, raising his hat reverentially, all
following his example.

A thrill of exultation runs like wildfire backward on to the extremest
rear--a joyous excitement, as the soldiers learn they have not made
their long march in vain, and that the foe is before them, not far oft.
For the banner waving above proclaims the siege still continued, and the
Indians keeping it up.

"They _are_ there," affirms the Colonel, after gazing some time through
his glass.  "I can see the smoke ascending from their camp fires.  No
doubt by this they'll be cooking their breakfasts.  Well, we won't be in
time to hinder their having that meal; but if they eat dinner this day,
without my leave, I shall be willing to throw up my commission as
colonel of the Zacatecas Lancers.  Now, gentlemen!" he adds, turning to
his staff, and summoning his chief officers around him in council of
war, "the enemy is yonder; no doubt of it.  'Tis a question as to how we
should advance upon him.  Give your opinion, Major Garcia."

"How many are there supposed to be, Colonel?" asks the major, a sage,
grizzled veteran.  "Our mode of approaching them should much depend upon
that."

"Unluckily I can't tell," says the Commander-in-chief; "there were
wellnigh five hundred all told when together; but it appears that half
went off on a raid down the Horcasitas, the other half remaining to
carry on the siege.  If the raiders are returned and are now among the
besiegers, then we'll have their full force to deal with, and may expect
a sharp fight for it.  I know these redskins of old, the band of the
Rattlesnake; though, as our young friend informs me, that worthy has
ceased to exist, and the Vulture reigns in his stead.  All the worse for
us, as Zopilote was the master of Cascabel in tactics, cunning,
courage--everything.  Never mind, we should only be too glad to meet the
renowned warrior, if but for glory's sake."

While the Colonel is still speaking a voice is heard to rearward, with
exclamations telling of excitement there.  Immediately after a subaltern
officer of the rear-guard advances rapidly to the front, conducting a
strange horseman, whose dress, travel-stained, with the sweat and dust
upon his horse, betokens him just arrived from a journey long and
hurriedly made.  A messenger on some errand, which his wan, woebegone
face bespeaks to be of the saddest.

"Whence come you, _amigo_?" demands the commanding officer, as the
stranger is brought face to face with him.

"From Nacomori, on the Horcasitas, Senor Colonel," is the answer.

"On what business?" asks Requenes, more than half divining it.

"Oh, senor, the Indians have been there; killed scores of our people--
children as grown men; plundered and burnt our houses; carried off all
our young women; made rack and ruin of everything.  I rode to Arispe,
hoping to find you there, but you were gone, and I've hastened hither
after you."

"What Indians?  Where did they come from?"

"From the north, senor; down the river.  Apaches, we thought; but it was
in the night they came upon us, and no one could be sure.  When morning
came they had gone off with everything."

"What night?  How long since this occurred?"

"The night of _Lunes_--just four days ago."

"The raiding party of the Coyoteros, gentlemen," says the Colonel to his
surrounding.  "The time corresponds, the place--everything; and likely
they've got back, and are now by the Cerro yonder.  If so, we have
others to rescue beside our own friends; with chastisement to inflict on
the red-handed marauders, to say nothing of revenge.  So much the more
reason for our not losing time.  Major! order the regiment to close up
and form line.  Let the others be drawn in also; I want to say a word to
them."

With a quickness due to thorough discipline, the lancers are brought
into battle line; not for fight now, but to receive an address.  Thrown
forward on one flank, and facing inwards, are the light artillerists;
while on the other in file form are Romero's irregulars.

Placing himself in a position to be heard by all, the Commander-in-chief
cries out:

"_Camarados_! at the base of yonder hill, where you see smoke rising, is
the enemy.  Apaches--Coyoteros--as we know, knowing them also to be the
cruellest of all the savages that infest our frontier.  To say nothing
of the glory gained in conquering them, 'twill be doing humanity a
service to destroy them; and never more than now has there been reason.

"This gentleman,"--he points to the newly-arrived messenger, still on
horseback and near by--"has brought news of a bloodthirsty massacre they
have just committed at Nacomori, on the Horcasitas, where women, scores,
have been carried off.  Like enough they're all over yonder now, and we
may be in time to release these prisoners, and avenge the murders that
have been done.  The only fear is of the Indians getting away from us.
Mounted on their swift mustangs, and leaving all encumbrances behind,
that is still possible enough.  But to prevent it, I intend dividing my
force, and sending detachments around to intercept and cut off their
retreat on every route they may take.  We must deal them a death-blow,
and I now call on you--every man to do his best.  Remember how many of
our people, perhaps many of your own relatives, have fallen victims to
the ferocity of these ruthless marauders.  Think of the crime we have
just heard of at Nacomori.  Think of it, _camarados_, and strike home!"

An enthusiastic cheer hails the Colonel's speech; and while it is still
ringing commands are issued for the disposition of the advance--the
movement soon after commencing.



CHAPTER THIRTY TWO.

SUCCOUR IN SIGHT.

Not an hour of daylight now passes, scarce a minute, without Don Estevan
Villanueva or Robert Tresillian having the telescope to their eyes,
scanning the plain southward.  For days this has been their practice, up
to that on which the red marauders are seen returning from their
murderous expedition.

And on the following morning at earliest dawn the two--Pedro Vicente
along with them--take their stand on an outward projection of the
_mesa_, which commands a view of the _llano_ all round its southern
side, at the same time overlooking the Coyotero camp.

They have not been long there when, under the first rays of the rising
sun, they see something sparkle which had never been observed by them
before, though in a place with which they are familiar--the same where
they first sighted the Cerro Perdido.  Nor is the glancing object a
single one, for there are many shining points as stars in a
constellation.  They are visible to the naked eye, for as yet none of
them have looked through the telescope.  As Don Estevan is levelling it,
the _gambusino_ says:

"Looks like the glitter of arms and accoutrements.  Pray the Virgin it
be that!"

"It _is_ that!" cries Don Estevan, at the first glance through the
glass.  "Arms, and in the hands of men.  I can make out a body of horse
in uniform--soldiers.  Requenes and his regiment; he to a certainty.  At
length--at last--we may hope to be rescued, and our long imprisonment
brought to an end."

His words, spoken excitedly and aloud, attract those who are sauntering
near, and soon most upon the _mesa_ come clustering round him.  To see
with eyes unaided that metallic sheen, as they eagerly hearken to its
interpretation.  Don Estevan, with the telescope still held aloft, goes
on speaking:

"Yes; 'tis they!  I can see they carry lances, by the sun glinting on
the blades above their heads.  They can be no other than the Zacatecas
regiment, with my brother-in-law at its head.  Your son, Tresillian, is
safe; their being yonder tells of his having reached Arispe.  Brave
youth! we all owe him our blessing."

"And we give him that, with our gratitude!" shouts Pedro Vicente, the
others enthusiastically echoing his words.

There is a momentary lull, all ears intently listening for what Don
Estevan may next say; which is:

"They appear to be extending line, and look as if there were a good six
or seven hundred.  Ah! now I note there are others besides the lancers--
a battery of brass guns--that's what's flashing back the sun.  And a
body of horsemen, not in uniform.  They seem to be at halt.  Why and for
what?"

"Like enough," suggests Tresillian, "they've made out our flag telling
them we are still here.  Requenes, with others of his officers, will
have telescopes too, and must see it, as also that smoke over the camp
below.  It will tell them our besiegers are there also.  That would
cause them to halt--to concert measures for the attack."

"You're right, Don Roberto, it must be as you say.  But now there's a
movement among them.  The mass is breaking up into detachments, some
commencing to march to the right, others to the left.  Ah!  I see it
all: they mean making a surround, cutting off the retreat of our enemy.
_Caramba_!  Requenes _is_ a cunning strategist, as I always believed
him."

With the glass still at his eye, the old soldier can see every movement
made, comprehending all, and explaining them in succession to the
audience around him.  A party of lancers, seemingly a squadron,
separating from the main body, moves off to the right, another party of
like strength proceeding in the opposite direction.  Then other
detachments follow these, as if to form an enfilading line when the time
comes for it.  But the central force remains stationary long after the
flanking parties have been extended, and is only seen to advance when
they are far away.  These make wide circuit, evidently designed to
embrace the Coyoteros' camp, and, if need be, the Cerro itself.

And now they draw nearer till all upon the _mesa_, without any
artificial aid, can see they are men, and as such surely friends
hastening to their rescue.

To their joy they also perceive that the occupants of the Indian camp
are as yet unaware of what is approaching.  Five hundred feet below,
their view is more limited; and long before the soldiers become visible
to them, they above see the latter distinctly, and understand their
strategic scheme.

Meanwhile the savages are not acting in the ordinary way: signs of
commotion are observable among them, as if some change were intended.
Horses are being caught and caparisoned, while the newly acquired
animals from the Horcasitas are again loaded with the spoils, those that
carried the captives being also made ready for the road.

The women are themselves seen within the _corral_; as on the evening
before, looking forlorn, every one of them a picture of despair.  They
are to be taken they know not whither, but to a place from which they
have no hope of return.  Little dream they that friends are so near.

"What a pity we can't let them know of rescue being at hand!" says Don
Estevan.  "They could hear us if we call to them, but some of the
Coyoteros are acquainted with our language, and it would warn them
also."

"No fear of that," affirms the _gambusino_; "I think I can speak a
tongue that the redskins won't understand, and the women will."

"What tongue?" asks Don Estevan.

"The Opata.  Some of those girls are _mestizas_, and should know the
lingo of their mothers."

"Try them with it, then, Don Pedro."

"With your worship's leave, I will."

Saying which, the _gambusino_ advances to the outermost edge of the
cliff, and, with all the strength of his lungs, utters some words
altogether unintelligible to those around him, but evidently understood
by the captives below.

Several of them on hearing it spring suddenly to their feet, looking up
in the direction whence it came, surprised to see men above, hitherto
unobserved by them, and still more to hear speech addressed to
themselves.  Hope and joy become mingled with their astonishment, when
the _gambusino_ goes on in the same vernacular to tell them how it is,
and that succour is near.

Though listening all the while, not one of the Apaches appears to
comprehend a word of what Vicente is saying.  They suppose it a mere
expression of sympathy; and, without giving heed to it, proceed with
their preparations for departure.  They are evidently bent upon this,
though it may be but the raiders about to continue on to their home in
Apacheria.  Still, other signs seem to indicate a general clearing out
of the camp; for now the whole _caballada_ of horses are being brought
in saddled and bridled, while everything portable in the way of goods is
turned out within the _corral_, packed as if for transportation.

And in reality it is their intention to abandon both camp and siege,
though reluctantly, and hating to surrender a chance of revenge that had
seemed so sure and near.  But they have had enough to content them for
the time, and there is a fear which forces them to forego it.  Ever
since Henry Tresillian escaped them they have been nervously
apprehensive, correctly surmising him a messenger.  He must long since
have reached Arispe, and may at any moment reappear, guiding back a
force sufficient to overwhelm them.

While yet unrecovered from their night's carousal, it is as the
fulfilment of a dream, their worst apprehensions realised, as they
behold coming towards them, though still far off, a body of men,
uniformed and in serried array, with pennoned lances borne aloft!

The sight is not so much a surprise, neither does it produce a panic;
for they who approach seem not in such numbers as to overawe them.  The
detached parties sent around are not within their view, and with their
habitual contempt for the Mexican _soldados_, they make light of those
that are, imagining them under a mistake--advancing upon an enemy whose
strength they have underrated.

The error is their own; but, misled by it, they resolve to ride out,
meet the pale-faced foemen, and anticipate their attack.  Their chief so
commands it.

Quick as thought every warrior is upon his horse, gun or spear in hand;
they, too, in military formation--line of battle--pressing forward to
the encounter, the sentries alone left on post.



CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

THE THUNDER GUNS.

As is their custom, the savages advance with loud cries and gestures of
menace, intended to terrify their antagonists.

They have got several miles out from the mountain, and almost within
charging distance, when they see that which brings them to sudden halt--
a thing above all others dreaded by the American aboriginal--cannon
"thunder guns"--as they call them.  The brass howitzers, hitherto
screened by the vanguard of cavalry, have been thrown to the front,
instantly unlimbered, and so brought under their eyes.  Then a flash, a
vomiting of flame and smoke, a loud ringing report, followed by the
hurtling of a shell in its flight through the air.  It drops in their
midst and instantly explodes, its severed fragments dealing death
around.

Too much this for Coyotero courage; and without waiting for other like
destructive missiles to follow, they turn tail and gallop back towards
the camp.  Not that they have any hope of safety there, for they believe
the great thunder guns can reach them anywhere, and their flight towards
it is but the impulse of a confused fear.

The sentries, seeing them in retreat, alike frightened by the report of
the howitzers, forsake their posts, each hastening towards a horse--his
own.

For a time the captive women are unguarded, seemingly forgotten.  It
gives the _gambusino_ a cue; and, acting upon it, he again calls out as
before in the Opata tongue,

"Sisters! now's your time!  Up and out of the _corral_; make round to
the lake, fast as you can run, and on into the ravine.  There you'll
find friends to meet you."

Listening to his counsel, as one the captive women resolve to act upon
it; for they are now cognisant of what is going on, and fully comprehend
the situation.

The result, a rush out of the enclosure all together, and a race round
to the spot indicated by that friendly voice above.

They reach it, to find there the man himself, with over two-score others
around him.  For the _gambusino_, seeing how things stood, and that the
besiegers had their hands full elsewhere, has hurried down the gorge,
all the fighting men of the miners' party along with him.

It is but a moment to place the escaped captives behind the rocks
standing thick all around; then, screening themselves by the same, they
await the coming of the savages.  But these come not; enough have they
to do looking out for their own safety.  The howitzers, now near, are
belching forth their bombs, that burst here and there, dealing death in
their ranks.

With the redskins it is no longer a question of resistance or fight, but
flight, _sauve qui peut_.  And without thought of taking along with them
either spoils or captives, they deem it enough if they can but save
their own lives.

They are all on horseback now, their chief at their head, who in loud
command calls upon them to follow him--not to the charge, but in
retreat.

First they flee northward; but short is their ride in that direction.
Scarce have they commenced it, when they see in front of them a body of
horse, seemingly numerous as that they are retreating from.

Shall they meet it, or turn back?  The thunder guns are still more than
a mile from the abandoned camp, and they will have time to repass it.

Promptly deciding to do so, they wheel round and gallop back, _ventre a
terre_; not slowing pace nor drawing rein till they have reached the
western elbow of the lake.  Then only coming to a stop perforce at sight
of still another party of palefaces there to confront them.

Intercepted, threatened on every side by a far superior force, they now
know themselves in a trap.  Panic stricken, they would surrender and cry
for quarter, but well are they aware it would not be given.  So, as
wolves brought to bay, they at length determine on fighting--to the
death.

For many of them, death it is.  Beset on all sides, in the midst of a
circle of fire, bombs exploding and bullets raining through their ranks,
they make but a despairing resistance; which ends in half their number
being killed and the other half taken prisoner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The rescuers are now in possession of the camp, animals, everything.
But the first to reach the bottom of the ravine is he who has guided
them thither, Henry Tresillian; there to receive a shower of thanks and
blessings, his father pressing him to his bosom, which alike beats with
joy and pride.  And the _gambusino_ embraces him, too, crying out,

"I see you've brought back my saddle, senorito; and after the service it
has done, I hope you'll never consent to part with it.  Bridle and
saddle both, I make you a present of them; which I trust you'll do me
the honour to accept."

This draws the attention of all upon Crusader standing by, who in turn
becomes the recipient of an ovation.

But his young master stays not to witness it.  Up on the summit is one
who occupies all his thoughts, claiming him now; and up bounds he with
lighter heart than he ever before made that ascent.

"Henrique!"

"Gertrudes!" are the exchanged exclamations of the youthful lovers, as
they become locked in each other's arms, their lips meeting in a kiss of
rapturous joy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All congratulations over, the corralled wagons are once more in
possession of their owners.  Scarce any damage has been done to the
mining machinery or tools; the Indians, from neglect or ignorance of
their uses, not having thought it worth while to destroy them.  And for
the animals and chattels they had carried off, there is ample
compensation in those now taken from them--enough to furnish the wagons
with fresh teams, re-establish the pack-train, in short, put the caravan
in order for resuming the march.  Which it does, after a couple of days
spent in getting things into condition for the route, when it continues
on to its original destination, the _gambusino_ still with it as guide.

On the same day Requenes starts out on return to Arispe, taking the
Coyotero prisoners along with him; while Don Juliano and his valiant
_vaqueros_ charge themselves with the task of restoring the women of
Nacomori to their homes.

When all are gone, and the Lost Mountain again left to tranquillity and
solitude, it is for days the scene of a spectacle telling of the
terrible strife which had occurred.  The wolves and coyotes have
gathered from afar, and over the bodies of the slain savages left
unburied, with those of their horses killed in the encounter, hold riot
and revel.

There, too, are the black vultures, some in the air, some on the ground,
in flocks so thick as to darken both earth and sky.  They anticipated a
plenteous repast--they have not been disappointed.



CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

AT THE ALTAR.

The last scene of our tale lies in the _pueblita_ of Santa Gertrudes; a
mining village chiefly supported by the _minera_ bearing the same name,
whose works, with the specialities of crushing-sheds, smelting-houses,
and tall chimneys, are seen just outside its suburbs.

All have a modern look, as well they may.  On the ground where they
stand, but three years before grew a thick _chapparal_ of mezquite,
cactus, yucca, and other plants characteristic of desert vegetation.
For Santa Gertrudes is in the very heart of the Sonora desert, remote
from any other civilised settlement.

Its prosperity, however, has attracted settlers; for not only does the
population of the village itself receive constant increase, but many
fertile tracts in the country around have been taken up, and are
occupied by a goodly number of graziers and agriculturists, whose chief
purpose is to supply the comestibles required by the miners and their
dependants.

The growth of Santa Gertrudes has been remarkably rapid, almost
unprecedently so.  From the first opening of the mine, every vein worked
has proved a _bonanza_, enriching the owners, Don Estevan Villanueva and
Robert Tresillian.  For it is the _vela_ discovered, denounced, and made
over to them by Pedro Vicente.

The gold-seeker himself has also become rich, by the conditions already
mentioned as attached to the conveyance of the property.  In short, all
concerned have benefited thereby--every one of that travelling party
delayed, with lives endangered, on the summit of the Cerro Perdido.

In and around Santa Gertrudes--name bestowed in honour of the Senora
Villanueva and her daughter, or rather their patroness saint--is every
evidence of advancement.  The cottages of the miners are trim and clean,
the shops that supply them showing an abundance of goods, even to
articles of _luxe_ and adornment.  A pretty _capella_, with spire and
belfry, stands central by the side of the public square, for, as in all
Spanish-American towns, Santa Gertrudes has its _plaza_.

Two other sides of the same are occupied by houses of superior
pretension, with ornamental grounds--the respective residences of Don
Estevan and his English partner--while here and there a house larger and
better than the common denotes the dwelling of an official of the
_minera_, some head of a department.

On this day Santa Gertrudes is _en fete_.  Its _plaza_ is full of
people; the miners in their gala dresses, and, mingling with them,
_rancheros_--the new settlers from the country around--resplendent in
their picturesque costume.  Soldiers, too, mix with the crowd, in the
gay uniform of the Zacatecas Lancers.  For Colonel Requenes and his
regiment, on return from an expedition to the northern frontier, have
halted at the _pueblita_, and are encamped on the plain outside.  The
tall chimneys of the _minera_ send forth no smoke, no sound proceeds
from the crushing-sheds or the smelting-houses; all is silent, and work
suspended as if it were a Sunday.

Different with the _capilla_, from whose belfry comes a continual
clanging of bells--merry bells--marriage bells.  Nor needs any one
telling who are to be wedded.  All know that the owners are about to
enter into relations different from that of a mere commercial
partnership; that Gertrudes Villanueva is about to become the wife of
Henry Tresillian.

The hour for the happy union has at length arrived, and from the two
grand houses on the _plaza_ issue the bride and bridegroom--each with
their train of attendants--and take their way to the _capella_, amidst
the enthusiastic plaudits of the assembled people, who cry out:

"_Viva la novia linda!  Viva el novio valiente_--_nuestro Salvador_!"
(Long live the beautiful bride!  Long live the gallant bridegroom--our
saviour!)

Inside the church the ceremony proceeds, relatives and friends from afar
assisting at it; among them Don Juliano Romero, and of course, also,
Colonel Requenes.  And there is one present who not only disapproves of
the marriage, but would forbid it, were it only in his power.  This the
young cornet of lancers, Colonel Requenes' aide-de-camp, now a captain,
who stands among the spectators, with an expression upon his features
telling of a heart torn with jealousy.

How different is that on the face of Pedro Vicente, luminous with
delight!  Joyed and proud is he to see his young _protege_ of the chase
attain the desire of his heart, in its fullest happiness.

The procession returns to the house of the bride's father, followed by
the crowd, again vociferating, "_Viva la novia linda!  Viva el novio
valiente_!"

Then the pre-arranged sports of the day commence on a grassy plain
outside the _pueblita_.  There is _correr el gallo_ (running the cock),
_colear el toro_ (baiting the bull), with other feats of equitation, in
which Crusader bears a conspicuous part.  Ridden by a famous _domidor_--
his owner for once but a looker-on--the beautiful black wins every
prize, in speed outstripping all horses on the ground.

The Lancer band makes music in accompaniment; and over an improvised
pavilion, ornamented with evergreens, in which stand the chief
spectators, waves the national flag--that same bit of bunting which,
three years before, was run up as a signal of distress on the *Lost
Mountain*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lost Mountain, by Mayne Reid

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOST MOUNTAIN ***

***** This file should be named 35649.txt or 35649.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/6/4/35649/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
