Project Gutenberg's The Stars in the Pool, by Edna Kingsley Wallace

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Stars in the Pool
       A Prose Poem for Lovers

Author: Edna Kingsley Wallace

Release Date: March 22, 2011 [EBook #35654]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STARS IN THE POOL ***




Produced by Sigal Alon, Matthew Wheaton, Fox in the Stars
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net











THE STARS IN THE POOL




THE

STARS IN

THE POOL

_A Prose Poem for Lovers_

BY

EDNA KINGSLEY WALLACE

_Author of "Feelings and Things," "Wonderings and Other Things"_

[Decoration]

NEW YORK

E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY

681 FIFTH AVENUE


_Copyright 1920_

_By E. P. DUTTON & CO._

_All Rights Reserved_


_Printed in the United States of America_




THE STARS IN THE POOL




_The Stars in the Pool_




I.


[Sidenote: _The Castle_]

Midmost of a forest of weaving lights and shadows, of dreaming winds,
and fragrance wandering, there stood a great white castle, fair, and
gleaming in the sun. Massive it was, yet high as well, so that it caught
all colours of the dawn and sunset, like unto some peak of snow, remote
from men.

[Sidenote: _Good King Telwyn_]

Within the castle dwelt the good King Telwyn, lord of all that forest
realm, wherein at whiles were clearings, with orchards and vineyards,
and fields of all manner of grain good for man and beast. And with the
King was Ellaline, the Queen, beloved and beautiful, and mother of
Roseheart, whom Telwyn her father, old and wise, knew for the tenderest
thought of God in woman form.

[Sidenote: _The Beauty of Roseheart_]

Fair as the dawn was Roseheart, and about her a freshness like that of
babes. There was in her hair the ruddiness of tried gold, spun into a
web to catch the sun. Like the sky in the East at twilight were her
eyes, and the dark brows thereof as a flight of bird's wings. The mouth
of her was crimson, and fresh, and young, and curved so tenderly
withal, that none looking upon her might fail to love her with the love
that leaps into the heart for all young things of fair seeming and
promise.

[Sidenote: _The Isle of Lokus_]

[Sidenote: _Lokus Remembereth his Youth_]

Now upon a day came overseas to Telwyn's realm one like a young god
invincible, Flame, son of Lokus, lord of a far island, wherein were
fiery mountains having their roots in the sea. It was a land of wondrous
beauty, but they that dwelt therein, rich though they were, for that the
land was exceeding fertile, yielding in fullest measure the fruits of
the earth, yet dwelt ever in danger betwixt the mountains and the sea.
For there had been times when living fire had rolled down the mountains,
and the earth had been shaken mightily, and the sea, in a huge wall of
emerald, had fallen upon the land and overwhelmed it. And Lokus, giving
thought to these things, had deep desire that the son of his heart
should escape these dangers, and live out his years in peace and
happiness. And for that the youth was ever of the mind to fashion of the
clay of the earth whatsoever things he saw, and might in nowise be
withheld from the cunning of his hands, it came into the mind of Lokus
that it were poor kindness to the child of his love to constrain him to
courts and statecraft. For Lokus remembered his own youth, and the
struggle thereof, when that his father had denied him the life of his
own gift, which, darkling long, now sought in the son of his body and
spirit its life to the glory of God.

[Sidenote: _The Gifts of Flame_]

[Sidenote: _Flame and the Salt Sea_]

Wherefore Lokus had called his son to him, and had bidden him to go
straitly to the friend of his own youth, the wise King Telwyn, who would
teach him somewhat of life and living in the great world. But more than
for the ways and wit of men did Flame have thought for all things
beautiful in form. Right well he loved to liven clay to semblance of
young maids and children, mothers, and old men wise with living. Ever
into their faces he put somewhat no other man might see in them. At
whiles, shapes of beauty like to nought that he had seen swam before his
vision, but swiftly they faded, and he rubbed his eyes, and looked as he
were silly. Wherefore men called him Dreamer. Yet with all this had he
little thought for what the Lord God had meant in the making of the
world, being well content in this his youth that by the instinct of his
fingers, and no thought withal, he could please the good folk with
happy likeness of themselves. Tall and straight was Flame, with hair
like fire seen through smoke, and with skin like ripe olives in the
light of the going sun. Firm his mouth, and his brow both high and wide.
In his eyes were all the changing lights and colours of the sea. And it
was as if the salt sea were in his blood, so that when he flamed in the
wont of youth and joy, it seemed like driftwood burning, leaping,
flowering, in all the colours known of men.

[Sidenote: _The Birth of Love_]

And Flame, son of Lokus, looking upon the Princess Roseheart, drew one
great breath, and loved her with the love of a man's heart. And
Roseheart, when she looked into the eyes of Flame, and his heart
therein, knew him for her lord, and loved him wholly.

[Sidenote: _Their Troth Plighted_]

Wherewith, Telwyn the King, her father, seeing these things, pondered
the youth, and when he had questioned him straitly, was in nowise loath
that the thing should be. For Telwyn was a wise man and discerning, and
found Flame a goodly youth, and nought against him for an husband to the
Princess, his daughter. Then was their troth plighted, yet were they
over young to wed, and Telwyn the King spake plain words to Flame, that
it were well he should prove himself in some wise ere he should claim
for bride the Princess Roseheart.




II.


[Sidenote: _The Pool_]

Now some way from the castle, deep in the forest, was set a Pool, so
deep and still that in its depths was imaged all that bent above its
brim--the fluttering leaves, and long-stemmed flowers, the flashing
flight of birds, and white-winged argosies of cloud. And so shadowed it
was, and so deep beyond depth, that he who looked as far as he might
could see the stars of heaven mirrored therein.

[Sidenote: _The Faces of Love_]

Daylong did Flame feed the hunger of his eyes on the beauty of his
beloved, as clad in kirtle of forest-green, girt with gold, she knelt at
the edge of the Pool, or laughing, chased the butterflies, to woo them
to her lips and hair. At whiles deep quiet came upon them as they bent
above the Pool, seeing nought of all it held save only the two faces of
love that looked therein.

[Sidenote: _Earthlove Sprite Invisible_]

Upon a day at the hour of golden noon, when all the land swam in a haze
of beauty, a flickering brightness came and passed, when Earthlove,
sprite invisible, touched with his lips these twain, and with a lilt of
laughter rode away athwart a sunbeam. Thereafter did Flame kiss
Roseheart long, upon the mouth, and trembling, gazed into her eyes that
were like still pools, wherein was nought save his own image, more
beautiful than life. And Flame's heart swelled within him, lordly-wise,
for that he dwelt so in the eyes and the heart of his beloved. And in
the eyes of Flame was nought save Roseheart imaged, but swaying as it
were on a surging wave wherethrough ran all the changing lights and
colours of the sea.

[Sidenote: _The Old Gray Woman_]

But when it was some while since these things had befallen, the dusk
was come, all suddenly, and there passed strangely over the Pool a
shivering, and from it rose a mist that hid it. The heart of Flame was
troubled, and lifting his eyes to see what was toward, he saw before him
momently a figure of sorrow, Wur, the Old Gray Woman of Shadows, whose
eyes were as misty pools at twilight, her hair as cobwebs matted, and
her garments as the wings of the dusk. Yet upon her, nathless, was a
wistful beauty as of moonlight, wherein were all things wondrous.

[Sidenote: _Of Sorrow_]

"Behold!" said Flame in wonder to the maid Roseheart, but she was in
fear of somewhat that was as a thing known and not known, and would not
look, but turned her face to his breast. And Flame spoke unto the Old
Gray Woman of Shadows, saying, "Gray One, I pray thee, what wouldst
thou?"

[Sidenote: _The Way of Destiny_]

She answered, and her voice was as the winds of autumn, through bare
branches: "I am Sorrow, and the Way of Destiny, and the Shadow of Things
to be. The flower fadeth, and the flesh falleth away as a garment, but
the seed and the soul shall not perish, except the seed fall on barren
ground, and the soul feed upon the body alone. Ponder ye these things in
your hearts." And in a breath she was gone, leaving upon them a chill
as of the winter death.

[Sidenote: _Earthlove Once More_]

Wherefore was Flame of grievous mind for that he did not understand
these things. And Roseheart clung to him weeping, the while he gave her
such sweet comfort as he might. Long he looked upon her in wonder, at
the spun gold of her hair, the white shining about her brows, her deep,
still eyes wherein was nought but his image, her mouth fashioned to joy
and love, and her slender body, curving to the grace of womanhood. And
once again Earthlove, sprite invisible, touched him, and stung him, and
his heart surged with love of the maid, and his man's desire grew great
within him.

She stirred, and looked into his eyes, and shrank away, for therein was
that which affrighted the peace of her soul. Looking, she saw not only
her fair face, but her whole white body, drifting in the sea-surge of
his eyes, wherein were all the changing lights and colours of the sea.

[Sidenote: _Sea-Surge and Fire-Bloom_]

And the soul of Roseheart was faint with the far music of the sea-surge
that was the soul of Flame. Yet being but a young maid, she was in fear
also, saying, "Flame! Thou dishonourest me!" and freed herself, and
sped away fleetly.

And upon the youth was shame, but a new strength therewith, so that he
refrained him from following her, and cast himself upon the ground and
wept, for that he had affrighted the innocence of Roseheart whom his
soul loved. And a great cry for succor grew in him, and he prayed full
heartily to the Lord God that He would show him His will.

[Sidenote: _Senta the Radiant One_]

Thereafter, feeling a presence, he looked up, and his eyes were blinded
with a great light, and he covered his eyes, and bowed his head. Before
him, in garments more shining than the noonday sun, stood Senta, the
Radiant One. She spake, and her voice had the beauty of the sea in
storm, when sudden sunlight, flaming from the West, gives rainbow
colours to the flying foam: "Hearken, Flame, to the voice of Vision,
which the Lord God put into thy soul when thou wast born. From this day
forth shalt thou rest not, but follow thy dream through all the earth
and across the seas. At the last shalt thou find that thou seekest, for
so is it written, but thou shalt not know the manner of thy finding, nor
may I tell thee. Sleep."

[Sidenote: _The Vision_]

[Sidenote: _The Woman of Radiance_]

And upon Flame came sleep as the sleep of the sea at sunrise, midmost
of the summer, whenas the glory of the sky is a great magic in the sea,
swinging as a censer to and fro, that the Lord God may be honoured of
the wonders He hath made. Now the dream of Flame was a dream of
womanhood--of women beautiful as dawn or flowers, of women whose fair
seeming covered evil, women good and women false, maids and mothers and
harlots, drifting, thronging, clamouring, praying, fawning,
passing--until at last came one clad in shining garments, fashioned full
seemly, of white silk that flowed and clung, revealing gracious lines of
her form who walked stately-wise, with little children about her knees.
And Flame saw that her form was radiance, and her eyes were stars, but
he might not discern the fashion of her face for the light thereof. And
he was sore troubled that the seeming of her face was withholden from
him, for he knew in his soul that he had somewhat to do with her.

[Sidenote: _Mother of Men_]

Came once more the voice of Senta the Radiant One: "Flame, Maker of
Images, attend my words. This woman shalt thou seek throughout the
world, forasmuch as she is the dream of dreams in thy soul. In the
fullness of thy manhood shalt thou fashion her in pure marble, and she
shall be called Mother of Men. As for thee, thou shalt be called the
Giver of Dreams. Awake."

And Senta the Radiant One, passing, gathered to her breast with one
swift motion the sprite Earthlove, that had revealed to her Flame and
Roseheart in their need to be taught the wisdom of life which they knew
not.




III.


[Sidenote: _Senta Taketh Earthlove_]

[Sidenote: _Dreams and Awakening_]

And when that Senta had taken Earthlove unto herself, and had passed,
the evening was come, and there were stars a-many in the depths of Pool.
Therewith, looking upon them, a great peace came upon Flame, and being
weary, he laid himself down that he might sleep and be refreshed. And as
he slept, he dreamed of that woman whose form was radiance, and whose
eyes were stars. And his fingers stirred, and sought to fashion out of
the earth her form of beauty; but all crumbled under his touch, and he
might not.

[Sidenote: _The Queen and her Women_]

When the morning was come, and upon all things lay new freshness as of
the world's beginning, the youth Flame arose and stripped him, and
plunged his body in the Pool that sleep might be shaken from him.
Whereafter he got him to the castle, and when that he had stayed his
hunger with bread and new milk, asked that he might have speech with his
troth-plight, the Princess Roseheart. Then a serving-man led him through
many halls to a great room wherein with their women sat Roseheart and
the Queen her mother.

[Sidenote: _Beauty Added unto Beauty_]

And there, in seemly raiment of soft colours, crimson, and the brown of
old wood, and fresh green, the women sat before their looms, and their
frames wherein rich broidery grew under their white fingers. And over
all was sunlight, a flickering whereof was made by blown vines without
the casements, which were open to the morn. There was the whisper of
silk, and much babble of talk, after the fashion of women working.
Shuttles flew in the looms, and white arms wondrous fair in motion drew
forth long silken threads, being wrought into fine stuffs, to the end
that beauty might be added unto beauty.

[Sidenote: _Roseheart is Troubled_]

Queen Ellaline sat very still in the midst of these her women. Of
delicate fashion she was, and gentle. Her eyes were widely set, and
blue, and mother-sweet, and her hair was silvering with the caress of
the years. And she was sad in the midst of sunshine, forasmuch as she
was troubled at the mien of the maid, her daughter, who sat with
drooping head and still hands. And in good sooth, the heart of the
Princess was heavy within her, and no little in fear. Nightlong had she
seen the vision of Flame, in whose eyes like the sea lay her white body
floating. Never before since he had loved her had she seen aught but her
soul's self therein, and she was troubled.

[Sidenote: _Roseheart is Troubled_]

[Sidenote: _Mother of Men_]

And now Flame, son of Lokus, lord of that far isle of sea-surge and
fire-bloom, entered in courtly wise this room of work and idleness, of
gayety and gossip, and of love perplexed. In reverent greeting did he
kiss the hand of Queen Ellaline; then turning him to the Princess
Roseheart, he took both of her white hands in his, seeking to look into
her eyes. And soon, for her love of him she might not refrain, and
bravely gave them to his seeing. And for that she was shamefast, in the
way of a maid, she looked as one that saw not. But in the eyes of
Roseheart, he who loved her saw as he was wont only the image and
seeming of himself. And he was sorrowful therewith, forasmuch as he had
thought mayhap to find in the eyes of his love the twin stars of the
woman of his dream. But the thing was not. And remembering the Radiant
One, and the things that she had said, he knew that, will-he, nill-he,
he must fare forth in quest of that woman whose form was radiance, and
whose eyes were stars--her from whom he should fashion his Mother of
Men.

Then spake Ellaline, the Queen, with quiet voice, saying, "What wouldst
thou, Flame, son of Lokus? My daughter Roseheart hath seeming of some
ill-hap with which thou hast to do."

[Sidenote: _Flame Speaketh Plainly_]

[Sidenote: _The Pain of Roseheart_]

Therewith did Flame drop the hands of Roseheart his love, and standing
before the Queen her mother, he spake on this wise: "I know not what
this thing may be, but somewhat hath been laid upon my will, so that
choice it hath none. Wherefore, though thy daughter Roseheart is as the
blood of my heart to me, and fain would I take her to wife straightway,
yet first must I go across the sea, and through all the earth, until I
find a certain woman whose form is radiance and whose eyes are stars,
that I may fashion of her in pure marble a Mother of Men that shall
fulfill the dream of my soul. Not of my willing is this thing laid upon
me. But the Lord God when I was born put into my soul the vision, and
into my hands the cunning to fashion the shape of my vision. Therefore
must I go, and abide the will of the Lord God lest He destroy me.
Whether I shall return I know not, for many will be the perils of the
way, but in my heart meseems I know that I shall return and take to
wife the maid Roseheart, whom in all honour I love and cherish."

[Sidenote: _A White Stillness_]

Hearing these words at the last, Roseheart found somewhat of courage
beyond that she had had, and looked into the eyes of Flame. Therein was
no longer her own white body, as she had feared to see, but the noble
form of a woman whose white silken draperies flowed and clung, whose
form was radiance, and whose eyes were stars. With her were little
children. And Roseheart, gazing, beheld the form of radiance, and the
faces of the children, as somewhat known, and not known, and in her
heart was a white stillness, and no anger that Flame would leave her to
seek this woman, but only the pain of longing, and a meekness like that
of Mary, the Blessed Mother.

[Sidenote: _Flame, His Farewell_]

Flame, pitiful of the still sorrow of Roseheart, clasped her to his
breast, and kissed her thrice upon the forehead. But the Lure of the Way
of Life was upon him, and turning strongly from the maid and the Queen,
her mother, he said: "Good greeting must I give you, from the heart, and
long farewell, for that I must be about the business the Lord God hath
set me. But ere I go, I would see Telwyn, and speak with him of that I
have to do."




IV.


[Sidenote: _Flame, His Farewell_]

All silently they three together sought Telwyn, the King, but now
returned from the hunt, and sitting at meat with his men in the great
banquet hall of the castle.

[Sidenote: _King Telwyn_]

A mighty man of sorts was Telwyn. Fierce in war, yet had he also a great
love of peace, of beauty, of mirth and joy, and of his food and wine.
Also had he great discernment for the true things in the hearts of men.
Wherefore, seeing sorrow and heaviness in the faces of the three whom he
loved, who would have speech with him, he bade his men-at-arms and
serving-men depart.

[Sidenote: _The King Pondereth_]

When that he had listened all quietly to the words of Flame, there first
came anger into his heart, and a mist upon his sight, for that
Roseheart, his daughter, who was as the remembered joy of his youth,
should be in woe for the going from her of Flame, Son of Lokus, to
follow the gleam of stars in the eyes of the woman of his dream. Yet was
Telwyn proud, and would constrain no man to take unreadily his daughter
Roseheart; and just, for that he remembered what he had said to the
youth, that it were well he should prove himself somewhat ere he should
take the maid in marriage. Therefore with a mighty intake of the breath,
and closing the lids of his eyes, wherein were lightnings, King Telwyn
spake on this wise, his voice as the voice of far thunders: "Flame, son
of Lokus, thou grievest the heart of Telwyn, father of Roseheart, for
that thou puttest the maid in sorrow for thy going. Yet am I a man, and
know the heart of a man in youth. Fain would I give thee of the wisdom I
have learned, but that may not be.

[Sidenote: _Telwyn Admonisheth Flame_]

In pain and struggle shalt thou come to thine own wisdom, which is for
thee alone, so that no man may give it thee, but thou must win it. Yet
since thou hast won a maid to her promise, it were meet that thou
shouldst go thy ways carefully, bravely, and in good faith, that thou
mayest return in honour.

[Sidenote: _Telwyn Admonisheth Flame_]

I charge thee, see thou to these things lest the vengeance of Telwyn
find thee out, though thou wert in the uttermost parts of the earth.
Lend not thy soul to wine to make a mock of, nor to false women that
they may break it. Bear thou thyself with modesty; give of thy strength
and wit to whomsoever hath need of them. Cheat no man of his due in any
wise, remembering that so thou wouldst cheat thyself of thy birthright,
which is to be one with truth and right in so far as thou canst attain
thereunto. Thou art the son of Lokus, and art bound to carry his name
and blood in honour. I have spoken. Farewell."




V.


[Sidenote: _Ellaline Distraught_]

[Sidenote: _Ellaline Beholdeth Wur_]

Now was Ellaline, the Queen, fair distraught, for that she understood
not her own mind in the matter. And her heart was as water with pity of
the maid, and as a sting her tongue, whenas she thought of the going of
Flame, for that to her seeing he had put an affront upon their house.
Yet might she not speak in wrath, when Telwyn her husband had spoken in
quietness. And there came upon her a trembling lest she speak, and
Telwyn's displeasure come upon her.

[Sidenote: _The Strength of Flame_]

Wherefore, turning to flee away, lest speaking she do wrong, Ellaline
the Queen saw some way off in the hall a figure of sorrow, Wur, the Old
Gray Woman of Shadows. And being in eld, well she wot that in the coming
of Wur was sign that the Lord God was minded to send upon their house
sorrow and the winds of destiny, and that not for her love and grief
might these things be stayed in anywise. Wherewith she kissed the maid
her daughter tenderly, as in farewell, and fled away straitly, weeping.
And Roseheart was white and still.

When Flame turned him to the Princess Roseheart, fain would she have had
him kiss her upon the mouth, but he would not, seeking her brow instead,
in all tenderness. And piteous was the face of the maid, that Flame whom
she loved denied her. But the eyes of Telwyn marking the thing, it
seemed good to him that Flame turned him from the lips of his love. Well
did the King know the hearts of men, and right heartily did he hold in
scorn those who had not the wit to fear such things as betray men unto
weakness.

[Sidenote: _The Going of Flame_]

Thereafter did Flame get him thence right speedily, to take ship for
far countries.

The maid Roseheart covered her eyes that she might not see the going of
her beloved. And she wept full sore, and when Telwyn the King would have
comforted her, Wur, the Old Gray Woman of Shadows, came unto her
pitifully, and took her from the arms of her father, and folded her
mantle about her, and led her away all gently. And yielding his little
maid unto Wur, whom well he wot of old, the King was shaken in grief,
that the thing must be and nought might stay it.




VI.


[Sidenote: _Roseheart and Wur_]

Daylong and nightlong the maid clung to Wur and to none other, and the
Old Gray Woman of Shadows, whose voice was like unto the winds of
Autumn, made sad music of the days and ways of men. Ever she spake,
telling tales of sorrow, whereunto Roseheart listened, saying in her
heart, "There is no sorrow like to mine, who am a widow before I am
wed."

[Sidenote: _Roseheart Wakes Weeping_]

Yet there was, withal, in the tales of Wur, a gray beauty that melted
the heart of the maid, even in despite of her own grief, to a vague and
terrible longing to learn what lay at the heart of life. Nightlong did
Wur watch over her, and the maid dreamed in sorrow, to wake weeping.

[Sidenote: _The Face of Grief_]

So for a space was grief bitter in the maid, and grievous was the hurt
of all things, for that Flame whom she loved had gone his ways from her.
Then on a day, for pity of the grief wherewith she suffered, a longing
grew in her to look upon the face of her sadness in the Pool in the
forest. Thither she went, therefore, with Wur, the Old Gray Woman of
Shadows, and leaned over the Pool in the wont of her old fashion. And as
with sore pity of herself she looked into the Pool, upon the face of
grief that was hers, she saw that in her eyes, which aforetime had held
nought save the face of Flame, was an image that blotted out all else.
Semblance it had of an image of Wur, the Old Gray Woman of Shadows,
whose hair was as cobwebs matted, whose eyes were as misty pools at
twilight, and whose garments were as the wings of the dusk. Yet as the
maid looked more nearly, she saw that the form had only the seeming of
Wur, and was in good sooth that of Roseheart herself, stricken in grief
to the likeness of Wur.

Arising in wonder she turned her to look upon Wur, and in the face of
the Old Gray Woman of Shadows she saw strangely the semblance of
herself, Roseheart. And at the horror and mystery of this thing which
she might not understand, the maid shrieked with terror. And when the
Old Gray Woman would have folded her in her arms to quiet her, the maid
would not, and shrank away, and prayed for help to the Lord God that she
might have comfort.

[Sidenote: _There Came a Radiance_]

And there came a radiance, growing ever brighter, until Wur, the Old
Gray Woman of Shadows, might not stay, but fled away before that which
was more shining than the noonday sun. And Roseheart was ware of a
presence she might not see for the brightness.

[Sidenote: _The Coming of Senta_]

Then spake Senta, the Radiant One, the Voice of Vision, unto the maid
Roseheart, full gently, yet in the manner of one who may not be
gainsaid: "Roseheart, beloved of Flame, who shall be called Giver of
Dreams, lift up thy heart. Well hast thou learned the lore of sorrow
that Wur hath taught thee, and these things it is needful that thou
shouldst know. But too much hast thou made thyself one with sorrow, to
the end that it hath grown dear to thee. This thing may not be. Pity
that seeketh not itself makes pure the heart of man, but pity of thyself
for thine own woe is another matter, whereto thou must look else will
thy sorrow destroy thee. Thou shalt arise, therefore, and go unto thy
father Telwyn the King, and thy mother, the Queen Ellaline. Sore have
been their hearts that thou wert in grief. It should be thy task rather,
to bring them joy who are stricken in years.

[Sidenote: _Vision and Dreams_]

"But since joy is not made of nought, and since there is now in thee
sorrow alone, I say unto thee, go thy ways among the people of thy
father the King, and of thy grief make garments of joy to cover the
nakedness of the poor withal. Take to them that are sick the flowers of
thy kindness, that shall be as the snowdrops blossoming under the mantle
of the winter of thy grief. Look into the eyes of the old and find
patience, and into the hearts of the children and find hope. Tend thou
the bed of pain, and ease the woe of the sons of men in such measure as
thou mayest. Therewith shall all things befall thee as the Lord God
desireth. Unto me, Senta, it is vouchsafed to give thee vision, and a
dream, even as I gave these things unto Flame, thy beloved. Sleep."

[Sidenote: _The Starry-eyed_]

And Roseheart laid her down in the deep sleep as of a rosebud in the sun
at mid-day, when life in a great tide flows and greatens, to the end
that the rose may be full-blown. And the dream of Roseheart was on this
wise: There was a woman in shining garments, fashioned full seemly of
white silk that flowed and clung, revealing gracious lines of her form
who walked stately-wise, with little children about her knees. Her form
was radiance, and her eyes were stars. And in the fashion of her
seeming, and in the faces of the children, was somewhat as it were a
thing known and not known. Then beheld Roseheart the seeming of Flame,
her beloved, looking in joy and reverence upon this woman whose form was
radiance, and whose eyes were stars.

And Senta the Radiant One said unto Roseheart: "Behold and see if this
be not she whom thou didst look upon at the last in the eyes of Flame
whom thou lovest." And it was so, and Roseheart marveled.

[Sidenote: _The Heart of the Maid_]

Whereafter Senta bade her awake, and she awoke and pondered these
things what they might mean. And in the heart of the maid there grew and
strengthened the desire and the will to be as that woman of her dream,
whose beauty was as music under the moon, and in all reverence beloved
of her troth-plight, Flame. Thus are women ever, in their deep need to
be in all ways that they may, the desired of their lord.




VII.


[Sidenote: _Roseheart Gives Greeting_]

When all things had become clear to Roseheart she arose swiftly, and
went unto Telwyn the King, and the Queen her mother. And upon her face
was a shining which was the shining of her soul. And she said unto them,
"I give you greeting, my father and my mother."

[Sidenote: _The Going of Wur_]

And looking upon her they were glad exceedingly, and exchanged looks the
one with the other, for that the face of Roseheart was no longer gray
with grief.

First answered Ellaline, saying, "Greeting to thee, my daughter. Where
now is Wur, that thou hast the look of happiness?"

Sudden wonder made wide the eyes of Roseheart. "In good sooth I know
not," she answered. "I have not seen her at all any more since the
coming of the Shining One."

Telwyn the King leaned him forward in eagerness, asking, "The Shining
One? What meanest thou?"

[Sidenote: _Roseheart, Her Task_]

[Sidenote: _Telwyn Perceiveth_]

Into the face of Roseheart came the far, wondering look of children,
but in her heart was a song. "I know not," she made answer, "unless it
was an angel of the Lord God, to shew me the things that I must do, and
that which I must become." Herewith the voice of the maid grew wondrous
sweet. "Of my garment of sorrow must I make raiment of joy to cover the
nakedness of the poor. To the sick must I take the flowers of kindness
that are now as snowdrops blossoming under the mantle of the winter of
grief. I am to look into the eyes of the old and find patience, and into
the hearts of children and find hope. And I am to tend the bed of pain,
and ease the suffering of the sons of men in such measure as I may,
that all things may befall me as the Lord God desireth."

Into the face of Telwyn there came a tenderness like that of women, and
in his voice were the tears a man may not suffer in his eyes. "Great is
the joy in my heart," he said, "for that thou art indeed become a woman.
And well I wot that the Lord God is with thee, that thou knowest these
things of wisdom."

[Sidenote: _The Queen Speaketh_]

And Ellaline, looking into the face of her daughter, drew her to her
heart, and spake on this wise: "Deep grief has it been to me that in thy
pain I might not help thee, but must leave thee to the care of Wur,
that woman of sorrow. Nathless have I prayed for thee without ceasing.
Blessed be the name of the Lord God that He hath found the Way for
thee."

[Sidenote: _Telwyn and Roseheart_]

Now on the morrow when Telwyn the King went among his people, to see
that all was well, and nought amiss that might be set right, he put
Roseheart his daughter upon a white palfrey; and himself upon a mighty
red horse, led her whithersoever he went, that she might see all things
in the wisdom and tenderness newly come to her. And from his deep eyes
like the caverns of the sky, he watched her, as pity grew in her, and
knowledge, and quick device of succor. Daylong they rode, at the
noontide having bite and sup with a woodcutter and his wife, newly
blessed with a fine man child. And Roseheart, taking the child in her
arms, laughed and wept that he was so small and sweet, and for that he
clung to her, and turned to her breast. And when the shadows grew long,
and they set their faces toward the castle, the maid was sore weary, but
she knew it not, for the pity in her, and the thought of all awry in the
world that must be set right.

[Sidenote: _Roseheart Steadfast_]

And it befell that she dreamed that night of a babe that lay upon her
breast, and so sweet it was, that she woke weeping for very joy.

Thereafter daily the maid went forth with the King her father, or at
whiles with the Queen her mother, whenas she was wont to say unto Telwyn
with sweet gravity, "This is a matter for women, of which thou knowest
nought."

[Sidenote: _Her Need and Desire_]

And the King smiled in his beard at the woman-ways of her. But hours
there were when that Roseheart was a-weary, and an-hungered for Flame,
her troth-plight lord. Yet always, remembering her dream, she arose from
grief, and with the trouble of others, and what she might do for them,
filled the emptiness of her heart. And so great was her need and desire
to become as the woman of the great dream, that slowly as a slender moon
fills with silver, or a rosebud greatens to fullness, did Roseheart the
maid grow in fashion and seeming and good sooth toward the very truth of
her desire, to be as that woman whose form was radiance and whose eyes
were stars.




VIII.


[Sidenote: _Thrice Bloomed the Rose_]

Thrice the snowdrops came and went, thrice bloomed the rose; thrice the
harvest ripened to the scythe, and winter flushed to spring, and Flame,
son of Lokus, was not yet come from overseas to claim his promise of his
troth-plight maiden.

[Sidenote: _Flame Journeyeth_]

[Sidenote: _He Groweth in Strength_]

Long had he wandered from land to land, seeking ever the shape of his
dream. Ever he made forms of beauty with his hands, whatsoever he saw,
and men marveled thereat, so cunning-true they were, and skillful. And
everywhere was he tempted with all manner of lures to flesh and spirit
that he forsake his dream and take his ease and pleasure like other men,
but he would not. And it befell that on a day when he was riding through
the forest, he came upon a carle that beat a woman, his wife. And Flame
was wroth with the carle, and fell upon him in fury, that so he should
misuse the strength that God had given him. And the anger of Flame was
as the strength of ten men, but when he had the throat of the man in his
fingers, and would have slain him, all suddenly his anger was not. And
in good pity of the fellow that he was yet in youth, he loosed him, and
admonished him, and went his ways. And the strength of the man that he
had spared to God's good life was added to his own strength.

[Sidenote: _He Serveth Need_]

[Sidenote: _He Fareth On_]

And with his good strength of the body was come strength of his soul
also. Wherefore, when in his wanderings he came upon a fair land wherein
was much kindness, and after a while that land, which had an aged king,
was threatened by savage men from wild forest land beyond, he girded on
his sword and led the people in war that they might put to confusion
the savage men who sought to slay them, and take their fat lands, and
the homes where they were born. And when their enemies were driven out,
the old King embraced with tears him who had risked his life for them,
and besought him, saying, "Flame, son of Lokus, what wouldst thou?
Whatsoever thou ask, that will I give thee." And Flame, with a look of
far horizons in his eyes that were like the sea, answered him on this
wise: "God be gracious to thee for thy kindness, but it is I who am in
thy debt, for that I have learned the sweetness of giving myself wholly,
even unto death, if need be, that innocent folk should not suffer, nor
evil prevail. I am a selfish man, thinking little enough of other folk,
as I go my way dreaming, and that now I have seen somewhat other than
that is a mercy of the Lord God."

[Sidenote: _Of Black Words_]

And though the people clamoured that he should stay with them, he went
his way, and came into a new land, and dwelt there for a time. And being
comely, with grace and courtliness in his mien, and the beauty of the
sea in his eyes, when he looked eagerly into the faces of women, seeking
his dream, many were sick with love of him. And they made devices that
he should tarry with them, some in innocence and good faith, as a maid
may, and some fawning, and whispering black words to the youth and heat
of his blood.

Of these last there came betimes a witch-woman, who discerning with
cunning the eyes of Flame that they were like the sea, made herself as a
moon-woman, that he should follow her. And Flame, looking upon her,
whose face was as silver, felt somewhat surge within him answering her
desire. And the woman glided before him until they were come into the
desert.

[Sidenote: _The Moon-Woman_]

And when the moon-woman moved not so swiftly, but lingered, and Flame
would have touched her, she laughed, and would and would not, and
reaching for her, he stumbled, and fell upon the ground, yet held her
fast. And the night was black upon them.

[Sidenote: _The Face of Leprosy_]

When the early morning was come, Flame turned him from the moon-woman
exulting that now at last he had drunk of the cup, desire whereof had
tormented him. But as he turned, some way off in brightness stood Senta
the Radiant One. And she drew near, and spake not, but shed her light,
without pity, upon the moon-woman. And Flame saw that she was not
beautiful, but a hag, and her face of silver the face of leprosy, white
and horrible, and as old as the world. And he looked about him, and saw
in the desert the bones of men. Then did he cry out in fear, "I am in
the place of the dead!"

And he rose up swiftly and fled away till he was come to the edge of the
desert, and thence into a gentle land, of murmuring streams, and trees
on the which was fruit of divers kinds, and good to the taste. And after
that Flame had drunk of the waters, and eaten of the fruit, the Lord God
was pitiful of his shame and weariness, and he slept.

[Sidenote: _Cometh the Dream_]

[Sidenote: _The Voice of Vision_]

Sleeping, once more he dreamed of that woman of radiance, starry-eyed.
But whereas aforetime he might not see the fashion of her face, it was
now revealed to him in the seeming of his troth-plight maiden,
glorified. Now was the rose full blown, the child become a woman, in
strength, and tenderness, and wisdom, and her beauty was as music under
the moon. Then unto him in his dream spake the Voice of Vision on this
wise: "Now that thou hast proved thyself in turning thee from the place
of the dead, shalt thou have fullness of life, withal. Thou hast looked
upon death in battle, and feared not, for that thou sawest therein that
life which is greater than thine own life; and thou hast looked upon
that life which is sin, and hast seen therein the death of the spirit.
Wherefore arise, and go straightway to claim the maiden Roseheart for
thy wife, that the true life of body and spirit may be fulfilled unto
thee. And whatsoever thou fashionest with thy hands, that shalt thou
fashion also with thy heart and soul, in the light of the vision the
Lord God hath given thee. Arise."

[Sidenote: _Strength Fulfilled_]

With a great cry of joy he awoke, and strength was fulfilled to him as
it had been a fountain, ever leaping and ever renewed. Wherewith
straightway he arose, and girt up his mantle for the journey, that
swift might be the way of his going.




IX.


[Sidenote: _Flame Returneth_]

[Sidenote: _The People at Games_]

Unto the days of three moons he journeyed, over land and sea, and at
last he was come into the country of Telwyn, wherein were peace, and
good harvest, and labour for all that would. And while he was yet some
way off, upon a hill, he saw that the people were gathered together in a
great meadow, and there rose to him on the wind a great song of joy that
they were singing.

And drawing near he saw that some of the people were playing at games in
the meadow, quoits and bowls, and other games of skill of divers kinds,
with trials of strength and daring for the eager blood of youth. And
there were horses a-many, and on them men laughing and jesting, and
there were women and children, some hundreds, clad in fluttering
garments of all the colours of joy.

[Sidenote: _The Day of Joy_]

In the midst of the throng there sat upon a dais a woman in shining
raiment of cloth of silver, broidered with roses that had caught their
colour from the rose tint of her face. And her hair of spun gold was
bound with a silver fillet, fashioned in all delicacy, and colored to
the semblance of the roses that were in the pattern thereof, with leaves
cunningly wrought of green gold. Standing beside her was a young page
clad in crimson who carried a tray whereon were ribbands of bright
colours, the which the Princess Roseheart, for she it was in the shining
raiment, did upon those who were victors in the games and contests.

[Sidenote: _The Morning of Life_]

Great was the pride of the people that the Princess had come amongst
them in their merrymaking. Long had she been with them in sorrow and
service, but not before this day in the joy of the morning of life, and
they deemed it of good augury for her happiness.

[Sidenote: _Cometh Flame_]

Now when Flame, yet some way off, saw that the woman in shining raiment
was the beloved of his soul, Roseheart, his heart leapt within him, and
there was upon his limbs the speed of light. But betimes it came to him
that travel was upon his garments, and that it were not fit he should
dishonour his troth-plight maiden by coming before her eyes in aught
unworthy. Wherefore he turned him aside from the meadow, and made such
haste as he might toward the castle midmost of the forest.

When he was come thither, he found therein only a few old serving men
and women, for that all others were making holiday in the meadow, the
King, Telwyn, and the Queen Ellaline, as well as the humblest folk in
the castle.

[Sidenote: _Sea-Surge and Fire-Bloom_]

And Flame got him right speedily to the great room that had been for his
sleeping aforetime. There, as of old, was a great chest wherein were the
garments he had brought with him from his home, the isle of sea-surge
and fire-bloom. Therefrom he chose raiment of rich silk wherein leapt
and flickered all colours as of driftwood burning--copper, and blue, and
green, and rose, and violet--with a broidered cloak of velvet like clear
flame. And he did on a sword the hilt whereof was wrought in divers hues
of pure gold.

And when all was done, and in the wont of youth he looked upon his
likeness in a mirror of silver that was there, he laughed in his heart
for that he was young and comely, and for that he was now returned to
the home of his heart.

[Sidenote: _The Silken Tent_]

Then with all speed he betook him thence to the great meadow. And when
he was come thither, he saw that a little way off at the edge of the
forest was a silken tent that was like a purple iris, so beautiful it
was, and that thereunder were King Telwyn and Queen Ellaline, looking
upon the pleasure of their people.

[Sidenote: _Of Queen Ellaline_]

And Flame saw that whereas the Princess Roseheart had been in the midst
of the crowd when first he had seen her, she was now with her father and
mother, the King and Queen, under the canopy, that had been set in a
mossy glade flecked with sunlight and shadow, and glad with delicate
flowers. The maid stood at the side of the Queen her mother talking
shiningly of all that had befallen that morning. And the Queen Ellaline,
most fair indeed to look upon, in thin silk of silver-grey, wherethrough
showed under-silks of blue and violet, smiled happily at the life and
eagerness of the maid her daughter.

[Sidenote: _Of Greetings_]

And when the people saw that Flame, the son of Lokus, was come once
more, from overseas, to claim his troth-plight, the Princess Roseheart,
they pressed upon him clamouring, glad with great joy that the youth was
grown a man, in full stature of strength and bravery. And Flame
returned their greetings in all courtesy and kindness, but ever his
eyes turned whither his heart drave, toward the tent like an iris,
whereunder, like one dreaming, stood the woman of his heart and his
dream, now motionless, with her soul in her eyes.

[Sidenote: _A Silver Trumpet Singing_]

And when King Telwyn made sure that the figure of flickering beauty that
burned its way through the crowd of the people was Flame, son of Lokus,
and none other, his heart was as a harp, swept with chords of joy and
questioning, of fear, and a nameless pain that now mayhap he must give
his little maid, that was as the remembered joy of his youth, to the
clasp of a man, in whom should be her life thenceforward. But the heart
of Queen Ellaline was as a silver trumpet singing, that the maid her
daughter was now to live the life of a woman, giving her life to a man,
that it should be greatened unto her, and to the world.




X.


[Sidenote: _The Humility of Pride_]

[Sidenote: _The Return In Honour_]

Now when Flame was come before the King and Queen and the Princess
Roseheart, he was filled with the humility of those who have great
pride, insomuch that he fell upon his knees before them to beg that
which aforetime he had asked as in the ignorance of a child. But ere he
could speak, King Telwyn put forth his hand and raised him, saying,
"Flame, son of Lokus, thou art a thousand times welcome. Hearty
greeting we give thee, in good faith that thou hast returned in
honour."

Then spake Flame on this wise: "Greeting from the heart I give thee.
Meseems my heart will burst with the fullness of my joy that I am come
once more to the home of my love, to look upon her beauty, and to give
into her keeping all that I have, and all that I am, for she is the soul
of my soul."

[Sidenote: _The Eagerness of Flame_]

Then, bethinking himself that he must remember in courtesy to put before
his own desires that which was due to others, he made obeisance to the
Queen, Ellaline, who greeted him with kindness, asking him whether he
had had food and drink since his journey.

"Nay," he said, "how should that have been, when I was so much more
an-hungered to see quickly the face of my beloved?" And he turned him to
his love, Roseheart, standing very still, with her soul in her eyes.

[Sidenote: _The Woman of Stars_]

With quick woman-wit then did Queen Ellaline motion the serving men that
they should draw the curtains of the tent, themselves standing without.
And the King and Queen withdrew also, that the lovers might be alone.
Whereupon Roseheart, her silver cloak falling from her, stood forth to
Flame as that woman whose form was radiance, and whose eyes were stars,
she that was clad in shining raiment, fashioned full seemly of white
silk that flowed and clung, revealing gracious lines of her form, who
walked stately-wise, with little children about her knees.

[Sidenote: _Flame Falleth Upon His Knees_]

And upon the sight of Flame was a mist, and when it had passed and he
looked again, the little children were not as they were living, but like
wraiths of divers colours, making as it were a rainbow in the midst
whereof stood one still a maid. And Flame fell upon his knees, and
called upon her name. And she set her two hands upon his head, and
lifting it gently, looked down into his soul. And when they had come to
understanding on this wise, she gave her hands into his, and lifted him
up. And he drew her to his heart, and kissed her on the mouth, whereat
she was all a woman, and clung to him, saying with little broken cries,
"It hath been so lonely without thee--I love thee so!"

[Sidenote: _The Finding_]

Remembering the pain and struggle of his quest, Flame cried out,
"Wherefore did I go from thee?" Yet even as he spake, right well he knew
how it had been needful that all things should have befallen them as
they had done.

Then did the face of Roseheart grow wistful-sweet, and she asked, "The
woman of thy dream--didst thou find her?" And Flame answered, "Aye, I
have found her. Dost thou not know? Thou thyself art that radiant woman,
starry-eyed. I know not what hath befallen thee, save that the starry
heavens, that look upon all things, have made thine eyes their
dwelling-place."

[Sidenote: _Beyond Self_]

[Sidenote: _The Remembered Vision_]

Whereupon Roseheart, his beloved, chided him on this wise, with a
laughter that was of the soul, and naught unkind in it: "My happiness
is so deep, I needs must laugh at thee. Meseems the truth is that
aforetime thou sawest only thyself in mine eyes, and that now thou hast
learned to look beyond thyself. And thus it hath been with me also. Once
I saw not anything but myself in thine eyes, but now therein I see ships
and far countries, and the forms of beauty that thou hast dreamed, and
those which thou shalt create in the years to come. When first I saw in
thine eyes that woman of thy dream, of whom thou hadst spoken, sorrow
and humility were heavy upon me, for that I understood not why there
should be aught in thine eyes but thy love, Roseheart. But there came a
time--" She was silent for a moment that she might hear the music of the
remembered vision. "Have I grown like her--in good sooth?" she
whispered.

"Thou art she," answered Flame, "the soul of my soul."

"And what of thee?" whispered Roseheart. "What hast thou learned of life
in thy far countries?"

[Sidenote: _The Feast is Spread_]

Whereupon he answered, as the Voice of Vision had told him, "I have
looked upon death for right's sake, and seen therein the life greater
than mine own life; and I have looked upon the life which is sin and
have seen therein the death of the spirit. I have much to tell thee, for
that there must be nought but truth between us."

Then did King Telwyn himself draw the curtains of the tent and look
within, smiling. "Flame, son of Lokus, the feast is spread for thee,
though well I wot thou knowest not if thou art hungry. But time and
enough will there be for talk with thy speech-friend and troth-plight
maiden, when thou hast eaten thy meat, and refreshed thee from thy
journey. Wherefore come now, the both of you, and shew yourselves unto
the people, that all may rejoice."

[Sidenote: _Feasting and Laughter_]

Thereupon did Flame, son of Lokus, lead forth his troth-plight maiden
Roseheart, to a great table that had been spread under the trees, with a
silken cloth, and great dishes of silver and gold, whereon were roast
flesh, and new bread, and green things steaming and savoury, and fruits
of divers sorts, good to the taste and beautiful. And there were flagons
of wine, crimson, and of the colour of corn, and of brown like the
leaves of autumn.

[Sidenote: _Flame Speaketh Modestly_]

Then was there feasting and laughter, and Flame, son of Lokus, told
many tales of far countries--of strange customs, and cunning of
husbandry and handicraft; of wars and the courts of Kings; of mightily
mountains, of great seas and the storms thereof, wherein he himself had
laboured mightily with the men of the ship that they should not perish
all.

[Sidenote: _The Queen Taketh Note_]

And for that all he spake on these matters was shrewd and well taken,
and modest withal, King Telwyn, listening, marked with gladness the
manhood that had come to this youth of the isle of sea-surge and
fire-bloom. And he was right well pleased, also, that the troth-plight
of his daughter was returned with clear eyes and noble bearing, and
courtesy and readiness for all that made speech with him.

[Sidenote: _Roseheart Hath Pride_]

And Queen Ellaline, in the wont of elder women, had eyes to the way of
Flame with his wine, the which he took gladly, as becomes a man, but not
overmuch; and she was content. Roseheart, sitting beside her mother, the
Queen, had thought for none but her troth-plight lord whom she loved;
yet marked with pride his thought and courtesy for all that sat at meat
with them. There was that in her which remembered with joy and
tenderness how that he had thought aforetime only of themselves and
their love; but now was she proud that her lord was become a man among
men, for well she knew that with all he said and did in any wise, there
ran always the music of his joy in her, and the love of his soul for
hers.




XI.


[Sidenote: _The Shadows Grow Long_]

[Sidenote: _Queen Ellaline Speaketh_]

Now when they had eaten and drunk their fill, and had had much talk
withal, the shadows had grown long, and bird-song rippled the air in the
wont of sundown. Wherefore King Telwyn bethought him how it would be
pleasant that the four of them, the Queen, the Princess Roseheart, and
her troth-plight lord, Flame, should walk in the forest for a space, ere
yet they returned to the castle.

But Queen Ellaline said to him, "Nay, my lord, shall not thou and I
return to the castle alone? Well I wot these twain have much to say,
each to the other. Were it not well that they should walk apart in the
forest in the cool of the evening, if that be their wish?"

And King Telwyn smiled thereat, saying, "Well, well! Certain it is that
I am but a stupid man, and thy woman's wit in the right of it." And
therewith he bade the young pair go apart as they wished for the space
of an hour or two.

[Sidenote: _Flame Showeth Gratitude_]

But ere they went their ways, Flame raised to his lips the hand of the
Queen, and kissed it, forasmuch as he was grateful to her exceedingly
that she had had thought and remembrance of the need of young lovers to
be alone together.

Whereafter, the King and the Queen having turned their steps to the
castle, Flame and the Princess Roseheart wandered in sweet content in
the path that led to the Pool, where aforetime they had found their love
and their destiny.

[Sidenote: _Roseheart Radiant_]

And when they were come thither, they found there, fluttering like
butterflies in a shaft of sunlight that came under the trees and among
the stems thereof, children that sported about the Pool. And these,
forsaking their play, clamoured about the Princess Roseheart, in sweet
rivalry of her love and her touch. And forasmuch as his beloved stood
now in the shaft of sunlight, radiant, starry-eyed, with little children
about her knees, Flame, the Giver of Dreams, worshiped her in his soul,
and stooped him to the earth that he might seize the clay thereof, and
mixing it with water from the Pool, fashion the likeness of her. But
though mightily he strove, the cunning of his hands was withholden from
him, and he might not.

[Sidenote: _The Dusk Cometh_]

Then the children, seeing it was late, flitted away to their homes, and
the sunlight grew faint and fainter, until the dusk was come, all
suddenly. And as the twain stood a little apart, each from the other,
there passed between them, as she had been a night-moth, Wur, the Old
Gray Woman of Shadows, whose eyes were as misty pools at twilight, her
hair like cobwebs matted, and her garments as the wings of the dusk. And
momently there was upon them a chill as of the winter-death.

[Sidenote: _Hand in Hand_]

Then did Flame know in his heart that he must tell his white-souled
love, Roseheart, of the moon-woman in the desert. And his heart shook at
thought of her grief and trouble thereat. But being a true man, and
strong for the more part, he knew that it were an ill thing to set
forward the time of saying that which must be said. Therefore he took
his love by the hand, and led her to a mossy bank, whereupon they sat
them down, hand in hand. After a little he said: "There is a thing that
I must tell thee, but because thou art a maid and innocent, I know not
if thou wilt understand."

[Sidenote: _Flame Confesseth_]

And seeing his trouble she answered him gently: "Meseems thou couldst
not do anything I would not understand."

Drawing her close within the shelter of his arms he said, "Thou
believest that I love thee as my heart's blood?"

"Verily," she made answer, "that must I needs believe, else could I not
wed thee." Then because he was silent a space, as one thinking, she
said, "What is it that thou wouldst say to me?"

[Sidenote: _Speech Faileth Him_]

With quick words then he spake on this wise: "Know then that there was a
woman--a witch that made herself as a woman of moonlight, beautiful
exceedingly, that I should follow her. And forasmuch as mine eyes and my
blood are as the sea, I might not refrain, for my weakness, but
followed her as the sea the moon. And we came into the desert, and there
remained for a space." Then did the speech of Flame fail him, for that
he knew not how to say that which must be said.

[Sidenote: _Life Dishonoured_]

And Roseheart looked upon him shrinkingly, and put away his arms, and
rose, and stood away from him. And in her eyes that had held stars,
there came a mist, as when the heavens grow dull with that which is not
storm, but more like to sickness. "And thou--" she whispered, "didst
thou give thyself to this woman?"

"Yea, but in the way of the flesh only," he answered, shamefast. "I know
not if a maid can understand."

Then was Roseheart silent a space, whereafter she said slowly, "Meseems
that therein lay the sin of what thou didst. Hadst thou given thyself
body and soul, thy sin against me had been greater, but methinks then
would it have been less against the Lord God, whose gift of life thou
hast dishonoured."

[Sidenote: _The Radiant One_]

Then spake Flame eagerly, "But I told thee she was a witch-woman. Thou
rememberest the Radiant One?"

"Aye." The Princess Roseheart was grave and sorrowful. "When that I
turned me away from the moon-woman I saw the Radiant One, and she came
and said naught, but shed her light upon the woman, and I saw that she
was not beautiful, like the moon, but a hag, and leprous. Wherefore,
looking about me I saw the bones of the dead. And I rose and fled away
from that place."

"Thou didst well."

[Sidenote: _Flame Shamefast_]

Then was Flame filled with terror that though she spake in all
gentleness, his love Roseheart was become as a stranger to him.
Straightway he went to her, saying, "Canst thou not forgive?"

"I know not," she made answer, with the weariness of one in mortal pain.

[Sidenote: _Thoughts of Torment_]

Then he sought to put his arms about her, and draw her to him, but she
looked at him as one in surprise, and therewith he feared to touch her.
And he fell upon his knees, and buried his face, shamefast, in the hem
of her garment, and wept that he had so wounded her whom his soul loved.
With all gentleness she put him away from her, and went apart. And her
eyes were dry, but her heart bled, so that she was as one sick unto
death.

Her thoughts pricked her with torment, that her lord whom she had
worshipped kneeling, as is the wont of women, was proven but a weak
creature on whom she might not lean for strength, for that he had it
not. And it was bitter to her that he whom she had thought to be a man
such as the Lord God had meant in the making of the world, had been but
as a child, or blind, that he had been deceived by the moon-woman.
Wherefore her heart, that had shrined a god, was now empty.




XII.


[Sidenote: _The Need of Flame_]

For some while did Flame lie upon the ground as one dead, but presently
his manhood arose and stood before the Princess Roseheart, saying, "Then
wilt thou send me from thee?"

[Sidenote: _A New Sweetness_]

[Sidenote: _Roseheart Forgiveth_]

And looking upon his manhood, that would face what must come to it, she
saw therewith somewhat that wrung her heart, the look of a little child,
with wistful eyes, and mouth that quivered. And she saw that his need
of her was greater than it had been aforetime, as of a child for his
mother. Wherewith into her heart that had been empty of all things
whenas the god might dwell there no longer, there came a new sweetness
it could scarce hold, so great was the flood thereof. And through her
body and her soul the sweetness surged, so that there remained no
bitterness at all, but a great gladness, as of the singing of many
waters in spring. In her face was the look as of a young mother looking
upon her first man-child that she hath borne in pain with thanksgiving.

Flame, looking upon the glory that was her face, fell at her feet,
crying, "Thou wilt forgive?"

And she lifted him up, and drew his head to her breast, saying the while
little words of love and comforting. Whereafter, he stood straight
before her, and they looked each into the other's eyes as they had been
spirits out of the flesh.

[Sidenote: _Somewhat of New Beauty_]

And there came a shining round about them, that was brighter than the
noonday sun, for that Senta, the Radiant One, was come and stood near
them. And Flame saw that in the face of his love was somewhat that had
not been there before, for the beauty whereof his soul sang. As one in a
dream he stooped him to the earth once more to take of the clay thereof
and fashion her his Mother of Men.

[Sidenote: _The Meaning of Love_]

But ere he might do the thing he would, Senta the Radiant One drew near,
and spake unto them, and her voice was as the music of a mighty
pine-wood raising to heaven a paean of triumph in a great wind of
spring, with the voices of children therethrough, like little singing
streams. And the words of Senta were these: "Joy to you that ye have
learned somewhat whereof life and love are made! Roseheart, beloved of
Flame, son of Lokus, now art thou become in very truth a Mother of Men
in thy woman's soul, for that thou hast learned the meaning of love,
which is to minister, to suffer, to understand, and to forgive. And thou
too, Flame, hast learned of it, insomuch that love constrained thee in
the pride of thy manhood to become as a little child that thou mightest
be forgiven. But stay thy hand, even yet, until thou hast taken the maid
to wife, and made her in good sooth a mother of men according to the
flesh. Then only shalt thou be given fullness of vision, and shalt
fashion her in pure marble to be as a dream forever in the hearts of
men."

[Sidenote: _The Sign and Symbol_]

With the passing of Senta, the Radiant One, was full evening come. And
Flame, Fashioner and Giver of Dreams, led the Princess Roseheart, his
love and troth-plight maiden, to the brink of the Pool, in wonder beyond
speech, and a silence as of music. For the Pool held deep within deep;
and far beyond their two faces of love, they beheld as in the night blue
of heaven, the stars that the Lord God had set therein to be a sign and
symbol unto men of the things beyond the flesh.


       *       *       *       *       *

And here ends this story of "The Stars in the Pool." Written by Edna
Kingsley Wallace. Set in Type by the Odets Printing Company, in the Year
of Our Lord One thousand nine hundred and twenty, and Published by E. P.
Dutton and Company in the City of New York.


       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Note.


  Title page spelling of "auther" was corrected to "author."

  Page 16 "s e -surge" was corrected to "sea-surge."

  Page 29 "He He" was corrected to "He."

  Archaic spellings, syntax and other anomalies remain as in original.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Stars in the Pool, by Edna Kingsley Wallace

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STARS IN THE POOL ***

***** This file should be named 35654.txt or 35654.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/6/5/35654/

Produced by Sigal Alon, Matthew Wheaton, Fox in the Stars
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
