The Project Gutenberg EBook of Walks and Words of Jesus, by M. N. Olmsted

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Walks and Words of Jesus
       A Paragraph Harmony of the Four Evangelists

Author: M. N. Olmsted

Commentator: R. S. Foster

Release Date: March 24, 2011 [EBook #35674]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WALKS AND WORDS OF JESUS ***




Produced by Heiko Evermann, Fox in the Stars, (scanned by
Fox in the Stars from the collection of Brays Advent
Christian Church in Iberia, Missouri), Michael Zeug, Lisa
Reigel, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net







Transcriber's Notes: Variations in spelling and hyphenation have been
left as in the original. Words in italics in the original are surrounded
by _underscores_. Words in a Gothic font in the original are surrounded
by =equal signs=. In the original, the words spoken by Jesus are in a
larger font--in this text, the words of Jesus are indented from the
margins. A few typographical errors have been corrected. A complete list
follows the text.

The text mentions a "geographical and historical chart" that was
intended to accompany this book. It is not a part of this text and is
not included here.




[Illustration: The Adoring Shepherds.

"And they came with haste, and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying
in a manger."--Page 13.]




                           WALKS AND WORDS

                                  of

                                JESUS;

            =A Paragraph Harmony of the Four Evangelists=.


                        BY REV. M. N. OLMSTED,

           WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY REV. BISHOP FOSTER, D.D.


                            FIFTH EDITION.


                              NEW YORK:
                          NELSON & PHILLIPS.

                             CINCINNATI:
                         HITCHCOCK & WALDEN.




       Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1867,

                          By M. N. OLMSTED,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States for the
                    Southern District of New York.






CONTENTS.


        I. Jesus in Creation and Prophecy                             11
       II. The Childhood of Jesus                                     14
      III. The Baptism and Temptation of Jesus                        16
       IV. Testimony of John--Call of the First Disciples             18
        V. First Miracle--Temple cleansed--Visit of Nicodemus         22
       VI. John Exalts Jesus--Woman at the Well--Visit to Samaria     27
      VII. Nobleman of Capernaum--Preaches at Nazareth                32
     VIII. Moves to Capernaum--Andrew and Peter Called                36
       IX. Sermon on the Mount, near Capernaum                        39
        X. Sermon on the Mount Continued                              46
       XI. Sermon on the Mount Concluded                              52
      XII. Draught of Fishes--Heals a Leper--Matthew Called           56
     XIII. Healing at the Pool--Resurrection Foretold                 62
      XIV. Disciples in the Cornfield--Withered Hand                  68

       XV. Apostles named--Woes and Blessings--Practical Lessons      72
      XVI. Practical Lessons Continued--Heals Centurion's Servant     75
     XVII. Widow of Nain--Messengers of John--Woes on Capernaum       80
    XVIII. Woman Washes Jesus' feet--Two Debtors                      85
      XIX. Pharisees seek a Sign--Jesus Teaches by Parables           91
       XX. Parables and Interpretations                               99
      XXI. The homeless Saviour--The Storm--The Demoniac             105
     XXII. Child Healed--Touch of Faith--Two Blind Men--Eats with
               Publicans and Sinners                                 109
    XXIII. Revisits Nazareth--Sends the Twelve with Instructions     114
     XXIV. John the Baptist Beheaded by Order of Herod               121
      XXV. Jesus Feeds Five Thousand with Five Loaves and two
               Fishes                                                123
     XXVI. Walks on the Sea--Peter Sinking--Mountain Closet          126
    XXVII. Jesus the Bread of Life for the World                     129
   XXVIII. Pharisees Murmur--Washings and Other Traditions           135
     XXIX. Syrophenician Woman--Blind Men--Feeds Four Thousand       139
      XXX. Pharisees ask a Sign--Reasons for Faith--Blind Men        142
     XXXI. Jesus Foretells his Death and Resurrection                145
    XXXII. Transfiguration--Cures a Demoniac                         149
   XXXIII. Death Foretold again--Pays Tribute--Caution Against
               Giving Offence                                        153
    XXXIV. Lessons of Humility and Forgiveness                       157
     XXXV. Jesus at the Feast--Return of the officers of the Chief
               Priests                                               163
    XXXVI. The Convicted Accusers--Jesus the Light of the World      168
   XXXVII. A man born Blind, Healed, Examined and Excommunicated     175
  XXXVIII. Parable of the Good Shepherd                              179
    XXXIX. Jesus Raises Lazarus--Jews Seek his Life                  184
       XL. Seventy Disciples sent out                                190
      XLI. Martha's Entertainment--Form of Prayer--Dumb Devil        196
     XLII. Evil Generation seek a Sign--Practical Lessons            200
    XLIII. Discourses on Various Topics--Ministerial Diligence       205
     XLIV. Tokens of Coming Judgment--Eighteen Years Infirmity       214
      XLV. Dropsy Cured--Parable of the Great Supper                 219
     XLVI. Parables of Lost Sheep, Lost Piece of Silver and
               Prodigal Son                                          225
    XLVII. The Unjust Steward--The Rich Man and Lazarus              230
   XLVIII. Of Giving Offence--Ten Lepers--Second Coming of Jesus     235
     XLIX. Importunate Widow--Marriage--Children brought to Jesus    240
        L. Young Ruler--Warning to the Rich--Parable of Laborers     245
       LI. Zebedee's Children--Heals two Blind Men near Jericho      251
      LII. Nobleman & Servants--Mary Anoints Jesus                   254
     LIII. Triumphant Entrance of Jesus into Jerusalem               260
      LIV. Greeks Wish to see Jesus--Barren Fig Tree                 264
       LV. Pharisees Question his Authority--Parable of Vineyard     269
      LVI. The Marriage Feast--Tribute to Cesar--Jewish Infidelity   274
     LVII. Jesus Answers Sadducees and Pharisees--Widows Offering    279
    LVIII. Woes Against Scribes, Pharisees and Hypocrites            284
      LIX. Destruction of the Temple and Coming of the Son of Man
               Foretold                                              290
       LX. Fearful Signs after the Great Tribulation                 296
      LXI. Parable of the Talents--Judgment of the Nations           303
     LXII. Covenant with Judas--Passover--Jesus Washes his
               Disciples' Feet                                       308
    LXIII. The Lord's Supper Instituted--Peter Forewarned            313
     LXIV. Jesus Comforts his Disciples--Teaches Love to each
               Other                                                 318
      LXV. Jesus the True Vine--Hatred of the World                  324
     LXVI. Jesus Forewarns his Disciples                             328
    LXVII. Jesus Prays for his Disciples--Foretells Peter's Denial   333
   LXVIII. The Agony of Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane            338
     LXIX. Betrayal of Jesus--Brought Before the High Priest         342
      LXX. Jesus Examined by the Sanhedrim--Peter denies him         345
     LXXI. Examination Continued--Judas Repents--Jesus Scourged      348
    LXXII. Jesus Before Herod--Message to Pilate from his
               Wife--Pilate Washes his Hands                         352
   LXXIII. Jesus Crucified--He Prays for his Enemies                 356
    LXXIV. The two Thieves--Jesus Thirsts--He gives up the Ghost     359
     LXXV. Jesus Taken down from the Cross--Buried--Tomb Sealed      362
    LXXVI. The Resurrection of Jesus--Scenes and Incidents           365
   LXXVII. Mary Magdalene and Others Visit the Sepulchre             367
  LXXVIII. Journey to Emmaus--Incredulity of Thomas                  369
    LXXIX. Jesus Appears to the Eleven; then to Five Hundred
               Brethren at once                                      374
     LXXX. The Ascension of Jesus--Incidents                         379
    LXXXI. Conclusion                                                383




INTRODUCTION


The happy thought of this volume was suggested by the incidental reading
of this fact, in the life of JOHN QUINCY ADAMS: He was one day engaged
in his usual study of the New Testament, (a practice he kept up daily
throughout life, even amid the most urgent State duties,) when being
particularly impressed by some words of Jesus, he conceived the idea of
abstracting all his words from the body of the sacred text, that he
might see them in their unity and wholeness. He immediately procured a
suitable blank book, and beginning with the first Gospel, wrote down
every word of Christ, as given by each of the Evangelists. This most
precious _excerpta_ he continued to read and devoutly study with great
profit and comfort.

If the publisher had done nothing else but carry out this idea, he would
have performed a good service, for many devout students of the Word of
God; but he has done much more and I doubt not, by a very simple method,
will become the instrument of good to thousands.

The several things aimed at and accomplished, in the plan of the book,
are these

FIRST. A complete harmony of the several Evangelistic narratives, in a
consecutive chronological order, thus presenting in one view a complete
and perfect picture of our Saviour's life and ministry. Every word of
each Gospel is given, (except that which is embraced in the two opening
chapters,) but in continued and unbroken flow, and not in the
fragmentary and disjointed order of chapter and verse, as found in the
ordinary form.

SECOND. The words spoken by Jesus himself are raised out of the page, in
relief, by means of larger type; so that if the reader is desirous, he
can peruse at a single sitting all the words of the Master left on
record, in the order of their utterance, and apart from the words of
others, without the labor of selecting.

THIRD. While the main intent is to present the Gospels in a harmonious
arrangement, and especially to give prominence to the divine speaker
himself, the author has furnished two preliminary and a concluding
chapter of real interest and value, in the first of which, by a
judicious collocation of passages from the Old and New Testaments, he
traces Christ as he appeared in Creation and Providence, as set forth by
the Prophets and Apostles. In the second he sketches a brief account of
his childhood with appropriate reflections, and in the concluding
chapter ending the volume, he gives his words uttered after the
ascension, as found in the Epistles and the book of Revelation.

FOURTH. Accompanying the volume, is a geographical and historical
chart, ingeniously contrived to illustrate the general idea of the book.
This chart is entitled "The Walks of Jesus; a Pictorial Chart of the
Antediluvian and Patriarchal Periods, and of the Holy Land; for Sunday
Schools and Families." It is published in neat and attractive form, and
of various sizes, and cannot fail to be a useful accompaniment of Bible
study.

I am so pleased with the general plan of this work, and with the manner
in which the publisher is executing his idea, that I take great pleasure
in commending it as a helpful and convenient companion to all Bible
lovers and students.

Among the many books which are appearing, concerning the Christ, this,
after all, is the truest and best. It may be WELL to read them--it is
INDISPENSABLE to read this. Whatever gives interest to the sacred page,
and especially, whatsoever shall give prominence to the simple word and
truth of Jesus, cannot fail to be fraught with blessings to the world.

The holy Evangelists were inspired men. All their words are the words of
God, and not one of them to be lightly esteemed, or to be held as of
questionable authority; and yet the precise sentences that fell from the
lips of the Only Begotten rise in importance and dignity, and come to us
with more direct authority and divinity. Let us remember the voice that
dropped from the open heaven: "This is my beloved Son: hear ye him."

                                                    R. S. FOSTER.




=Walks and Words of Jesus=




CHAPTER I.

JESUS IN CREATION AND PROPHECY.


When we open the HOLY BIBLE, the very first sentence unfolds to us the
creation of worlds by the Word and power of Jehovah: "In the beginning
God created the heaven and the earth."

In the NEW TESTAMENT Jesus is presented as the "Creator of all things."
The inspired writer opens the subject in these words: "In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same
was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and without
him was not anything made that was made."

Paul, in one of his epistles, speaks of this same Jesus as the image of
the invisible God, the first born of every creature: "for by him were
all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible
and invisible, whether _they_ be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him;
and he is before all things, and by him all things consist."

Again, John, in his vision of the future glory of the Church, saw the
Eternal Throne, and Jesus the Mighty Conqueror seated upon it; and heard
voices chanting in angelic strains, "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come."

And four-and-twenty elders, clothed in white robes, with crowns of gold,
fell prostrate before him, and worshipped him that liveth for ever and
ever, saying, "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and
power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are
and were created."

When Adam had ruined himself and his posterity by eating the forbidden
fruit, Jehovah, in his infinite love, gave him the promise of a MESSIAH,
in the words addressed to the serpent: "I will put enmity between thee
and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy
head, and thou shalt bruise his heel."

As we trace along the stream of time, we see this faint promise oft
renewed, brightening with every repetition.

When Jehovah had destroyed the world by a flood, on account of its
wickedness, preserving only the family of Noah to repeople it, and had
scattered the builders of Babel, confounding their language, he said to
faithful Abram: "Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and
from thy father's house, unto a land that I will show thee: and I will
make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name
great; and thou shalt be a blessing: and I will bless them that bless
thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and in thee shall all families of
the earth be blessed."

Jacob, on his way to Padan-Aram, slept, and saw in the night-visions, a
ladder, with its foot upon the earth, and its top reaching to heaven,
and lo! angels were ascending and descending upon it. And he heard the
voice of the Lord from the top of the ladder, saying unto him: "I _am_
the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land
whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed; and thy
seed shall be as the dust of the earth; and thou shalt spread abroad to
the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in
thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed."

[Illustration: Bethlehem--Birthplace of Jesus.]

Thus from time to time was the promise of a coming Saviour renewed,
until, on the plains of Bethlehem, a glorious light burst upon the
watching shepherds, and an angel appeared, saying; "Fear not: for,
behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all
people. For unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour,
which is Christ the Lord." And suddenly there was with the angel a
multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying, "Glory to God
in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men."

And when the angels had departed, the shepherds said one to another,
"Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing which is come to
pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us." And they came with haste,
and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger. And the
shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that
they had heard and seen.

Eight days after, at the circumcision of the child, he was called Jesus,
which signifies Saviour, a name given before he was born: "for" said the
angel, "He shall save his people from their sins."




CHAPTER II.

THE CHILDHOOD OF JESUS.


The Incarnation of the Son of God, presents us with an example of
condescension and humiliation, only equalled by the exaltation of its
subjects. He came to earth, that he might exalt us to heaven. His
sufferings and death, clothe us, who are dead in sin, with immortality,
and secure to us the bliss of an eternal Paradise. To trace the
footsteps of Jesus, God Incarnate, and to present the words that dropped
fresh from his wise and holy lips, while on his mission of mercy to this
sin-stricken world, will be the object of these pages.

The child grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the
grace of God was upon him. But his first _word_, on record, was uttered
at the age of twelve years. A multitude had assembled at Jerusalem. The
eight days' worship being ended, the crowds disperse and scatter to
their homes in the distant countries round about. The parents, supposing
"the child Jesus" to be among their relatives and acquaintances in the
great throng, pass on a day's journey, when they seek him but find him
not.

They return, anxious and sorrow stricken, to Jerusalem, where they find
him still in the Temple, sitting with the Doctors of the law, and
astonishing the multitude with his understanding and answers. His
mother, though amazed at his wisdom, gently chides her son for his lack
of filial fidelity, saying, "Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us?
behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing." And he said unto
them,

     How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not that I must be about
     my Father's business?

And they understood not the saying which he spake unto them. And he went
down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them; but his
mother kept all these sayings in her heart.

Eighteen years now pass away without the record of another word. While
he honored his earthly parents, and was diligent in his daily toil, he
was doubtless ever busy in the work assigned him by his Father in
heaven. Multitudes may have been charmed by his youthful eloquence,
confounded by his wisdom, and melted under his sweet spirit of love. But
to us it is one great blank. This brief sentence among the doctors in
the temple, in answer to the question of the anxious mother, is like
some blazing comet, which for a brief space lights the starry vault with
its radiance, and then shoots off, in its eccentric course, to be seen
no more for years to come. During these silent years, multitudes had
passed to their reward. "Seed time and harvest, summer and winter, day
and night," had succeeded each other, in regular order; while the "bow
in the cloud" had constantly reminded the world of the gracious promise
of God to Noah. But not a word is preserved from the lips of this
wonderful child. Not a footprint marks his journeyings.

At the age of thirty he suddenly appears again on the page of history.
Let us now follow his footsteps, and listen to his words.




CHAPTER III.

THE BAPTISM AND TEMPTATION OF JESUS.


And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of
Galilee, to Jordan, unto John, to be baptized of him. But John forbade
him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?
And Jesus answering said unto him,

     Suffer _it to be_ so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfill
     all righteousness.

Then he suffered him. Now when all the people were baptized, it came to
pass, that Jesus also being baptized, went up straightway out of the
water; and praying, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and the Holy
Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him, and there came a
voice from heaven, _saying_, "Thou art my beloved son, in whom I am well
pleased."

And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, returned from Jordan, and was
led by the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the devil. And
he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted of Satan; and was
with the wild beasts. And in those days he did eat nothing. And when he
had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungered.
And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread. But Jesus answered and said,

     It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every
     word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.

Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and setteth him on a
pinnacle of the temple. And saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God,
cast thyself down from hence: for it is written, He shall give his
angels charge concerning thee, to keep thee: And in _their_ hands they
shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.
And Jesus answering said unto him,

     It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.

Again, the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and
sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, in a
moment of time. And the devil said unto him, All this power will I give
thee, and the glory of them: for that is delivered unto me: and to
whomsoever I will I give it. If thou therefore wilt fall down and
worship me, all shall be thine. And Jesus answered and said unto him,

     Get thee behind me, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt
     worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.

And when the devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him
for a season. And, behold, angels came and ministered unto him.




CHAPTER IV.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN--CALL OF THE FIRST DISCIPLES.


This is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from
Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou? He confessed, and denied not; but
confessed, I am not the Christ.

And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, I am not.
Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No. Then said they unto him, Who
art thou? that we may give an answer to them that sent us. What sayest
thou of thyself? He said, I _am_ the voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet
Esaias.

And they which were sent were of the Pharisees. And they asked him, and
said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor
Elias, neither that prophet? John answered them, saying, I baptize with
water: but there standeth one among you, whom ye know not; He it is, who
coming after me is preferred before me, whose shoe's latchet I am not
worthy to unloose. These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan,
where John was baptizing.

The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold the
Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world. This is he of whom
I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred before me: for he was
before me. And I knew him not: but that he should be made manifest to
Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water.

And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven
like a dove, and it abode upon him. And I knew him not: but he that sent
me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt
see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bare record that this is
the Son of God.

Again the next day after, John stood, and two of his disciples; And
looking upon Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God! And
the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus. Then Jesus
turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them,

     What seek ye?

They said unto him, Rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted,
Master,) where dwellest thou? He saith unto them,

     Come and see.

They came and saw where he dwelt, and abode with him that day: for it
was about the tenth hour. One of the two which heard John _speak_ and
followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother. He first findeth his
own brother Simon, and saith unto him, We have found the Messias, which
is, being interpreted, the Christ. And he brought him to Jesus. And when
Jesus beheld him, he said,

     Thou art Simon the son of Jona: thou shalt be called Cephas,
     which is, by interpretation, A stone.

The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip,
and saith unto him,

     Follow me.

Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.

Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of whom
Moses in the law and the prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son
of Joseph. And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any good thing come
out of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and see. Jesus saw
Nathanael coming to him, and saith unto him,

     Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile!

Nathanael saith unto him, Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered and
said unto him,

     Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig
     tree, I saw thee.

Nathanael answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God;
thou art the King of Israel. Jesus answered and said unto him,

     Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree,
     believest thou? thou shalt see greater things than these.

And he saith unto him,

     Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see heaven
     open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the
     Son of man.




CHAPTER V.

FIRST MIRACLE--TEMPLE CLEANSED--VISIT OF NICODEMUS.


And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and the
mother of Jesus was there. And both Jesus was called, and his disciples,
to the marriage. And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith
unto him, They have no wine. Jesus saith unto her,

     Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come.

His mother saith unto the servants, Whatsoever he saith unto you, do
_it_. And there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner
of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece.
Jesus saith unto them,

     Fill the waterpots with water.

And they filled them up to the brim. And he saith unto them,

     Draw out now and bear unto the governor of the feast.

And they bare _it_. When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water
that was made wine, and knew not whence it was: (but the servants which
drew the water knew;) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom,
and saith unto him, Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine;
and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse; _but_ thou hast
kept the good wine until now. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in
Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth his glory; and his disciples
believed on him.

After this he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his
brethren, and his disciples: and they continued there not many days. And
the Jews' passover was at hand. And Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and
found in the temple those that sold oxen and sheep, and doves, and the
changers of money sitting. And when he had made a scourge of small
cords, he drove them all out of the temple, and the sheep, and the oxen;
and poured out the changers' money, and overthrew the tables; and said
unto them that sold doves,

     Take these things hence; make not my Father's house an house
     of merchandise.

And his disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine
house hath eaten me up. Then answered the Jews and said unto him: What
sign shewest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things? Jesus
answered and said unto them,

     Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.

Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building,
and wilt thou rear it up in three days? But he spake of the temple of
his body. When therefore he was risen from the dead, his disciples
remembered that he had said this unto them; and they believed the
Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.

Now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, in the feast _day_, many
believed in his name, when they saw the miracles which he did. But Jesus
did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all _men_, and needed
not that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in man.

There was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that
thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that
thou doest, except God be with him. Jesus answered and said, unto him,

     Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again,
     he cannot see the kingdom of God.

Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he
enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born? Jesus
answered,

     Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water
     and _of_the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
     That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is
     born of the Spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto
     thee, Ye must be born again. The wind bloweth where it
     listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not
     tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one
     that is born of the Spirit.

Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be? Jesus
answered and said unto him,

     Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things?

     Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and
     testify that we have seen; and ye receive not our witness. If
     I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall
     ye believe, if I tell you _of_ heavenly things. And no man
     hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven,
     _even_ the Son of man which is in heaven.

     And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so
     must the Son of man be lifted up: that whosoever believeth in
     him should not perish, but have eternal life. For God so loved
     the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
     believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
     For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world;
     but that the world through him might be saved.

     He that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that
     believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not
     believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. And this
     is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
     men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were
     evil. For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither
     cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he
     that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be
     made manifest, that they are wrought in God.




CHAPTER VI.

JOHN EXALTS JESUS--WOMAN AT THE WELL--VISIT TO SAMARIA.


After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judea;
and there he tarried with them, and baptized. And John also was
baptizing in AEnon near to Salim, because there was much water there: and
they came, and were baptized. For John was not yet cast into prison.

Then there arose a question between _some_ of John's disciples and the
Jews about purifying. And they came unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi,
he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness,
behold, the same baptizeth, and all _men_ come to him, John answered and
said, a man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven. Ye
yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I
am sent before him. He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the
friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth
greatly because of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore is
fulfilled. He must increase, but I _must_ decrease. He that cometh from
above is above all: he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of
the earth: he that cometh from heaven is above all.

And what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth; and no man
receiveth his testimony. He that hath received his testimony hath set to
his seal that God is true. For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words
of God: for God giveth not the Spirit by measure _unto him_. The Father
loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. He that
believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not
the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.

When therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made
and baptized more disciples than John, (though Jesus himself baptized
not, but his disciples,) He left Judea, and departed again into Galilee.
And he must needs go through Samaria.

Then cometh he to a city of Samaria, which is called Sychar, near to the
parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph. Now Jacob's well was
there. Jesus therefore, being wearied with _his_ journey, sat thus on
the well: _and_ it was about the sixth hour. There cometh a woman of
Samaria to draw water: Jesus saith unto her,

     Give me to drink.

(For his disciples were gone away into the city to buy meat.)

Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou, being a
Jew, asketh drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews have
no dealings with the Samaritans. Jesus answered and said unto her,

     If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to
     thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and
     he would have given thee living water.

The woman saith unto him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the
well is deep: from whence then hast thou that living water? Art thou
greater than our father Jacob, which gave us the well, and drank thereof
himself, and his children, and his cattle? Jesus answered and said unto
her,

     Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again: But
     whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall
     never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in
     him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.

The woman saith unto him, Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not,
neither come hither to draw. Jesus saith unto her,

     Go, call thy husband, and come hither.

The woman answered and said, I have no husband. Jesus said unto her,

     Thou hast well said, I have no husband: for thou hast had five
     husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband: in
     that saidst thou truly.

The woman said unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. Our
fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is
the place where men ought to worship. Jesus saith unto her,

     Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall neither in
     this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. Ye
     worship ye know not what: we know what we worship: for
     salvation is of the Jews. But the hour cometh, and now is,
     when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit
     and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him. God
     _is_ a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship _him_ in
     spirit and in truth.

The woman saith unto him, I know that Messias cometh, which is called
Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things. Jesus saith unto
her,

     I that speak unto thee am _he_.

And upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked with the
woman: yet no man said, What seekest thou? or, Why talkest thou with
her? The woman then left her waterpot, and went her way into the city,
and said to the men, Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever
I did: is not this the Christ? Then they went out of the city, and came
unto him. In the meanwhile his disciples prayed him saying, Master, eat.
But he said unto them,

     I have meat to eat that ye know not of.

Therefore said the disciples one to another, Hath any man brought him
_ought_ to eat? Jesus saith unto them,

     My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish
     his work. Say not ye, There are yet four months, and _then_
     cometh harvest? behold, I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and
     look on the fields; for they are white already to harvest. And
     he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto
     life eternal: that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may
     rejoice together. And herein is that saying true, One soweth,
     and another reapeth. I sent you to reap that whereon ye
     bestowed no labor: other men labored, and ye are entered into
     their labors.

And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him for the saying
of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did. So when
the Samaritans were come unto him, they besought him that he would tarry
with them: and he abode there two days. And many more believed because
of his own word; and said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of
thy saying: for we have heard _him_ ourselves, and know that this is
indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world.




CHAPTER VII.

NOBLEMAN OF CAPERNAUM--PREACHES AT NAZARETH.


Now after two days he departed thence, and went into Galilee. For Jesus
himself testified that a prophet hath no honor in his own country. Then
when he was come into Galilee, the Galilaeans received him, having seen
all the things that he did at Jerusalem at the feast: for they also
went unto the feast.

So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where he made the water wine.
And there was a certain nobleman, whose son was sick at Capernaum. When
he heard that Jesus was come out of Judea into Galilee, he went unto
him, and besought him that he would come down and heal his son: for he
was at the point of death. Then said Jesus unto him,

     Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe.

The nobleman saith unto him, Sir, come down ere my child die. Jesus
saith unto him,

     Go thy way: thy son liveth.

And the man believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and he
went his way. And as he was now going down, his servants met him, and
told _him_, saying, Thy son liveth. Then enquired he of them the hour
when he began to amend. And they said unto him, Yesterday at the seventh
hour the fever left him. So the father knew that _it was_ at the same
hour, in the which Jesus said unto him, Thy son liveth: and himself
believed, and his whole house. This _is_ again the second miracle _that_
Jesus did, when he was come out of Judea into Galilee. And Jesus
returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and there went out a
fame of him through all the region round about. And he taught in their
synagogues, being glorified of all.

And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as his
custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up
for to read. And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet
Esaias. And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was
written, The Spirit of the Lord _is_ upon me, because he hath anointed
me to preach the Gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the
brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of
sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach
the acceptable year of the Lord.

And he closed the book, and he gave _it_ again to the minister, and sat
down. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened
on him. And he began to say unto them,

     This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears.

And all bear him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which
proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph's son? And
he said unto them,

     Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal
     thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also
     here in thy country.

And he said,

     Verily, I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own
     country. But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel
     in the days of Elias, when the heaven was shut up three years
     and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land;
     but unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, _a
     city_ of Sidon, unto a woman _that was_ a widow. And many
     lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and
     none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman, the Syrian.

And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled
with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him
unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might
cast him down headlong. But he passing through the midst of them went
his way.




CHAPTER VIII.

MOVES TO CAPERNAUM--ANDREW AND PETER CALLED.


Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison, he departed
into Galilee; and leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, a
city of Galilee, which is upon the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon
and Nephthalim: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias
the prophet, saying, The land of Zebulon, and the land of Nephthalim,
_by_ the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles; the
people which sat in darkness saw great light; and to them which sat in
the region and shadow of death light is sprung up. From that time Jesus
began to preach the gospel of the kingdom of God, and to say,

     Repent: the time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at
     hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel.

And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called
Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for they were
fishers. And he saith unto them,

     Follow me, and I will make you to become fishers of men.

And they straightway left _their_ nets, and followed him. And going on
a little farther thence, he saw other two brethren, James _the son_ of
Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father,
mending their nets; and straightway he called them: and they immediately
left the ship and their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired
servants, and went after him.

And they went into Capernaum: and straightway on the sabbath day he
entered into the synagogue, and taught. And they were astonished at his
doctrine: for his word was with power: for he taught them as one that
had authority, and not as the scribes.

And in the synagogue there was a man, which had a spirit of an unclean
devil, and cried out with a loud voice, saying, Let _us_ alone; what
have we to do with thee, _thou_ Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to
destroy us? I know thee who thou art; the Holy One of God. And Jesus
rebuked him, saying,

     Hold thy peace, and come out of him.

And when the devil had torn him, had thrown him in the midst, and cried
with a loud voice, he came out of him, and hurt him not.

And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among
themselves, saying, What thing is this? What new doctrine _is_ this?
What a word _is_ this! for with authority and power he commandeth even
the unclean spirits, and they do obey him, and they come out. And
immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region, into every
place of the country round about Galilee.

And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they entered
into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John. And Simon's
wife's mother was taken with a great fever; and anon they tell him of
her; and they besought him for her. And he stood over her, and rebuked
the fever; and he came and took her by the hand, and lifted her up; and
immediately the fever left her, and she arose, and ministered unto them.

And at even, when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with
divers diseases brought them unto him; and them that were possessed with
devils: and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them. And
all the city was gathered together at the door.

And devils also came out of many, crying out, and saying, Thou art
Christ the Son of God. And he rebuking _them_ suffered them not to
speak: for they knew that he was Christ. That it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our
infirmities, and bare _our_ sicknesses. And in the morning, rising up a
great while before day, and when it was day, he went out, and departed
into a solitary place, and there prayed. And Simon and they that were
with him followed after him. And when they had found him, they said unto
him, All _men_ seek for thee. And he said unto them,

     Let us go into the next towns, that I may preach there also:
     for therefore came I forth.

And the people sought him, and came unto him, and stayed him, that he
should not depart from them. And he said unto them,

     I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also: for
     therefore am I sent.

And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and
preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness
and all manner of disease among the people, and cast out devils. And his
fame went throughout all Syria: and they brought unto him all sick
people that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and those
which were possessed with devils, and those which were lunatic, and
those that had the palsy; and he healed them. And there followed him
great multitudes of people from Galilee, and _from_ Decapolis, and from
Jerusalem, and _from_ Judea, and _from_ beyond Jordan.




CHAPTER IX.

SERMON ON THE MOUNT, NEAR CAPERNAUM.


And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was
set, his disciples came unto him: And he opened his mouth, and taught
them, saying,

     Blessed _are_ the poor in spirit: for their's is the kingdom
     of heaven. Blessed _are_ they that mourn: for they shall be
     comforted. Blessed _are_ the meek: for they shall inherit the
     earth. Blessed _are_ they which do hunger and thirst after
     righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed _are_ the
     merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in
     heart: for they shall see God.

     Blessed _are_ the peacemakers: for they shall be called the
     children of God. Blessed _are_ they which are persecuted for
     righteousness' sake: for their's is the kingdom of heaven.
     Blessed are ye, when _men_ shall revile you, and persecute
     _you_, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely,
     for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad: for great _is_
     your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets
     which were before you.

     Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his
     savor, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good
     for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot
     of men. Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a
     hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it
     under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto
     all that are in the house. Let your light so shine before men,
     that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father
     which is in heaven.

     Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I
     am not come to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto
     you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one title shall in
     no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled.

     Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least
     commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the
     least in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever shall do and
     teach _them_, the same shall be called great in the kingdom
     of heaven. For I say unto you, That except your righteousness
     shall exceed _the righteousness_ of the scribes and Pharisees,
     ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.

     Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt
     not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the
     judgment: But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his
     brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment:
     and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in
     danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool,
     shall be in danger of hell fire.

     Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
     rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; leave
     there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be
     reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
     Agree with thine adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way
     with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the
     judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be
     cast into prison. Verily, I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no
     means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost
     farthing.

     Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt
     not commit adultery: but I say unto you, That whosoever
     looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery
     with her already in his heart. And if thy right eye offend
     thee, pluck it out, and cast _it_ from thee: for it is
     profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
     not _that_ thy whole body should be cast into hell. And if thy
     right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast _it_ from thee,
     for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should
     perish, and not _that_ thy whole body should be cast into
     hell.

     It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him
     give her a writing of divorcement: But I say unto you, That
     whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of
     fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoever
     shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery.

     Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old
     time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto
     the Lord thine oaths: But I say unto you, Swear not at all;
     neither by heaven; for it is God's throne: nor by the earth;
     for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for it is the
     city of the great King. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head,
     because thou canst not make one hair white or black. But let
     your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is
     more than these cometh of evil.

     Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a
     tooth for a tooth: but I say unto you, That ye resist not
     evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn
     to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the
     law, and take away thy coat, let him have _thy_ cloak also.
     And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him
     twain. Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would
     borrow of thee turn not thou away.

     Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy
     neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your
     enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate
     you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and
     persecute you; that ye may be the children of your Father
     which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil
     and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the
     unjust.

     For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do
     not even the publicans the same? And if ye salute your
     brethren only, what do ye more _than others_? do not even the
     publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father
     which is in heaven is perfect.




CHAPTER X.

SERMON ON THE MOUNT, CONTINUED.


     Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of
     them; otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in
     heaven. Therefore when thou doest _thine_ alms, do not sound a
     trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues
     and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I
     say unto you, They have their reward. But when thou doest
     alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth:
     that thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which seeth
     in secret himself shall reward thee openly.

     And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites
     _are_: for they love to pray standing in the synagogues, and
     in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men.
     Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. But thou, when
     thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut
     thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy
     Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.

     But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen
     _do_: for they think that they shall be heard for their much
     speaking. Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father
     knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him. After
     this manner therefore pray ye:

     Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy
     kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as _it is_ in heaven.
     Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our debts, as
     we forgive our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but
     deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power,
     and the glory, for ever. Amen.

     For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father
     will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not men their
     trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.

     Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad
     countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may
     appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have
     their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head,
     and wash thy face; that thou appear not unto men to fast, but
     unto thy Father which is in secret: and thy Father, which
     seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.

     Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and
     rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal:
     but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither
     moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break
     through nor steal. For where your treasure is, there will your
     heart be also.

     The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be
     single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine
     eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If
     therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great
     _is_ that darkness! No man can serve two masters: for either
     he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold
     to the one, and despise the other, Ye cannot serve God and
     mammon.

     Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what
     ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body,
     what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the
     body than raiment. Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow
     not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your
     heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than
     they?

     Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his
     stature? And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the
     lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do
     they spin; and yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all
     his glory was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore, if
     God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to
     morrow is cast into the oven, _shall he_ not much more
     _clothe_ you, O ye of little faith.

     Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What
     shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? (For
     after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your
     heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.

     But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness;
     and all these things shall be added unto you. Take therefore
     no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought
     for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day _is_ the
     evil thereof.




CHAPTER XI.

SERMON ON THE MOUNT, CONCLUDED.


     Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye
     judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it
     shall be measured to you again. And why beholdest thou the
     mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the
     beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy
     brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and,
     behold, a beam _is_ in thine own eye.

     Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye;
     and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of
     thy brother's eye. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs,
     neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample
     them under their feet, and turn again and rend you.

     Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find;
     knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for every one that
     asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that
     knocketh it shall be opened.

     Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will
     he give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a
     serpent? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts
     unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is
     in heaven give good things to them that ask him?

     Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to
     you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the
     prophets.

     Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide _is_ the gate, and
     broad _is_ the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many
     there be which go in thereat: because strait _is_ the gate,
     and narrow _is_ the way, which leadeth unto life, and few
     there be that find it.

     Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's
     clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know
     them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs
     of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good
     fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good
     tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither _can_ a corrupt
     tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not
     forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.
     Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

     Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
     the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father
     which is in heaven. Many will say to me in that day, Lord,
     Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have
     cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works?
     And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart
     from me, ye that work iniquity.

     Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth
     them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house
     upon a rock: and the rain descended, and the floods came, and
     the winds blew, and beat upon that house: and it fell not: for
     it was founded upon a rock.

     And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth
     them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his
     house upon the sand: and the rain descended, and the floods
     came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it
     fell: and great was the fall of it.

And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were
astonished at his doctrine: For he taught them as _one_ having
authority, and not as the Scribes. When he was come down from the
mountain, great multitudes followed him.




CHAPTER XII.

GREAT DRAUGHT OF FISHES--HEALS A LEPER--MATTHEW CALLED.


And it came to pass, that, as the people pressed upon him to hear the
word of God, he stood by the lake of Gennesaret, and saw two ships
standing by the lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were
washing _their_ nets.

And he entered into one of the ships, which was Simon's, and prayed him
that he would thrust out a little from the land. And he sat down, and
taught the people out of the ship. Now when he had left speaking, he
said unto Simon,

     Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a
     draught.

And Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have toiled all the night,
and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word I will let down the
net. And when they had this done, they inclosed a great multitude of
fishes: and their net brake. And they beckoned unto _their_ partners,
which were in the other ship, that they should come and help them. And
they came, and filled both the ships, so that they began to sink.

When Simon Peter saw _it_ he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, Depart
from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord. For he was astonished, and all
that were with him, at the draught of the fishes which they had taken:
and so _was_ also James and John, the sons of Zebedee, which were
partners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon,

     Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men.

And when they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all, and
followed him.

And it came to pass, when he was in a certain city, behold, there came a
man full of leprosy to him, beseeching him, and kneeling down to him,
worshipped him, and fell on _his_ face, and besought him, saying, Lord,
if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. And Jesus, moved with
compassion, put forth _his_ hand, and touched him, and saith unto him,

     I will; be thou clean.

And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him,
and he was cleansed. And he straightly charged him, and forthwith sent
him away; and saith unto him,

     See thou say nothing to any man: but go thy way, shew thyself
     to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things which
     Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.

But he went out, and began to publish _it_ much, and to blaze abroad
the matter. And great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed
by him of their infirmities, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly
enter into the city, but was without in desert places: and he withdrew
himself into the wilderness, and prayed. And they came to him from every
quarter. And again he entered into Capernaum after _some_ days; and it
was noised that he was in the house. And straightway many were gathered
together, insomuch that there was no room to receive _them_, no not so
much as about the door: and he preached the word unto them.

And it came to pass on a certain day, as he was teaching, that there
were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, which were come out of
every town of Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem: and the power of the
Lord was _present_ to heal them.

And, behold, men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a palsy;
which was borne of four. And they sought _means_ to bring him in, and to
lay _him_ before him. And when they could not find by what _way_ they
might bring him in, nigh unto him, because of the multitude, they went
upon the housetop, and uncovered the roof where he was: and when they
had broken _it_ up, they let him down through the tiling with _his_
couch wherein the sick of the palsy lay, into the midst before Jesus.
When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy,

     Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee.

And the scribes and Pharisees began to reason, in their hearts, Why
doth this _man_ thus speak blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God
only? And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so
reasoned within themselves, he, knowing their thoughts, said unto them,

     Why reason ye these things? Wherefore think ye evil in your
     hearts? Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy,
     _Thy_ sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and take up thy
     bed and walk? But that ye may know that the Son of man hath
     power on earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the sick of the
     palsy,) I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go
     thy way into thine house.

And immediately he rose up before them, and took up that whereon he lay,
and departed to his own house, glorifying God.

But when the multitudes saw _it_, they marvelled, and glorified God,
which had given such power unto men; and were filled with fear, saying,
We never saw it on this fashion. We have seen strange things to day.

And after these things he went forth again by the sea side; and all the
multitude resorted unto him, and he taught them. And as Jesus passed
forth from thence, he saw a man, named Matthew, (a publican named Levi)
the _son_ of Alpheus, sitting at the receipt of custom, and he said unto
him,

     Follow me.

And he left all, rose up, and followed him.

And Levi made him a great feast in his own house: And it came to pass,
that, as Jesus sat at meat in his house, many publicans and sinners sat
also together with Jesus and his disciples: for there were many, and
they followed him. And when the scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with
publicans and sinners, they murmured against his disciples, saying, How
is it that he eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners? When Jesus
heard _it_, he saith unto them,

     They that are whole have no need of the physician, but they
     that are sick: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners
     to repentance.

And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast: and they
come and say unto him, Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees
fast, often, and make prayers, but thy disciples fast not? And Jesus
said unto them,

     Can ye make the children of the bridechamber fast, while the
     bridegroom is with them? as long as they have the bridegroom
     with them, they cannot fast. But the days will come, when the
     bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they
     fast in those days.

And he spake also a parable unto them;

     No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment:
     else the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old,
     and the rent is made worse, and the piece that was _taken_ out
     of the new agreeth not with the old.

     And no man putteth new wine into old bottles: else the new
     wine will burst the bottles, and be spilled, and the bottles
     shall perish. But new wine must be put into new bottles; and
     both are preserved. No man also having drunk old _wine_
     straightway desireth new: for he saith, The old is better.




CHAPTER XIII.

HEALING AT THE POOL--RESURRECTION FORETOLD.


After this there was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem. Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep _market_ a pool, which
is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having five porches. In these
lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered,
waiting for the moving of the water. For an angel went down at a certain
season into the pool, and troubled the water: whosoever then first after
the troubling of the water stepped in was made whole of whatsoever
disease he had.

And a certain man was there, which had an infirmity thirty and eight
years. When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time
_in that case_, he saith unto him,

     Wilt thou be made whole?

The impotent man answered him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is
troubled, to put me into the pool: but while I am coming, another
steppeth down before me. Jesus saith unto him,

     Rise, take up thy bed, and walk.

And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and walked:
and on the same day was the sabbath.

The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It it the Sabbath day:
it is not lawful for thee to carry _thy_ bed. He answered them, He that
made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up thy bed and walk. Then
asked they him, What man is that which said unto thee, Take up thy bed,
and walk? And he that was healed wist not who it was: for Jesus had
conveyed himself away, a multitude being in _that_ place. Afterwards
Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said unto him,

     Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing
     come unto thee.

The man departed, and told the Jews that it was Jesus, which had made
him whole. And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to
slay him, because he had done these things on the sabbath day. But Jesus
answered them,

     My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.

Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only had
broken the sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making
himself equal with God. Then answered Jesus and said unto them,

     Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of
     himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things
     soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise. For the
     Father loveth the Son and sheweth him all things that himself
     doeth: and he will shew him greater works than these, that ye
     may marvel. For as the Father raises up the dead, and
     quickeneth _them_; even so the Son quickeneth whom he will.
     For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment
     unto the Son; that all _men_ should honor the Son, even as
     they honor the Father. He that honoreth not the Son honoreth
     not the Father which hath sent him.

     Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and
     believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and
     shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death
     unto life. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming,
     and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
     God: and they that hear shall live. For as the Father hath
     life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in
     himself; and hath given him authority to execute judgment
     also, because he is the Son of man.

     Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all
     that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
     forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
     life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
     damnation. I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I
     judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own
     will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me.

     If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true. There is
     another that beareth witness of me; and I know that the
     witness which he witnesseth of me is true.

     Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth. But I
     receive not testimony from man: but these things I say, that
     ye might be saved. He was a burning and a shining light: and
     ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light.

     But I have greater witness than _that_ of John: for the works
     which the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that
     I do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me. And
     the Father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of
     me. Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his
     shape. And ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he
     hath sent, him ye believe not.

     Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal
     life: and they are they which testify of me. And ye will not
     come to me, that ye might have life. I receive not honor from
     men. But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you.
     I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not: if
     another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive. How
     can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek
     not the honor that _cometh_ from God only?

     Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father: there is
     _one_ that accuseth you, _even_ Moses, in whom ye trust. For
     had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote
     of me. But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye
     believe my words?




CHAPTER XIV.

DISCIPLES IN THE CORN FIELD--WITHERED HAND.


And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that Jesus
went through the corn fields; and his disciples were an hungered, and
began to pluck the ears of corn, and did eat, rubbing _them_ in _their_
hands. But when the Pharisees saw _it_, they said unto him, Behold, thy
disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the sabbath day. But he
said unto them,

     Have ye never read what David did, when he had need, and was
     an hungered, he, and they that were with him? How he went into
     the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and
     did eat the shew bread, and gave also to them that were with
     him, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them
     which were with him, but only for the priests.

     Or have ye not read in the law, how that on the sabbath days
     the priests in the temple profane the sabbath, and are
     blameless? But I say unto you, That in this place is _one_
     greater than the temple. But if ye had known what _this_
     meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not
     have condemned the guiltless.

And he said unto them,

     The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath:
     therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.

And it came to pass also on another sabbath, when he was departed
thence, that he entered into the synagogue and taught: and there was a
man there whose right hand was withered. And the scribes and Pharisees
watched him, whether he would heal him on the sabbath day.

And they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days?
that they might find an accusation against him. But he knew their
thoughts, and said to the man which had the withered hand,

     Rise up and stand forth in the midst.

And he arose and stood forth. Then said Jesus unto them,

     I will ask you one thing: Is it lawful on the sabbath days to
     do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy _it_?

But they held their peace. And he said unto them,

     What man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep,
     and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay
     hold on it, and lift _it_ out? How much then is a man better
     than a sheep? Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath
     days.

And when he had looked round about on them with anger, being grieved for
the hardness of their hearts, he saith unto the man,

     Stretch forth thine hand.

And he stretched _it_ forth; and his hand was restored whole as the
other. And they were filled with madness.

And the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took counsel with the
Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.

But when Jesus knew _it_, he withdrew himself from thence with his
disciples to the sea: and a great multitude from Galilee followed him,
and from Judea, and from Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and _from_ beyond
Jordan; and they about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they had
heard what great things he did, came unto him.

And he spake to his disciples, that a small ship should wait on him
because of the multitude, lest they should throng him. For he had healed
many; insomuch that they pressed upon him for to touch him, as many as
had plagues. And unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before
him, and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God. And he straitly charged
them that they should not make him known:

That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet,
saying, Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom my
soul is well pleased: I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall shew
judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall
any man hear his voice in the streets. A bruised reed shall he not
break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment
unto victory. And in his name shall the Gentiles trust.




CHAPTER XV.

APOSTLES NAMED--WOES AND BLESSINGS--PRACTICAL LESSONS.


And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a mountain to
pray, and continued all night in prayer to God.

And when it was day, he called _unto him_ his disciples; whom he would:
and they came unto him. And of them he chose twelve, whom also he named
apostles; that they should be with him, and that he might send them
forth to preach, and to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out
devils.

Now the names of the twelve apostles are these: The first, Simon, (whom
he also named Peter) and Andrew his brother; and James the _son_ of
Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and he surnamed them Boanerges,
which is, The sons of thunder: Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew the
publican; and Thomas, and James the _son_ of Alpheus, and Lebbeus, whose
surname was Thaddeus: (The same with Judas the brother of James,) and
Simon called Zelotes, (the Canaanite,) and Judas Iscariot, who also
betrayed him. And he came down with them, and stood in the plain, and
the company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all
Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which
came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that were
vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole
multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and he
healed _them_ all. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said,

     Blessed _be ye_ poor: for your's is the kingdom of God.
     Blessed _are ye_ that hunger now: for ye shall be filled.
     Blessed _are ye_ that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed
     are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate
     you _from their company_, and shall reproach _you_, and cast
     out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye
     in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward _is_
     great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto
     the prophets.

     But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your
     consolation. Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger.
     Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep. Woe
     unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did
     their fathers to the false prophets.

     But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, do good to
     them which hate you, Bless them that curse you, and pray for
     them which despitefully use you. And unto him that smiteth
     thee on the _one_ cheek, offer also the other; and him that
     taketh away thy cloak forbid not _to take thy_ coat also.

     Give to every man that asketh of thee; and of him that taketh
     away thy goods ask _them_ not again. And as ye would that men
     should do to you, do ye also to them likewise. For if ye love
     them which love you, what thank have ye? for sinners also love
     those that love them.

     And if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank
     have ye? for sinners also do even the same. And if ye lend _to
     them_ of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? for
     sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much again.

     But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for
     nothing again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be
     the children of the Highest: for he is kind unto the
     unthankful and _to_ the evil. Be ye therefore merciful, as
     your Father also is merciful.




CHAPTER XVI.

PRACTICAL LESSONS, CONTINUED--HEALS CENTURION'S SERVANT.


     Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye
     shall not be condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven:
     give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed
     down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give
     into your bosom. For with the same measure that ye mete
     withal it shall be measured to you again.

And he spake a parable unto them,

     Can the blind lead the blind? shall they not both fall into
     the ditch? The disciple is not above his master: but every one
     that is perfect shall be as his master. And why beholdest thou
     the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but perceivest not the
     beam that is in thine own eye?

     Either how canst thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me pull
     out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest
     not the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast
     out first the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou
     see clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy brother's eye.

     For a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit; neither doth
     a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. For every tree is
     known by his own fruit. For of thorns men do not gather figs,
     nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes. A good man out of
     the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is
     good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart
     bringeth forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the
     heart his mouth speaketh.

     And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I
     say? Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth
     them, I will shew you to whom he is like: he is like a man
     which built an house, and digged deep, and laid the foundation
     on a rock: and when the flood arose, the stream beat
     vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it: for it was
     founded upon a rock. But he that heareth, and doeth not, is
     like a man that without a foundation built an house upon the
     earth; against which the stream did beat vehemently, and
     immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house was great.

Now when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the people, he
entered into Capernaum. And a certain centurion's servant, who was dear
unto him, was sick and ready to die.

And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the elders of the Jews,
beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant. And when they
came to Jesus, they besought him instantly, saying, That he was worthy
for whom he should do this: For he loveth our nation, and he hath built
us a synagogue. And Jesus saith unto him,

     I will come and heal him.

Then Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the house,
the centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, Lord, trouble not
thyself: for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my roof:
wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee: but speak
the word only, and my servant shall be healed.

For I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers, and I
say unto one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and
to my servant, Do this, and he doeth _it_. When Jesus heard these
things, he marveled at him, and turned him about, and said unto the
people that followed him,

     Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no,
     not in Israel. And I say unto you, That many shall come from
     the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac,
     and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. But the children of the
     kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there shall be
     weeping and gnashing of teeth.

And Jesus said unto the centurion,

     Go thy way; and as thou hast believed, _so_ be it done unto
     thee.

And his servant was healed in the self-same hour. And they that were
sent, returning to the house, found the servant whole that had been
sick.




CHAPTER XVII.

WIDOW OF NAIN--MESSENGERS OF JOHN--WOES ON CAPERNAUM.


And it came to pass the day after, that he went into a city called Nain:
and many of his disciples went with him, and much people. Now when he
came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man carried
out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow: and much people of
the city was with her. And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on
her, and said unto her,

     Weep not.

And he came and touched the bier, and they that bare _him_ stood still.
And he said,

     Young man, I say unto thee, Arise.

And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered him to
his mother. And there came a fear on all: and they glorified God,
saying, That a great prophet is risen up among us; and, That God hath
visited his people. And this rumor of him went forth throughout all
Judea, and throughout all the region round about. And the disciples of
John shewed him of all these things.

Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two
of his disciples to Jesus, saying, Art thou he that should come? or
look we for another? When the men were come unto him, they said, John
Baptist hath sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he that should come? or
look we for another? And in that same hour he cured many of _their_
infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto many _that were_
blind he gave sight. Then Jesus answering said unto them,

     Go your way, and tell John what things ye have seen and heard:
     how that the blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the
     lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised
     up, and the poor have the gospel preached to them. And blessed
     is _he_, whosoever shall not be offended in me.

And when the messengers of John were departed, Jesus began to say unto
the multitudes concerning John,

     What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken
     with the wind? But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed
     in soft raiment? behold, they that wear soft _clothing_--they
     which are gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately, are in
     king's courts. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet?
     yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet. For this is _he_
     of whom it is written, Behold I send my messenger before thy
     face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

     Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women,
     there hath not risen a greater prophet than John the Baptist:
     notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is
     greater than he. And from the days of John the Baptist until
     now the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent
     take it by force. For all the prophets and the law prophesied
     until John. And if ye will receive _it_, this is Elias, which
     was for to come. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

And all the people that heard _him_, and the publicans, justified God,
being baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and lawyers
rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of
him. And the Lord said,

     Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this generation? and
     to what are they like? They are like unto children sitting in
     the market place, and calling one to another, and saying, We
     have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned
     to you, and ye have not wept.

     For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking
     wine; and ye say, He hath a devil. The Son of man is come
     eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold a gluttonous man, and
     a wine bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners! But wisdom
     is justified of all her children.

Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works
were done, because they repented not:

     Woe unto thee Chorasin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the
     mighty works, which were done in you, had been done in Tyre
     and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and
     ashes. But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre
     and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you.

     And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shall be
     brought down to hell: for if the mighty works, which have been
     done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained
     until this day. But I say unto you, That it shall be more
     tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than
     for thee.

At that time Jesus answered and said,

     I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou
     hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast
     revealed them unto babes. Even so Father: for so it seemed
     good in thy sight. All things are delivered unto me of my
     Father, and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither
     knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and _he_ to
     whomsoever the Son will reveal _him_.

     Come unto me, all _ye_ that labor and are heavy laden, and I
     will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me;
     for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto
     your souls. For my yoke _is_ easy, and my burden is light.




CHAPTER XVIII.

WOMAN WASHES JESUS' FEET--BLIND AND DUMB DEVIL--BLASPHEMY AGAINST THE
HOLY GHOST.


And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him. And he
went into the Pharisee's house, and sat down to meat. And, behold a
woman in the city, which was a sinner, when she knew that _Jesus_ sat at
meat in the Pharisee's house, brought an alabaster box of ointment, and
stood at his feet behind _him_ weeping, and began to wash his feet with
tears, and did wipe _them_ with the hairs of her head, and kissed his
feet, and annointed _them_ with the ointment.

Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw _it_, he spake within
himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who
and what manner of woman _this is_ that toucheth him: for she is a
sinner. And Jesus answering said unto him,

     Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee.

And he saith, Master, say on.

     There was a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one
     owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. And when they
     had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me
     therefore, which of them will love him most?

Simon answered and said, I suppose that _he_, to whom he forgave most.
And he said unto him,

     Thou hast rightly judged.

And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon,

     Seest thou this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest
     me no water for my feet: but she hath washed my feet with
     tears, and wiped _them_ with the hairs of her head. Thou
     gavest me no kiss; but this woman since the time I came in
     hath not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil thou didst
     not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with
     ointment. Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many,
     are forgiven; for she loved much: but to whom little is
     forgiven, _the same_ loveth little.

And he said unto her,

     Thy sins are forgiven.

And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, Who
is this that forgiveth sins also? And he said to the woman,

     Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace.

And it came to pass afterward, that he went throughout every city and
village, preaching and showing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God:
and the twelve _were_ with him. And certain women, which had been healed
of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene, out of whom went
seven devils. And Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and
Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto him of their substance.
And they went into an house.

And the multitude cometh together again, so that they could not so much
as eat bread. And when his friends heard _of it_, they went out to lay
hold on him: for they said, He is beside himself.

Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind, and dumb;
and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake and saw.
And all the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the son of David?
But when the Pharisees and the scribes which came down from Jerusalem
heard _it_, they said, He hath Beelzebub. This _fellow_ doth not cast
out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils. And Jesus knew
their thoughts. And he called them _unto him_, and said unto them in
parables,

     How can Satan cast out Satan? And if a kingdom be divided
     against itself, that kingdom cannot stand, and every city or
     house divided against itself shall not stand: and if Satan
     cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how shall then
     his kingdom stand? He cannot stand, but hath an end. And if I
     by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast
     _them_ out? therefore they shall be your judges. But if I
     cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God
     is come unto you.

     Or else how can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil
     his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he
     will spoil his house. He that is not with me is against me;
     and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad. Wherefore
     I say unto you, All manner of sin shall be forgiven unto the
     sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall
     blaspheme: but the blasphemy _against_ the _Holy_ Ghost shall
     not be forgiven unto men.

     And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man it shall
     be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy
     Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world,
     neither in the _world_ to come, but is in danger of eternal
     damnation.

Because they said, He hath an unclean spirit.

     Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make
     the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known
     by _his_ fruit. O generation of vipers, how can ye, being
     evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of the heart
     the mouth speaketh. A good man out of the good treasure of the
     heart bringeth forth good things: and an evil man out of the
     evil treasure bringeth forth evil things.

     But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak,
     they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. For by
     thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt
     be condemned.




CHAPTER XIX.

PHARISEES SEEK A SIGN--JESUS TEACHES BY PARABLES.


Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying,
Master, we would see a sign from thee. But he answered and said unto
them,

     An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and
     there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the
     prophet Jonas: for as Jonas was three days and three nights in
     the whale's belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and
     three nights in the heart of the earth.

     The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this
     generation, and shall condemn it: because they repented at the
     preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas _is_
     here. The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment
     with this generation, and shall condemn it: for she came from
     the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of
     Solomon; and, behold, a greater than Solomon _is_ here.

     When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh
     through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none. Then he
     saith, I will return into my house from whence I came out; and
     when he is come, he findeth _it_ empty, swept, and garnished.
     Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits
     more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there:
     and the last _state_ of that man is worse than the first. Even
     so shall it be also unto this wicked generation.

While he yet talked to the people, behold _his_ mother and his brethren
stood without, desiring to speak with him. And the multitude sat about
him. Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand
without, desiring to speak with thee. But he answered and said unto him
that told him,

     Who is my mother? and who are my brethren?

And he looked round about on them which sat about him. And he stretched
forth his hand toward his disciples, and said,

     Behold my mother and my brethren! For whosoever shall do the
     will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother,
     and sister, and mother.

The same day went Jesus out of the house. And he began again to teach by
the seaside: and great multitudes were gathered together, and were come
to him out of every city; so that he entered into a ship, and sat in the
sea; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the land. And he taught
them many things by parables, and said unto them in his doctrine,

     Hearken; Behold, there went out a sower to sow his seed: and
     it came to pass, as he sowed, some _seeds_ fell by the
     way-side, and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the air
     came and devoured them up.

     Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth:
     and forthwith they sprung up, because they had no deepness of
     earth: and when the sun was up, they were scorched; and
     because they had no root, they withered away; because it
     lacked moisture.

     And some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked
     it, and it yielded no fruit.

     And other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang
     up, and increased; and brought forth, some thirty, some sixty,
     and some an hundred.

And when he had said these things, he cried,

     He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speakest thou unto them
in parables? He answered and said unto them,

     Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the
     kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. For whosoever
     hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
     abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken
     away even that he hath. Therefore speak I to them in parables:
     because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not,
     neither do they understand.

     And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith,
     By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing
     ye shall see and shall not perceive: for this people's heart
     is waxed gross and _their_ ears are dull of hearing, and their
     eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with
     _their_ eyes, and hear with _their_ ears, and should
     understand with _their_ heart, and should be converted, and I
     should heal them. But blessed _are_ your eyes, for they see:
     and your ears, for they hear. For verily I say unto you, That
     many prophets and righteous _men_ have desired to see _those
     things_ which ye see, and have not seen _them_; and to hear
     _those things_ which ye hear, and have not heard _them_.

Another parable put he forth unto them, saying,

     The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good
     seed in his field: but while men slept, his enemy came and
     sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way. But when the
     blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared
     the tares also.

     So the servants of the householder came and said unto him,
     Sir, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? from whence
     then hath it tares? He said unto them, An enemy hath done
     this. The servants said unto him, Wilt thou then that we go
     and gather them up? But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up
     the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. Let both grow
     together until the harvest: and in the time of harvest I will
     say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and
     bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into
     my barn.

And he said,

     So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into
     the ground; and should sleep, and rise night and day, and the
     seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how. For the
     earth bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade, then
     the ear, after that the full corn in the ear. But when the
     fruit is brought forth, immediately he putteth in the sickle,
     because the harvest is come.

Another parable put he forth unto them, saying,

     Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? or with what
     comparison shall we compare it? The kingdom of heaven is like
     to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his
     field: which, when it is sown in the earth, is less than all
     the seeds that be in the earth: but when it is sown, it
     groweth up, and becometh greater than all herbs, and shooteth
     out great branches, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of
     the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.

Another parable spake he unto them,

     The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took,
     and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was
     leavened.

And with many such parables spake he the word unto them, as they were
able to hear _it_. But without a parable spake he not unto them: that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open
my mouth in parables; I will utter things which have been kept secret
from the foundation of the world. And when they were alone, he expounded
all things to his disciples.




CHAPTER XX.

PARABLES AND INTERPRETATIONS.


Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and when he
was alone, they that were about him with the twelve disciples asked him,
saying, What might this parable be? And he said unto them,

     Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of
     God: but unto them that are without, all _these_ things are
     done in parables; that seeing they may see, and not perceive;
     and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest at any
     time they should be converted, and _their_ sins should be
     forgiven them.

And he said unto them,

     Know ye not this parable? and how then will ye know all
     parables. Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower. Now the
     parable is this: The seed is the word of God. The sower soweth
     the word. Those by the way-side where the word is sown, are
     they that hear the word of the kingdom; but when they have
     heard, and understandeth _it_ not, then Satan cometh
     immediately, and taketh away the word that was sown in their
     hearts: lest they should believe and be saved. This is he
     which received seed by the way-side.

     And these are they likewise which are sown on stony ground;
     who, when they have heard the word, immediately receive it
     with gladness; and have no root in themselves, and so endure
     but for a time: afterward, in time of temptation, when
     affliction or persecution ariseth, for the word's sake,
     immediately they are offended, and fall away.

     And that which fell among thorns are they, which, when they
     have heard the word, go forth, and the cares of this world,
     and the deceitfulness of riches, and pleasures of _this_ life,
     and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and
     it becometh unfruitful.

     And these are they which are sown on good ground; such as in
     an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep _it_,
     and bring forth fruit with patience; some thirty-fold, some
     sixty, and some an hundred.

And he said unto them,

     No man, when he hath lighted a candle, covereth it with a
     vessel, or putteth _it_ under a bushel, or under a bed: but
     setteth _it_ on a candlestick, that they which enter in may
     see the light. For there is nothing hid, which shall not be
     manifested; neither was anything kept secret, that shall not
     be known and come abroad. If any man have ears to hear, let
     him hear.

And he said unto them,

     Take heed what ye hear: with what measure ye mete, it shall be
     measured to you: and unto you that hear shall more be given.
     For he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not,
     from him shall be taken even that which he seemeth to have.

And his disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of
the tares of the field. He answered and said unto them,

     He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man; the field is
     the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but
     the tares are the children of the wicked _one_; the enemy that
     sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the end of the world;
     and the reapers are the angels. As therefore the tares are
     gathered and burned in the fire: so shall it be in the end of
     this world. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and
     they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend,
     and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace
     of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Then
     shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
     their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.

     Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a
     field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy
     thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that
     field.

     Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchantman,
     seeking goodly pearls: who, when he had found one pearl of
     great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it.

     Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast
     into the sea, and gathered of every kind: which, when it was
     full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the good
     into vessels, but cast the bad away. So shall it be at the end
     of the world: the angels shall come forth, and sever the
     wicked from among the just, and shall cast them into the
     furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

Jesus saith unto them,

     Have ye understood all these things?

They say unto him, Yea, Lord. Then said he unto them,

     Therefore every scribe _which is_ instructed unto the kingdom
     of heaven is like unto a man _that is_ an householder, which
     bringeth forth out of his treasure _things_ new and old.

Then came to him _his_ mother and his brethren, and could not come at
him for the press. And it was told him _by certain_ which said, Thy
mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to see thee. And he
answered and said unto them,

     My mother and my brethren are those which hear the word of
     God and do it.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE HOMELESS SAVIOUR--THE STORM--DEMONIAC.


And it came to pass, _that_ when Jesus had finished these parables, he
departed thence. And the same day, when the even was come, when Jesus
saw great multitudes about him, he gave commandment to depart unto the
other side. And a certain scribe came, and said unto him, Master, I will
follow thee whithersoever thou goest. And Jesus saith unto him,

     The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air _have_ nests;
     but the Son of man hath not where to lay _his_ head.

And another of his disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me first to go
and bury my father. But Jesus said unto him,

     Follow me; and let the dead bury their dead.

And when they had sent away the multitude, and when he was entered into
a ship, his disciples followed him. And he said unto them,

     Let us go over unto the other side of the lake.

And there were also with him other little ships. And they launched
forth. But as they sailed he fell asleep: and, behold, there came down a
great storm of wind, on the lake: and the waves beat into the ship,
insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves; and they were filled
_with water_, and were in jeopardy. And he was in the hinder part of the
ship, asleep on a pillow: and his disciples came to _him_, and awoke
him, saying, Lord, save us: Master, master, carest thou not that we
perish? And he saith unto them,

     Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?

Then he arose and rebuked the winds, and the raging of the water: and
said unto the sea,

     Peace, be still.

And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm. And he said unto them,

     Why are ye so fearful? how is it that ye have no faith?

But the men marvelled, and they feared exceedingly, and said one to
another, What manner of man is this? for he commandeth even the winds
and water, and they obey him. And they came over unto the other side of
the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes, which is over against
Galilee. And when he went forth to land, there met him out of the city a
certain man, which had devils long time, and ware no clothes, neither
abode in _any_ house, but in the tombs; exceeding fierce, so that no man
might pass by that way: and no man could bind him, no, not with chains:
because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the
chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the fetters broken in
pieces: neither could any _man_ tame him. And always, night and day, he
was in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cutting himself with
stones.

But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and fell down before him, and
worshipped him, and cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I to do
with thee, Jesus, _thou_ Son of the most high God? Art thou come hither
to torment us before the time? I adjure thee by God, that thou torment
me not. For he said unto him,

     Come out of the man _thou_ unclean spirit.

(For oftentimes it had caught him: and he was kept bound with chains and
in fetters; and he brake the bands, and was driven of the devil into the
wilderness.) And Jesus asked him, saying,

     What is thy name?

And he said Legion: because many devils were entered into him. And they
besought him that he would not command them to go out into the deep.

And there was a good way off from them, nigh unto the mountains a great
herd of swine feeding. And all the devils besought him, saying, If thou
cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine, that we may
enter into them. And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And the unclean
spirits went out, and entered into the swine: and, behold, the whole
herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea, (they were
about two thousand;) and were choked in the sea. When they that fed
_them_ saw what was done, they fled, and went and told _it_ in the city
and in the country: and told everything, and what was befallen to the
possessed of the devils.

And, behold, the whole city came out to see what it was that was done.
And they come to Jesus, and found the man, out of whom the devils were
departed, sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind:
and they were afraid. They also which saw _it_ told them by what means
he that was possessed of the devils was healed; and _also_ concerning
the swine. Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes
round about, besought _him_ that he would depart out of their coast: for
they were taken with great fear: and he went up into the ship, and
returned back again.

And when he was come into the ship, the man out of whom the devils were
departed besought him that he might be with him: howbeit Jesus suffered
him not, but saith unto him,

     Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the
     Lord hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee.

And he departed and began to publish throughout the whole city (in
Decapolis) how great things Jesus had done for him: and all _men_ did
marvel.

And he entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own city.
And it came to pass, that, when Jesus was returned again by ship unto
the other side, much people _gladly_ received him: for they were all
waiting for him. And he was nigh unto the sea.




CHAPTER XXII.

CHILD HEALED--TOUCH OF FAITH--TWO BLIND MEN--EATS WITH PUBLICANS, ETC.


And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold, many
publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his disciples. And
when the Pharisees saw _it_, they said unto his disciples, Why eateth
your Master with publicans and sinners? But when Jesus heard _that_, he
said unto them,

     They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are
     sick. But go ye and learn what _that_ meaneth, I will have
     mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am not come to call the
     righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the
Pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast not? And Jesus said unto
them,

     Can the children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the
     bridegroom is with them? but the days will come, when the
     bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.
     No man putteth a piece of new cloth unto an old garment, for
     that which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment,
     and the rent is made worse. Neither do men put new wine into
     old bottles: else the bottles break, and the wine runneth out,
     and the bottles perish: but they put new wine into new
     bottles, and both are preserved.

While he spake these things unto them, behold, there cometh one of the
rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name; and when he saw him, he fell
down at Jesus' feet, and besought him greatly, that he would come into
his house; saying, My little daughter lieth at the point of death: _I
pray thee_ come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed; and
she shall live. For he had one only daughter, about twelve years of age,
and she lay a dying. And Jesus arose, and followed him, and _so did_ his
disciples; and much people followed him, and thronged him.

And, behold, a woman, which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve
years, and had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent
all that she had, and was nothing bettered, neither could be healed of
any, but rather grew worse, when she had heard of Jesus, came in the
press behind, and touched the hem of his garment: for she said within
herself, If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole. And
straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in
_her_ body that she was healed of that plague. And Jesus immediately
knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in
the press, and said.

     Who touched my clothes?

When all denied, Peter, and they that were with him, said, Master, Thou
seest the multitude throng thee and press _thee_, and sayest thou, Who
touched me? And Jesus said,

     Somebody hath touched me: for I perceive that virtue hath gone
     out of me.

And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing. And when
the woman saw that she was not hid, she came fearing and trembling,
knowing what was done in her, and falling down before him, she declared
unto him all the truth, before all the people, for what cause she had
touched him, and how she was healed immediately. And when he saw her, he
said unto her,

     Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole;
     go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.

And the woman was made whole from that hour.

While he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's _house
certain_ which said, Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the Master
any further? As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he saith
unto the ruler of the synagogue,

     Be not afraid, only believe, and she shall be made whole.

And he suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, and James, and John
the brother of James. And when Jesus came to the house of the ruler of
the synagogue, and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise, and
them that wept and wailed greatly, he suffered no man to go in, save
Peter, and James, and John, and the father and the mother of the maiden.
And all wept, and bewailed her. And when he was come in, he saith unto
them,

     Why make ye this ado, and weep? Give place: for the maid is
     not dead, but sleepeth.

And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead. But when he
had put them all out, he taketh the Father and the mother of the damsel,
and them that were with him, and entered in where the damsel was lying.
And he took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her,

     Talitha cumi; which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto
     thee, Arise.

And her spirit came again, and she arose straightway, and walked: for
she was _of the age_ of twelve years. And her parents were astonished
with a great astonishment. And he charged them straitly that no man
should know it: and commanded that something should be given her to eat.
And the fame hereof went abroad into all that land.

And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying and
saying, _Thou_ Son of David, have mercy on us. And when he was come into
the house, the blind men came to him: and Jesus saith unto them,

     Believe ye that I am able to do this?

They said unto him, Yea, Lord. Then touched he their eyes, saying,

     According to your faith be it unto you.

And their eyes were opened: and Jesus straitly charged them, saying,

     See _that_ no man know _it_.

But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that
country.

As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man possessed with
a devil. And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spake: and the
multitudes marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel. But the
Pharisees said, He casteth out devils through the prince of the devils.




CHAPTER XXIII.

REVISITS NAZARETH--SENDS OUT THE TWELVE WITH INSTRUCTIONS.


And he went out from thence, and came into his own country; and his
disciples follow him. And when he was come into his own country, and
when the sabbath day was come, he began to teach in the synagogue: and
many hearing _him_ were astonished, saying, From whence hath this _man_
these things? And what wisdom _is_ this which is given unto him, that
even such mighty works are wrought by his hands? Is not this the
carpenter? (the carpenter's son?) Is not his mother called Mary? and his
brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, are
they not all with us? Whence then hath this _man_ all these things? And
they were offended in him. But Jesus said unto them,

     A prophet is not without honor, save in his own country,
     and among his own kin, and in his own house.

[Illustration: Nazareth--Residence of Jesus in Youth.]

And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief, save
that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed _them_. And he
marvelled because of their unbelief.

And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every
sickness and every disease among the people. But when he saw the
multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them, because they fainted,
and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd. Then saith he
unto his disciples,

     The harvest truly _is_ plenteous, but the laborers _are_ few;
     pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send
     forth laborers into his harvest.

And when he had called unto _him_ his twelve disciples, he gave them
power and authority over all devils, to cast them out, and to heal all
manner of sickness and all manner of disease. And he sent them forth by
two and two: to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick. These
twelve, Jesus sent forth, and commanded them saying,

     Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into _any_ city of
     the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep
     of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying, The
     kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the
     lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have
     received, freely give.

And he said unto them,

     Take nothing for _your_ journey, save a staff only; provide
     neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, nor scrip
     for _your_ journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, but _be_
     shod with sandals; for the workman is worthy of his meat.

     And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, enquire who
     in it is worthy; and there abide till ye go thence. And when
     ye come into an house, salute it. And if the house be worthy,
     let your peace come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your
     peace return to you. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor
     hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city,
     shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against
     them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for
     the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than
     for that city.

     Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be
     ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But
     beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils,
     and they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye shall be
     brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a
     testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver
     you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it
     shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For
     it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which
     speaketh in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother
     to death, and the father the child: and the children shall
     rise up against _their_ parents, and cause them to be put to
     death. And ye shall be hated of all _men_ for my name's sake:
     but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.

     But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into
     another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone
     over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come.

     The disciple is not above _his_ master, nor the servant above
     his lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his
     master, and the servant as his lord. If they have called the
     master of the house Beelzebub, how much more _shall they call_
     them of his household?

     Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered that
     shall not be revealed; and hid that shall not be known. What
     I tell you in darkness _that_ speak ye in light: and what ye
     hear in the ear, _that_ preach ye upon the house-tops.

     And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to
     kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy
     both soul and body in hell. Are not two sparrows sold for a
     farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without
     your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
     Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many
     sparrows.

     Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I
     confess also before my Father which is in heaven. But
     whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny
     before my Father which is in heaven.

     Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to
     send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at
     variance against his father, and the daughter against her
     mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. And
     a man's foes _shall be_ they of his own household. He that
     loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and
     he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of
     me. And he that taketh not his cross and followeth after me,
     is not worthy of me.

     He that findeth his life shall lose it; and he that loseth his
     life for my sake shall find it. He that receiveth you
     receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent
     me. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall
     receive a prophet's reward: and he that receiveth a righteous
     man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous
     man's reward. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of
     these little ones a cup of cold _water_ only in the name of a
     disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his
     reward.

And they departed, and went through the towns, preaching the gospel,
that men should repent. And they cast out many devils, and anointed with
oil many that were sick, and healed _them_.




CHAPTER XXIV.

JOHN THE BAPTIST BEHEADED BY ORDER OF HEROD.


And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve
disciples, he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities. At
that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus, of all that was
done by him: (for his name was spread abroad:) and he was perplexed,
because that it was said of some, that John was risen from the dead: and
of some that Elias had appeared; and of others, that one of the old
prophets was risen again.

And Herod said, John have I beheaded: but who is this, of whom I hear
such things? And (he) said unto his servants, This is John the Baptist;
he is risen from the dead; and therefore mighty works do shew forth
themselves in him: and he desired to see him. Others said, That it
is Elias. And others said, That it is a prophet, or as one of the
prophets. But when Herod heard _thereof_, he said, it is John, whom I
beheaded: he is risen from the dead.

For Herod himself had sent forth and laid hold upon John, and bound him
in prison for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's wife: for he had
married her. For John had said unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to
have thy brother's wife. Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against him,
and would have killed him; but she could not: for Herod feared John,
knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and observed him; and when
he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly.

And when a convenient day was come, that Herod on his birth day made a
supper to his lords, high captains, and chief _estates_ of Galilee; and
when the daughter of the said Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased
Herod and them that sat with him, the king said unto the damsel, Ask of
me whatsoever thou wilt, and I will give _it_ thee. Whereupon he
promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she would ask. And he sware
unto her, Whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I will give _it_ thee, unto
the half of my kingdom. And she went forth, and said unto her mother,
What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptist.

And she, being before instructed of her mother, came in straightway with
haste unto the king, and asked saying, I will that thou give me by and
by in a charger the head of John the Baptist.

And the king was exceedingly sorry: _yet_ for his oath's sake, and for
their sakes which sat with him, he would not reject her. And immediately
the king sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be brought; and
he went and beheaded him in the prison. And brought his head in a
charger, and gave it to the damsel: and the damsel gave _it_ to her
mother. And when his disciples heard _of it_, they came and took up his
corpse, and laid it in a tomb, and went and told Jesus.




CHAPTER XXV.

JESUS FEEDS FIVE THOUSAND WITH FIVE LOAVES AND TWO FISHES.


And the apostles, when they were returned, gathered themselves together
unto Jesus, and told him all things, both what they had done, and what
they had taught. And he said unto them,

     Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest awhile.

For there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as
to eat. After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, which is
_the sea_ of Tiberias, by ship privately, into a desert place belonging
to the city called Bethsaida. And the people saw them departing, and
many knew him, and ran afoot thither out of all cities, and outwent
them, and came together unto him, because they saw his miracles which he
did on them that were diseased.

And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with
compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a
shepherd: and he began to teach them many things; and spake unto them of
the kingdom of God, and healed them that had need of healing.

And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his disciples.
And the passover, a feast of the Jews, was nigh. When Jesus then lifted
up _his_ eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he saith unto
Philip,

     Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat?

And this he said to prove him: for he himself knew what he would do.
Philip answered him, Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient
for them, that every one of them may take a little. And when it was
evening, his disciples, the twelve, came unto him, and said, This is a
desert place, and now the time _is_ far passed: send them away, that
they may go into the towns and country round about, and lodge, and buy
themselves bread: for they have nothing to eat: for we are here in a
desert place. But Jesus said unto them,

     They need not depart; give ye them to eat.

And they say unto him, Shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of
bread, and give them to eat? He saith unto them,

     How many loaves have ye? go and see.

And when they knew, one of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's
brother, saith unto him, There is a lad here, which hath five barley
loaves, and two small fishes: but what are they among so many? We have
no more but five loaves and two fishes: except we should go and buy meat
for all this people. For they were about five thousand men. He said,

     Bring them hither to me.

And he said to his disciples,

     Make them sit down by fifties in a company upon the green
     grass.

Now there was much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in ranks, by
hundreds, and by fifties, in number about five thousand. And when Jesus
had taken the five loaves and the two fishes, and when he had given
thanks, looking up to heaven, he blessed them and brake the loaves, and
gave the loaves to _his_ disciples, and the disciples to the multitude
that were set down: and likewise the two fishes divided he among them
all; as much as they would. And they did all eat, and were filled. When
they were filled, he said unto his disciples,

     Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.

Therefore they gathered _them_ together, and filled twelve baskets with
the fragments of the five barley loaves, and of the fishes, which
remained over and above unto them that had eaten. And they that had
eaten were about five thousand men, beside women and children.




CHAPTER XXVI.

WALKS ON THE SEA--MOUNTAIN CLOSET--PETER SINKING.


Then those men when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did, said, This
is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world.

And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship, and
to go before him unto the other side, unto Bethsaida, while he sent away
the people.

When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him by
force, to make him a king, and when he had sent the multitudes away, he
departed again into a mountain himself alone, to pray. And when even was
_now_ come, his disciples went down unto the sea, and entered into a
ship, and went over the sea toward Capernaum. And it was now dark, and
Jesus was not come to them. But the ship was now in the midst of the
sea, tossed with waves: for the wind was contrary: and he alone on the
land.

And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew. And he saw them
toiling in rowing: for the wind was contrary unto them. So when they had
rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, and about the fourth
watch of the night, they see Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing nigh
unto the ship: and would have passed by them. And when the disciples
saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit;
and they cried out for fear: for they all saw him, and were troubled.
But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying,

     Be of good cheer; it is I; be not afraid.

And Peter answered him and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto
thee on the water. And he said,

     Come.

And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the water to
go to Jesus. But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and
beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me. And immediately
Jesus stretched forth _his_ hand, and caught him, and said unto him,

     O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?

Then they willingly received him into the ship. And when they were come
into the ship the wind ceased: and immediately the ship was at the land
whither they went.

Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him, saying, Of a
truth thou art the Son of God. And they were sore amazed in themselves
beyond measure, and wondered. For they considered not _the miracle_ of
the loaves: for their heart was hardened.

And when they had passed over, they came into the land of Gennesaret,
and drew to the shore. And when they were come out of the ship, and when
the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into all that
country; and ran through that whole region round about, and began to
carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard he was. And
whithersoever he entered, into villages, or cities, or country, they
laid the sick in the streets, and besought him that they might touch if
it were but the border of his garment: and as many as touched him were
made whole. The day following when the people which stood on the other
side of the sea saw that there was none other boat there, save that one
whereinto his disciples were entered, and that Jesus went not with his
disciples into the boat, but _that_ his disciples were gone away alone:
(howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias, nigh unto the place where
they did eat bread, after that the Lord had given thanks;) when the
people therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither his disciples,
they also took shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking for Jesus.




CHAPTER XXVII.

JESUS THE BREAD OF LIFE FOR THE WORLD.


And when they had found him on the other side of the sea, they said unto
him, Rabbi, when camest thou hither? Jesus answered them and said,

     Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw
     the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were
     filled. Labor not for the meat which perisheth, but for that
     meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of
     man shall give unto you: for him hath God the Father sealed.

Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might work the works
of God? Jesus answered and said unto them,

     This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath
     sent.

They said therefore unto him, What sign showest thou then, that we may
see, and believe thee? what dost thou work? Our fathers did eat manna
in the desert; as it is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat.
Then said Jesus unto them,

     Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread
     from heaven; but my Father giveth you the true bread from
     heaven. For the bread of God is he that cometh down from
     heaven, and giveth life unto the world.

Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this bread. And Jesus
said unto them,

     I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never
     hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst. But I
     said unto you, That ye also have seen me, and believe not. All
     that the Father giveth me shall come to me; and him that
     cometh to me I will in no wise cast out. For I came down from
     heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent
     me. And this is the Father's will which hath sent me, that of
     all which he hath given me, I should lose nothing, but should
     raise it up again at the last day. And this is the will of him
     that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and
     believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise
     him up at the last day.

The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which
came down from heaven. And they said, Is not this Jesus the son of
Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how is it then that he saith, I
came down from heaven? Jesus therefore answered and said unto them,

     Murmur not among yourselves. No man can come to me, except the
     Father which hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at
     the last day. It is written in the prophets, And they shall be
     all taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and
     hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me. Not that any man
     hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath seen
     the Father. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth
     on me hath everlasting life. I am that bread of life. Your
     fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead. This is
     the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat
     thereof, and not die. I am the living bread which came down
     from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live
     forever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I
     will give for the life of the world.

The Jews therefore strove among themselves saying, How can this man give
us _his_ flesh to eat? Then said Jesus unto them,

     Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the
     Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Whoso
     eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and
     I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat
     indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my
     flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. As
     the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father, so
     he that eateth me, even he shall live by me. This is that
     bread which came down from heaven; not as your fathers did eat
     manna, and are dead: he that eateth of this bread shall live
     forever.

These things said he in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum. Many
therefore of his disciples, when they had heard _this_, said, This is an
hard saying; who can hear it? When Jesus knew in himself that his
disciples murmured at it, he said unto them,

     Doth this offend you? _What_ and if ye shall see the Son of
     man ascend up where he was before? It is the Spirit that
     quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that I
     speak unto you, _they_ are spirit, and _they_ are life. But
     there are some of you that believe not.

For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and
who should betray him. And he said,

     Therefore I said unto you, that no man can come unto me,
     except it were given unto him of my Father.

From that _time_ many of his disciples went back, and walked no more
with him. Then said Jesus unto the twelve,

     Will ye also go away?

Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the
words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure that thou art that
Christ, the Son of the living God. Jesus answered them,

     Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil.

He spake of Judas Iscariot, _the son_ of Simon; for he it was that
should betray him, being one of the twelve.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

PHARISEES MURMUR--WASHINGS AND OTHER TRADITIONS.


Then came together unto him the Pharisees, and certain of the scribes,
which came from Jerusalem. And when they saw some of his disciples eat
bread with defiled, that is to say, with unwashen hands, they found
fault. For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash _their_
hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders. And _when they
come_ from the market, except they wash, they eat not. And many other
things there be, which they have received to hold, _as_ the washing of
cups, and pots, brazen vessels, and of tables.

Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why do thy disciples
transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash not their hands
when they eat bread. But he answered and said unto them,

     Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your
     tradition? Full well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye
     may keep your own tradition. For God commanded, saying, Honor
     thy father and mother: and, He that curseth father or mother,
     let him die the death. But ye say, Whosoever shall say to
     _his_ father or _his_ mother, _It is_ Corban, that is to say,
     a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me; and
     honor not his father or his mother, _he shall be free_. Thus
     have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your
     tradition. And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his
     father or his mother; making the word of God of none effect
     through your tradition, which ye have delivered: and many such
     like things do ye.

     _Ye_ hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This
     people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoreth me
     with _their_ lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain
     do they worship me, teaching _for_ doctrines the commandments
     of men. For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the
     tradition of men, _as_ the washing of pots and cups: and many
     other such things ye do.

And when he had called all the people _unto him_, he said unto them,

     Hearken unto me every one _of you_, and understand: there is
     nothing from without a man, that entering into him can defile
     him: but the things which come out of him, those are they that
     defile the man. If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.

And when he was entered into the house from the people, then came his
disciples, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Pharisees were
offended, after they heard this saying? But he answered and said,

     Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall
     be rooted up. Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the
     blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into
     the ditch.

Then answered Peter, and said unto him, Declare unto us this parable.
And Jesus said,

     Are ye also yet without understanding? Do not ye yet
     understand, that whatsoever thing from without entereth into
     the man, _it_ cannot defile him; because it entereth not into
     his heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught,
     purging all meats? But those things which proceed out of the
     mouth come forth from the heart; and they defile the man. For
     from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
     adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness,
     wickedness, false witness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil
     eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness: all these evil things come
     from within, and defile the man: but to eat with unwashen
     hands defileth not a man.




CHAPTER XXIX.

SYROPHENICIAN WOMAN--BLIND MEN--FEEDS FOUR THOUSAND.


Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon.
And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried
unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord _thou_ Son of David: my
daughter is grievously vexed with a devil. But he answered her not a
word. And his disciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away,
for she crieth after us. But he answered and said,

     I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

And (he) entered into an house, and would have no man know _it_: but he
could not be hid. For a _certain_ woman, whose young daughter had an
unclean spirit, heard of him, and came and fell at his feet, and
worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me. The woman was a Greek, a
Syrophenician by nation: and she besought him that he would cast forth
the devil out of her daughter. But Jesus said unto her,

     Let the children first be filled; for it is not meet to take
     the children's bread, and to cast _it_ unto the dogs.

And she answered and said unto him, Truth, Lord: yet the dogs under the
table, eat of the children's crumbs which fall from their masters'
table. Then Jesus answered and said unto her,

     O woman, great _is_ thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou
     wilt.

And he said unto her,

     For this saying go thy way; the devil is gone out of thy
     daughter.

And her daughter was made whole from that very hour. And when she was
come to her house, she found the devil gone out, and her daughter laid
upon the bed.

And again Jesus departed from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, and came
nigh unto the sea of Galilee: through the midst of the coasts of
Decapolis. And they bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an
impediment in his speech; and they beseech him to put his hand upon him.
And he took him aside from the multitude, and put his fingers into his
ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue; and looking up to heaven, he
sighed, and saith unto him,

     Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.

And straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was
loosed, and he spake plain. And he charged them that they should tell no
man: but the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal they
published _it_; and were beyond measure astonished, saying, He hath
done all things well: he maketh both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to
speak.

And (Jesus) went up into a mountain, and sat down there. And great
multitudes came unto him, having with them _those that were_ lame,
blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus' feet;
and he healed them; insomuch that the multitude wondered, when they saw
the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the
blind to see: and they glorified the God of Israel.

In those days the multitude being very great, and having nothing to eat,
Jesus called his disciples _unto him_, and saith unto them,

     I have compassion on the multitude, because they have now been
     with me three days, and have nothing to eat: and if I send
     them away fasting to their own houses, they will faint by the
     way.

For divers of them came from far. And his disciples say unto him, Whence
should we have so much bread in the wilderness, as to fill so great a
multitude? And Jesus saith unto them,

     How many loaves have ye?

And they said, Seven, and a few little fishes. And he commanded the
multitude to sit down on the ground. And he took the seven loaves and
the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake _them_, and gave to his
disciples, to set before _them_; and they did set _them_ before the
people. And they had a few small fishes; and he blessed, and commanded
to set them also before _them_. And they did all eat, and were filled:
and they took up of the broken _meat_ that was left seven baskets full.
And they that did eat were four thousand men, beside women and children.




CHAPTER XXX.

PHARISEES ASK A SIGN--REASONS FOR FAITH--BLIND MEN.


And he sent away the multitude. And straightway he entered into a ship
with his disciples, and came into the parts of Dalmanutha. The Pharisees
also with the Sadducees came forth, and began to question with him, and
tempting desired him that he would shew them a sign from heaven. He
answered and said unto them,

     When it is evening, ye say, _It will be_ fair weather: for the
     sky is red. And in the morning, _It will be_ foul weather to
     day: for the sky is red and lowering. O _ye_ hypocrites, ye
     can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not _discern_ the
     signs of the times? A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh
     after a sign; and there shall no sign be given unto it, but
     the sign of the prophet Jonas.

And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and saith,

     Why doth this generation seek after a sign? verily I say unto
     you, There shall no sign be given unto this generation.

And he left them, and entering into the ship again departed to the other
side. And when his disciples were come to the other side, they had
forgotten to take bread, neither had they in the ship with them more
than one loaf. Then Jesus charged them, saying,

     Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the
     Sadducees, and _of_ the leaven of Herod.

And they reasoned among themselves, saying, _It is_ because we have
taken no bread. _Which_ when Jesus perceived, he said unto them,

     O ye of little faith, Why reason ye among yourselves, because
     ye have brought no bread? Do ye not yet understand? Perceive
     ye not yet, neither understand? Have ye your heart yet
     hardened? Having eyes, see ye not? and having ears, hear ye
     not? and do ye not remember the five loaves of the five
     thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? Neither the seven
     loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
     When I brake the five loaves among five thousand, how many
     baskets full of fragments took ye up?

They say unto him, Twelve.

     And when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets full
     of fragments took ye up?

And they said, Seven. And he said unto them,

     How is it that ye do not understand that I spake _it_ not to
     you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of
     the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.

Then understood they how that he bade _them_ not beware of the leaven
of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.

And he cometh to Bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him, and
besought him to touch him. And he took the blind man by the hand, and
led him out of the town; and when he had spit on his eyes, and put his
hands upon him, he asked him if he saw aught. And he looked up, and
said, I see men as trees, walking. After that he put _his_ hands again
upon his eyes, and made him look up: and he was restored, and saw every
man clearly. And he sent him away to his house, saying,

     Neither go into the town, nor tell _it_ to any in the town.




CHAPTER XXXI.

JESUS FORETELLS HIS DEATH AND RESURRECTION.


And Jesus went out, and his disciples, into the towns of Cesarea
Philippi: and it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples
were with him: and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them,

     Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?

And they said, Some _say that thou art_ John the Baptist: some, Elias;
and others, Jeremias, or, that one of the old prophets is risen again.
He said unto them,

     But whom say ye that I am?

And Simon Peter answered and said unto him, Thou art the Christ, the Son
of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him,

     Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not
     revealed _it_ unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And
     I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock,
     I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not
     prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the
     kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth
     shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on
     earth shall be loosed in heaven.

Then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that he was
Jesus the Christ.

From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how that
he, the Son of man, must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things and
be rejected of the elders, and _of_ the chief priests, and scribes and
be killed, and after three days rise again. And he spake that saying
openly.

Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from
thee, Lord: this shall not be unto thee. But when he had turned about
and looked on his disciples, he rebuked Peter saying,

     Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offence unto me: for
     thou savorest not the things that be of God, but those that be
     of men.

And when he had called the people _unto him_ with his disciples also, he
said to them all,

     Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take
     up his cross, daily, and follow me. For whosoever will save
     his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for
     my sake and the gospel's, the same shall save it. For what
     shall it profit a man, what is a man advantaged, if he shall
     gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or be cast away?
     or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? For the
     Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his
     angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his
     works. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my
     words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also
     shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own
     glory, and _in his_ Father's, and of the holy angels.

And he said unto them,

     Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand
     here, which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the
     kingdom of God come with power.

[Illustration: Mount Tabor.]




CHAPTER XXXII.

TRANSFIGURATION--CURES A DEMONIAC.


And after six days Jesus taketh _with him_ Peter, and James, and John
his brother, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by
themselves, to pray. And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance
was altered, and he was transfigured before them: and his face did shine
as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light, _and_ glistering,
exceeding white as snow; so as no fuller on earth can white them.

And, behold, there appeared unto them two men, which were Moses and
Elias: who appeared in glory, and they were talking with Jesus, and
spake of his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem.

But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep: and when
they were awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood with
him. And it came to pass, as they departed from him, Peter said unto
Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here. If thou wilt, let us make
here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for
Elias. For he wist not what to say; for they were sore afraid.

While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and they
feared as they entered into the cloud. And there came a voice out of the
cloud, which said, This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased:
hear ye him. And when the disciples heard _it_, they fell on their
face, and were sore afraid. And when the voice was past, Jesus came and
touched them and said,

     Arise, and be not afraid.

And suddenly, when they had looked round about, they saw no man any
more, save Jesus only with themselves. And they kept _it_ close, and
told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen.

And it came to pass, that on the next day, as they came down from the
mountain, Jesus charged them, that they should tell no man what things
they had seen, till the son of man were risen from the dead. And they
kept that saying with themselves, questioning one with another what the
rising from the dead should mean. And his disciples asked him, saying,
why then say the scribes that Elias must first come? And Jesus answered
and said unto them,

     Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things; and how
     it is written of the Son of man, that he must suffer many
     things, and be set at nought. But I say unto you, That Elias
     is come already, and they knew him not, but have done unto him
     whatsoever they listed, as it is written of him. Likewise
     shall also the Son of man suffer of them.

Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the
Baptist. When they were come down from the hill, much people met him.
And when he came to _his_ disciples, he saw a great multitude about
them, and the scribes questioning with them. And straightway all the
people, when they beheld him, were greatly amazed, and running to _him_
saluted him. And he asked the scribes,

     What question ye with them?

And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a _certain_
man, kneeling down to him, and saying, Master, I have brought unto thee
my son: which hath a dumb spirit; I beseech thee, look upon my son: for
he is mine only child. Lord, have mercy on my son; for he is lunatic,
and sore vexed: for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, and oft into the
water. And, lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly crieth out; and
wheresoever he taketh him, he teareth him: and he foameth, and gnasheth
with his teeth, and pineth away: and bruising him hardly departeth from
him. And I brought him to thy disciples, that they should cast him out;
and they could not cure him. Then Jesus answered and said,

     O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with
     you? how long shall I suffer you? Bring thy son hither.

And they brought him unto him: and when he saw him, straightway the
spirit tare him; and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming. And he
asked his father,

     How long is it ago since this came unto him?

And he said, Of a child. And ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire,
and into the waters, to destroy him: but if thou canst do anything, have
compassion on us, and help us. Jesus said unto him,

     If thou canst believe, all things _are_ possible to him that
     believeth.

And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears,
Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief. When Jesus saw that the people
came running together, he rebuked the foul spirit, saying unto him,

     _Thou_ dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, come out of him,
     and enter no more into him.

And _the spirit_ cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him: and he
was as one dead; insomuch that many said, He is dead. But Jesus took him
by the hand, and lifted him up; and he arose. And the child was cured
from that very hour. And (Jesus) delivered him again to his father. And
when he was come into the house, then came the disciples to Jesus apart,
and asked him privately, Why could not we cast him out? And Jesus said
unto them,

     Because of your unbelief: for verily I say unto you, If ye
     have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this
     mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove;
     and nothing shall be impossible unto you. Howbeit this kind
     can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

DEATH FORETOLD AGAIN--PAYS TRIBUTE--CAUTION AGAINST GIVING OFFENCE.


After these things Jesus departed thence, and passed through Galilee;
for he would not walk in Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill him. And
he would not that any man should know _it_. And they were all amazed at
the mighty power of God. But while they wondered every one at all things
which Jesus did, he said unto his disciples,

     Let these sayings sink down into your ears: for the Son of man
     shall be betrayed into the hands of men: and they shall kill
     him; and after that he is killed, he shall rise the third
     day.

But they understood not that saying, and it was hid from them, that they
perceived it not: and they feared to ask him of that saying. And they
were exceeding sorry.

Then there arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be
greatest. And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received
tribute _money_ came to Peter, and said, Doth not your master pay
tribute? He saith, Yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus
prevented him, saying,

     What thinkest thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth
     take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of
     strangers?

Peter saith unto him, Of strangers. Jesus saith unto him,

     Then are the children free. Notwithstanding, lest we should
     offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take up
     the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his
     mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money; that take, and give
     unto them for me and thee.

And being in the house he asked them,

     What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way?

But they held their peace: for by the way they had disputed among
themselves, who _should be_ the greatest. And Jesus perceiving the
thought of their heart, sat down, and called the twelve, and saith unto
them,

     If any man desire to be first, _the same_ shall be last of
     all, and servant of all.

And he took a child, and set him in the midst of them: and when he had
taken him in his arms, he said unto them,

     Whosoever shall receive one of such children in my name,
     receiveth me: and whosoever shall receive me, receiveth not
     me, but him that sent me, for he that is least among you all,
     the same shall be great.

And John answered and said, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy
name, and he followeth not us: and we forbad him, because he followeth
not with us. And Jesus said unto him,

     Forbid _him_ not: for there is no man which shall do a
     miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me. For he
     that is not against us is on our part. For whosoever shall
     give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye belong
     to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his
     reward. And whosoever shall offend one of _these_ little ones
     that believe in me, it is better for him that a millstone were
     hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the sea.

     And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off; it is better for thee
     to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into
     hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched: where their
     worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.

     And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee
     to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into
     hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched: where their
     worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.

     And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for
     thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than
     having two eyes to be cast into hell fire: where their worm
     dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.

     For every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice
     shall be salted with salt. Salt _is_ good: but if the salt
     have lost his saltness, wherewith will ye season it? Have salt
     in yourselves, and have peace one with another.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

LESSONS OF HUMILITY AND FORGIVENESS


At the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven? And Jesus called a little child unto
him, and set him in the midst of them, and said,

     Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as
     little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
     heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this
     little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
     And whoso shall receive one such little child in my name
     receiveth me. But whoso shall offend one of these little ones
     which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone
     were hanged about his neck, and _that_ he were drowned in the
     depth of the sea.

     Woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be
     that offences come; but woe to that man by whom the offence
     cometh! Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut
     them off, and cast _them_ from thee: it is better for thee to
     enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having two hands
     or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire.

     And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast _it_
     from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life with one
     eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.
     Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I
     say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the
     face of my Father which is in heaven. For the Son of man is
     come to save that which was lost.

     How think ye? if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them
     be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and
     goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is gone
     astray. And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you,
     he rejoiceth more of that _sheep_, than of the ninety and nine
     which went not astray. Even so it is not the will of your
     Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones
     should perish.

     Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and
     tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall
     hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother. But if he will not
     hear _thee, then_ take with thee one or two more, that in the
     mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
     And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell _it_ unto the
     church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto
     thee as an heathen man and a publican.

     Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall
     be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth
     shall be loosed in heaven. Again I say unto you, That if two
     of you shall agree on earth as touching anything that they
     shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in
     heaven. For where two or three are gathered together in my
     name, there am I in the midst of them.

Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin,
against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus saith unto him,

     I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy
     times seven. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a
     certain king, which would take account of his servants. And
     when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which
     owed him ten thousand talents. But for as much as he had not
     to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and
     children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. The
     servant therefore fell down, and worshipped him, saying, Lord,
     have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. Then the lord
     of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and
     forgave him the debt.

     But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellow
     servants, which owed him an hundred pence: and he laid hands
     on him, and took _him_ by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou
     owest. And his fellow servant fell down at his feet, and
     besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay
     thee all. And he would not: but went and cast him into prison,
     till he should pay the debt.

     So when his fellow servants saw what was done, they were very
     sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that was done.
     Then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O
     thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because
     thou desiredst me; shouldest not thou also have had compassion
     on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee?

     And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors,
     till he should pay all that was due unto him. So likewise
     shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your
     hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.




CHAPTER XXXV.

JESUS AT THE FEAST--RETURN OF THE OFFICERS OF THE CHIEF PRIESTS


Now the Jew's feast of tabernacles was at hand. His brethren therefore
said unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judea, that thy disciples also
may see the works that thou doest. For _there is_ no man _that_ doeth
anything in secret, and he himself seeketh to be known openly. If thou
do these things, shew thyself to the world. For neither did his brethren
believe in him. Then Jesus said unto them,

     My time is not yet come: but your time is always ready. The
     world cannot hate you; but me it hateth, because I testify of
     it, that the works thereof are evil. Go ye up unto this feast:
     I go not up yet unto this feast; for my time is not yet full
     come.

When he had said these words unto them, he abode _still_ in Galilee.
But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the feast,
not openly, but as it were in secret.

Then the Jews sought him at the feast, and said, where is he? And there
was much murmuring among the people concerning him: for some said, He is
a good man: others said, Nay; but he deceiveth the people. Howbeit no
man spake openly of him for fear of the Jews.

Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple and
taught. And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters,
having never learned? Jesus answered them, and said,

     My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will
     do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of
     God, or _whether_ I speak of myself. He that speaketh of
     himself seeketh his own glory: but he that seeketh his glory
     that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in
     him. Did not Moses give you the law, and _yet_ none of you
     keepeth the law? Why go ye about to kill me?

The people answered and said, Thou hast a devil: who goeth about to kill
thee? Jesus answered and said unto them,

     I have done one work, and ye all marvel. Moses therefore gave
     unto you circumcision; (not because it is of Moses, but of the
     fathers;) and ye on the sabbath day circumcise a man. If a man
     on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses
     should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have made
     a man every whit whole on the sabbath day? Judge not according
     to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he, whom they seek to
kill? But, lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the
rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ? Howbeit we know this
man whence he is, but when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is.
Then cried Jesus in the temple as he taught, saying,

     Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am: and I am not come of
     myself, but he that sent me is true, whom ye know not. But I
     know him: for I am from him, and he hath sent me.

Then they sought to take him: but no man laid hands on him, because his
hour was not yet come. And many of the people believed on him, and said,
When Christ cometh, will he do more miracles than these which this _man_
hath done? The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things
concerning him; and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to
take him. Then said Jesus unto them,

     Yet a little while am I with you, and _then_ I go unto him
     that sent me. Ye shall seek me, and shall not find _me_: and
     where I am, _thither_ ye cannot come.

Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither will he go, that we shall
not find him? will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles, and
teach the Gentiles? What _manner of_ saying is this that he said, Ye
shall seek me, and shall not find _me_: and where I am, _thither_ ye
cannot come? In the last day that great _day_ of the feast, Jesus stood
and cried, saying,

     If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that
     believeth on me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly
     shall flow rivers of living water.

(But this spake he of the spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive: for the Holy Ghost was not yet _given_; because that Jesus was
not yet glorified.)

Many of the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of a
truth this is the Prophet. Others said, This is the Christ. But some
said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Hath not the Scripture said,
That Christ cometh of the seed of David, and out of the town of
Bethlehem, where David was? So there was a division among the people
because of him. And some of them would have taken him; but no man laid
hands on him.

Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees; and they said
unto them, Why have ye not brought him? The officers answered, Never man
spake like this man. Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also
deceived? Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him?
But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed.

Nicodemus saith unto them, (he that came to Jesus by night, being one of
them,) Doth our law judge _any_ man, before it hear him, and know what
he doeth? They answered and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilee?
Search, and look: for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet. And every man
went unto his own house. Jesus went unto the mount of Olives.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

THE CONVICTED ACCUSERS--JESUS THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD.


And early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all the
people came unto him; and he sat down, and taught them. And the scribes
and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery; and when they
had set her in the midst, they say unto him, Master, this woman was
taken in adultery, in the very act. Now Moses in the law commanded us,
that such should be stoned: but what sayest thou? This they said,
tempting him, that they might have to accuse him. But Jesus stooped
down, and with _his_ finger wrote on the ground, _as though he heard
them not_. So when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself, and
said unto them,

     He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone
     at her.

And again he stooped down and wrote on the ground. And they which heard
_it_, being convicted by _their own_ conscience, went out one by one,
beginning at the eldest, _even_ unto the last: and Jesus was left alone,
and the woman standing in the midst. When Jesus had lifted up himself,
and saw none but the woman, he said unto her,

     Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned
     thee?

She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her,

     Neither do I condemn thee: go and sin no more.

Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying,

     I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not
     walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.

The Pharisees therefore said unto him, Thou bearest record of thyself;
thy record is not true. Jesus answered and said unto them,

     Though I bear record of myself, _yet_ my record is true: for I
     know whence I came, and whither I go; but ye cannot tell
     whence I come, and whither I go. Ye judge after the flesh; I
     judge no man. And yet if I judge, my judgment is true: for I
     am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me. It is also
     written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. I
     am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent
     me, beareth witness of me.

Then said they unto him, Where is thy father? Jesus answered,

     Ye neither know me, nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye
     should have known my Father also.

These words spake Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the temple; and
no man laid hands on him; for his hour was not yet come. Then said Jesus
again unto them,

     I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins:
     whither I go, ye cannot come.

Then said the Jews, Will he kill himself? because he saith, Whither I
go, ye cannot come. And he said unto them,

     Ye are from beneath: I am from above: ye are of this world; I
     am not of this world. I said therefore unto you, that ye
     shall die in your sins: for if ye believe not that I am _he_,
     ye shall die in your sins.

Then they said unto him, Who art thou? And Jesus saith unto them,

     Even _the same_ that I said unto you from the beginning. I
     have many things to say and to judge of you: but he that sent
     me is true; and I speak to the world those things which I have
     heard of him.

They understood not that he spake to them of the Father. Then said Jesus
unto them,

     When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that
     I am _he_, and _that_ I do nothing of myself; but as my Father
     hath taught me, I speak these things. And he that sent me is
     with me: the Father hath not left me alone; for I do always
     those things that please him.

As he spake these words, many believed on him. Then said Jesus to those
Jews which believed on him,

     If ye continue in my word, _then_ are ye my disciples indeed;
     and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
     free.

They answered him, We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to
any man: how sayest thou, Ye shall be made free? Jesus answered them,

     Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin is
     the servant of sin. And the servant abideth not in the house
     for ever: _but_ the Son abideth ever. If the Son therefore
     shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. I know that ye
     are Abraham's seed; but ye seek to kill me, because my word
     hath no place in you. I speak that which I have seen with my
     Father: and ye do that which ye have seen with your father.

They answered and said unto him, Abraham is our father. Jesus said unto
them,

     If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of
     Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you
     the truth, which I have heard of God: this did not Abraham. Ye
     do the deeds of your Father.

Then said they to him, We be not born of fornication; we have one
Father, _even_ God. Jesus said unto them,

     If God were your Father, ye would love me: for I proceeded
     forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent
     me. Why do ye not understand my speech? _even_ because ye
     cannot hear my word. Ye are of _your_ father the devil, and
     the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from
     the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no
     truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own:
     for he is a liar, and the father of it. And because I tell
     _you_ the truth, ye believe me not. Which of you convinceth me
     of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? He
     that is of God heareth God's words: ye therefore hear _them_
     not, because ye are not of God.

Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, Say we not well that thou art
a Samaritan, and hast a devil? Jesus answered,

     I have not a devil; but I honor my Father, and ye do dishonor
     me. And I seek not mine own glory: there is one that seeketh
     and judgeth. Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my
     saying, he shall never see death.

Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham
is dead, and the prophets, and thou sayest, If a man keep my saying, he
shall never taste of death. Art thou greater than our father Abraham,
which is dead? and the prophets are dead: whom makest thou thyself?
Jesus answered,

     If I honor myself, my honor is nothing: it is my Father that
     honoreth me; of whom ye say, that he is your God: Yet ye have
     not known him: but I know him: and if I should say, I know
     him not, I shall be a liar like unto you; but I know him, and
     keep his saying. Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day;
     and he saw _it_, and was glad.

Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast
thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them,

     Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am.

Then took they up stones to cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, and went
out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

A MAN BORN BLIND, HEALED, EXAMINED AND EXCOMMUNICATED.


And as _Jesus_ passed by, he saw a man which was blind from _his_ birth.
And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or
his parents, that he was born blind? Jesus answered,

     Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the
     works of God should be made manifest in him. I must work the
     works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night cometh,
     when no man can work. As long as I am in the world, I am the
     light of the world.

When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the
spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay, and
said to him,

     Go, wash in the pool of Siloam, (which is by interpretation,
     Sent.)

He went his way therefore, and washed, and came seeing.

The neighbors therefore, and they which before had seen him that he was
blind, said, Is not this he that sat and begged? Some said, This is he:
others _said_, He is like him: _but_ he said I am _he_. Therefore said
they unto him, How were thine eyes opened? He answered and said, A man
that is called Jesus made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and said unto
me, go to the pool of Siloam, and wash: and I went and washed, and I
received sight. Then said they unto him, Where is he? He said, I know
not.

They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind. And it was
the sabbath day when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes. Then
again the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. He
said unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see.
Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This man is not of God, because
he keepeth not the sabbath day. Others said, How can a man that is a
sinner do such miracles? And there was a division among them. They say
unto the blind man again, What sayest thou of him, that he hath opened
thine eyes? He said, He is a prophet.

But the Jews did not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and
received his sight, until they called the parents of him that had
received his sight. And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, who
ye say was born blind? how then doth he now see? His parents answered
them and said, We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind:
but by what means he now seeth, we know not; or who hath opened his
eyes, we know not: he is of age; ask him: he shall speak for himself.
These _words_ spake his parents, because they feared the Jews: for the
Jews had agreed already, that if any man did confess, that he was
Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue. Therefore said his
parents, He is of age: ask him.

Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him, Give
God the praise: we know that this man is a sinner. He answered and said,
Whether he be a sinner _or no_, I know not: one thing I know, that,
whereas I was blind, now I see. Then said they to him again, What did he
to thee? how opened he thine eyes? He answered them, I have told you
already, and ye did not hear: wherefore would ye hear _it_ again? will
ye also be his disciples?

Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple; but we are
Moses' disciples. We know that God spake unto Moses: _as_ for this
_fellow_, we know not from whence he is. The man answered and said unto
them, Why herein is a marvellous thing, that ye know not from whence he
is, and _yet_ he hath opened mine eyes. Now we know that God heareth not
sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God, and doeth his will, him
he heareth. Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened
the eyes of one that was born blind. If this man were not of God, he
could do nothing. They answered and said unto him, Thou wast altogether
born in sins, and dost thou teach us? And they cast him out.

Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found him, he
said unto him,

     Dost thou believe on the Son of God?

He answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him? And
Jesus said unto him,

     Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee.

And he said, Lord, I believe, And he worshipped him. And Jesus said,

     For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see
     not, might see; and that they which see, might be made blind.

And _some_ of the Pharisees which were with him heard these words, and
said unto him, Are we blind also? Jesus said unto them,

     If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We
     see; therefore your sin remaineth.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

PARABLE OF THE GOOD SHEPHERD.


     Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the
     door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the
     same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the
     door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth;
     and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by
     name, and leadeth them out.

     And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them,
     and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a
     stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for
     they know not the voice of strangers.

This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things
they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again,

     Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep.
     All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers: but the
     sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by me if any man enter
     in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find
     pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill,
     and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that
     they might have _it_ more abundantly.

     I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for
     the sheep. But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd,
     whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and
     leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf catches them, and
     scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is an
     hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good
     shepherd, and know my _sheep_, and am known of mine. As the
     Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down
     my life for the sheep.

     And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also
     I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be
     one fold, _and_ one shepherd. Therefore doth my Father love
     me, because I lay down my life, that I may take it again. No
     man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself, I have
     power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This
     commandment have I received of my Father.

There was a division therefore again among the Jews for these sayings.
And many of them said, He hath a devil, and is mad; why hear ye him?
Others said, these are not the words of him that hath a devil. Can a
devil open the eyes of the blind?

And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was winter.
And Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon's porch. Then came the Jews
round about him, and said unto him, How long dost thou make us to
doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly. Jesus answered them,

     I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in my
     Father's name, they bear witness of me. But ye believe not,
     because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you. My sheep
     hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: And I give
     unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither
     shall any _man_ pluck them out of my hand. My Father, which
     gave _them_ me, is greater than all; and no _man_ is able to
     pluck _them_ out of my Father's hand. I and _my_ Father are
     one.

Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him. Jesus answered them,

     Many good works have I shewed you from my Father; for which of
     those works do ye stone me?

The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone thee not; but
for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God.
Jesus answered them,

     Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods? If he
     called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the
     Scripture cannot be broken; Say ye of him, whom the Father
     hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest;
     because I said I am the Son of God? If I do not the works of
     my Father, believe me not. But if I do, though ye believe not
     me, believe the works: that ye may know, and believe, that the
     Father _is_ in me, and I in him.

Therefore they sought again to take him: but he escaped out of their
hand, and went away again beyond Jordan into the place were John at
first baptized; and there he abode. And many resorted unto him, and
said, John did no miracle: but all things that John spake of this man
were true. And many believed on him there.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

JESUS RAISES LAZARUS--JEWS SEEK HIS LIFE.


Now a certain _man_ was sick, _named_ Lazarus, of Bethany, the town of
Mary and her sister Martha. (It was _that_ Mary which anointed the Lord
with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus
was sick.) Therefore his sisters sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he
whom thou lovest is sick. When Jesus heard _that_, he said,

     This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God,
     that the Son of God might be glorified thereby.

Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. When he had heard
therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same place
where he was. Then after that saith he to _his_ disciples,

     Let us go into Judea again.

_His_ disciples say unto him, Master, the Jews of late sought to stone
thee; and goest thou thither again? Jesus answered,

     Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the
     day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this
     world. But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because
     there is no light in him.

These things said he: and after that he saith unto them,

     Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go, that I may awake him
     out of sleep.

Then said his disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well. Howbeit
Jesus spake of his death; but they thought that he had spoken of taking
of rest in sleep. Then said Jesus unto them plainly,

     Lazarus is dead. And I am glad for your sakes that I was not
     there, to the intent ye may believe; nevertheless let us go
     unto him.

Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his fellow disciples,
Let us also go, that we may die with him. Then when Jesus came, he found
that he had _lain_ in the grave four days already. Now Bethany was nigh
unto Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off: and many of the Jews came to
Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning their brother. Then Martha,
as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him; but Mary
sat _still_ in the house. Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord if thou
hadst been here, my brother had not died. But I know, that even now,
whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give _it_ thee. Jesus saith
unto her,

     Thy brother shall rise again.

Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the
resurrection at the last day. Jesus saith unto her,

     I am the resurrection, and the life; he that believeth in me,
     though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth
     and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this?

She saith unto him, Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the
son of God, which should come into the world. And when she had so said,
she went her way, and called Mary her sister, secretly, saying, The
Master is come, and calleth for thee. As soon as she heard _that_, she
arose quickly, and came unto him.

Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place where
Martha met him. The Jews then which were with her in the house, and
comforted her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up hastily and went
out, followed her, saying, She goeth unto the grave to weep there. Then
when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his
feet, saying unto him, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not
died. When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping
which came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled, and
said,

     Where have ye laid him?

They said unto him, Lord, come and see. Jesus wept. Then said the Jews,
Behold, how he loved him! And some of them said, Could not this man,
which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man
should not have died? Jesus therefore again groaning in himself, cometh
to the grave. It was a cave, and a stone lay upon it. Jesus said,

     Take ye away the stone.

Martha, the sister of him that was dead, saith unto him, Lord, by this
time he stinketh: for he hath been _dead_ four days. Jesus saith unto
her,

     Said I not unto thee, that if thou wouldest believe, thou
     shouldest see the glory of God?

Then they took away the stone _from the place_ where the dead was laid:
And Jesus lifted up _his_ eyes, and said,

     Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me. And I knew that
     thou hearest me always: but because of the people which stand
     by I said _it_, that they may believe that thou hast sent me.

And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice,

     Lazarus, come forth.

And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with grave-clothes:
and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them,

     Loose him, and let him go.

Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which
Jesus did, believed on him. But some of them went their ways to the
Pharisees, and told them what things Jesus had done. Then gathered the
chief priests and the Pharisees a council, and said, What do we? for
this man doeth many miracles. If we let him thus alone, all _men_ will
believe on him: and the Romans shall come and take away both our place
and nation.

And one of them, _named_ Caiaphas, being the high priest that same year,
said unto them, Ye know nothing at all, nor consider that it is
expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the
whole nation perish not. And this spake he not of himself: but being
high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that
nation; and not for that nation only, but that also he should gather
together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad. Then
from that day forth they took counsel together for to put him to death.

Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews; but went thence
unto a country near to the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim, and
there continued with his disciples.

And it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be received
up, he steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, and sent messengers
before his face: and they went, and entered into a village of the
Samaritans, to make ready for him. And they did not receive him, because
his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem. And when his disciples
James and John saw _this_, they said, Lord, wilt thou that we command
fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did? But
he turned, and rebuked them, and said,

     Ye know not what manner of spirits ye are of. For the Son of
     man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save _them_.

And they went to another village. And it came to pass, that, as they
went in the way, a certain _man_ said unto him, Lord I will follow thee
withersoever thou goest. And Jesus said unto him,

     Foxes have holes, and birds of the air _have_ nests; but the
     Son of man hath not where to lay _his_ head.

And he said unto another,

     Follow me.

But he said, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father. Jesus said
unto him,

     Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou and preach the
     kingdom of God.

And another also said, Lord, I will follow thee; but let me first go bid
them farewell, which are at home at my house. And Jesus said unto him,

     No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back,
     is fit for the kingdom of God.




CHAPTER XL.

SEVENTY DISCIPLES SENT OUT.


After these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them
two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he
himself would come. Therefore said he unto them,

     The harvest truly _is_ great, but the laborers _are_ few: pray
     ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth
     laborers into his harvest. Go your ways: behold, I send you
     forth as lambs among wolves. Carry neither purse nor scrip,
     nor shoes: and salute no man by the way.

     And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace _be_ to
     this house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall
     rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again. And in the
     same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they
     give: for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house
     to house. And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive
     you, eat such things as are set before you: and heal the sick
     that are therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is
     come nigh unto you.

     But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not,
     go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, Even
     the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe
     off against you: notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the
     kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But I say unto you,
     that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than
     for that city.

     Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the
     mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been
     done in you, they had a great while ago repented, sitting in
     sackcloth and ashes. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre
     and Sidon at the judgment, than for you. And thou, Capernaum,
     which art exalted to heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell. He
     that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you
     despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent
     me.

And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils
are subject unto us through thy name. And he said unto them,

     I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give
     unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over
     all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by any means
     hurt you. Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the
     spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your
     names are written in heaven.

In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said,

     I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou
     hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast
     revealed them unto babes: even so, Father: for so it seemed
     good in thy sight. All things are delivered to me of my
     Father: and no man knoweth who the Son is, but the Father; and
     who the Father is, but the Son, and _he_ to whom the Son will
     reveal _him_.

And he turned him unto _his_ disciples, and said privately,

     Blessed _are_ the eyes which see the things that ye see: for I
     tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see
     those things which ye see, and have not seen _them_; and to
     hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard _them_.

And behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying, Master,
what shall I do to inherit eternal life? He said unto him,

     What is written in the law? how readest thou?

And he answering, said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all
thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself. And he said unto him,

     Thou hast answered right: this do, and thou shalt live.

But he, willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my
neighbor? And Jesus answering, said,

     A certain _man_ went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell
     among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded
     _him_, and departed, leaving _him_ half dead. And by chance
     there came down a certain priest that way: and when he saw
     him, he passed by on the other side. And likewise a Levite,
     when he was at the place, came and looked _on him_, and passed
     by on the other side.

     But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was:
     and when he saw him, he had compassion _on him_, and went to
     _him_, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and
     set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took
     care of him. And on the morrow when he departed, he took out
     two pence, and gave _them_ to the host, and said unto him,
     Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I
     come again, I will repay thee. Which now of these three,
     thinkest thou, was neighbor unto him that fell among thieves?

And he said, He that shewed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him,

     Go, and do thou likewise.




CHAPTER XLI.

MARTHA'S ENTERTAINMENT--FORM OF PRAYER--DUMB DEVIL.


Now it came to pass, as they went, that he entered into a certain
village: and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house.
And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus' feet, and
heard his word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to
him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to
serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me. And Jesus answered and
said unto her,

     Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many
     things: but one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that
     good part, which shall not be taken away from her.

And it came to pass, that, as he was praying in a certain place, when he
ceased, one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as
John also taught his disciples. And he said unto them,

     When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be
     thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done, as in heaven,
     so in earth. Give us day by day our daily bread. And forgive
     us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to
     us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil.

And he said unto them,

     Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at
     midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves; for
     a friend of mine in his journey is come to me, and I have
     nothing to set before him? And he from within shall answer and
     say, Trouble me not: the door is now shut, and my children are
     with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee. I say unto you,
     Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his
     friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give
     him as many as he needeth.

     And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and
     ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For
     every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth;
     and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. If a son shall
     ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a
     stone? or if _he ask_ a fish, will he for a fish give him a
     serpent? Or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a
     scorpion? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts
     unto your children; how much more shall _your_ heavenly Father
     give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?

And he was casting out a devil, and it was dumb. And it came to pass,
when the devil was gone out, the dumb spake; and the people wondered.
But some of them said, He casteth out devils through Beelzebub the chief
of the devils. And others, tempting _him_, sought of him a sign from
heaven. But he, knowing their thoughts, said unto them,

     Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation;
     and a house _divided_ against a house falleth. If Satan also
     be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand?
     because ye say that I cast out devils through Beelzebub. And
     if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast
     _them_ out? Therefore shall they be your judges. But if I with
     the finger of God cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom of God
     is come upon you.

     When a strong man armed keepeth his palace, his goods are in
     peace. But when a stronger than he shall come upon him and
     overcome him, he taketh from him all his armor wherein he
     trusted, and divideth his spoils. He that is not with me is
     against me: and he that gathereth not with me scattereth.

     When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh
     through dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he saith,
     I will return unto my house whence I came out. And when he
     cometh, he findeth _it_ swept and garnished. Then goeth he,
     and taketh _to him_ seven other spirits more wicked than
     himself; and they enter in, and dwell there: and the last
     _state_ of that man is worse than the first.

And it came to pass, as he spake these things, a certain woman of the
company lifted up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed _is_ the womb
that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked. But he said,

     Yea rather, blessed _are_ they that hear the word of God, and
     keep it.




CHAPTER XLII.

EVIL GENERATION SEEK A SIGN--PRACTICAL LESSONS.


And when the people were gathered thick together, he began to say,

     This is an evil generation: they seek a sign; and there shall
     no sign be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet. For
     as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also the Son
     of man be to this generation. The queen of the south shall
     rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation, and
     condemn them; for she came from the utmost parts of the earth
     to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater than
     Solomon _is_ here. The men of Nineveh shall rise up in the
     judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for they
     repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater
     than Jonas _is_ here.

     No man, when he hath lighted a candle, putteth _it_ in a
     secret place, neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick,
     that they which come in may see the light. The light of the
     body is the eye: therefore when thine eye is single, thy whole
     body also is full of light; but when _thine eye_ is evil, thy
     body also _is_ full of darkness. Take heed therefore that the
     light which is in thee be not darkness. If thy whole body
     therefore _be_ full of light, having no part dark, the whole
     shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle
     doth give thee light.

And as he spake, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him: and
he went in, and sat down to meat. And when the Pharisee saw _it_, he
marvelled that he had not first washed before dinner. And the Lord said
unto him,

     Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the
     platter; but your inward part is full of ravening and
     wickedness. _Ye_ fools, did not he that made that which is
     without make that which is within also? But rather give alms
     of such things as ye have; and, behold, all things are clean
     unto you.

     But woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and all
     manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God:
     these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other
     undone.

     Woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye love the uppermost seats in
     the synagogues, and greetings in the markets.

     Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are as
     graves which appear not, and the men that walk over _them_ are
     not aware _of them_.

Then answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him, Master, thus saying
thou reproachest us also. And he said,

     Woe unto you also _ye_ lawyers! for ye lade men with burdens
     grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens
     with one of your fingers.

     Woe unto you! for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and
     your fathers killed them. Truly ye bear witness that ye allow
     the deeds of your fathers: for they indeed killed them, and ye
     build their sepulchres. Therefore also said the Wisdom of God
     I will send them prophets and apostles, and _some_ of them
     they shall slay and persecute: that the blood of all the
     prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may
     be required of this generation; from the blood of Abel unto
     the blood of Zacharias, which perished between the altar and
     the temple: verily I say unto you, It shall be required of
     this generation.

     Woe unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of
     knowledge: ye entered not in yourselves, and them that were
     entering in ye hindered.

And as he said these things unto them, the scribes and the Pharisees
began to urge _him_ vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many
things: Laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something out of his
mouth, that they might accuse him.




CHAPTER XLIII.

DISCOURSES ON VARIOUS TOPICS--MINISTERIAL DILIGENCE.


In the mean time, when there were gathered together an innumerable
multitude of people, insomuch that they trode one upon another, he began
to say unto his disciples first of all,

     Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
     For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed:
     neither hid, that shall not be known. Therefore whatsoever ye
     have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light; and that
     which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed
     upon the housetops.

     And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill
     the body, and after that have no more that they can do. But I
     will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which after
     he hath killed hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto
     you, Fear him. Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings,
     and not one of them is forgotten before God? But even the very
     hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore; ye
     are of more value than many sparrows.

     Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men,
     him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of
     God: but he that denieth me before men shall be denied before
     the angels of God. And whosoever shall speak a word against
     the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him that
     blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven.

     And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and _unto_
     magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing
     ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: for the Holy Ghost
     shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.

And one of the company said unto him, Master, speak to my brother, that
he divide the inheritance with me. And he said unto him,

     Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you?

And he said unto them,

     Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man's life
     consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he
     possesseth.

And he spake a parable unto them, saying,

     The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully:
     and he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do,
     because I have no room where to bestow my fruits.

     And he said, This will I do; I will pull down my barns, and
     build greater; and there will I bestow all my fruits and my
     goods. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods
     laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, _and_ be
     merry.

     But God said unto him, _Thou_ fool, this night thy soul shall
     be required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which
     thou hast provided? So _is_ he that layeth up treasure for
     himself, and is not rich towards God.

And he said unto his disciples,

     Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what
     ye shall eat, neither for the body, what ye shall put on. The
     life is more than meat, and the body _is more_ than raiment.
     Consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap; which
     neither have storehouse nor barn; and God feedeth them: how
     much more are ye better than the fowls? And which of you with
     taking thought can add to his stature one cubit? If ye then be
     not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye thought
     for the rest?

     Consider the lilies how they grow: they toil not, they spin
     not; and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was
     not arrayed like one of these. If then God so clothe the
     grass, which is to day in the field, and to morrow is cast
     into the oven; how much more _will he clothe_ you, O ye of
     little faith? And seek not ye what ye shall eat, or what ye
     shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind. For all these
     things do the nations of the world seek after; and your Father
     knoweth that ye have need of these things. But rather seek ye
     the kingdom of God; and all these things shall be added unto
     you.

     Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure
     to give you the kingdom. Sell that ye have, and give alms;
     provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the
     heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither
     moth corrupteth. For where your treasure is, there will your
     heart be also.

     Let your loins be girded about, and _your_ lights burning; and
     ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord, when he
     will return from the wedding; that when he cometh and
     knocketh, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed _are_
     those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall find
     watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself,
     and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and
     serve them.

     And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third
     watch, and find _them_ so, blessed are those servants. And
     this know, that if the goodman of the house had known what
     hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not
     have suffered his house to be broken through. Be ye therefore
     ready also; for the Son of man cometh at an hour when ye think
     not.

Then Peter said unto him, Lord, speakest thou this parable unto us, or
even to all? and the Lord said,

     Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom _his_ lord
     shall make ruler over his household, to give _them their_
     portion of meat in due season? Blessed _is_ that servant, whom
     his lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Of a truth I say
     unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that he hath.

     But and if that servant say in his heart, My lord delayeth his
     coming; and shall begin to beat the men servants and maidens,
     and to eat and drink, and to be drunken; the lord of that
     servant will come in a day when he looketh not for _him_, and
     at an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder,
     and will appoint him his portion with the unbelievers.

     And that servant which knew his lord's will, and prepared not
     _himself_, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten
     with many _stripes_. But he that knew not, and did commit
     things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few _stripes_.
     For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
     required: and to whom men have committed much, of him they
     will ask the more.

     I am come to send fire on the earth; and what will I, if it be
     already kindled? But I have a baptism to be baptized with: and
     how am I straitened till it be accomplished! Suppose ye that I
     am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather
     division: for from henceforth there shall be five in one
     house divided, three against two, and two against three. The
     father shall be divided against the son, and the son against
     the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter
     against the mother; the mother in law against the daughter in
     law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.

And he said also to the people,

     When ye see a cloud rise out of the west, straightway ye say,
     There cometh a shower; and so it is. And when _ye see_ the
     south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it cometh to
     pass. _Ye_ hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and
     of the earth: but how is it that ye do not discern this time?
     Yea, and why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right?

     When thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate, _as
     thou art_ in the way, give diligence that thou mayest be
     delivered from him; lest he hale thee to the judge, and the
     judge deliver thee to the officer, and the officer cast thee
     into prison. I tell thee, thou shalt not depart thence, till
     thou hast paid the very last mite.




CHAPTER XLIV.

TOKENS OF COMING JUDGMENT--EIGHTEEN YEARS INFIRMITY.


There were present at that season some that told him of the Galileans,
whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. And Jesus
answering said unto them,

     Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the
     Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you, Nay:
     but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Or those
     eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them,
     think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in
     Jerusalem? I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall
     all likewise perish.

He spake also this parable:

     A certain _man_ had a fig tree planted in his vineyard; and he
     came and sought fruit thereon, and found none. Then said he
     unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these three years I
     come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it
     down; why cumbereth it the ground? And he answering said unto
     him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about
     it, and dung _it_: and if it bear fruit, _well_: and if not,
     _then_ after that thou shalt cut it down.

And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath. And,
behold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen
years, and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up _herself_.
And when Jesus saw her, he called _her_ to _him_, and said unto her.

     Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity.

And he laid _his_ hands on her: and immediately she was made straight,
and glorified God. And the ruler of the synagogue answered with
indignation, because that Jesus had healed on the sabbath day, and said
unto the people, There are six days in which men ought to work: in them
therefore come and be healed, and not on the sabbath day. The Lord then
answered him, and said,

     _Thou_ hypocrite, doth not each one of you on the sabbath
     loose his ox or _his_ ass from the stall, and lead _him_ away
     to watering? And ought not this woman, being a daughter of
     Abraham, whom Satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen years, be
     loosed from this bond on the sabbath day?

And when he had said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed: and
all the people rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by
him. Then said he,

     Unto what is the kingdom of God like? and whereunto shall I
     resemble it? It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man
     took, and cast into his garden; and it grew, and waxed a
     great tree: and the fowls of the air lodged in the branches of
     it.

And again he said,

     Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God? It is like leaven,
     which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the
     whole was leavened.

And he went through the cities and villages, teaching, and journeying
toward Jerusalem. Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be
saved? And he said unto them,

     Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto
     you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. When once
     the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the
     door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door,
     saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us: and he shall answer and say
     unto you, I know you not whence ye are: Then shall ye begin to
     say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast
     taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I know
     you not whence ye are; depart from me, all _ye_ workers of
     iniquity. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when
     ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
     prophets, in the kingdom of God, and you _yourselves_ thrust
     out.

     And they shall come from the east, and _from_ the west, and
     from the north, and _from_ the south, and shall sit down in
     the kingdom of God. And, behold, there are last which shall be
     first, and there are first which shall be last.

The same day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying unto him, Get
thee out and depart hence, for Herod will kill thee. And he said unto
them,

     Go ye, and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out devils, and I do
     cures to day and to morrow, and the third _day_ I shall be
     perfected. Nevertheless I must walk to day, and to morrow,
     and the _day_ following: for it cannot be that a prophet
     perish out of Jerusalem.

     O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and
     stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have
     gathered thy children together, as a hen _doth gather_ her
     brood under _her_ wings, and ye would not! Behold your house
     is left unto you desolate: and verily I say unto you, Ye shall
     not see me, until _the time_ come when ye shall say, Blessed
     _is_ he that cometh in the name of the Lord.




CHAPTER XLV.

DROPSY CURED--PARABLE OF THE GREAT SUPPER.


And it came to pass, as he went into the house of one of the chief
Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath day, that they watched him. And,
behold, there was a certain man before him which had the dropsy. And
Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees, saying,

     Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?

And they held their peace. And he took _him_, and healed him, and let
him go; and answered them, saying,

     Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pit, and
     will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day?

And they could not answer him again to these things.

And he put forth a parable to those which were bidden, when he marked
how they chose out the chief rooms; saying unto them,

     When thou art bidden of any _man_ to a wedding, sit not down
     in the highest room; lest a more honorable man than thou be
     bidden of him; and he that bade thee and him come and say to
     thee, Give this man place; and thou begin with shame to take
     the lowest room. But when thou art bidden, go and sit down in
     the lowest room; that when he that bade thee cometh, he may
     say unto thee, Friend, go up higher: then shalt thou have
     worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thee.
     For whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that
     humbleth himself shall be exalted.

Then said he also to him that bade him,

     When thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends,
     nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor _thy_ rich
     neighbors; lest they also bid thee again, and a recompense be
     made thee. But when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the
     maimed, the lame, the blind: and thou shalt be blessed; for
     they cannot recompense thee: for thou shalt be recompensed at
     the resurrection of the just.

And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things, he
said unto him, Blessed _is_ he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of
God. Then said he unto him,

     A certain man made a great supper, and bade many: and sent
     his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden,
     Come; for all things are now ready. And they all with one
     _consent_ began to make excuse. The first said unto him, I
     have bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it:
     I pray thee have me excused. And another said, I have bought
     five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them: I pray thee have me
     excused. And another said, I have married a wife, and
     therefore I cannot come.

     So that servant came and shewed his lord these things. Then
     the master of the house being angry said to his servant, Go
     out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring
     in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the
     blind. And the servant said, Lord, it is done as thou hast
     commanded, and yet there is room. And the Lord said unto the
     servant, Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel
     _them_ to come in, that my house may be filled. For I say unto
     you, That none of those men which were bidden shall taste of
     my supper.

And there went great multitudes with him: and he turned, and said unto
them,

     If any _man_ come to me, and hate not his father, and mother,
     and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and
     his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever
     doth not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my
     disciple. For which of you, intending to build a tower,
     sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have
     _sufficient_ to finish _it_? Lest haply, after he hath laid
     the foundation, and is not able to finish _it_, all that
     behold _it_ begin to mock him, saying, This man began to
     build, and was not able to finish.

     Or what king, going to make war against another king, sitteth
     not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten
     thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty
     thousand? Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he
     sendeth an ambassage, and desireth conditions of peace. So
     likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that
     he hath, he cannot be my disciple. Salt _is_ good: but if the
     salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It
     is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dunghill; _but_
     men cast it out. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.




CHAPTER XLVI.

PARABLES OF LOST SHEEP, LOST PIECE OF SILVER AND PRODIGAL SON.


Then drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners for to hear him.
And the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth
sinners, and eateth with them.

And he spake this parable unto them, saying,

     What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of
     them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness,
     and go after that which is lost, until he find it? And when he
     hath found _it_, he layeth _it_ on his shoulders, rejoicing.
     And when he cometh home, he calleth together _his_ friends and
     neighbors, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep
     which was lost. I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in
     heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety
     and nine just persons, which need no repentance.

     Either what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one
     piece, doth not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek
     diligently, till she find _it_? And when she hath found _it_,
     she calleth _her_ friends and _her_ neighbors together,
     saying, Rejoice with me; for I have found the piece which I
     had lost. Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the
     presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth.

And he said,

     A certain man had two sons: and the younger of them said to
     _his_ father, Father, give me the portion of goods that
     falleth _to me_. And he divided unto them _his_ living. And
     not many days after the younger son gathered all together, and
     took his journey into a far country, and there wasted his
     substance with riotous living. And when he had spent all,
     there arose a mighty famine in that land; and he began to be
     in want. And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that
     country; and he sent him into his fields to feed swine. And he
     would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine
     did eat; and no man gave unto him.

     And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants
     of my father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish
     with hunger! I will arise and go to my father, and will say
     unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before
     thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as
     one of thy hired servants.

     And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a
     great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and
     ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. And the son said
     unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy
     sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. But the
     father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and
     put _it_ on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on
     _his_ feet: and bring hither the fatted calf, and kill _it_:
     and let us eat and be merry: for this my son was dead, and is
     alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to be
     merry.

     Now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew
     nigh to the house, he heard music and dancing. And he called
     one of the servants, and asked what these things meant. And he
     said unto him, Thy brother is come; and thy father hath killed
     the fatted calf, because he hath received him safe and sound.
     And he was angry, and would not go in: therefore came his
     father out and entreated him.

     And he answering said to _his_ father, Lo, these many years do
     I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy
     commandment; and yet thou never gavest me a kid that I might
     make merry with my friends: but as soon as this thy son was
     come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast
     killed for him the fatted calf. And he said unto him, Son,
     thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. It was
     meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy
     brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is
     found.




CHAPTER XLVII.

THE UNJUST STEWARD--THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS.


And he said also unto his disciples,

     There was a certain rich man, which had a steward; and the
     same was accused unto him that he had wasted his goods. And he
     called him, and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of
     thee? give an account of thy stewardship; for thou mayest be
     no longer steward.

     Then the steward said within himself, What shall I do? for my
     lord taketh away from me the stewardship: I cannot dig; to beg
     I am ashamed. I am resolved what to do, that, when I am put
     out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.

     So he called every one of his lord's debtors _unto him_, and
     said unto the first, How much owest thou unto my lord? And he
     said, An hundred measures of oil. And he said unto him, Take
     thy bill, and sit down quickly, and write fifty. Then said he
     to another, And how much owest thou? And he said, An hundred
     measures of wheat. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and
     write fourscore.

     And the lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done
     wisely: for the children of this world are in their generation
     wiser than the children of light.

     And I say unto you, Make to yourselves friends of the mammon
     of unrighteousness; that, when ye fail, they may receive you
     into everlasting habitations. He that is faithful in that
     which is least is faithful also in much: and he that is unjust
     in the least, is unjust also in much.

     If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous
     mammon, who will commit to your trust the true _riches_? And
     if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's,
     who shall give you that which is your own?

     No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one,
     and love the other, or else he will hold to the one, and
     despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.

And the Pharisees also, who were covetous, heard all these things: and
they derided him. And he said unto them,

     Ye are they which justify yourselves before men; but God
     knoweth your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed among
     men is abomination in the sight of God.

     The law and the prophets _were_ until John: since that time
     the kingdom of God is preached, and every man presseth into
     it. And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass, than one
     tittle of the law to fail. Whosoever putteth away his wife,
     and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and whosoever
     marrieth her that is put away from _her_ husband committeth
     adultery.

     There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and
     fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day: and there was a
     certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate full
     of sores, and desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell
     from the rich man's table: moreover the dogs came and licked
     his sores. And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was
     carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also
     died and was buried; and in hell he lift up his eyes, being in
     torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his
     bosom. And he cried and said, Father Abraham have mercy on me,
     and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in
     water, and cool my tongue: for I am tormented in this flame.

     But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime
     receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things:
     but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. And besides
     all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: so
     that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither
     can they pass to us, that _would come_ from thence.

     Then he said, I pray thee therefore, father, that thou
     wouldest send him to my father's house: for I have five
     brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they also come
     into this place of torment. Abraham saith unto him, They have
     Moses and the prophets; let them hear them. And he said, Nay,
     father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead, they
     will repent. And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and
     the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose
     from the dead.




CHAPTER XLVIII.

OF GIVING OFFENCE--TEN LEPERS--SECOND COMING OF JESUS.


Then said he unto his disciples,

     It is impossible but that offences will come: but woe _unto
     him_, through whom they come! It were better for him that a
     millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the
     sea, than that he should offend one of these little ones.

     Take heed to yourselves: If thy brother trespass against thee,
     rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him. And if he trespass
     against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day
     turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shalt forgive him.

And the apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith. And the Lord
said,

     If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye might say unto
     this sycamine tree, Be thou plucked up by the root, and be
     thou planted in the sea; and it should obey you. But which of
     you, having a servant plowing or feeding cattle, will say unto
     him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go and sit down
     to meat? And will not rather say unto him, Make ready
     wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, till I
     have eaten and drunken; and afterward thou shalt eat and
     drink? Doth he thank that servant because he did the things
     that were commanded him? I trow not. So likewise ye, when ye
     shall have done all those things which are commanded you,
     say, We are unprofitable servants: we have done that which
     was our duty to do.

And it came to pass, as he went to Jerusalem, that he passed through the
midst of Samaria and Galilee. And as he entered into a certain village,
there met him ten men that were lepers, which stood afar off and they
lifted up _their_ voices, and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us. And
when he saw _them_, he said unto them,

     Go shew yourselves unto the priests.

And it came to pass, that, as they went, they were cleansed. And one of
them, when he saw, that he was healed, turned back, and with a loud
voice glorified God. And fell down on _his_ face at his feet, giving him
thanks: and he was a Samaritan. And Jesus answering said,

     Were there not ten cleansed? but where _are_ the nine? There
     are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this
     stranger.

And he said unto him,

     Arise, go thy way: thy faith hath made thee whole.

And it came to pass, _that_ when Jesus had finished these sayings, he
departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judea, by the farther
side of Jordan: and great multitudes followed him; and he healed them
there; and as he was wont, he taught them again. And when he was
demanded of the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should come, he
answered them and said,

     The kingdom of God cometh not with observation: neither shall
     they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of
     God is within you.

And he said unto the disciples,

     The days will come, when ye shall desire to see one of the
     days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see _it_. And they
     shall say to you, See here; or, see there: go not after
     _them_, nor follow _them_. For as the lightning, that
     lighteneth out of the one _part_ under heaven, shineth unto
     the other _part_ under heaven; so shall also the Son of man be
     in his day. But first must he suffer many things, and be
     rejected of this generation. And as it was in the days of Noe,
     so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man. They did
     eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in
     marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the
     flood came, and destroyed them all.

     Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they
     drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; but
     the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and
     brimstone from heaven, and destroyed _them_ all. Even thus
     shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed. In
     that day, he which shall be upon the housetop, and his stuff
     in the house, let him not come down to take it away; and he
     that is in the field, let him likewise not return back.
     Remember Lot's wife.

     Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it; and
     whosoever shall lose his life shall preserve it. I tell you,
     in that night there shall be two _men_ in one bed; the one
     shall be taken, and the other left. Two _women_ shall be
     grinding together; the one shall be taken, and the other left.
     Two _men_ shall be in the field: the one shall be taken, and
     the other left.

And they answered and said unto him, Where, Lord? And he said unto them,

     Wheresoever the body _is_, thither will the eagles be gathered
     together.




CHAPTER XLIX.

IMPORTUNATE WIDOW--MARRIAGE--CHILDREN BROUGHT TO JESUS.


And he spake a parable unto them _to this end_, that men ought always to
pray, and not to faint; saying,

     There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither
     regarded man: and there was a widow in that city; and she came
     unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine adversary. And he would
     not for a while: but afterward he said within himself, Though
     I fear not God, nor regard man: yet because this widow
     troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual coming
     she weary me.

And the Lord said,

     Hear what the unjust judge saith. And shall not God avenge his
     own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear
     long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily.
     Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith
     on the earth.

And he spake this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that
they were righteous, and despised others:

     Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee,
     and the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus
     with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men
     _are_, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
     publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that
     I possess.

     And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much
     as _his_ eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying,
     God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man went down
     to his house justified _rather_ than the other: for every one
     that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth
     himself shall be exalted.

The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is
it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause? And he
answered and said unto them,

     What did Moses command you?

And they said, Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement, and to put
_her_ away. And Jesus answered and said unto them,

     For the hardness of your heart he wrote you this precept. Have
     ye not read, that from the beginning of the creation God made
     them male and female, and said, For this cause shall a man
     leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and
     they twain shall be one flesh? Wherefore they are no more
     twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together,
     let not man put asunder.

They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of
divorcement, and to put her away? he saith unto them,

     Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to
     put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so. And
     I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except _it
     be_ for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth
     adultery: and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit
     adultery.

And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same _matter_. And
he saith unto them,

     Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another,
     committeth adultery against her. And if a woman shall put away
     her husband and be married to another, she committeth
     adultery.

His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with _his_
wife, it is not good to marry. But he said unto them,

     All _men_ cannot receive this saying, save _they_ to whom it
     is given. For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from
     _their_ mother's womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were
     made eunuchs of men: and there be eunuchs, which have made
     themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that
     is able to receive _it_, let him receive _it_.

Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put
_his_ hands on them and pray: but when _his_ disciples saw _it_, they
rebuked those that brought _them_. But when Jesus saw _it_, he was much
displeased, and said unto them,

     Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them
     not: for of such is the kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you,
     Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little
     child, he shall not enter therein.

And he took them up in his arms, put _his_ hands upon them, and blessed
them, and departed thence.




CHAPTER L.

YOUNG RULER--WARNING TO THE RICH--PARABLE OF LABOURERS.


And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and
kneeled to him and said unto him, Good Master, what good thing shall I
do, that I may have eternal life? And Jesus said unto him,

     Why callest thou me good? _there is_ none good but one, _that
     is_, God: but if thou wilt enter into life, keep the
     commandments.

He saith unto him, Which? Jesus said,

     Thou knowest the commandments. Thou shalt do no murder, Thou
     shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt
     not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honor thy father and
     mother, and, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

The young man saith unto him, Master, all these things have I kept from
my youth up: what lack I yet? Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and
said unto him,

     One thing thou lackest: if thou wilt be perfect, go thy way,
     sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou
     shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross,
     and follow me.

But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful: for he
had great possessions. And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful, he
looked round about, and saith unto his disciples,

     Verily I say unto you, That a rich man shall hardly enter into
     the kingdom of heaven!

And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answereth
again, and saith unto them.

     Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to
     enter into the kingdom of God! It is easier for a camel to go
     through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into
     the kingdom of God.

When his disciples heard _it_, they were exceedingly amazed, and they
were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, Who then can be
saved? And Jesus looking upon them saith,

     With men _it is_ impossible, but not with God: for with God
     all things are possible.

Then answered Peter and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and
followed thee: what shall we have therefore? And Jesus said unto them,

     Verily I say unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the
     regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of
     his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the
     twelve tribes of Israel. And every one that hath forsaken
     houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
     wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake, and the
     gospel's, shall receive an hundredfold, now in this time,
     houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children,
     and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come,
     eternal life. But many _that are_ first shall be last; and the
     last first.

     For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man _that is_ an
     householder, which went out early in the morning to hire
     laborers into his vineyard. And when he had agreed with the
     laborers for a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
     And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing
     idle in the market place, and said unto them, Go ye also into
     the vineyard, and whatsoever is right I will give you. And
     they went their way. Again he went out about the sixth and
     ninth hour, and did likewise.

     And about the eleventh hour he went out and found others
     standing idle, and saith unto them, Why stand ye here all the
     day idle? They say unto him, Because no man hath hired us. He
     saith unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoever
     is right, _that_ shall ye receive.

     So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his
     steward, Call the laborers, and give them _their_ hire,
     beginning from the last unto the first. And when they came
     that _were hired_ about the eleventh hour, they received every
     man a penny. But when the first came, they supposed that they
     should have received more; and they likewise received every
     man a penny.

     And when they had received _it_, they murmured against the
     goodman of the house, saying, These last have wrought _but_
     one hour, and thou hast made them equal unto us, which have
     borne the burden and heat of the day. But he answered one of
     them, and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong: didst not thou
     agree with me for a penny? Take _that_ thine _is_, and go thy
     way: I will give unto this last, even as unto thee. Is it not
     lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye
     evil, because I am good? So the last shall be first, and the
     first last; for many be called, but few chosen.




CHAPTER LI.

ZEBEDEE'S CHILDREN--HEALS TWO BLIND MEN NEAR JERICHO.


And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went before
them: and they were amazed; and as they followed, they were afraid. And
he took again the twelve disciples apart in the way, and began to tell
them what things should happen unto him, _saying_,

     Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and all things that are written
     by the prophets concerning the Son of man shall be
     accomplished. And the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the
     chief priests and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn him
     to death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles: and they
     shall mock him, and shall scourge him, and shall spit upon
     him, and shall kill him: and the third day he shall rise
     again.

And they understood none of these things: and this saying was hid from
them, neither knew they the things which were spoken.

Then came to him the mother of Zebedee's children with her sons, James
and John, worshipping _him_, and desiring a certain thing of him,
saying, Master, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we
shall desire. And he said unto them,

     What would ye that I should do for you?

They said unto him, Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy right
hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory. And Jesus answered
and said,

     Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that
     I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I
     am baptized with?

They say unto him, We are able. And Jesus said unto them,

     Ye shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of; and with the
     baptism that I am baptized withal shall ye be baptized: but to
     sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give;
     but _it shall be given to them_ for whom it is prepared of my
     Father.

And when the ten heard _it_, they were moved with indignation against
the two brethren, James and John. But Jesus called them _to him_, and
saith unto them,

     Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the
     Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and their great ones
     exercise authority upon them. But so shall it not be among
     you: but whosoever shall be great among you shall be your
     minister: and whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be
     servant of all. For even the Son of man came not to be
     ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a
     ransom for many.

And it came to pass, that as he was come nigh unto Jericho, a certain
blind man sat by the way side begging: and hearing the multitude pass
by, he asked what it meant. And they told him, that Jesus of Nazareth
passeth by. And he cried, saying, Jesus, _thou_ Son of David, have mercy
on me. And they which went before rebuked him, that he should hold his
peace: but he cried so much the more, _Thou_ Son of David, have mercy on
me. And Jesus stood, and commanded him to be brought unto him: and when
he was come near, he asked him, saying,

     What wilt thou that I shall do unto thee?

And he said, Lord, that I may receive my sight. And Jesus said unto him,

     Receive thy sight: thy faith hath saved thee?

And immediately he received his sight, and followed him, glorifying God:
and all the people, when they saw _it_, gave praise unto God.

And _Jesus_ entered and passed through Jericho: and as he went out of
Jericho with his disciples and a great number of people, blind
Bartimeus, the son of Timeus, sat by the highway side begging. And when
he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out, and say,
Jesus, _thou_ son of David, have mercy on me. And many charged him that
he should hold his peace: but he cried the more a great deal, _Thou_ Son
of David, have mercy on me. And Jesus stood still, and commanded him to
be called. And they call the blind man, saying unto him, Be of good
comfort, rise; he calleth thee, And he, casting away his garment, rose,
and came to Jesus. And Jesus answered and said unto him,

     What wilt thou that I should do unto thee?

The blind man said unto him, Lord, that I might receive my sight. And
Jesus said unto him,

     Go thy way; thy faith hath made thee whole.

And immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way.




CHAPTER LII.

NOBLEMAN & SERVANTS--MARY ANOINTS JESUS.


And, behold, _there was_ a man named Zaccheus, which was the chief among
the publicans, and he was rich. And he sought to see Jesus who he was;
and could not for the press, because he was little of stature. And he
ran before, and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see him: for he was
to pass that _way_. And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and
saw him, and said unto him,

     Zaccheus, make haste, and come down: for to day I must abide
     at thy house.

And he made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully. And when
they saw _it_, they all murmured, saying, That he was gone to be guest
with a man that is a sinner.

And Zaccheus stood and said unto the Lord; Behold, Lord, the half of my
goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken anything from any man by
false accusation, I restore _him_ fourfold. And Jesus said, unto him,

     This day is salvation come to this house, forasmuch as he also
     is a son of Abraham. For the Son of man is come to seek and to
     save that which was lost.

And as they heard these things, he added and spake a parable, because he
was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God
should immediately appear. He said therefore,

     A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for
     himself a kingdom, and to return. And he called his ten
     servants, and delivered them ten pounds, and said unto them,
     Occupy till I come. But his citizens hated him, and sent a
     message after him, saying, We will not have this _man_ to
     reign over us.

     And it came to pass, that when he was returned, having
     received the kingdom, then he commanded these servants to be
     called unto him, to whom he had given the money, that he might
     know how much every man had gained by trading. Then came the
     first saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained ten pounds. And he
     said unto him, Well, thou good servant: because thou hast been
     faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten
     cities. And the second came, saying, Lord, thy pound hath
     gained five pounds. And he said likewise to him, Be thou also
     over five cities.

     And another came, saying, Lord, behold, _here is_ thy pound,
     which I have kept laid up in a napkin; for I feared thee,
     because thou art an austere man: thou takest up that thou
     layedst not down, and reapest that thou didst not sow. And he
     saith unto him, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee,
     _thou_ wicked servant. Thou knewest that I was an austere man,
     taking up that I laid not down, and reaping that I did not
     sow: Wherefore then gavest not thou my money into the bank,
     that at my coming I might have required mine own with usury?

     And he said unto them that stood by, Take from him the pound,
     and give _it_ to him that hath ten pounds. (And they said unto
     him, Lord, he hath ten pounds.) For I say unto you, That unto
     every one which hath shall be given; and from him that hath
     not, even that he hath shall be taken away from him. But those
     mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them,
     bring hither, and slay them before me.

And when he had thus spoken, he went before, ascending up to Jerusalem.
And the Jews' passover was nigh at hand; and many went out of the
country up to Jerusalem, before the passover, to purify themselves.

Then sought they for Jesus, and spake among themselves, as they stood in
the temple, What think ye, that he will not come to the feast? Now both
the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a commandment, that if any
man knew where he were, he should shew _it_, that they might take him.
Then Jesus six days before the passover came to Bethany, where Lazarus
was which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.

Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper there
they made him a supper; and Martha served; but Lazarus was one of them
that sat at the table with him. Then took Mary an alabaster box of a
pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, and she brake the box, and
poured it on his head, as he sat _at meat_, and anointed the feet of
Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house was filled with
the odour of the ointment.

But when his disciples saw it, then saith one of his disciples, Judas
Iscariot, Simon's _son_, which should betray him, why was not this
ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor? This he
said, not that he cared for the poor; but because he was a thief, and
had the bag, and bare what was put therein.

And there were some that had indignation within themselves, and said,
Why was this waste of the ointment made? For it might have been sold for
more than three hundred pence, and have been given to the poor. And
they murmured against her. When Jesus understood _it_, he said unto
them,

     Why trouble ye the woman? Let her alone: why trouble ye her?
     she hath wrought a good work on me: against the day of my
     burying hath she kept this. For ye have the poor with you
     always, and whensoever ye will ye may do them good: but me ye
     have not always. She hath done what she could: for in that she
     hath poured this ointment on my body, she is come aforehand to
     anoint my body to the burying. Verily I say unto you,
     Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole
     world, _there_ shall also this, that this woman hath done, be
     told for a memorial of her.

Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was there: and they came
not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he
had raised from the dead. But the chief priests consulted that they
might put Lazarus also to death; because that by reason of him many of
the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus.




CHAPTER LIII.

TRIUMPHANT ENTRANCE OF JESUS INTO JERUSALEM.


On the next day much people that were come to the feast, when they heard
that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, took branches of palm trees, and
went forth to meet him, and cried, Hosanna: Blessed _is_ the King of
Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord.

And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come nigh to Bethphage
and Bethany, at the mount called _the mount_ of Olives, then sent Jesus
two disciples, saying unto them,

     Go into the village over against you, and straightway, as soon
     as ye enter into it, ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt
     with her, whereon yet never man sat; loose _them_, and bring
     _them_ unto me. And if any man say unto you, Why do ye this?
     say ye that the Lord hath need of them; and straightway he
     will send them hither.

All this was done, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the
prophet, saying, Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh
unto thee, meek and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass.

And the disciples that were sent went their way, and found even as he
had said unto them, the colt tied by the door without in a place where
two ways met; and they loose him. And as they were loosing the colt, the
owners thereof said unto them, Why loose ye the colt? And they said, The
Lord hath need of him; even as Jesus had commanded: and they let them
go.

And they brought the ass and the colt to Jesus: and they cast their
garments upon the colt, and they set Jesus thereon; as it is written,
Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold, thy King cometh, sitting on an ass's
colt. These things understood not his disciples at the first: but when
Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these things were written
of him, and _that_ they had done these things unto him.

And as he went, a very great multitude spread their garments in the way;
others cut down branches from the trees, and strewed _them_ in the way.

And when he was come nigh, even now at the descent of the mount of
Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise
God with a loud voice for all the mighty works that they had seen;
saying, Blessed _be_ the King that cometh in the name of the Lord: peace
in heaven, and glory in the highest.

The people therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of his
grave, and raised him from the dead, bare record. For this cause the
people also met him, for that they heard that he had done this miracle.

And some of the Pharisees from among the multitude said unto him,
Master, rebuke thy disciples. And he answered and said unto them,

     I tell you that, if these should hold their peace, the stones
     would immediately cry out.

And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying,
Hosanna to the son of David: Blessed _is_ he that cometh in the name of
the Lord: Hosanna in the highest. Blessed _be_ the kingdom of our father
David, that cometh in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest.

And when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it, saying,

     If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
     things _which belong_ unto thy peace! but now they are hid
     from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine
     enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee
     round, and keep thee in on every side. And shall lay thee even
     with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they shall
     not leave in thee one stone upon another; because thou
     knewest not the time of thy visitation.

And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying, Who
is this? And the multitude said, This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth
of Galilee. And Jesus entered into Jerusalem and into the temple.

The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye
prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him.

And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple; and he healed
them. And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things
that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna
to the son of David; they were sore displeased, and said unto him,
Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus saith unto them,

     Yea; have ye never read; Out of the mouth of babes and
     sucklings thou hast perfected praise?

And when he had looked round about upon all things, and now the eventide
was come, he went out.




CHAPTER LIV.

GREEKS WISH TO SEE JESUS--BARREN FIG TREE.


And there were certain Greeks among them that came up to worship at the
feast: the same came therefore to Philip, which was of Bethsaida of
Galilee, and desired him, saying, Sir, we would see Jesus. Philip cometh
and telleth Andrew: and again Andrew and Philip tell Jesus. And Jesus
answered them, saying,

     The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified.
     Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall
     into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it
     bringeth forth much fruit. He that loveth his life shall lose
     it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it
     unto life eternal. If any man serve me, let him follow me; and
     where I am there shall also my servant be: if any man serve
     me, him will _my_ Father honor. Now is my soul troubled; and
     what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour: but for this
     cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name.

Then came there a voice from heaven, _saying_, I have both glorified
_it_, and will glorify _it_ again. The people therefore that stood by,
and heard _it_, said that it thundered: others said, An Angel spake to
him.

Jesus answered and said,

     This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes. Now is
     the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world
     be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will
     draw all _men_ unto me.

This he said, signifying what death he should die. The people answered
him, We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth for ever; and how
sayest thou, The son of man must be lifted up? Who is this son of man?
Then Jesus said unto them,

     Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while ye have
     the light, lest darkness come upon you; for he that walketh in
     darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye have light,
     believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light.

These things spake Jesus, and departed, and did hide himself from them.
And he left them, and went out of the city into Bethany, with the
twelve; and lodged there.

And on the morrow, in the morning, when they were come from Bethany, as
he returned into the city, he hungered. And when he saw a fig tree in
the way, afar off having leaves, he came, if haply he might find any
thing thereon: and when he came to it, he found nothing but leaves; for
the time of figs was not _yet_. And Jesus answered and said unto it,

     No man eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever.

And his disciples heard _it_. And presently the fig tree withered away.
And when the disciples saw _it_, they marvelled, saying, How soon is the
fig tree withered away! Jesus answered and said unto them,

     Verily I say unto you, If ye have faith, and doubt not, ye
     shall not only do this _which is done_ to the fig tree, but
     also if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and
     be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done. And all things,
     whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall
     receive.

And they come to Jerusalem: and Jesus went into the temple of God, and
began to cast out them that sold therein, and them that bought in the
temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the seats of
them that sold doves; and would not suffer that any man should carry
_any_ vessel through the temple. And he taught, saying unto them,

     Is it not written, My house shall be called of all nations the
     house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves.

And the scribes and chief priests heard _it_. And he taught daily in the
temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the chief of the
people sought to destroy him, and could not find what they might do: for
they feared him, because all the people was astonished at his doctrine
(and were very attentive to hear him.) And when even was come, he went
out of the city.

And in the morning, as they passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up
from the roots. And Peter calling to remembrance saith unto him, Master,
behold, the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away. And Jesus
answering saith unto them,

     Have faith in God. For verily I say unto you, That whosoever
     shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou
     cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall
     believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass,
     he shall have whatsoever he saith. Therefore I say unto you,
     What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye
     receive _them_, and ye shall have _them_. And when ye stand
     praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any; that your
     Father also, which is in heaven, may forgive you your
     trespasses. But if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father
     which is in heaven forgive your trespasses.




CHAPTER LV.

PHARISEES QUESTION HIS AUTHORITY--PARABLE OF THE HOUSEHOLDER AND HIS
VINEYARD.


And they come again to Jerusalem: and it came to pass, _that_ on one of
those days, as he taught the people in the temple, and preached the
gospel, the chief priests and the scribes, and the elders of the people
came unto him as he was teaching, and spake unto him, saying, Tell us,
by what authority doest thou these things? or who is he that gave thee
this authority to do these things?

And Jesus answered and said unto them,

     I will also ask of you one question, which if ye tell me, I in
     likewise will tell you by what authority I do these things.
     The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men?
     answer me.

And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven;
he will say, Why then did ye not believe him? But if we shall say, Of
men: all the people will stone us: for all _men_ counted John, that he
was a prophet indeed. And they answered and said unto Jesus, We cannot
tell. And Jesus answering saith unto them,

     Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.

     But what think ye? A _certain_ man had two sons; and he came
     to the first, and said, Son, go work today in my vineyard. He
     answered and said, I will not: but afterward he repented, and
     went. And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he
     answered and said, I _go_, sir: and went not. Whether of them
     twain did the will of _his_ father?

They say unto him, The first. Jesus saith unto them,

     Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and the harlots go
     into the kingdom of God before you. For John came unto you in
     the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the
     publicans and the harlots believed him: and ye, when ye had
     seen _it_, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him.

Hear another parable:

     There was a certain householder, which planted a vineyard, and
     hedged it round about, and digged a wine-press in it, and
     built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a
     far country, for a long time. And at the season when the time
     of the fruit drew near, he sent to the husbandmen a servant,
     that he might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of the
     vineyard. And the husbandmen caught _him_, and beat him, and
     sent him away empty.

     And again he sent unto them another servant; and at him they
     cast stones, and wounded _him_ in the head, and entreated
     _him_ shamefully, and sent _him_ away empty. And again he sent
     a third: and him they killed, and cast _him_ out. And many
     others; beating some, and killing some.

     Having yet therefore one son, his well beloved, then said the
     lord of the vineyard, What shall I do? I will send my beloved
     son: he sent him also last unto them, saying, It may be they
     will reverence _him_, when they see him. But when the
     husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying,
     This is the heir: come, let us kill him, that the inheritance
     may be ours. So they cast him out of the vineyard, and killed
     _him_. When the Lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what
     will he do unto those husbandmen? They say unto him, He will
     miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out _his_
     vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the
     fruits in their season.

And when they heard _it_, they said, God forbid. And he beheld them, and
said unto them,

     Did ye never read in the Scriptures, The stone which the
     builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner:
     this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?
     Therefore I say unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken
     from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits
     thereof. And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be
     broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to
     powder.

And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables, they
perceived that he spake of them. But when they sought the same hour to
lay hands on him, they feared the multitude, because they took him for a
prophet: for they knew that he had spoken the parable against them; and
they left him, and went their way.




CHAPTER LVI.

THE MARRIAGE FEAST--TRIBUTE TO CESAR--JEWISH INFIDELITY.


And Jesus answered and spake unto them again by parables, and said,

     The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made
     a marriage for his son, and sent forth his servants to call
     them that were bidden to the wedding: and they would not come.
     Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which
     are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my
     fatlings _are_ killed, and all things _are_ ready: come unto
     the marriage. But they made light of _it_, and went their
     ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise: and the
     remnant took his servants, and entreated _them_ spitefully,
     and slew _them_.

     But when the king heard _thereof_, he was wroth: and sent
     forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up
     their city. Then saith he to his servants, The wedding is
     ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy. Go ye
     therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid
     to the marriage. So those servants went out into the highways,
     and gathered all as many as they found, both bad and good: and
     the wedding was furnished with guests.

     And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a
     man which had not on a wedding garment; and he saith unto him,
     Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding
     garment? And he was speechless. Then said the king to the
     servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast
     _him_ into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing
     of teeth. For many are called, but few _are_ chosen.

Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle him in
_his_ talk. And they watched _him_, and sent forth spies, certain of the
Pharisees and of the Herodians, which should feign themselves just men,
that they might take hold of his words, that so they might deliver him
unto the power and authority of the governor.

And when they were come, they say unto him, Master, we know that thou
art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for
any _man_: for thou regardest not the person of men, but teachest the
way of God in truth. Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful
to give tribute unto Cesar, or not? Shall we give, or shall we not give?
But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said,

     Why tempt ye me, _ye_ hypocrites? Shew me the tribute money;
     bring me a penny, that I may see _it_.

And they brought unto him a penny. And he saith unto them,

     Whose _is_ this image and superscription?

They say unto him, Cesar's. Then saith he unto them,

     Render therefore unto Cesar the things which are Cesar's; and
     unto God the things that are God's.

And they could not take hold of his words before the people. When they
had heard _these words_, they marvelled at his answer and held their
peace, and left him, and went their way.

The same day came to him certain of the Sadducees, which deny that there
is any resurrection; and they asked him, saying, Master, Moses wrote
unto us, If any man's brother die, and leave _his_ wife _behind_ him,
and leave no children, that his brother shall marry his wife, and raise
up seed unto his brother.

Now there were with us seven brethren: and the first, when he had
married a wife, died, and having no issue, left his wife unto his
brother: and the second took her to wife, and he died childless. And the
third took her; and in like manner the seven also: and they left no
children, and died. Last of all the woman died also. Therefore in the
resurrection, when they shall rise, whose wife shall she be of the
seven? for they all had her to wife. And Jesus answering said unto them,

     Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the Scriptures,
     neither the power of God? The children of this world marry,
     and are given in marriage: but they which shall be accounted
     worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the
     dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage: neither can
     they die any more: for they are equal unto the angels of God
     in heaven; and are the children of God, being the children of
     the resurrection.

     And as touching the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in
     the book of Moses, how in the bush God spake unto him, saying,
     I _am_ the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God
     of Jacob? He is not the God of the dead, but the God of the
     living; for all live unto him. Ye therefore do greatly err.

And when the multitude heard _this_, they were astonished at his
doctrine. Then certain of the scribes answering said, Master, thou hast
well said. And after that they durst not ask him any _question at all_.




CHAPTER LVII.

JESUS ANSWERS SADDUCEES AND PHARISEES--WIDOWS OFFERING.


But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to
silence, they were gathered together. And one of the scribes _which was_
a lawyer, came, and having heard them reasoning together, and perceiving
that he had answered them well, asked _him a question_, tempting him,
and saying, Master, which _is_ the great commandment in the law? Which
is the First commandment of all?

And Jesus answered him,

     The first of all the commandments _is_, Hear, O Israel, The
     Lord our God is one Lord: and thou shalt love the Lord thy God
     with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
     mind, and with all thy strength: this is the first and great
     commandment. And the second _is_ like unto it, Thou shalt love
     thy neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments hang all
     the law and the prophets. There is none other commandment
     greater than these.

And the scribe said unto him, Well Master, thou hast said the truth: for
there is one God; and there is none other but he: and to love him with
all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with all the soul,
and with all the strength, and to love _his_ neighbor as himself, is
more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.

And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him,

     Thou art not far from the kingdom of God.

And no man after that durst ask him _any question_.

While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them, saying,

     What think ye of Christ? whose son is he?

They say unto him, _The Son_ of David. He saith unto them,

     How then doth David in spirit call him Lord?

And Jesus answered and said, while he taught in the temple,

     How say the scribes that Christ is the Son of David? For
     David himself saith by the Holy Ghost, in the book of Psalms,
     The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I
     make thine enemies thy footstool. David therefore himself
     calleth him Lord; and whence is he _then_ his son?

And no man was able to answer him a word: and the common people heard
him gladly: neither durst any _man_ from that day forth ask him any more
_questions_.

Then in the audience of all the people he said unto his disciples, in
his doctrine,

     Beware of the scribes, which love to go in long clothing, and
     _love_ salutations in the market places, and the chief seats
     in the synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at feasts: which
     devour widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayers:
     these shall receive greater damnation.

And Jesus sat over against the treasury. And he looked up, and saw the
people casting their gifts into the treasury. And many that were rich
cast in much. And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two
mites, which make a farthing. And he called _unto him_ his disciples,
and saith unto them,

     Verily I say unto you, That this poor widow hath cast more in,
     than all they which have cast into the treasury: for all
     _they_ did cast in of their abundance, unto the offerings of
     God: but she of her want did cast in all that she had, _even_
     all her living.

But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed
not on him: that the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled,
which he spake, Lord, who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the
arm of the Lord been revealed? Therefore they could not believe, because
that Esaias said again, He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their
heart; that they should not see with _their_ eyes, nor understand with
_their_ heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.

These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him.
Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but
because of the Pharisees they did not confess _him_, lest they should be
put out of the synagogue: for they loved the praise of men more than the
praise of God. Jesus cried and said,

     He that believeth on me, believeth not on me, but on him that
     sent me. And he that seeth me seeth him that sent me. I am
     come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me
     should not abide in darkness. And if any man hear my words,
     and believe not, I judge him not: for I came not to judge the
     world, but to save the world.

     He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one
     that judgeth him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall
     judge him in the last day. For I have not spoken of myself;
     but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I
     should say, and what I should speak. And I know that his
     commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore,
     even as the Father said unto me, so I speak.




CHAPTER LVIII.

WOES AGAINST SCRIBES, PHARISEES AND HYPOCRITES.


Then spake Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples, saying,

     The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat: all
     therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, _that_ observe and
     do; but do not ye after their works: for they say, and do not.
     For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay
     _them_ on men's shoulders; but they _themselves_ will not move
     them with one of their fingers.

     But all their works they do for to be seen of men: they make
     broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the border of their
     garments, and love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the
     chief seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the markets,
     and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi. But be not ye called
     Rabbi: for one is your Master, _even_ Christ; and all ye are
     brethren. And call no _man_ your father upon the earth: for
     one is your Father which is in heaven. Neither be ye called
     masters: for one is your Master, _even_ Christ. But he that is
     greatest among you shall be your servant. And whosoever shall
     exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble
     himself shall be exalted.

     But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye
     shut up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go
     in _yourselves_, neither suffer ye them that are entering to
     go in.

     Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour
     widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayer:
     therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.

     Woe unto you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass
     sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye
     make him two-fold more the child of hell than yourselves.

     Woe unto you, _ye_ blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall
     swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear
     by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor! _Ye_ fools and
     blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that
     sanctifieth the gold?

     And, Whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but
     whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty.
     _Ye_ fools and blind: for whether _is_ greater, the gift, or
     the altar that sanctifieth the gift? Whoso therefore shall
     swear by the altar, sweareth by it, and by all things
     thereon. And whoso shall swear by the temple, sweareth by it,
     and by him that dwelleth therein. And he that shall swear by
     heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by him that sitteth
     thereon.

     Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay
     tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the
     weightier _matters_ of the law, judgment, mercy and faith:
     these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other
     undone. _Ye_ blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow
     a camel.

     Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make
     clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within
     they are full of extortion and excess. _Thou_ blind Pharisee,
     cleanse first that _which is_ within the cup and platter, that
     the outside of them may be clean also.

     Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are
     like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful
     outward, but are within full of dead _men's_ bones, and of all
     uncleanness. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto
     men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

     Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye
     build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of
     the righteous, and say, If we had been in the days of our
     fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the
     blood of the prophets. Wherefore ye be witnesses unto
     yourselves, that ye are the children of them which killed the
     prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. _Ye_
     serpents, _ye_ generation of vipers, how can ye escape the
     damnation of hell.

     Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men,
     and scribes: and _some_ of them ye shall kill and crucify; and
     _some_ of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and
     persecute _them_ from city to city: that upon you may come all
     the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of
     righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias,
     whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I say
     unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation.

     O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, _thou_ that killest the prophets, and
     stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have
     gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her
     chickens under _her_ wings, and ye would not! Behold, your
     house is left unto you desolate. For I say unto you, Ye shall
     not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed _is_ he that
     cometh in the name of the Lord.




CHAPTER LIX.

DESTRUCTION OF THE TEMPLE AND COMING OF THE SON OF MAN FORETOLD.


And Jesus went out, and departed from the temple, and as he went out,
his disciples came to _him_ for to shew him the buildings of the temple.
And as some spake of the temple, how it was adorned with goodly stones
and gifts, one of his disciples saith unto him, Master, see what manner
of stones and what buildings _are here_! And Jesus answering said unto
him,

     Seest thou these great buildings? _As for_ these things which
     ye behold, the days will come, in the which, verily I say unto
     you, There shall not be left here one stone upon another, that
     shall not be thrown down.

And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, over against the temple, Peter
and James and John and Andrew asked him privately, saying, Master, tell
us, when shall these things be? and what _shall be_ the sign of thy
coming, and of the end of the world, when all these things shall be
fulfilled? and Jesus answered and said unto them,

     Take heed that no man deceive you. For many shall come in my
     name, saying, I am Christ; and the time draweth near; and
     shall deceive many; go ye not therefore after them. But when
     ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars, see that ye be not
     troubled: for all _these things_ must first come to pass; but
     the end is not yet.

Then said he unto them,

     Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom;
     and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes,
     in divers places; and fearful sights and great signs shall
     there be from heaven. All these _are_ the beginning of
     sorrows. But take heed to yourselves: before all these, they
     shall lay their hands on you, and persecute _you_; for they
     shall deliver you up to councils: and in the synagogues ye
     shall be beaten: and ye shall be brought before rulers and
     kings for my sake, for a testimony against them. And (they)
     shall kill you; and ye shall be hated of all nations for my
     name's sake. And the gospel must first be published among all
     nations.

     But when they shall lead _you_, and deliver you up, take no
     thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye
     premeditate: but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour,
     that speak ye: for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy
     Ghost. For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your
     adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist.

     And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another,
     and shall hate one another. And ye shall be betrayed both by
     parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends; the
     brother shall betray the brother to death, and the father the
     son; and children shall rise up against _their_ parents, and
     shall cause them to be put to death. And _some_ of you shall
     they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all
     _men_ for my name's sake. But there shall not an hair of your
     head perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.

     And many false prophets shall rise and shall deceive many. And
     because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax
     cold. But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be
     saved. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all
     the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the
     end come.

     When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation,
     spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place,
     (whoso readeth let him understand:) and when ye shall see
     Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that the desolation
     thereof is nigh.

     Then let them which are in Judea flee to the mountains: and
     let them which are in the midst of it depart out; and let not
     them that are in the countries enter thereinto. And let him
     that is on the housetop not go down into the house, neither
     enter _therein_, to take anything out of his house and let him
     that is in the field not turn back again for to take up his
     garment. For these be the days of vengeance, that all things
     which are written may be fulfilled. But woe unto them that are
     with child, and to them that give suck in those days!

     But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on
     the sabbath day: for then shall be great tribulation, such as
     was not since the beginning of the world which God created
     unto this time, neither shall be.

     And except that the Lord had shortened those days, no flesh
     should be saved: but for the elect's sake, whom he hath
     chosen, he hath shortened the days. For there shall be great
     distress in the land, and wrath upon this people. And they
     shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away
     captive into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down
     of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

     And then if any man shall say to you, Lo, here _is_ Christ;
     or, lo, _he is_ there; believe _him_ not: for false Christs
     and false prophets shall rise, and shall shew signs and
     wonders to seduce, if _it were_ possible, even the elect. But
     take ye heed: behold, I have foretold you all things.

     Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the
     desert; go not forth: behold, _he is_ in the secret chambers;
     believe _it_ not. For as the lightning cometh out of the east,
     and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of
     the Son of man be. For wheresoever the carcase is, there will
     the eagles be gathered together.




CHAPTER LX.

FEARFUL SIGNS AFTER THE GREAT TRIBULATION--PARABLE OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


     Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun
     be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the
     stars shall fall from heaven, and upon the earth distress of
     nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring:
     men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after
     those things which are coming on the earth: for the powers of
     heaven shall be shaken.

     And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven:
     and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they
     shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with
     power and great glory. And he shall send his angels with a
     great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his
     elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the
     earth to the uttermost part of heaven. And when these things
     begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads;
     for your redemption draweth nigh.

And he spake to them a parable;

     Now learn a parable of the fig tree; behold the fig tree and
     all the trees: when his branch is yet tender, and putteth
     forth leaves, ye see and know of your own selves that summer
     is now nigh at hand. So likewise ye when ye see these things
     come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand,
     _even_ at the doors. Verily I say unto you, This generation
     shall not pass away, till all these things be fulfilled.
     Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
     away.

     And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be
     overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this
     life, and _so_ that day come upon you unawares. For as a snare
     shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole
     earth. Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be
     accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to
     pass, and to stand before the Son of man. But of that day and
     _that_ hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in
     heaven, neither the Son, but my Father only. Take ye heed,
     watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is.

     But as the days of Noe _were_, so shall also the coming of the
     Son of man be. For as in the days that were before the flood
     they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
     marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and
     knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so
     shall also the coming of the Son of man be. Then shall two be
     in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left. Two
     _women shall be_ grinding at the mill; the one shall be taken,
     and the other left. Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour
     your Lord doth come.

     _For the Son of man is_ as a man taking a far journey, who
     left his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to
     every man his work, and commanded the porter to watch. Watch
     ye therefore: for ye know not when the master of the house
     cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in
     the morning: lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping.

     But know this, that if the good man of the house had known in
     what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and
     would not have suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore
     be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not the Son
     of man cometh. And what I say unto you I say unto all, Watch.

     Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath
     made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due
     season? Blessed _is_ that servant, whom his lord when he
     cometh shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, That he
     shall make him ruler over all his goods. But and if that evil
     servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming;
     and shall begin to smite _his_ fellow servants, and to eat and
     drink with the drunken; the lord of that servant shall come in
     a day when he looketh not for _him_, and in an hour that he is
     not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint _him_ his
     portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and
     gnashing of teeth.

     Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins,
     which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom.
     And five of them were wise, and five _were_ foolish. They that
     _were_ foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them.
     But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.

     While the bridegroom tarried they all slumbered and slept.
     And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom
     cometh; go ye out to meet him. Then all those virgins arose,
     and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise,
     Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out. But the wise
     answered, saying, _Not so_; lest there be not enough for us
     and you; but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for
     yourselves. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came;
     and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage: and
     the door was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins,
     saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered and said,
     Verily I say unto you, I know you not. Watch, therefore, for
     ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man
     cometh.




CHAPTER LXI.

PARABLE OF THE TALENTS--JUDGMENT OF THE NATIONS.


     For _the kingdom of heaven is_ as a man travelling into a far
     country, _who_ called his own servants, and delivered unto
     them his goods. And unto one he gave five talents, to another,
     two, and to another, one; to every man according to his
     several ability; and straightway took his journey.

     Then he that had received the five talents went and traded
     with the same, and made _them_ other five talents. And
     likewise he that _had received_ two, he also gained other two.
     But he that had received one went and digged in the earth, and
     hid his lord's money.

     After a long time the lord of those servants cometh, and
     reckoneth with them. And so he that had received five talents
     came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord, thou
     deliveredst unto me five talents: behold, I have gained beside
     them five talents more. His lord said unto him, Well done,
     _thou_ good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over
     a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter
     thou into the joy of thy lord.

     He that had received two talents came and said, Lord, thou
     deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, I have gained two
     other talents besides them. His lord said unto him, Well done,
     good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few
     things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou
     into the joy of thy lord.

     Then he which had received the one talent came and said, Lord,
     I knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou
     hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not strewed: and
     I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo,
     _there_ thou hast _that is_ thine.

     His lord answered and said unto him, _Thou_ wicked and
     slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not,
     and gather where I have not strewed: Thou oughtest therefore
     to have put my money to the exchangers, and _then_ at my
     coming I should have received mine own with usury. Take
     therefore the talent from him, and give _it_ unto him which
     hath ten talents. For unto every one that hath shall be given,
     and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall
     be taken away even that which he hath.

     And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness:
     there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

     When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy
     angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his
     glory: and before him shall be gathered all nations: and he
     shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth
     _his_ sheep from the goats: and he shall set the sheep on his
     right hand, but the goats on the left.

     Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye
     blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
     from the foundation of the world: for I was an hungered, and
     ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a
     stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was
     sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

     Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we
     thee an hungered, and fed _thee_? or thirsty, and gave _thee_
     drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took _thee_ in? or,
     naked, and clothed _thee_? Or when saw we thee sick, or in
     prison, and came unto thee?

     And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto
     you, Inasmuch as ye have done _it_ unto one of the least of
     these my brethren, ye have done _it_ unto me.

     Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from
     me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil
     and his angels: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat:
     I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and
     ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in
     prison, and ye visited me not.

     Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we
     thee an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or
     sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?

     Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you,
     Inasmuch as ye did _it_ not to one of the least of these, ye
     did _it_ not to me. And these shall go away into everlasting
     punishment: but the righteous into life eternal.

And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said
unto his disciples,

     Ye know that after two days is _the feast of_ the Passover,
     and of unleavened bread: and the Son of man is betrayed to be
     crucified.




CHAPTER LXII.

COVENANT WITH JUDAS--JESUS WASHES HIS DISCIPLES' FEET.


Then assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the
elders of the people, unto the palace of the high priest, who was called
Caiaphas, and consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill
_him_. But they said, Not on the feast _day_, lest there be an uproar
among the people: for they feared the people.

Then entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot, being of the number of
the twelve. And he went his way, and communed with the chief priests and
captains, how he might betray him unto them, and said _unto them_, What
will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? And when they heard
_it_, they were glad, and promised to give him money. And they
covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver. And from that time he
sought opportunity how he might conveniently betray him unto them in the
absence of the multitude.

And in the day time he was teaching in the temple; and at night he went
out, and abode in the mount that is called _the mount_ of Olives. And
all the people came early in the morning to him in the temple for to
hear him.

Then came the first _day_ of the _feast_ of unleavened bread, when the
passover must be killed; and he sent Peter and John, saying,

     Go and prepare us the passover, that we may eat.

And they said unto him, Where wilt thou that we go and prepare that thou
mayest eat the passover? And he said unto them,

     Go ye into the city, and behold, when ye are entered into the
     city, there shall a man meet you, bearing a pitcher of water,
     follow him into the house where he entereth in. And
     wheresoever he shall go in, say ye to the goodman of the
     house, The Master saith my time is at hand; I will keep the
     passover at thy house with my disciples. Where is the
     guest-chamber, where I shall eat the passover with my
     disciples? And he will shew you a large upper room furnished
     _and_ prepared: there make ready for us.

And his disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found as he
had said unto them: and the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them;
and they made ready the passover.

And in the evening, when the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve
apostles with him. And he said unto them,

     With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you
     before I suffer: for I say unto you, I will not any more eat
     thereof, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.

And he took the cup and gave thanks, and said,

     Take this, and divide _it_, among yourselves: for I say unto
     you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine, until the
     kingdom of God shall come.

Now before the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was
come that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having
loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. And
supper being ended, the devil having now put into the heart of Judas
Iscariot, Simon's _son_, to betray him; Jesus knowing that the Father
had given all things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and
went to God; he riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments, and
took a towel, and girded himself. After that he poureth water into a
basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe _them_ with
the towel wherewith he was girded.

Then cometh he to Simon Peter: and Peter saith unto him, Lord, dost thou
wash my feet? Jesus answered and said unto him,

     What I do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.

Peter saith unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered him.

     If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.

Simon Peter saith unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also _my_ hands
and _my_ head. Jesus saith unto him,

     He that is washed needeth not save to wash _his_ feet, but is
     clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not all.

For he knew who should betray him; therefore said he,

     Ye are not all clean.

So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was
set down again, he said unto them,

     Know ye what I have done to you? Ye call me Master and Lord:
     and ye say well; for _so_ I am. If I then, _your_ Lord and
     Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one
     another's feet. For I have given you an example, that ye
     should do as I have done to you. Verily, verily, I say unto
     you, The servant is not greater than his lord: neither he that
     is sent greater than he that sent him. If ye know these
     things, happy are ye if ye do them.




CHAPTER LXIII.

THE LORD'S SUPPER INSTITUTED--PETER FOREWARNED.


And as they were eating, the Lord Jesus the _same_ night in which he was
betrayed, took bread, and gave thanks, and blessed _it_, and brake _it_,
and gave _it_ to the disciples, and said,

     Take, eat; this is my body, which is broken for you: this do
     in remembrance of me.

     But, behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me _is_ with me on
     the table. And truly the Son of man goeth, as it was
     determined: but woe unto that man by whom he is betrayed!

     I speak not of you all: I know whom I have chosen; but that
     the Scripture may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me
     hath lifted up his heel against me. Now I tell you before it
     come, that, when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am
     _he_. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that receiveth
     whomsoever I send receiveth me: and he that receiveth me
     receiveth him that sent me.

And as they sat and did eat, when Jesus had thus said, he was troubled
in spirit, and testified, and said,

     Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you which eateth
     with me shall betray me.

Then the disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spake. And
they began to inquire among themselves, which of them it was that should
do this thing.

And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say
unto him, one by one, Lord, is it I? And he answered and said unto them,

     It _is_ one of the twelve, that dippeth with me in the dish:
     the same shall betray me. The son of man goeth as it is
     written of him, but woe unto that man by whom the son of man
     is betrayed! it had been good for that man if he had not been
     born.

Now there was leaning on Jesus' bosom one of his disciples, whom Jesus
loved. Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, that he should ask who it
should be of whom he spake. He then lying on Jesus' breast saith unto
him, Lord, who is it? Jesus answered,

     He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped _it_.

And when he had dipped the sop, he gave _it_ to Judas Iscariot, _the
son_ of Simon. And after the sop Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus
unto him,

     That thou doest, do quickly.

Now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake this unto him. For
some _of them_ thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said
unto him, Buy _those things_ that we have need of against the feast; or,
that he should give something to the poor. Then Judas, which betrayed
him, answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto him,

     Thou hast said.

He then having received the sop went immediately out: and it was night.
Therefore, when he was gone out, Jesus said,

     Now is the son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him.
     If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in
     himself, and shall straightway glorify him. Little children,
     yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me: and as I
     said unto the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say
     to you. A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one
     another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.
     By this shall all _men_ know that ye are my disciples, if ye
     have love one to another.

Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither goest thou? Jesus answered him,

     Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now: but thou shalt
     follow me afterwards.

Peter said unto him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down
my life for thy sake. Jesus answered him,

     Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake? Verily, verily I say
     unto thee, The cock shall not crow, till thou hast denied me
     thrice.

And there was also a strife among them, which of them should be
accounted the greatest. And he said unto them,

     The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and
     they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors.
     But ye _shall_ not _be_ so: but he that is greatest among you,
     let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that
     doth serve. For whether _is_ greater, he that sitteth at meat,
     or he that serveth? _is_ not he that sitteth at meat? but I am
     among you as he that serveth. Ye are they which have continued
     with me in my temptations. And I appoint unto you a kingdom,
     as my father hath appointed unto me; that ye may eat and drink
     at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the
     twelve tribes of Israel.




CHAPTER LXIV.

JESUS COMFORTS HIS DISCIPLES--TEACHES LOVE TO EACH OTHER.


And the Lord said,

     Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired _to have_ you, that
     he may sift _you_ as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that
     thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen
     thy brethren.

And he said unto him, Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into
prison, and to death. And he said,

     I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this day, before
     thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me.

And he said unto them,

     When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye
     anything?

And they said, Nothing. Then said he unto them,

     But now, he that hath a purse, let him take _it_, and likewise
     _his_ scrip; and he that hath no sword, let him sell his
     garment, and buy one. For I say unto you, that this that is
     written must yet be accomplished in me. And he was reckoned
     among the transgressors: for the things concerning me have an
     end.

And they said, Lord, behold, here _are_ two swords. And he said unto
them,

     It is enough.

After the same manner also _he took_ the cup, when he had supped, and
when he had given thanks, he gave _it_ to them, saying,

     Drink ye all of it.

And they all drank of it. And he said unto them

     This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for
     many for the remission of sins: this do ye, as oft as ye drink
     _it_, in remembrance of me. But I say unto you, I will not
     drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day
     when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom.

     Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe
     also in me. In my Father's house are many mansions: if _it
     were_ not _so_, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place
     for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come
     again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, _there_
     ye may be also. And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know.

Thomas saith unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can
we know the way. Jesus saith unto him,

     I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the
     Father, but by me. If ye had known me, ye should have known my
     Father also: and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen
     him.

Philip saith unto him, Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us.
Jesus saith unto him,

     Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known
     me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how
     sayest thou _then_, Shew us the Father? Believest thou not
     that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that
     I speak unto you, I speak not of myself: but the Father that
     dwelleth in me, he doeth the works. Believe me that I _am_ in
     the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me for the
     very work's sake.

     Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the
     works that I do shall he do also; and greater _works_ than
     these shall he do; because I go unto my Father. And whatsoever
     ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may
     be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask anything in my name,
     I will do _it_. If ye love me keep my commandments. And I
     will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter,
     that he may abide with you for ever; _Even_ the Spirit of
     truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him
     not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth
     with you, and shall be in you.

     I will not leave you comfortless; I will come to you. Yet a
     little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me:
     because I live, ye shall live also. At that day ye shall know
     that I _am_ in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you. He that
     hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth
     me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I
     will love him, and will manifest myself to him.

Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou wilt
manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world? Jesus answered and
said unto him,

     If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will
     love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
     him. He that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings: and the
     word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which sent
     me. These things have I spoken unto you, being _yet_ present
     with you.

     But the Comforter, _which is_ the Holy Ghost, whom the Father
     will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring
     all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto
     you.

     Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the
     world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled,
     neither let it be afraid. Ye have heard how I said unto you, I
     go away, and come _again_ unto you. If ye loved me, ye would
     rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father
     is greater than I. And now I have told you before it come to
     pass, that, when it is come to pass, ye might believe.
     Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the prince of
     this world cometh, and hath nothing in me. But that the world
     may know that I love the Father; and as the Father gave me
     commandment, even so I do. Arise, let us go hence.




CHAPTER LXV.

JESUS THE TRUE VINE--HATRED OF THE WORLD.


     I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every
     branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every
     _branch_ that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring
     forth more fruit. Now ye are clean through the word which I
     have spoken unto you. Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch
     cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no
     more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye _are_
     the branches; he that abideth in me, and I in him, the same
     bringeth forth much fruit; for without me ye can do nothing.
     If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is
     withered; and men gather them, and cast _them_ into the fire,
     and they are burned.

     If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask
     what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. Herein is my
     Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my
     disciples. As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you:
     continue ye in my love. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall
     abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments
     and abide in his love. These things have I spoken unto you,
     that my joy might remain in you, and _that_ your joy might be
     full.

     This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have
     loved you. Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay
     down his life for his friends. Ye are my friends, if ye do
     whatsoever I command you. Henceforth I call you not servants;
     for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth; but I have
     called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my
     Father I have made known unto you.

     Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained
     you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and _that_ your
     fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the
     Father in my name, he may give it you. These things I command
     you, that ye love one another.

     If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before _it
     hated_ you.

     If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but
     because ye are not of the world but I have chosen you out of
     the world, therefore the world hateth you.

     Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not
     greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will
     also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will
     keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you
     for my name's sake, because they know not him that sent me.

     If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin:
     but now they have no cloak for their sin. He that hateth me
     hateth my Father also.

     If I had not done among them the works which none other man
     did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and
     hated both me and my Father. But _this cometh to pass_, that
     the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law. They
     hated me without a cause.

     But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from
     the Father, _even_ the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from
     the Father, he shall testify of me: and ye also shall bear
     witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning.




CHAPTER LXVI.

JESUS FOREWARNS HIS DISCIPLES.


     These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be
     offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the
     time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he
     doeth God service. And these things will they do unto you,
     because they have not known the Father, nor me. But these
     things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may
     remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not
     unto you at the beginning, because I was with you.

     But now I go my way to him that sent me; and none of you
     asketh me, Whither goest thou? But because I have said these
     things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart. Nevertheless I
     tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away:
     for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you;
     but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is
     come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness,
     and of judgment: of sin, because they believed not on me; of
     righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no
     more; of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.

     I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear
     them now. Howbeit when he, the spirit of truth, is come, he
     will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of
     himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, _that_ shall he speak:
     and he will shew you things to come. He shall glorify me: for
     he shall receive of mine, and shall shew _it_ unto you. All
     things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that
     he shall take of mine, and shall shew _it_ unto you. A little
     while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and
     ye shall see me, because I go to the Father.

Then said _some_ of his disciples among themselves, What is this that he
saith unto us, A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a
little while, and ye shall see me; and, Because I go to the Father? They
said therefore, What is this that he saith, A little while? We cannot
tell what he saith.

Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto them,

     Do ye inquire among yourselves of that I said, A little while,
     and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye
     shall see me? Verily, verily, I say unto you, That ye shall
     weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye shall be
     sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

     A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour
     is come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she
     remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born
     into the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will
     see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no
     man taketh from you.

     And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I
     say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name,
     he will give _it_ you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my
     name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.
     These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs; but the time
     cometh, when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I
     shall shew you plainly of the Father.

     At that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say not unto you,
     that I will pray the Father for you: for the Father himself
     loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I
     came out from God. I came forth from the Father, and am come
     into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the
     Father.

His disciples saith unto him, Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and
speakest no proverb. Now are we sure that thou knowest all things, and
needest not that any man should ask thee: by this we believe that thou
camest forth from God. Jesus answered them,

     Do ye now believe? Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come,
     that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall
     leave me alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is
     with me. These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye
     might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but
     be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.




CHAPTER LXVII.

JESUS PRAYS FOR HIS DISCIPLES--FORETELLS PETER'S DENIAL.


These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said,

     Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that the Son also
     may glorify thee: As thou hast given him power over all flesh,
     that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast
     given him. And this is life eternal, that they might know
     thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.
     I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work
     which thou gavest me to do.

     And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with
     the glory which I had with thee before the world was.

     I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me
     out of the world; thine they were, and thou gavest them me;
     and they have kept thy word. Now they have known that all
     things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee. For I have
     given unto them the words which thou gavest me: and they have
     received _them_, and have known surely that I came out from
     thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me.

     I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which
     thou hast given me; for they are thine. And all mine are
     thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them. And now
     I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I
     come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name those
     whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we _are_.

     While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name:
     those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is
     lost, but the son of perdition; that the Scripture might be
     fulfilled. And now come I to thee; and these things I speak in
     the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in
     themselves.

     I have given them my word; and the world hath hated them,
     because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the
     world. I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the
     world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil. They
     are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.

     Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth. As thou
     hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them
     into the world. And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that
     they also might be sanctified through the truth.

     Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall
     believe on me through their word; that they all may be one; as
     thou, Father, _art_ in me, and I in thee, that they also may
     be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent
     me. And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them: that
     they may be one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in
     me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world
     may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as
     thou hast loved me. Father, I will that they also, whom thou
     hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my
     glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before
     the foundation of the world.

     O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have
     known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me. And I
     have declared unto them thy name, and will declare _it_: that
     the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in
     them.

[Illustration: Gorge of the Kidron.]

When Jesus had spoken these words, and when they had sung an hymn, he
came out, and went as he was wont, to the mount of Olives; and his
disciples also followed him, over the brook Cedron. Then saith Jesus
unto them,

     All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is
     written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock
     shall be scattered abroad. But after I am risen again, I will
     go before you into Galilee.

Peter answered and said unto him, Though all _men_ shall be offended
because of thee, _yet_ will I never be offended. And Jesus saith unto
him,

     Verily I say unto thee, That this day, _even_ in this night,
     before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.

But he spake the more vehemently, If I should die with thee, I will not
deny thee in any wise. Likewise also said all the disciples.




CHAPTER LXVIII.

THE AGONY OF JESUS IN THE GARDEN OF GETHSEMANE.


Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, where was a
garden, into the which he entered and his disciples. And when he was at
the place, he said unto them,

     Pray that ye enter not into temptation. Sit ye here, while I
     go and pray yonder.

And he was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast. And he took with
him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, James and John, and began to be
sorrowful and very heavy. Then saith he unto them,

     My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye
     here, and watch with me.

And he went a little farther, and kneeled down, and fell on his face on
the ground, and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass
from him. And he said,

     Abba, Father, all things _are_ possible unto thee: O my
     Father, if it be possible, if thou be willing, remove this cup
     from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done.

And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him. And
being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were
great drops of blood falling down to the ground.

And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith
unto Peter,

     Simon, sleepest thou? What, could ye not watch with me one
     hour? Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the
     spirit indeed _is_ willing, but the flesh _is_ weak.

He went away the second time, and prayed, and spake the same words:
saying,

     O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I
     drink it, thy will be done.

And when he returned, he found them asleep again, (for their eyes were
heavy,) neither wist they what to answer him.

And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying
the same words. And he cometh the third time to his disciples, and saith
unto them,

     Sleep on now, and take _your_ rest: it is enough: behold, the
     hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands
     of sinners. Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that
     doth betray me.

And when he rose up from prayer and was come to his disciples, he found
them sleeping for sorrow, and said unto them,

     Why sleep ye? rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation.

And Judas also, which betrayed him, knew the place: for Jesus ofttimes
resorted thither with his disciples. Judas then, having received a band
_of men_ and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, cometh
thither with lanterns, and torches and weapons.

And immediately, while he yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve,
and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief
priests and the scribes and the elders of the people.

Jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him, went
forth, and said unto them,

     Whom seek ye?

They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith unto them,

     I am _he_.

And Judas also, which betrayed him, stood with them. As soon then as he
had said unto them, I am _he_, they went backward, and fell to the
ground. Then asked he them again,

     Whom seek ye?

And they said, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered,

     I have told you that I am _he_: if therefore ye seek me, let
     these go their way.

That the saying might be fulfilled, which he spake. Of them which thou
gavest me have I lost none.




CHAPTER LXIX.

BETRAYAL OF JESUS--BROUGHT BEFORE THE HIGH PRIEST.


Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall
kiss, that same is he: hold him fast, and lead _him_ away safely. And as
soon as he was come, he goeth straightway and drew near unto Jesus to
kiss him: and saith, Hail, Master, Master; and kissed him. And Jesus
said unto him,

     Friend, wherefore art thou come? Betrayest thou the Son of man
     with a kiss?

Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.

When they, which were about him saw what would follow, they said unto
him, Lord, shall we smite with the sword? And one of them that stood by
(Simon Peter) with Jesus stretched out _his_ hand, and drew his sword,
and struck a servant of the high priest's, and cut off his right ear.
The servant's name was Malchus. And Jesus answered and said,

     Suffer ye thus far.

And he touched his ear and healed him. Then said Jesus unto Peter,

     Put up thy sword into the sheath: for all they that take the
     sword shall perish with the sword: the cup which my Father
     hath given me, shall I not drink it? Thinkest thou that I
     cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me
     more than twelve legions of angels? But how then shall the
     scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?

In that same hour, Jesus said unto the chief priests and captains of the
temple, and the elders, which were come to him,

     Be ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and staves for
     to take me? When I was daily with you in the temple, ye
     stretched forth no hands against me: but this is your hour,
     and the power of darkness.

But all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be
fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.

And there followed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth cast
about _his_ naked _body_; and the young men laid hold on him: and he
left the linen cloth and fled from them naked.

Then the band and the captain and officers of the Jews took Jesus and
bound him, and led him away to Annas first; for he was father-in-law to
Caiaphas, which was the high priest that same year. Now Caiaphas was he,
which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man
should die for the people. And they that had laid hold on Jesus led
_him_ away to Caiaphas the high priest, and brought him into the high
priest's house.

And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and _so did_ another disciple: that
disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the
palace of the high priest. But Peter stood at the door without. Then
went out that other disciple, which was known unto the high priest, and
spake unto her that kept the door, and brought in Peter.

The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine.
Jesus answered him,

     I spake openly to the world; I ever taught in the synagogue,
     and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort: and in
     secret have I said nothing. Why askest thou me? ask them which
     heard me, what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I
     said.

And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by struck
Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest
so? Jesus answered him,

     If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well,
     why smitest thou me?

Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest. And with him
were assembled all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes. And
Peter followed him afar off, even into the palace of the high priest.
And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall, and were set
down together, Peter sat down among the servants, and warmed himself at
the fire, to see the end.




CHAPTER LXX.

JESUS EXAMINED BY THE SANHEDRIM--PETER DENIES HIM.


Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought false
witness against Jesus, to put him to death; but found none: yea, though
many false witnesses came, _yet_ found they none: their witness agreed
not together. At the last came two false witnesses, and bare false
witness against him, saying, We heard him say, I am able to destroy the
temple of God, that is made with hands, and within three days I will
build another made without hands. But neither so did their witness agree
together.

And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying,
Answerest thou nothing? what _is it which_ these witness against thee?
But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the high priest asked
him, and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell
us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God, the Son of the Blessed?
Jesus saith unto him,

     Thou hast said: nevertheless say I unto you, Hereafter shall
     ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and
     coming in the clouds of heaven.

Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy;
what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have heard his
blasphemy. What think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of
death.

And the men that held Jesus mocked him, and smote _him_. And some began
to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to buffet him. And when they
had blindfolded him, they struck him on the face, and others smote _him_
with the palms of their hands, saying, Prophesy unto us, thou Christ,
Who is he that smote thee? And many other things blasphemously spake
they against him.

And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the maids of
the high priest: (the damsel that kept the door;) and when she saw
Peter, as he sat by the fire, warming himself, she looked upon him, and
said, And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth. Art thou not also _one_
of this man's disciples?

But he denied before _them_ all, saying, Woman, I know him not, neither
understand I what thou sayest. And he went out into the porch; and the
cock crew.

And the servants and officers stood there, who had made a fire of coals:
for it was cold: and they warmed themselves: and Peter stood with them,
and warmed himself. And after a little while, when he was gone out into
the porch, another _maid_ saw him, and said unto them that were there,
This is _one_ of them, this _fellow_ was also with Jesus of Nazareth.

They said therefore unto him, Art not thou also _one_ of his disciples?
And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man.

And about the space of an hour after, they that stood by said again to
Peter, Surely, thou art _one_ of them: for thou art a Galileean, and thy
speech agreeth _thereto_. One of the servants of the high priest, being
_his_ kinsman whose ear Peter cut off, saith, Did not I see thee in the
garden with him? But he began to curse and to swear, _saying_, I know
not this man of whom ye speak. And immediately the second time, while he
yet spake, the cock crew.

And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter. And Peter remembered the
word of the Lord, how he had said unto him, Before the cock crow twice,
thou shalt deny me thrice. And when he thought thereon, he went out, and
wept bitterly.




CHAPTER LXXI.

EXAMINATION CONTINUED--JUDAS REPENTS--JESUS SCOURGED.


And as soon as it was day, the elders of the people and the chief
priests and the scribes came together, and led him into their council,
saying, Art thou the Christ? tell us. And he said unto them,

     If I tell you, ye will not believe: and if I also ask _you_,
     ye will not answer me, nor let _me_ go. Hereafter shall the
     Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God.

Then said they all, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto them,

     Ye say that I am.

And they said, What need we any further witness? for we ourselves have
heard of his own mouth.

And straightway, when the morning was come, all the chief priests held a
consultation with the elders of the people, and scribes, and the whole
council, against Jesus, to put him to death: And when they had bound
him, the whole multitude of them arose and led him away from Caiaphas
unto the hall of judgment: and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the
governor: and it was early.

Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned,
repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the
chief priests and elders, saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed
the innocent blood. And they said, What _is that_ to us? see thou _to
that_. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and
departed, and went and hanged himself.

And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful
for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood. And
they took counsel, and bought with them the potters field, to bury
strangers in. Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood, unto
this day.

Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying,
And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was
valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value, and gave them for
the potter's field, as the Lord appointed me.

And they themselves went not into the judgment hall, lest they should be
defiled, but that they might eat the passover. Pilate then went out unto
them, and said, What accusation bring ye against this man? They answered
and saith unto him, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have
delivered him up unto thee. Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and
judge him according to your law. The Jews therefore said unto him, It is
not lawful for us to put any man to death; that the saying of Jesus
might be fulfilled, which he spake, signifying what death he should die.

Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and
said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews? Jesus answered him,

     Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee
     of me?

Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests have
delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done? Jesus answered,

     My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this
     world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be
     delivered to the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence.

Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered,

     Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for
     this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness
     unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my
     voice.

Pilate saith unto him, What is truth? And when he had said this, he went
out again unto the Jews, and saith unto them, I find in him no fault _at
all_. But ye have a custom, that I should release unto you one at the
passover: will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the
Jews? Then cried they all again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now
Barabbas was a robber.

Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged _him_. And the soldiers
platted a crown of thorns, and put _it_ on his head, and they put on him
a purple robe, and said, Hail, King of the Jews! and they smote him with
their hands.

Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto them, Behold, I bring
him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him. Then
came Jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And
_Pilate_ saith unto them, Behold the man!

When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him, they cried out,
saying, Crucify _him_, crucify _him_. Pilate saith unto them, Take ye
him, and crucify _him_: for I find no fault in him. The Jews answered
him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made
himself the Son of God.

When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid; and
went again into the judgment hall, and saith unto Jesus, Whence art
thou? But Jesus gave him no answer. Then saith Pilate unto him, Speakest
thou not unto me? knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee,
and have power to release thee? Jesus answered,

     Thou couldest have no power _at all_ against me, except it
     were given thee from above: therefore he that delivered me
     unto thee hath the greater sin.

And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews cried
out, saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesar's friend:
whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Cesar.

When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat
down in the judgment seat in a place that is called the Pavement, but in
the Hebrew, Gabbatha. And it was the preparation of the passover, and
about the sixth hour.




CHAPTER LXXII.

JESUS BEFORE HEROD--MESSAGE TO PILATE FROM HIS WIFE.


And Jesus stood before the governor: and they began to accuse him,
saying, We found this _fellow_ perverting the nation, and forbidding to
give tribute to Cesar, saying that he himself is Christ a King. And
Pilate the governor, asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews?
And Jesus saith unto him,

     Thou sayest.

And the chief priests accused him of many things: and when he was
accused of the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.

And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? hearest thou
not how many things they witness against thee? And he answered him to
never a word; insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.

Then said Pilate to the chief priests and _to_ the people, I find no
fault in this man. And they were the more fierce, saying, He stireth up
the people, teaching throughout all Jewry, beginning from Galilee to
this place.

When Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked whether the man were a Galileean.
And as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod's jurisdiction, he
sent him to Herod, who himself also was at Jerusalem at that time. And
when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad: for he was desirous to see
him of a long _season_, because he had heard many things of him; and he
hoped to have seen some miracle done by him. Then he questioned with him
in many words; but he answered him nothing. And the chief priests and
scribes stood and vehemently accused him.

And Herod with his men of war set him at nought, and mocked _him_, and
arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate.

And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together: for before
they were at enmity between themselves.

And he saith unto the Jews, Behold, your King! But they cried out, Away
with _him_, away with _him_, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Shall
I crucify your King? The chief priests answered, We have no king but
Cesar.

And Pilate, when he had called together the chief priests and the rulers
and the people, said unto them, Ye have brought this man unto me, as one
that perverteth the people: and, behold, I, having examined _him_
before you, have found no fault in this man touching those things
whereof ye accuse him: No, nor yet Herod, for I sent you to him; and,
lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto him. I will therefore chastise
him, and release _him_.

Now at _that_ feast the governor was wont to release unto the people one
prisoner, whomsoever they desired. (For of necessity he must release one
unto them at the feast.) And they had then a notable prisoner, called
Barabbas, _which lay_ bound with them that had made insurrection with
him, who had committed murder in the insurrection.

And the multitude crying aloud began to desire _him to do_ as he had
ever done unto them. Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate
said unto them, Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus
which is called Christ, the king of the Jews? For he knew that the chief
priests had delivered him for envy.

When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him,
saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered
many things this day in a dream because of him. But the chief priests
and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask, that he should
rather release Barabbas unto them, and destroy Jesus. And they cried out
all at once, saying, Away with this _man_, and release unto us Barabbas:
(Who for a certain sedition made in the city, and for murder, was cast
into prison.)

Pilate therefore, willing to release Jesus, spake again to them. Whether
of the twain will ye that I release unto you? They said Barabbas. Pilate
saith unto them, What shall I do then with Jesus which is called
Christ? _unto him_ whom ye call the King of the Jews? And they cried out
again, saying, Crucify _him_; let him be crucified.

And the governor said unto them the third time, Why, what evil hath he
done? I have found no cause of death in him: I will therefore chastise
him, and let _him_ go. And they were instant with loud voices, requiring
that he might be crucified. And they cried out the more exceedingly,
Crucify him.

When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but _that_ rather a
tumult was made, he took water, and washed _his_ hands before the
multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see
ye _to it_. Then answered all the people, and said, His blood _be_ on
us, and on our children. And the voices of them and of the chief priests
prevailed. And _so_ Pilate, willing to content the people, gave sentence
that it should be as they required.

And he released unto them him that for sedition and murder was cast into
prison, whom they had desired; but he delivered Jesus, when he had
scourged _him_, to their will, to be crucified.




CHAPTER LXXIII.

JESUS CRUCIFIED--HE PRAYS FOR HIS ENEMIES.


Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall,
called Pretorium; and gathered unto him the whole band _of soldiers_.
And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe.

And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put _it_ on his head,
and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him, and
began to salute him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews! And
they smote him on the head with a reed, and did spit upon him, and
bowing _their_ knees worshipped him. And when they had mocked him, they
took off the purple from him, and put his own clothes on him, and led
him out to crucify him.

And as they led him away, they laid hold upon one Simon, a Cyrenian, who
passed by, coming out of the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus:
him they compelled, and on him they laid the cross, that he might bear
_it_ after Jesus.

And there followed him a great company of people, and of women, which
also bewailed and lamented him. But Jesus turning unto them said,

     Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for
     yourselves, and for your children. For, behold, the days are
     coming, in the which they shall say, blessed _are_ the barren,
     and the wombs that never bare, and the paps that never gave
     suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on
     us: and to the hills, Cover us. For if they do these things in
     a green tree, what shall be done in the dry.

And there were also two other malefactors, led with him to be put to
death. And he bearing his cross went forth, and when they were come to a
place called Golgotha, which is called Calvary, which is, being
interpreted, the place of a skull, they gave him vinegar to drink
mingled with gall: and when he had tasted _thereof_, he would not drink.

There they crucified him, and two malefactors with him, one on the right
hand, and the other on the left, and Jesus in the midst. Then said
Jesus,

     Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.

And Pilate wrote a title, and put _it_ on the cross. And the writing
was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. This title then read many
of the Jews: for the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the
city: and it was written in Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin. Then said the
chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The King of the Jews;
but that he said, I am King of the Jews. Pilate answered, What I have
written, I have written.

Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and
made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also _his_ coat: now the
coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout. They said
therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it,
whose it shall be: that the scripture might be fulfilled, which was
spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among them, and upon my
vesture did they cast lots. These things therefore the soldiers did. And
it was the third hour, and they crucified him.

And sitting down they watched him there, and set up over his head his
accusation. And the superscription of his accusation was written over,
THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS. And with him they crucify two
thieves; the one on his right hand, and the other on his left. And the
scripture was fulfilled, which saith, And he was numbered with the
transgressors.




CHAPTER LXXIV.

THE TWO THIEVES--JESUS THIRSTS--HE GIVES UP THE GHOST.


And the people stood beholding. And they that passed by railed on him,
wagging their heads, and saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the temple,
and buildest _it_ in three days, Save thyself. If thou be the Son of
God, come down from the cross.

Likewise also the chief priests mocking _him_, with the scribes and
elders, and the rulers also with them derided _him_, saying, He saved
others; himself he cannot save. Let him save himself, if he be Christ,
the chosen of God. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down
from the cross, that we may see, and we will believe him. He trusted in
God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he said, I am the
Son of God.

And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering him
vinegar, and saying, If thou be the King of the Jews, save thyself. And
a superscription also was written over him in letters of Greek, and
Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

The thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same in his
teeth. And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him,
saying, If thou be Christ, save thyself and us.

But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear God,
seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly; for we
receive the due reward of our deeds: but this man hath done nothing
amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest into
thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him,

     Verily I say unto thee, to day shalt thou be with me in
     paradise.

Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother's
sister, Mary the _wife_ of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus
therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved,
he saith unto his mother,

     Woman, behold thy son!

Then saith he to the disciple,

     Behold thy mother!

And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own _home_.

And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole land
until the ninth hour. And the sun was darkened, and about the ninth hour
Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying,

     ELI, ELI, LAMA SABACHTHANI?

which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
And some of them that stood by, when they heard _it_, said, Behold, he
calleth for Elias. After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now
accomplished, that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith,

     I thirst.

Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar: and straightway one of them
ran, and took a sponge, and filled _it_ with vinegar, and put _it_ on a
reed, and gave him to drink. The rest said, Let be, let us see whether
Elias will come to save him. When Jesus therefore had received the
vinegar, he said,

     It is finished.

And the vail of the temple was rent in the midst. And when Jesus had
cried with a loud voice, he said,

     Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit!

And having said thus, he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.




CHAPTER LXXV.

JESUS TAKEN DOWN FROM THE CROSS--BURIED--TOMB SEALED.


And, behold, the vail of the temple was rent in twain from the top to
the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent; and the graves
were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose, and came
out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city,
and appeared unto many.

And when the centurion, which stood over against him, and they that were
with him, watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that were
done, that he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, they feared greatly,
saying, Truly this was the Son of God. And all the people that came
together to that sight, beholding the things which were done, smote
their breasts, and returned. And all his acquaintance, and the women
that followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him, stood afar off,
beholding these things; among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the
mother of James the less and of Joses, and Salome, the mother of
Zebedee's children; (who also, when he was in Galilee, followed him, and
ministered unto him;) and many other women which came up with him unto
Jerusalem.

The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies
should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day, (for that sabbath
day was an high day,) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken,
and _that_ they might be taken away.

Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the
other which was crucified with him. But when they came to Jesus, and saw
that he was dead already, they brake not his legs: but one of the
soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came thereout
blood and water. And he that saw _it_ bare record, and his record is
true: and he knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe. For
these things were done, that the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone
of him shall not be broken. And again another scripture saith, They
shall look on him whom they pierced.

And after this, when the even was come, because it was the preparation,
that is, the day before the sabbath, there came a rich man of Arimathea
named Joseph, an honorable counsellor, _and he was_ a good man, and a
just: (the same had not consented to the counsel and deed of them;) _he
was_ of Arimathea, a city of the Jews: who also himself waited for the
kingdom of God, being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the
Jews. This _man_ went in boldly into Pilate, and begged that he might
take away the body of Jesus.

And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead; and calling _unto him_ the
centurion, he asked him whether he had been any while dead. And when he
knew _it_ of the centurion, then Pilate commanded the body to be
delivered unto Joseph. He came therefore, and took the body of Jesus.

And there came also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by
night, and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound
_weight_. And when Joseph had taken the body down, he wrapped it in a
clean linen cloth, with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to
bury.

Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden; and in the
garden a new sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid. There laid they
Jesus therefore in his own new tomb which he had hewn out in the rock:
because of the Jews' preparation _day_; for the sepulchre was nigh at
hand: and he rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulchre and
departed. And that day was the preparation and the sabbath drew on.

And the women also, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary, _the mother_ of
Joses, which came with him from Galilee, followed after, and sitting
over against the sepulchre, beheld the sepulchre, and how his body was
laid. And they returned, and prepared spices and ointments; and rested
the sabbath day according to the commandment.

Now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation, the chief
priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate, saying, Sir, we
remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three
days I will rise again. Command therefore that the sepulchre be made
sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal
him away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the
last error shall be worse than the first.

Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch: go your way, make _it_ as sure
as ye can. So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone,
and setting a watch.




CHAPTER LXXVI.

THE RESURRECTION OF JESUS--SCENES, ETC.


And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the _mother_ of
James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might come and
annoint him.

In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn towards the first _day_
of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the
sepulchre, at the rising of the sun. And, behold, there was a great
earthquake: for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came
and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it. His
countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow: and for
fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead _men_.

And they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone from
the door of the sepulchre? And when they looked, they saw that the stone
was rolled away: for it was very great.

And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know
that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is not here: for he is
risen, as he said, Come, see the place where the Lord lay.

And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the
right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were affrighted.
And he saith unto them, Be not affrighted: Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth,
which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the place where
they laid him. But go your way quickly, and tell his disciples, and
Peter, that he is risen from the dead; and behold, he goeth before you
into Galilee; there shall ye see him, as he said unto you: lo, I have
told you.

And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre, with fear and
great joy; for they trembled and were amazed; and did run to bring his
disciples word: neither said they anything to any _man_; for they were
afraid.

Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city,
and shewed unto the chief priests all the things that were done. And
when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they
gave large money unto the soldiers, saying, Say ye, His disciples came
by night, and stole him _away_ while we slept. And if this come to the
governor's ears, we will persuade him, and secure you. So they took the
money, and did as they were taught: and this saying is commonly reported
among the Jews until this day.

Now upon the first _day_ of the week, very early in the morning, they
came unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared,
and certain _others_ with them. And they found the stone rolled away
from the sepulchre. And they entered in, and found not the body of the
Lord Jesus.

And it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two
men stood by them in shining garments: and as they were afraid, and
bowed down _their_ faces to the earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye
the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen; remember how
he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee, saying, The Son of man
must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and
the third day rise again.

And they remembered his words, and returned from the sepulchre, and told
all these things unto the eleven, and to all the rest. And their words
seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not.




CHAPTER LXXVII.

MARY MAGDALENE AND OTHERS VISIT THE SEPULCHRE.


The first _day_ of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, when it was yet
dark, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away from the
sepulchre. Then she runneth, and cometh to Simon Peter, and to the other
disciple, whom Jesus loved, and saith, unto them, They have taken away
the Lord out of the sepulchre and we know not where they have laid him.

It was Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary _the mother_ of James, and
other _women that were_ with them, which told these things unto the
apostles.

Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the
sepulchre. So they ran both together: and the other disciple did outrun
Peter, and came first to the sepulchre. And he stooping down, _and
looking in_, saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in.

Then cometh Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulchre, and
seeth the linen clothes lie, and the napkin, that was about his head,
not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by
itself. Then went in also that other disciple, which came first to the
sepulchre, and he saw, and believed. For as yet they knew not the
scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.

Then the disciples went away again unto their own home, (Peter)
wondering in himself at that which was come to pass.

But Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping: and as she wept, she
stooped down, _and looked_ into the sepulchre, and seeth two angels in
white sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where the
body of Jesus had lain. And they say unto her, Woman, Why weepest thou?
She saith unto them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know
not where they have laid him.

(Now when _Jesus_ was risen early the first _day_ of the week, he
appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils.)
And when she had thus said, she turned herself back, and saw Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus. Jesus saith unto her,

     Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou?

She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou have
borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him
away. Jesus saith unto her,

     Mary.

She turned herself, and saith unto him, Rabboni: which is to say,
Master. Jesus said unto her,

     Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go
     to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father,
     and your Father; and _to_ my God, and your God.

_And_ she went and told the disciples that had been with him, as they
mourned and wept, that she had seen the Lord, and _that_ he had spoken
these things unto her. And they, when they had heard that he was alive,
and had been seen of her, believed not.




CHAPTER LXXVIII.

JOURNEY TO EMMAUS--INCREDULITY OF THOMAS.


After that he appeared in another form unto two of them, that same day,
as they walked, and went into the country, to a village called Emmaus,
which was from Jerusalem _about_ threescore furlongs. And they talked
together of all these things which had happened.

And it came to pass, that, while they communed _together_ and reasoned,
Jesus himself drew near, and went with them. But their eyes were holden
that they should not know him. And he said unto them,

     What manner of communications _are_ these that ye have one to
     another, as ye walk, and are sad?

And the one of them, whose name was Cleopas, answering, said unto him,
Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things
which are come to pass there in these days? And he said unto them,

     What things?

And they said unto him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a
prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people: and how
the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to death,
and have crucified him.

But we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel:
and beside all this, to day is the third day since these things were
done. Yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished,
which were early at the sepulchre; and when they found not his body,
they came saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels, which said
that he was alive. And certain of them which were with us went to the
sepulchre, and found _it_ even so as the women had said: but him they
saw not. Then said he unto them,

     O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets
     have spoken: ought not Christ to have suffered these things,
     and to enter into his glory?

And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in
all the scriptures the things concerning himself.

And they drew nigh unto the village whither they went: and he made as
though he would have gone further. But they constrained him, saying,
Abide with us: for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent. And
he went in to tarry with them.

And it came to pass, as he sat at meat with them, he took bread, and
blessed _it_, and brake, and gave to them. And their eyes were opened,
and they knew him; and he vanished out of their sight.

And they said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, while he
talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?

And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the
eleven gathered together, and them that were with them, saying, The Lord
is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon. And they told what things
_were done_ in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking of
bread: neither believed they them.

And as they thus spake, the same day at evening, being the first _day_
of the week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled
for fear of the Jews, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and
saith unto them,

     Peace _be_ unto you.

But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen
a spirit. And he said unto them,

     Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?
     Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me,
     and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me
     have.

And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them _his_ hands, and _his_ feet,
and his side. Then were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord.

And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto
them.

     Have ye here any meat?

And they gave him a piece of broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. And he
took _it_, and did eat before them. Then said Jesus to them again,

     Peace _be_ unto you: as _my_ Father hath sent me, even so send
     I you.

And when he had said this, he breathed on _them_, and said unto them,

     Receive ye the holy Ghost. Whose soever sins ye remit, they
     are remitted unto them; _and_ whose soever _sins_ ye retain,
     they are retained.

But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Dydimus, was not with them when
Jesus came. The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen
the Lord. But, he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the
print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and
thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.

And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with
them: _then_ came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst,
as they sat at meat, and said,

     Peace be unto you;

and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because
they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen. Then saith
he to Thomas,

     Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither
     thy hand, and thrust _it_ into my side: and be not faithless,
     but believing.

And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God. Jesus said
unto him,

     Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed:
     blessed _are_ they that have not seen, and _yet_ have
     believed.

And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying,

     All hail.

And they came and held him by the feet, and worshipped him. Then said
Jesus unto them,

     Be not afraid; go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee,
     and there shall they see me.




CHAPTER LXXIX.

JESUS APPEARS TO THE ELEVEN; THEN TO FIVE HUNDRED BRETHREN AT ONCE.


Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain where
Jesus had appointed them. And when they saw him, they worshipped him:
but some doubted.

[Illustration: Sea of Galilee.]

And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying,

     All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye
     therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
     name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:
     teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
     commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, _even_ unto the
     end of the world. Amen.

After that he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once.

After these things Jesus showed himself again to the disciples at the
sea of Tiberias; and on this wise shewed he _himself_.

There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and
Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the _sons_ of Zebedee, and two other
of his disciples.

Simon Peter saith unto them, I go a fishing. They say unto him, We also
go with thee. They went forth, and entered into a ship immediately; and
that night they caught nothing. But when the morning was now come, Jesus
stood on the shore: but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus. Then
Jesus saith unto them,

     Children, have ye any meat?

They answered him, No, And he said unto them,

     Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find.

They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the
multitude of fishes.

Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter, it is the
Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt _his_
fisher's coat _unto him_, (for he was naked,) and did cast himself into
the sea. And the other disciples came in a little ship; (for they were
not far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits,) dragging the net
with fishes. As soon as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals
there, and fish laid thereon, and bread. Jesus saith unto them,

     Bring of the fish which ye have now caught.

Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land full of great fishes, an
hundred and fifty and three: and for all there were so many, yet was not
the net broken. Jesus saith unto them,

     Come _and_ dine.

And none of the disciples durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing that it
was the Lord. Jesus then cometh, and taketh bread, and giveth them, and
fish likewise. This is now the third time that Jesus shewed himself to
his disciples, after that he was risen from the dead. So when they had
dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter,

     Simon, _son_ of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?

He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith
unto him,

     Feed my lambs.

He saith to him the second time,

     Simon, _son_ of Jonas, lovest thou me?

He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith
unto him,

     Feed my sheep.

He saith unto him the third time,

     Simon, _son_ of Jonas, lovest thou me?

Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou
me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest
that I love thee. Jesus saith unto him,

     Feed my sheep.

     Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou
     girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest; but when
     thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and
     another shall gird thee, and carry _thee_ whither thou
     wouldest not.

This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when
he had spoken this, he saith unto him,

     Follow me.

Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved
following; which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord,
which is he that betrayeth thee? Peter seeing him, saith to Jesus, Lord,
and what _shall_ this man _do_? Jesus saith unto him,

     If I will that he tarry till I come, what _is that_ to thee?
     follow thou me.

Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple
should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I
will that he tarry till I come, what _is that_ to thee? This is the
disciple which testifieth of these things: and wrote these things: and
we know that his testimony is true. After that he was seen of James.




CHAPTER LXXX.

THE ASCENSION OF JESUS--INCIDENTS.


And (_Jesus_), being assembled together with _them_, commanded them that
they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the
Father, which, _saith he_, ye have heard of me. And he said unto them,

     These _are_ the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet
     with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were
     written in the Law of Moses, and _in_ the prophets, and _in_
     the Psalms, concerning me.

Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the
scriptures, and said unto them,

     Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and
     to rise from the dead the third day: and that repentance and
     remission of sins should be preached in his name among all
     nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And ye are witnesses of these
     things.

     And, behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; but
     tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with
     power from on high. For John truly baptized with water; but ye
     shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence.

When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord,
wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? And he said
unto them,

     It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the
     Father hath put in his own power. But ye shall receive power,
     after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be
     witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
     Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.

And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he said unto them,

     Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every
     creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved;
     but he that believeth not shall be damned. And these signs
     shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out
     devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up
     serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not
     hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall
     recover.

So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he lifted up his hands, and
blessed them. And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted
from them, and while they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud received
him out of their sight; he was received up into heaven, and sat on the
right hand of God.

And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold,
two men stood by them in white apparel; which also said, Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, which is
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have
seen him go into heaven.

And they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy: from
the mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a sabbath day's
journey; and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God.
Amen.

And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples,
which are not written in this book: But these are written, that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God; and that believing ye
might have life through his name.

And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they
should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could
not contain the books that should be written. Amen.

And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with
_them_, and confirming the word with signs following. Amen.




CONCLUSION.


Jesus has now conquered death, and ascended, where "He ever liveth to
make intercession for us." We no more mark his footsteps, or hear his
voice amid the hills and valleys of the Promised Land; but in the groves
of immortal bliss, he is worshipped by adoring angels, and by the
"spirits of just men made perfect."

There, Moses and Elias, Peter, James and John, "walk with him in white,"
and in a more exalted sense than, when on the Mount of Transfiguration,
exclaim, "Master, it is good for us to be here." And with these,

     "The saints of all ages in harmony meet,
     Their Saviour and brethren transported to greet;
     While the anthems of rapture unceasingly roll,
     And the smile of our Jesus is the feast of the soul."

But while we linger on these mortal shores, other words, from the lips
of Jesus, still fall upon our ears.

When Paul was on his way to the feast of the Passover at Jerusalem, he
tarried for a brief space at Ephesus. Here he called together the elders
of the church, and gave them an account of his labors, and exhorted them
to diligence in the cause of their Master. And in that memorable
farewell address, while urging upon the strong the duty of supporting
the weak, he enforces his doctrine, by reminding them of the "words of
the Lord Jesus," where he says,

     It is more blessed to give than to receive.

John was banished to the Isle of Patmos, for the word of God, and the
testimony of Jesus. In a vision, he saw one like unto the Son of man,
walking in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks. His hair was like
wool, white as snow; his eyes as a flame of fire; his feet like fine
brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice like the sound of
many waters.

In his right hand were seven stars: and out of his mouth went a two
edged sword: and his countenance _was_ as the sun shining in his
strength. And when John saw him, he fell at his feet as one dead. But
Jesus laid his right hand upon him saying:

     Fear not; I am the first and the last: _I am_ he that liveth,
     and was dead; and, behold, I am alive forever more, Amen; and
     have the keys of hell and of death. Write the things which
     thou hast seen, and the things which are, and the things which
     shall be hereafter; the mystery of the seven stars which thou
     sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks.
     The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches; and the
     seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches.

And these are the words which he commanded John to write to the angels,
or ministers, of the seven churches.

To the church in Ephesus, write:

     I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how
     thou canst not bear them which are evil: and thou hast tried
     them which say they are apostles and are not, and hast found
     them liars: and hast borne, and hast patience, and for my
     name's sake hast labored, and hast not fainted. Nevertheless I
     have _somewhat_ against thee, because thou hast left thy first
     love. Remember, therefore from whence thou art fallen, and
     repent, and do thy first works; or else I will come unto thee
     quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place,
     except thou repent. But this thou hast, that thou hatest the
     deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.

To the church of Smyrna, write:

     I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, but thou art
     rich; and _I know_ the blasphemy of them which say they are
     Jews, and are not, but _are_ the synagogue of Satan. Fear none
     of those things which thou shalt suffer: behold, the devil
     shall cast _some_ of you into prison, that ye may be tried;
     and ye shall have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto
     death, and I will give thee a crown of life.

To the church in Pergamos, write:

     I know thy works, and where thou dwellest, _even_ where
     Satan's seat _is_: and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not
     denied my faith, even in those days wherein Antipas _was_ my
     faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan
     dwelleth. But I have a few things against thee, because thou
     hast there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught
     Balak to cast a stumbling-block before the children of Israel,
     to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to commit
     fornication. So hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of
     the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. Repent, or else I will
     come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them with the
     sword of my mouth.

To the church at Thyatira, write:

     I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy
     patience, and thy works; and the last _to be_ more than the
     first. Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee,
     because thou sufferest that woman, Jezebel, which calleth
     herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to
     commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols.
     And I gave her space to repent of her fornication; and she
     repented not. Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them
     that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except
     they repent of their deeds. And I will kill her children with
     death: and all the churches shall know that I am he which
     searcheth the reins and hearts; and I will give unto every one
     of you according to your works. But unto you I say, and unto
     the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine, and
     which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak; I
     will put upon you none other burden. But that which ye have
     _already_, hold fast till I come. And he that overcometh, and
     keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over
     the nations; and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the
     vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers, even as
     I received of my Father; and I will give him the morning star.

To the church in Sardis, write:

     I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and
     art dead. Be watchful and strengthen the things which remain,
     that are ready to die: for I have not found thy works perfect
     before God. Remember therefore how thou hast received and
     heard, and hold fast and repent. If therefore thou shalt not
     watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know
     what hour I will come upon thee. Thou hast a few names even in
     Sardis which have not defiled their garments, and they shall
     walk with me in white, for they are worthy.

To the church in Philadelphia, write:

     I know thy works. Behold, I have set before thee an open door,
     and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and
     hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name. Behold, I will
     make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews,
     and are not, but do lie; behold I will make them to come and
     worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.
     Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will
     keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon
     all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. Behold,
     I come quickly; hold that fast which thou hast, that no man
     take thy crown. Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in
     the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will
     write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of
     my God, _which is_ new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of
     heaven from my God; and _I will write upon him_ my new name.

To the church of the Laodiceans, write:

     I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would
     thou wert cold or hot. So then because thou art lukewarm, and
     neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth.
     Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and
     have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched,
     and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.

     I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou
     mayest be rich; and white raiment, that thou mayest be
     clothed, and _that_ the shame of thy nakedness do not appear;
     and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou mayest see. As
     many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; be zealous, therefore,
     and repent. Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man
     hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and
     will sup with him, and he with me. To him that overcometh
     will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also
     overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne.

John in his vision saw also a new heaven and a new earth; and there was
no more sea. For the former things were passed away. And Jesus who sat
upon the throne, said:

     Behold, I make all things new.

And he said to John:

     Write: for these words are true and faithful. It is done. I am
     Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give unto
     him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life
     freely.

     He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his
     God, and he shall be my son. But the fearful, and unbelieving,
     and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and
     sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their
     part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which
     is the second death.

And John saw the holy city, with its jasper walls, its golden streets,
and gates of pearl; its crystal river, and tree of life, with its
perpetual fruits and healing leaves; and the light of the city was the
glory of the Lamb. And he spake to John and said,

     I, Jesus, have sent mine angel to testify unto you these
     things, in the churches. I am the root and the offspring of
     David, _and_ the bright and morning star.

     And the Spirit and the bride say, come. And let him that
     heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And
     whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.

     For I testify unto every one that heareth the words of the
     prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things,
     God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this
     book. And if any man shall take away from the words of the
     book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the
     book of life, and out of the holy city, and _from_ the things
     which are written in this book.

He which testifieth these things saith,

     Surely I come quickly: Amen.

Even so, come, Lord Jesus. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
you all. Amen.




INDEX


  MATTHEW.

  CHAP. III.

  VERSES.                  PAGE.

  13 to 16                    16

  CHAP. IV.

   1 to  8                    17
   9 "  11                    18
  12 "  20                    36
  21, 22                      37
  23 to 25                    39

  CHAP. V.

   1 to  3                    39
   4 "  13                    40
  14 "  19                    41
  20 "  24                    42
  25 "  30                    43
  31 "  36                    44
  37 "  45                    45
  46 "  48                    46

  CHAP. VI.

   1, 2                       46
   3 to  7                    47
   8 "  16                    48
  17 "  23                    49
  24 "  29                    50
  30 "  34                    51

  CHAP. VII.

   1 to  6                    52
   7 "  14                    53
  15 "  22                    54
  23 "  29                    55

  CHAP. VIII.

   1                          55
   2 to  4                    57
   7 "   9                    78
  10 "  13                    79
  14 "  17                    38
  18 "  22                   105
  23 to 27                   106
  28, 29                     107
  30 to 34                   108

  CHAP. IX.

   1, 10 to 13               109
   2, 4, 8, 9                 59
  14 to 18                   110
  19, 20                     111
  22 to 24                   112
  26 "  30                   113
  31 "  34                   114
  35 "  38                   115

  CHAP. X.

   1, 5                      115
   2 to  4                    72
   6 "  14                   116
  15 "  20                   117
  21 "  26                   118
  27 "  35                   119
  36 "  42                   120

  CHAP. XI.

   1                         121
   2                          80
   5 to  8                    81
   9 "  15                    82
  16 "  21                    83
  22 "  27                    84
  28 "  30                    85

  CHAP. XII.

   1, 2, 4                    68
   5, 6, 7, 9, 10             69
  11 to 13                    70
  15, 17 " 21                 71
  22 to 27                    88
  28 "  32                    89
  33 "  37                    90
  38 "  42                    91
  43 "  48                    92
  49, 50                      93

  CHAP. XIII.

   1, 2, 4, 5                 93
   5, 10, 11, 12              94
  13 to 17                    95
  18                          99
  19                         100
  24 to 80                    96
  31                          97
  32, 33, 35                  98
  36 to 41                   102
  42 "  48                   103
  49 "  52                   104
  53                         105
  54 to 57                   114
  58                         115

  CHAP. XIV.

   1, 2                      121
   2 to  4                   135
   5 "   9                   136
   7, 8                      122
  10 to 12                   123
  15, 16                     124
  27 to 33                   127
  35                         128

  CHAP. XV.

  12 to 16                   137
  17 "  20                   138
  21 "  25                   139
  27 "  29                   140
  29 "  31, 33 to 36         141
  37 "  39                   142

  CHAP. XVI.
   1 to  3                   142
   4 to  9                   143
  10, 11                     144
  12 to 14                   145
  16 "  21                   146
  22, 23, 26                 147
  27                         148

  CHAP. XVII.

   1 to 6                    149
   7, 9 to 12                150
  13 to 17                   151
  18 "  20                   152
  21 "  23                   153
  24 "  27                   154

  CHAP. XVIII.

   1 to  3                   157
   4 "   8                   158
   9 "  15                   159
  16 "  20                   160
  21 "  28                   161
  29 "  35                   162

  CHAP. XIX.

   1                         237
   2                         238
   3 to  5                   242
   6 "   9                   243
  10 "  13                   244
  15 "  18                   245
  19 "  24                   246
  25, 27 to 29               247

  CHAP. XX.

   1 to  7                   248
   8 "  13                   249
  14 "  18                   250
  19, 20, 22                 251
  23, 24                     252

  CHAP. XXI.

   1 to  3                   260
   4 "   8                   261
   9                         262
  10, 11, 14 to 16           263
  17 to 22                   266
  12                         267
  23 to 25                   269
  28 "  32                   270
  33 "  35                   271
  40 "  42                   272
  43 "  46                   273

  CHAP. XXII.

   1 to  6                   274
   7 "  13                   275
  14 "  21                   276
  22 "  25, 28               277
  30, 33                     278
  34 to 36, 38 to 40         279
  41 "  43                   280
  46                         281

  CHAP. XXIII.

   1 to  6                   284
   7 "  14                   285
  15 "  20                   286
  21 "  27                   287
  28 "  34                   288
  35 "  39                   289

  CHAP. XXIV.

   1 to  3                   290
   4 "   8                   291
   9, 10                     292
  11 to 15                   293
  20, 21                     294
  26 to 29                   296
  30 " 32                    297
  34, 35                     298
  36, 37 to 42               299
  43 to 47                   300
  48 " 51                    301

  CHAP. XXV.

   1 to  5                   301
   6 "  13                   302
   4 "  19                   303
  20 "  24                   304
  25 "  31                   305
  32 "  37                   306
  38 "  44                   307
  45, 46                     308

  CHAP. XXVI.

   6 to  8                   258
  10, 12, 13                 259
  15 to 17                   309
  18, 19                     310
  26                         313
  22 to 24                   314
  25                         315
  27 to 28                   319
  29                         320
  31                         337
  32, 33, 35, 36             338
  37 to 41                   339
  42, 44, 45, 46             340
  47                         341
  48 to 51                   342
  52 "  56                   343
  57                         344
  58 to 61                   345
  63 "  68                   346
  70 "  72, 75               347

  CHAP. XXVII.

   1                         348
   2 to  9                   349
  11 "  13                   352
  14                         353
  15 to 17, 19 to 22         354
  24 "  25                   355
  27 "  29, 32               356
  33 "  34                   357
  35 "  37                   358
  40 "  44                   359
  46                         360
  48, 49                     361
  51 to 56                   362
  57, 58                     363
  59 to 66                   364

  CHAP. XXVIII.

   1 to  6                   365
   7, 8, 11 to 15            366
   9, 10, 16 to 19           374
  20                         375


  MARK.

  CHAP. I.

   9, 11                      16
  13                          17
  14, 15, 17                  36
  19 to 22, 26 to 28          37
  29 "  33, 35 to 38          38
  39                          39
  40, 41, 45                  57
  45                          58

  CHAP. II.

   1 to  5                    58
   6 "  13                    59
  14 to 18                    60
  19 "  21                    61
  25, 26                      68
  27, 28                      69

  CHAP. III.

   1, 2                       69
   4, 6                       70
   7 to 12                    71
  13 "  15, 17, 19            72
  24 "  26                    88
  28 "  30                    89
  32                          92
  34                          93

  CHAP. IV.

   1 to  4                    93
   7 "   8                    94
  10 "  13                    99
  14 "  17                   100
  18 "  23                   101
  24 "  25                   102
  26 "  31                    97
  32 "  34                    98
  35                         105
  36 to 41                   106

  CHAP. V.

   1, 3 to 7                 107
  11 to 16, 18, 19           108
  20 "  21                   109
  22, 23                     110
  24, 26, 29 to 32           111
  33 to 39                   112
  40 "  43                   113

  CHAP. VI.

   1 to  2                   114
   4 "   7                   115
   8, 9                      116
  12 to 15                   121
  16 "  27                   122
  29 "  34                   123
  35 "  38                   124
  39 "  41, 43               125
  45 "  48                   126
  50 "  52                   127
  53 "  56                   128

  CHAP. VII.

   1 to  5, 9                135
  11 "  13, 8                136
  14 "  17                   137
  18 "  23                   138
  24 "  27                   139
  28 "  37                   140

  CHAP. VIII.

   1 to 3                    141
   6, 7, 9, 10, 11           142
  12 to 15                   143
  17 "  21                   144
  22 "  27                   145
  29                         146
  31 to 36                   147
  38                         148

  CHAP. IX.

   1                         148
   2 to  4, 6                149
   8 to 10, 12, 13           150
  14 "  18, 20               151
  21 "  28                   152
  29 "  31                   153
  32                         154
  33 to 38                   155
  39 "  45                   156
  46 "  50                   157

  CHAP. X.

   1                         237
   3 to  6                   242
  10 "  12                   243
  13 "  15                   244
  16 "  19                   245
  20, 21, 23, 24             246
  26, 27, 29, 30             247
  31                         248
  32, 33                     250
  34 to 37                   251
  39 "  45                   252
  46 "  49                   253

  CHAP. XI.

   2, 3                      260
   4, 6, 7                   261
  10                         262
  11                         263
  12 to 14                   266
  15 to 23                   267
  24 "  26                   268
  27, 28, 30 to 33           269

  CHAP. XII.

   2 to  5                   271
   6                         272
  12                         273
  13 to 15                   276
  19, 23, 24                 277
  26, 27                     278
  28 to 30                   279
  31 "  35                   280
  36 "  41                   281
  42 "  44                   282

  CHAP. XIII.

   1 to  4                   290
   9                         291
  10                         292
  15 to 16                   294
  19 "  23                   295
  27, 28                     297
  29, 32                     298
  33, 34                     299
  35 to 37                   300

  CHAP. XIV.

   1                         308
   3 to  5                   258
   6 "   9                   259
  11 "  13                   309
  14 "  17                   310
  18 "  20                   314
  23                         319
  26                         337
  30, 31                     338
  33, 35, 36, 37             339
  39 to 41                   340
  43                         341
  44, 45, 47                 342
  51, 52                     343
  53, 54, 56 to 60           345
  61, 64 to 67               346
  68 to 72                   347

  CHAP. XV.

   1                         348
   3, 4                      352
   6 to 11                   354
  12 "  15                   355
  16, 18 to 21               356
  22                         357
  25 to 28                   358
  29, 30, 32                 359
  33 to 35                   360
  39 "  41                   362
  42 "  45                   363
  46, 47                     364

  CHAP. XVI.

   1 to  6                   365
   7 "   8                   366
   9                         368
  10 to 12                   369
  13                         371
  14                         373
  15                         380
  16 to 19                   381
  20                         382


  LUKE.

  CHAP. III.

  21, 22                      16

  CHAP. IV.

   1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9 to 12     17
   6, 7                       18
  14 to 16                    33
  17 "  24                    34
  25 "  30                    35
  31                          36
  32 to 37                    37
  38 "  42                    38
  42, 43                      39

  CHAP. V.

   1 to 8                     56
   9 " 12                     57
  15 " 19                     58
  21, 25, 26, 27              59
  27 " 30, 33, 34             60
  36 " 39                     61

  CHAP. VI.

   1 to  4                    68
   6 "   8                    69
   9, 11                      70
  12 to 15, 17 to 19          72
  20 "  26                    73
  27 "  34                    74
  35 "  38                    75
  39 "  43                    76
  44 "  49                    77

  CHAP. VII.

   1 to  9                    78
  10                          79
  11 to 18                    80
  19 "  22, 24, 25            81
  28, 29                      82
  30 to 35                    83
  36 "  38                    85
  39 "  44                    86
  45 "  50                    87

  CHAP. VIII.

   1 to  3                    87
   4 "   5                    93
   6 "   8                    94
  11 "  13                   100
  14 "  17                   101
  18                         102
  19 to 21                   104
  22 "  25                   106
  26 "  31                   107
  34 "  38                   108
  39 "  40                   109
  42, 43, 45 to 47           111
  48, 50 " 52                112
  53, 55, 56                 113

  CHAP. IX.

   1 to  2                   115
   3                         116
   6 to  9                   121
  10                         123
  11, 12                     124
  13, 14                     125
  18                         145
  19, 20                     146
  23, 25                     147
  26                         148
  28 to 35                   149
  36, 37                     150
  38, 41                     151
  42                         152
  43, 44                     153
  45, 46                     154
  47 to 50                   155
  51 "  60                   189
  61, 62                     190

  CHAP. X.

   1 to  4                   190
   5 "  11                   191
  12 "  19                   192
  20 "  24                   193
  25 "  31                   194
  32 "  37                   195
  38 "  42                   196

  CHAP. XI.

   1, 2                      196
   3 to  9                   197
  10 "  17                   198
  20 "  24                   199
  25 "  29                   200
  30 "  34                   201
  35 "  42                   202
  43 "  49                   203
  50 "  54                   204

  CHAP. XII.

   1 to  5                   205
   6 "  11                   206
  12 "  18                   207
  19 "  26                   208
  27 "  33                   209
  34 "  39                   210
  40 "  46                   211
  47 "  52                   212
  53 "  58                   213
  59                         214

  CHAP. XIII.

   1 to  4                   214
   5 "  12                   215
  13 "  19                   216
  20 "  26                   217
  27 "  33, 34, 35           218

  CHAP. XIV.

   1                         219
   2 to 10                   220
  11 "  16                   221
  17 "  22                   222
  23 "  29                   223
  30 "  35                   224

  CHAP. XV.

   1 to  7                   225
   8 "  13                   226
  14 "  20                   227
  21 "  27                   228
  28 "  32                   229

  CHAP. XVI.

   1 to  5                   230
   6 "  11                   231
  12 "  17                   232
  18 "  24                   233
  25 "  30                   234
  31                         235

  CHAP. XVII.

   1 to  4                   235
   5 "  10                   236
  11 "  19                   237
  20 "  26                   238
  27 "  34                   239
  35 "  37                   240

  CHAP. XVIII.

   1 to  4                   240
   5 "  11                   241
  12 "  14                   242
  15                         244
  31                         250
  34                         251
  35 to 43                   253

  CHAP. XIX.

   1                         253
   2 to  5                   254
   6 "  14                   255
  15 "  21                   256
  22 "  27                   257
  28                         258
  29, 30                     260
  32 to 38                   261
  39 "  44                   262
  45, 47, 48                 267

  CHAP. XX.

   1, 2, 6                   268
   9 to 12                   271
  13 "  17                   272
  19                         273
  20                         276
  26 to 35                   277
  36, 38, 39, 40             278
  42 to 45                   281

  CHAP. XXI.

   1                         281
   4                         282
   5 to  7                   290
   8 "  12                   291
  15 "  16                   292
  16 "  19                   293
  20 "  23                   294
  24                         295
  25                         296
  26, 28, 29                 297
  30 to 32, 34 to 36         298
  37, 38                     309

  CHAP. XXII.

   2 to 4, 6 to 10           309
  14 "  17                   310
  19, 21, 22                 313
  23                         314
  24 to 30                   317
  31 "  35                   318
  36 "  38                   319
  39                         337
  40                         338
  41 to 44                   339
  45                         340
  47 to 49, 51               342
  52, 53                     343
  54                         344
  55                         345
  56, 63 to 65               346
  57 to 61                   347
  66 "  71                   348

  CHAP. XXIII.

   1                         348
   2, 3                      352
   4 to 14                   353
  15 "  20                   354
  21 "  25                   355
  26 "  29                   356
  30 "  34                   357
  35 "  39                   359
  40 "  43, 45               360
  48, 49                     362
  50 to 52                   363
  54 "  56                   364

  CHAP. XXIV.

   1 to  6                   366
   7 "  11                   367
  12                         368
  13                         369
  15 to 25                   370
  26 "  36                   371
  37 "  43                   372
  44 "  47                   379
  48 "  50                   380
  51, 52                     381
  53                         382


  JOHN.

  CHAP. I.

  19 to 23                    18
  24 "  38                    19
  39 "  47                    20
  48 "  51                    21

  CHAP. II.

   1 to  9                    22
  10 "  20                    23
  20 "  25                    24

  CHAP. III.

   1 to  6                    24
   6 "  13                    25
  14 "  21                    26
  22 "  30                    27
  31 "  36                    28

  CHAP. IV.

   1 to  9                    28
  10 "  16                    29
  17 "  24                    30
  25 "  36                    31
  37 "  45                    32
  46 "  54                    33

  CHAP. V.

   1 to  9                    62
  10 "  19                    63
  20 "  24                    64
  25 "  32                    65
  33 "  41                    66
  42 "  45                    67

  CHAP. VI.

   1, 2                      123
   3 to  7                   124
   8 "  13                   125
  14 "  19                   126
  21                         127
  22 to 24                   128
  25 "  30                   129
  40 "  46                   131
  47 "  55                   132
  56 "  64                   133
  65 "  71                   134

  CHAP. VII.

   1                         153
   2 to  8                   163
   9 "  21                   164
  22 "  29                   165
  30 "  39                   166
  40 "  53                   167

  CHAP. VIII.

   1                         167
   2 to 10                   168
  11 "  16                   169
  17 "  24                   170
  25 "  31                   171
  32 "  40                   172
  41 "  46                   173
  47 "  55                   174
  56 "  59                   175

  CHAP. IX.

   1 to  3                   175
   4 "  16                   176
  17 "  29                   177
  30 "  41                   178

  CHAP. X.

   1 to  5                   179
   6 "  13                   180
  14 "  24                   181
  25 "  32                   182
  33 "  42                   183

  CHAP. XI.

   1 to  9                   184
  10 "  21                   185
  22 "  38                   186
  39 "  42                   187
  43 "  54                   188
  55 "  57                   258

  CHAP. XII.

   1 to  6                   258
   7, 9 to 11                259
  12, 13                     260
  14 to 18                   261
  19                         263
  20 to 27                   264
  28 "  36                   265
  37 "  50                   282

  CHAP. XIII.

   1 to 10                   311
  11 "  17                   312
  18 "  19                   313
  20 "  22                   314
  23 "  32                   315
  33 "  38                   316

  CHAP. XIV.

   1 to  7                   320
   8 "  14                   321
  15 "  22                   322
  23 "  28                   323
  29 "  31                   324

  CHAP. XV.

   1, 2                      324
   3 to  9                   325
  10 "  16                   326
  17 "  23                   327
  24 "  27                   328

  CHAP. XVI.

   1, 2                      328
   3 to  9                   329
  10 "  17                   330
  18 "  23                   331
  24 "  31                   332
  32, 33                     333

  CHAP. XVII.

   1, 2                      333
   3 to  9                   334
  10 "  15                   335
  16 "  23                   336
  24 "  26                   337

  CHAP. XVIII.

   1                         337
   2, 3                      340
  10, 11                     342
  12 to 16, 19 to 23         344
  24                         345
  17                         346
  18, 25, 26                 347
  28                         348
  29 to 32                   349
  33 "  38                   350
  39, 40                     351

  CHAP. XIX.

   1 to 11                   351
  12 "  14                   352
  15                         353
  16                         355
  17 to 21                   358
  25 "  27                   360
  28 "  30                   361
  31                         362
  32 to 39                   363
  40 "  42                   364

  CHAP. XX.

   1 to  5                   367
   6 "  16                   368
  17 "  18                   369
  19                         371
  20 to 22                   372
  23 "  29                   373
  30 "  31                   382

  CHAP. XXI.

   1 to  6                   375
   7 "  15                   376
  16 "  18                   377
  19 "  24                   378
  25                         382


  MISCELLANEOUS.

  ACTS.

   1: 4                      379
   1: 5 to  8                280
   1: 9 "  11                381
   1:12                      382
  20:35                      384

  1 COR.

  11:23, 24                  313
  11:25                      319
  15: 6                      375
  15: 7                      378

  REV.

   1:17 to 20 & 2: 1 to 5    385
   2: 6 to 13                386
   2:14 "  20                387
   2:21 "  27                388
   2:28, 29 & 3: 1 to 8      389
   3: 9 to 12                390
   3:13 "  20                391
   3:21, 22 & 2: 5 to 8      392
  22:16 to 19                393
  22:20                      394




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


The following corrections have been made to the text:

     Page 5: LXXIV.[original has XXIV.] The two Thieves

     Page 16: "Thou art my beloved son, in whom I am well
     pleased."[quotation mark missing in original]

     Page 30: Sir, I perceive[original has percieve] that thou art
     a prophet.

     Page 123: JESUS FEEDS FIVE THOUSAND[original has extraneous
     hyphen]

     Page 124: when it was evening, his disciples[original has
     diciples]

     Page 165: know this man whence he is,[original has a period]
     but when

     Page 165: no man knoweth whence he is.[original has a comma]

     Page 185: in the grave four days already.[period missing in
     original]

     Page 194: and fell among thieves[original has theives]

     Page 267: Jesus answering[original has anwering] saith unto
     them

     Page 344: took Jesus and bound him, and led[original has lead]
     him away

     Page 349: Then said Pilate unto[original has uuto] them

     Page 383: "[quotation mark missing in original]The saints of
     all ages

     Page 399: CHAP. XVIII.[period missing in original]

     Page 399: CHAP. XIX.[period missing in original]

     Page 400: 7, 9[original has extraneous comma] to 11





End of Project Gutenberg's Walks and Words of Jesus, by M. N. Olmsted

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WALKS AND WORDS OF JESUS ***

***** This file should be named 35674.txt or 35674.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/6/7/35674/

Produced by Heiko Evermann, Fox in the Stars, (scanned by
Fox in the Stars from the collection of Brays Advent
Christian Church in Iberia, Missouri), Michael Zeug, Lisa
Reigel, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
