The Project Gutenberg EBook of Psycho-Phone Messages, by Francis Grierson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Psycho-Phone Messages

Author: Francis Grierson

Release Date: March 25, 2011 [EBook #35681]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PSYCHO-PHONE MESSAGES ***




Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)









PSYCHO-PHONE MESSAGES

RECORDED BY FRANCIS GRIERSON

Spiritual Messages from the late General U. S. Grant, on Adequate
Preparation in America; Thomas Jefferson, on the Future of American
Democracy; Benjamin Disraeli, on English and Irish Affairs; Prince
Bismarck, on the Indemnities; John Marshall, on the Psychology of the
Supreme Court of the United States; Alexander Hamilton, on the Forces that
Precede Revolution; Abraham Lincoln, on the Future of Mexico; Robert
Ingersoll, on Our Great Women; Henry Ward Beecher, on the New Puritanism;
Benjamin Wade, of Ohio, on President Harding; General B. H. Grierson, on
Japan, Mexico and California, etc.




  PSYCHO-PHONE
  MESSAGES


  RECORDED BY
  FRANCIS GRIERSON


  Published by
  AUSTIN PUBLISHING COMPANY
  Los Angeles, California




  Copyright, June 1921
  By B. F. Austin




INTRODUCTION


The word "psycho-phone" was first suggested and used by Mr. Francis
Grierson in a lecture I heard him deliver before the Toronto Theosophical
Society, August 31st, 1919, a year before Thomas Edison announced his
intention of devising an instrument which he hopes will serve to establish
intercourse between our world and the world of spirit.

My own experiences as a student in this sphere of psychic research in
Europe and America, covering a period of thirty years, convince me that we
have here a revelation of a new mode of spiritual communication unlike
anything heretofore given to the world, not only different in quality but
different in purpose.

From personal knowledge I can state that the recorder of these messages
has not acted on ideas advanced by anyone living on our plane.

Looking back over the past two decades, I am led to believe that Mr.
Grierson's predictions in "The Invincible Alliance," and in that startling
poem, "The Awakening in Westminster Abbey," forecasting the war and the
tragic events in Ireland, were spiritual and psycho-phonic in character.

From 1909 to 1911 Francis Grierson was the acknowledged leading writer on
"The New Age," of London, which at that time had as contributors, H. G.
Wells, Bernard Shaw, Arnold Bennett, the two Chestertons, Hillaire
Belloc--in one word, all the most prominent writers and advanced thinkers
in Britain, yet not one of them except Mr. Grierson could see the
approaching world upheaval.

Early in 1909 he published a series of articles in that weekly depicting
the coming war, and nothing of so drastic a nature had ever appeared in an
English publication. In the spring of 1913 these articles were published
in book form in London and New York under the title of "The Invincible
Alliance."

In the Westminster Abbey composition, published in "The New Age" in 1910,
the characteristics of four personalities are plainly manifest--Coleridge,
Milton, Shelley and Shakespeare--and I have not forgotten the sensation
caused by this great work in London at the time of its appearance.

Having had occasion to study the social and psychic conditions in France,
Germany, Italy, Austria and England before the great war, and after having
been an eye witness of scenes unique in the annals of musical inspiration
in the artistic and literary circles of Europe as well as the most
intellectual of the royal courts, in which Mr. Grierson was the central
figure, I now have a better understanding of the work he accomplished and
its far-reaching import. The more complex the work the longer must be the
preparation, and we are now confronted with what will appear to many as
the most interesting phase of Mr. Grierson's psychic gifts, for the seer
who ushered in the new mystical movement by the publication of "Modern
Mysticism" in 1899 is now the recorder of messages which must induce
thinking and unprejudiced minds to pause and consider such matters in a
new light, and it is to be hoped that many more messages like these may
be recorded by the same hand.

As I write, I have before me a unique collection of letters written to Mr.
Grierson by men and women eminent in philosophy, art, music, literature
and journalism, in Europe and America. Among the letters that Mr. Grierson
values the most in this remarkable album are eight from members of the
French Academy, with Sully Prudhomme, winner of the first Noble Prize,
heading the list. Which reminds me that I heard him say one evening in
Paris, after hearing Mr. Grierson's music: "You have placed me on the
threshold of the other world. There are not words in the French language
to express what I have felt tonight!" Up to that moment the famous
Academician had been known as an avowed agnostic.

Maeterlinck writes that the first Grierson volume (in French) influenced
him more than any book he had ever read. There are four letters from the
Belgian mystic.

This album is filled with expressions from the most authoritative minds in
literature and art, as well as statesmen, soldiers and diplomats, such as
Jules Simon, the Duc de Broglie, Lord Lytton, British ambassador at Paris;
Lord Reading, British ambassador at Washington; Field Marshall Lord
Wolseley, General B. H. Grierson, U.S.A., leading members of the Bonaparte
family in Paris, Prince Henri of Orleans (son of Louis Philippe), Princess
Eulalia of Spain, and crowned heads who gave receptions in Mr. Grierson's
honor during the past thirty years. There are letters from distinguished
Americans, such as Col. Henry Watterson (who wrote two long editorials on
Mr. Grierson in the Louisville "Courier Journal"), Henry Mills Alden,
editor of "Harper's Monthly," Prof. William James, Marion Reedy, Edwin
Markham, Edith Thomas, Mary Austin, and many leading professors of
Harvard, Yale, Columbia, Cornell, the Universities of Illinois, Wisconsin
and California.

Edwin Bjorkman says, in his "Voices of Tomorrow":--

"To Francis Grierson belongs the honor of having first attained to
prophetic vision of the common goal. In his first volume, published in
Paris in 1889, he suggested every idea which since then has become
recognized as essential not only to Bergson and Maeterlinck but to the
constantly increasing number of writers engaged in making the time
conscious of its own spirit. As we read essay after essay it is as if we
beheld the globe of life revolving slowly between us and some unknown
source of light."

The following remarks from the London "Outlook" seem to me pertinent to
the subject:--

"Grierson is an Englishman, for he was born in Cheshire; Scotland may
justly claim him in that he is a direct descendent of Sir Robert Grierson,
the famous Laird of Lag, who is the hero of Scott's novel, 'The Red
Gauntlet'; that America has had a part in the making of him all readers of
that wonderful book, 'The Valley of Shadows,' know; France can claim him
since he began his musical career in Paris and published his first book in
French; but no special country can claim to have developed his
genius--that is cosmopolitan."

As "Current Opinion" says, in a long study: "He presents a unique
combination of thinker, writer, artist and musician who owes nothing to
any school or any master or system of training; and his experience is
without a parallel in the intellectual world of our day."

LAWRENCE WALDEMAR TONNER,


  245-1/2 So. Spring St.
    Los Angeles, California.




FOREWORD


These messages were begun in September, 1920, and the last was recorded in
May, 1921. I little dreamed that many of the predictions set forth would
be verified so soon. For names, in themselves, count for nothing. The
subliminal mind may assume different names on different occasions. A
message is of value exactly in proportion to the information imparted.

The first communication from General Grant was recorded September ninth.
It is peremptory in tone, and contains a warning touching the insecurity
of the Panama Canal. In November Mr. Harding made a tour of inspection and
found the fortifications of the Canal inadequate. I then decided on the
publication of these messages.

They deal with the actual. Take, for example, John Marshall's documents,
which are filled with warnings no reader with intelligence will attempt to
refute, Disraeli's indictment of English statesmanship in recent times,
Lincoln's utterances on affairs in Europe and Mexico, General Grant on
Preparation, Benjamin Franklin on the Privilege of Liberty, Bishop
Phillips Brooks on the Coming Ordeals, to name but a few.

As a Judge sums up, regardless of who may or may not agree, a decision is
rendered according to the vision of the one who delivers the message.
Principle, not Party, is the basis of judgment.

Witness Disraeli's remark that the blunders committed by the British
Parliament would have been impossible in an Irish Parliament in Dublin.

In a series of articles in "Nash's Magazine" Mr. Basil King suggests that
"the means of communication with the plane next above us may be through
the everlasting doors which the subliminal opens upward. Through these
doors the mind may go up and out; through these doors the light may come
in and down."

In our group of investigators we have had the perseverence essential for
serious development, and, as in all demonstrations, whether physical or
psychical, everything depends on conditions, so we have had periods of
weeks when no message of any kind was received.

A striking feature of these communications is their freedom from restraint
imposed by popular opinion. They contain neither theories nor appeals.
Warnings are uttered concerning events and their inevitable reactions.

The psycho-phonic waves, by which the messages are imparted, are as
definite as those received by wireless methods.

FRANCIS GRIERSON.

Los Angeles, California




CONTENTS


                                                              PAGE

  Introduction                                                   5

  Foreword                                                      13

  Thomas Reed, of Maine, Late Speaker of the House, on the
  Peace League                                                  21

  General U. S. Grant, on Adequate Preparation in America       24

  General U. S. Grant (second message)                          27

  Thomas Jefferson, on the Future of American Democracy         30

  Elizabeth Cady Stanton, on the Future of American Women       33

  Benjamin Franklin, on the Privilege of Liberty                43

  John Marshall, "The Expounder of the Constitution," on the
  Psychology of the Supreme Court                               46

  Daniel Webster, on "Bohemian" Statesmen                       47

  Oliver Wendell Holmes, on the New Eden                        49

  Benjamin Wade, Late Governor of Ohio, U. S. Senator, on
  President Harding                                             51

  Don Piatt, Late Editor of "The Capital," Washington,
  D. C., on Prohibition and the Blue Laws                       55

  Benjamin Disraeli, on English and Irish Affairs               58

  Prince Bismarck, on Germany and the Indemnities               63

  Henry Ward Beecher, on the New Puritanism                     70

  John Marshall, on Liberty and the League (second message)     74

  Abraham Lincoln, on the Future of Mexico                      79

  Robert Ingersoll, on Our Great Women                          82

  Stephen A. Douglass, on War Between England and America       83

  General B. H. Grierson, on Japan and California               85

  Alexander Hamilton, on the Forces that Precede Revolution     89

  Phillips Brooks, on The Coming Ordeals                        93




Psycho-phone Messages




THOMAS B. REED

(Late Speaker of the House)

Recorded September seventh, 1920.


The formidable imbecility of the Senate rivaled the fantastic irritability
of the President.

Born with a Utopian temperament, Mr. Wilson has a Herculean passion for
generalities and a Lilliputian penchant for details.

You scratched the Teutons at Versailles and found a new species of Tartar;
you scratched the Japanese and found a Pacifist camouflage; you scratched
the Poles and found a pianist with his hair uncut; you scratched the
French and found a tiger with his claws unclipped. Your mania for
scratching other nations will keep your nails manicured without the aid of
scissors.

Never since the Declaration of Independence and the first peal of the
Liberty Bell did a chief executive walk up a winding stair into so pretty
a parlor as when Mr. Wilson, with the naivete of a Princeton president,
faced that cacophony of sectional jazz bands to witness the cryptic
hand-writing on the wall at the peace table. Who was his adviser? Was it a
gentleman with owl spectacles from the oil fields of Texas? And was there
no one who could have cautioned him against the finesse of Clemenceau who
spent sixty years sharpening his wits on the political grindstone of
Europe? Was no one in America aware that the French Premier is a fluent
speaker in English?

Mr. Wilson could speak no French, which reminds me that Jack Spratt could
eat no fat and his wife could eat no lean, and so betwixt them both they
licked the platter clean. But a clean plate does not mean a clean slate,
and the President brought one home filled with the riddle of the Sphinx.
Yet the Peace Conference revealed the secret of perpetual motion and
conferred a timely service, for the hubbub created by the
Wilson-Lansing-House-Party at Versailles kept the Senate from passing into
a trance.

A blind man can tell the difference between pepper pods and apple
dumplings, but who can tell where tweedle-dee ends and tweedle-dum begins?
No one. Then how can your statesmen distinguish between the psychological
characteristics of the Hungarians and the Bohemians, the Bavarians and the
Saxons, the difference between a polka and a polonaise, a pig in a stye
and a pig in a slaughter house?

Patriotism often depends on an influence too subtle for analysis, and yet
they would enact drastic laws to bind all Europe in one bond. They will
hardly succeed in a thousand years.

Some pay through the nose, some through the pocket and some through the
stomach. Americans are paying through all three. Danton declared the
secret of the French Revolution was audacity, and audacity, and again
audacity, but what you need today is vigilance repeated ad infinitum.

I am placing you in communication with some of the most far-reaching minds
of the past hundred and fifty years. The psycho-phone is new and we are
using it for the first time.




THE LATE GENERAL U. S. GRANT

Recorded September Ninth, 1920


The imbroglio started by President Carranza is beginning to influence the
politicians of Buenos Ayres and other centers in South America. They have
secretly repudiated the Monroe Doctrine. Their next maneuver will be a
public repudiation.

I would say to Congress, stop juggling with phrases and attend to the
business of the hour. The majority have been chasing shadows in a sphere
of politics illumined by moonshine bottled in the Blue Ridge. I was more
careful of my brand. When President Lincoln asked for the label, so he
could recommend it to other generals, he was not far wrong in his
surmises. It is not so much the thing as the quality that counts. Most of
you at Washington will have to learn the difference between inhibition and
prohibition.

The United States will be isolated within three years from this date if
the blowhards from the woolly constituencies are not suppressed. You need
a broncho buster in the Senate and a donkey muzzler in the House.

When a boycott is started by the countries south of the Union your enemies
in Europe will begin to act. It is not a question of commerce but of
common sense. I repeat what Lincoln said in 1862: "The times are dark and
the spirits of ruin are abroad in all their power."

My message to Congress is: See that fifty thousand troops are stationed
permanently near the District of Columbia.

My message to the Governors of New York, Pennsylvania and Illinois is: Get
ready! The troops on the borders of Texas, New Mexico and Arizona are
inadequate. The fortifications of the Panama and at San Diego and San
Pedro are inadequate. You are in the same condition the French were in
previous to 1789, when the motto was, "After us the Deluge." The Deluge
came but it did not consist of water.

Our foes of the old Germany and the new Russia count on crippling the
United States through South America, with the aid of Japan; but he who
delivers the first blow will be the victor.

The Germans still believe they can eventually invade France, enter Paris
and cause a revolution, found a new empire to include France, Belgium,
Holland and Switzerland, with Italy later on. This dream includes a
practical understanding with Soviet Russia, which, by that time, they
expect would be weary of futile experiments. Plots will be exposed that
will make it apparent how vain some of your optimistic surmises have been.
Diplomats who are not psychologists will be balked by developments in
Switzerland, that nation having become the rendezvous of disillusioned
wire-pullers without a country.

You are now at the cross roads. Take the wrong turning and you will come
to the skull and cross bones.

I could say much more but we are not yet experts in this new mode of
inter-communication and must be brief.




GENERAL U. S. GRANT.

(Second Message)

Recorded May Third, 1921


I concur with Alexander Stephens when he says: "Congress has never been so
supine and so serpentine."

Millions are sent to the people of distant countries in no way related to
our Government or people, and yet Congress permits thousands of veterans
of the great war to continue in a state of neglect, suffering and
humiliation.

Do the authorities believe that when the day of trial arrives the friends
and relatives of these veterans will hurry to volunteer for active
service? The country is being fascinated by incidents and events in
far-off regions, and the tragic conditions at home have entered a chronic
stage.

There are too many old men in Congress--men who never did more than fight
grasshoppers or watch a game of football from reserved seats.

We do not like the looks of the President's pronunciamento. It contains
too many side issues. He is making Mr. Wilson's mistake of being verbose.
Mr. Wilson tried to hypnotize Europe; the Senate is trying to hypnotize
Mr. Harding. Popularity breeds as much contempt as familiarity. No
President can ever succeed in conciliating all classes, sections and
parties.

The politicians of Buenos Ayres have now spoken as I predicted in my first
message. They have attacked Mr. Harding for his speech on Pan-Americanism,
all which goes to prove that the President is repeating for South America
Mr. Wilson's blunders in France.

Remember what Lincoln said to Judge Whitney:--

"Those fellows think I don't see anything, but I see all around them. I
see better what they want to do with me than they do themselves."

The politicians of South America see better what the President wants to do
with them than he does himself.

The administration will face a critical period in the early fall. There
will be a break in the dominant phalanx. A social and political
readjustment will compel mediation in quarters the most unexpected.

The new political and commercial dispensation for the English-speaking
countries will begin on September twenty-second at two P.M.




THOMAS JEFFERSON


Few politicians understand the difference between scene-shifting and
progress. Things shift, new names are applied, but the vicious circle
continues.

I see no evidence that human nature has changed since my time, in this or
any other country.

If the Republican Ship of State is leaking, the Democratic craft is
drifting without sail or rudder. What your statesmen fail to understand is
that progress is not induced by force but by free will. New political
planks rammed into your platforms against the wishes of the majority are
without significance. The phrase, "The Solid South," which meant something
vital at one time, has no meaning in these days of quick change and
movie-show influences.

Democracy, in some sections, is a matter of climate. If you have come to a
point where science and sentimentality are engaged in a drastic war, then
the Democratic phalanx must undergo some rude changes.

The Democratic tail wagged the Republican dog for some time, but that
curious spectacle has lost its hold on public interest. It is not now a
question of one end wagging the other, but who will wag both. If
Republicans stand for crude force, and Democrats for antebellum
sentimentality, both are doomed together.

In the South, Democracy means politics at the polls, aristocracy in the
parlor. In the North, Republicanism means the aristocracy of wealth.

However, your conception of social equality is undergoing modification.

In Washington's time the slogan was revolution; in Lincoln's time it was
abolition; in your time it is prohibition, which reminds me that laws
passed in haste bring long periods of repentance.

Effective effrontery is the result of courageous ignorance, for millions
are more easily influenced by illusive promises than by the lessons of
experience.

Modern civilization has hurried to meet four deadly things--riches,
pleasures, materialism and war. But the tortoise is a better example of
progress than the hare fleeing before the greyhound.




ELIZABETH CADY STANTON


It appalls the normal mind to stop and consider the criminal blunders made
by the educated Prussian and the educated Englishman prior to 1914. No
statesman had the vision to see what was going to happen to the man-made
world.

Since it is a question of intuition and feeling versus cold reason and
business logic, let us see which side is the more vital and all-enduring.
Let us consider for a brief space what it is that influences people. Let
us consider the influence exerted by the arts. What is music? Emotion
created by sound vibrations. What is dramatic acting? Emotion created by
vocal vibrations combined with gesture and physical movement. Has anyone
ever witnessed automatic acting that left a profound impression?

Orators become famous when they unite deep feeling with knowledge. But
what gives expression? The power of awakening emotion in others. Feeling
is always more convincing than intellect. Intellect is full of theories,
notions and superstitions. But where you find deep feeling combined with
knowledge, you will find reason directed by qualities which pass through
the surface and attain the heart-throbs of the real.

There are many kinds of emotion. There is the hard emotion of anger, the
confused emotion of fear, the painful emotion of jealousy, the
indescribable emotion of despair, the radiant emotion of joy. But the
greatest emotion of all is that of knowledge united to feeling.

Men, as a rule, speak of emotion as a weakness, and they confuse it with
impulse--a very different thing. Impulse is often the result of weak
nerves, uncontrolled by the will; but we must not confuse it with the
emotional quality which underlies all great achievement in art,
literature, philosophy and personality. The more impulsive the individual
is, the more primitive the reasoning faculty.

English and American business men are limited in general knowledge. I have
never been able to discover any distinctive difference between the two.
In France and Italy many business men are able to discuss art, literature
and music on the same level with the masters. The Latin races and the
Celtic races possess a culture that can be traced back for two or three
thousand years, but Anglo-Saxon culture only to the time of the Saxon
invasion. The Anglo-Saxons were the mushrooms of our civilization. They
were a stolid business people who lacked creative genius.

The outstanding intellect of England today is Celtic. The Scotch, the
Irish and the Welsh combine emotion and power with tenacity of purpose,
and it is this Celtic element that keeps America in the front rank of
nations.

What women have been opposing is the primitive monotony of the Anglo-Saxon
trend. It has meant a mixture of politics and commerce so primitive and so
naive that Frenchmen are amazed when they visit America and note the
striking difference between the culture of the women and the mentality of
the average man.

One of your great mystics has said: "The chemical constituents of human
bodies is the same. The ashes of a saint and the ashes of a sinner give
the same chemical results. As human bodies they are the same, but their
functions separate them and make them totally different, so that the
difference cannot by any hocus-pocus of metaphysics or magic be bridged or
spanned."

Two things of the same material are really different if their functions
are different. The real substance of a thing is in its function. We have
to judge people by the things they do, not by their appearance; for there
is no clear understanding between two persons whose aims are different.
This is why there are so many divorces. This is why so many intellectual
women live separate lives from their husbands in the same house.

People seem to be similar and equal but they differ according to their
functions. If we take a philosopher, a hangman and a sailor who appear to
be equal as human beings we shall see that in their functions there is
nothing in common. The souls of these men are different in the very
nature, origin and purpose of their existence.

Thousands of people move in a world of material shadows while their souls,
the substance of which is intellectual and spiritual, inhabit a sphere
absolutely apart. Especially is this the case with many of the cultured
women of our time who are compelled to live a double life. Their
intellects are far removed from the ordinary pursuits of the commercial
world.

A woman of spiritual culture who marries a commercial man has married a
shadow. A woman of high ideals who marries a professional politician has
hitched her motor car to a meteor. A romantic woman married to a
multi-millionaire whose world is bound in liberty bonds loses her liberty.
A metaphysical woman who marries a financier is handicapped by the
physical.

A union of spiritual functions with material formulas is impossible, for
there is no way in which mere sensation can be made to harmonize with the
higher emotions.

The new era of woman, which is just beginning to dawn, will direct
education; and through education, politics; through politics, the progress
of nations. Heretofore, the commercial and political world had a free
hand. The progressive element was confined to a limited number of men in
the colleges and the ministry, together with a remnant of law-makers. But
their influence was negative owing to lack of material support.

Women will now present a formidable force in numbers, backed by a
spiritual power, aided by men who understand the difference between
functions and appearance, sensuous desires and ideal emotions.

For years I maintained that women do not realize the power they possess.
They live so much in a world of their own that they do not regard the
man-made commercial world as worth elevating.

Thousands of men are living in a sphere some degrees below the normal.
They have been surrounded from the beginning with influences that
obliterate all the higher faculties of the mind.

It has taken woman some centuries to rise to power, but the work is only
half done. Never can the commercial instinct and the intellectual ideal be
made to harmonize. The two spheres of consciousness are totally distinct.

The modern intellect has been organized without considering the moral
meaning of its activity. This has caused the delusion that the crowning
glory of European culture is the dreadnaught. Ninety per cent of all
modern inventions are for bodily destruction or bodily comfort. While the
body lolls in luxury, the spirit is soused in lethargy.

As Ouspensky says, we have created two lives--one material, the other
spiritual. I believe this is owing to the fact that man is living and
working in the material and woman in the spiritual. In other words, she is
carrying her own responsibilities on one shoulder and man's baneful
burdens on the other. The figure of Atlas holding up the Globe should be
changed to that of a female.

One would think that in these days, when psychology is taught even to
children, that a man who has lived forty years in the world of action
would know better than to boast of his eternal activities. The word "busy"
has grown to be a veritable fetish with thousands who have little or
nothing to do. The truth is, most men are not half as busy as they seem
and not more than a fourth as wise as they look.

We have to find out by exact analysis just what incentive lies behind
people's actions. What makes the distinction is the quality of our acts.
Everything in the material and the spiritual worlds is judged according to
quality. Gold, diamonds, clothes, bricks, music, poetry, literature, are
adjudged, in the last resort, on the basis of intrinsic value. When people
are engaged in pursuits for the sake of money the results will be on a
plane with the quality of the incentive.

In the work done by women in the past fifty years in this country, the
incentive has been of a higher quality than that shown by men.

While men introduced a coarse realism into the novel, women saved the
situation by new ideals. I do not think there would be much left worth
reading today but for woman's taste and judgment.

In the world of intellect and emotion things hang together. A low plane of
intellect will produce low impulses. The more we know the greater our
control of the different sense organs. Nothing can happen without a
corresponding cause behind it.

The hysteria so common at great political conventions is caused by the
exceedingly limited intelligence of the managers and directors who labor
under the illusion that blind impulse is tantamount to vision. In other
words, where the critical faculties are not developed anything can happen.
And it is not difficult to predict that when political conventions are
swayed by hysterical temperaments the authority at the White House will
have all he can do to steer the Ship of State through the troubled waters
of impulse and confusion.

There is a will to power that is blind. There is another will to power
that brings the higher emotions to bear on the lower impulses, controls
and directs the organs of sense.

The people who elect a President are the ones who will influence his
actions. And when we talk about a President being a good man for business
we are compelled to seek for the reason behind the statement.

If finance lands a President at the White House, women, children, teachers
and philosophers must shift for themselves, since the supreme test lies in
function, and not in manners, words and looks. And finance means finesse.

Do not expect great innovations at the Capitol until a strong woman takes
her seat at the White House; and by this I do not mean one of Barnum's
bearded ladies.

Conservatism is a good thing when it is coupled with vision and judgment,
but bear in mind that monotony and mediocrity start in the same groove,
run at the same pace and arrive at the same grave.




BENJAMIN FRANKLIN


There is but one mark of patriotism and that is vigilance and enthusiasm.
The cause of your trouble is the sincerity with which your foes think and
act and the lukewarm sentiment shown by Americans. The reason is to be
found in the comfort and luxury of the present day compared with the
pioneer sacrifices of your fathers and grandfathers. Your opponents are
vindictive as well as vigilant. They mean what they say and do what they
will. They are working as individuals, as well as in groups and parties,
but Americans who inherited the land with liberty are exchanging both for
the license of the maw.

When school teachers and farm hands are permitted to leave the country for
the city, the end is not so far off as your sophisticated solons of the
State Capitols would lead you to suppose.

I once stated that three movings equal one fire, and I can say now that
the lack of teachers and farm hands has resulted in a damage equal to one
revolution. No calamity comes and goes single handed. The world, the flesh
and the devil are a triumvirate bound together by ties of consanguinity.
Your school teachers are passing over to the world, your farm laborers to
the flesh, and your ministers to the devil.

You are browsing on the stubble. One delinquency involves another, and
eventually the monetary capital of the nation may be reduced to that of
France. The nation will awake one day to the disillusioning fact that
peace and progress cannot be gauged by commercial prosperity alone. For
without food what avails your steel, your oil and your gold?

If you could witness the mortification poor Andrew Carnegie is now
undergoing because of his lack of vision, you would have a lesson not soon
forgotten. He built libraries but furnished no books to fill them. It was
like building houses without windows. When leading business men commit
such folly what can you expect of the nation at large?

The three things most needed by the people are food, raiment and shelter.
The next three are instruction, religion and discipline. Liberty is a
privilege; it comes after all the others. The individual has no rights
inimical to those of the collective conscience.

Until you learn this fundamental maxim, all your knowledge will prove but
a sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal.

The nations are rattling over the cobble stones of bankruptcy on a
buckboard of compromise, on the high road to revolution.




JOHN MARSHALL

(The Expounder of the Constitution)

Recorded October, 1920


Some recent decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States are, more
than any other factor, calculated to develop and foster an element of
national unrest. Its deliberations are beyond the intelligence of many and
above the interests of the majority. Its psychology is that of a divorce
between capital and labor. Its rulings remind me of what transpired in
England early in the nineteenth century.

Many who were not socialists are beginning to turn from the older order,
imbued with the feeling that nothing could happen in the future worse for
the country at large than the conditions that are being endured in the
present.

A revolution arrives after a series of connected events which exhausts the
patience of the public, and events are moving with intensity as well as
rapidity.




DANIEL WEBSTER


You will search the pages of history in vain without finding a parallel to
present conditions.

The war gave Bohemia her freedom; at the same time it licensed a bohemian
poet to keep Italy stewing in her own juice, a bohemian journalist from
New York to direct affairs in Moscow, and a bohemian socialist from
Switzerland to rule over Russia.

Added to this a fashionable ladies' pianist has tried his hand, or should
I say fingers, in the science of unfurling the sails of Poland's new Ship
of State, while shop-keepers direct affairs in Germany and pusilanimous
politicians keep the people of America in a state of tepid trepidation and
flatulent turmoil. Can you wonder that the country is being hypnotized by
the sight of so many cantankerous cataleptics?

Macbeth declared he had waded in so far that returning would be as
perilous as going on. Nothing will move them until they are swamped by
the high tide of reaction and flung as flotsam on the rocks of a stormy
opportunism.

A new Damocles has a sword suspended over the National Capitol, and
liberty hangs to the hinges of the Constitution by a hair.




OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES


While a few people are ready to return to first principles, many are
giving expressions to Garden of Eden proclivities. But instead of the old
Eve, you have the new Amazon; instead of the old serpent, copperheads in
Congress; instead of the old Adam, fresh brands of bluebeards.

Agreeable to the apple of the new Adam's eye and the fruitarian diet of
the new Eden, some ladies have adopted the fig-leaf standard. But let that
pass for the moment, always bearing in mind that he who loses his sense of
humor loses his equilibrium.

Millions of people are dancing their legs off to keep their heads on.

Providence is wiser than the moralists.

There was a way out of the trenches and there is a way out of the
pessimism developed by the dying dispensation. It is not so much a
question of keeping your powder dry as it is of keeping your wits from
congealing.

Beware of nebulous notions and theories. Uncanny kinks lead to calamitous
brain storms. A stitch in the side saves nine--kicks behind the solar
plexus.




BENJAMIN WADE

(Late Governor of Ohio--U. S. Senator)


Viewed in the light that shines on the White House, there is no difference
between a man from Ohio and a gentleman from Indiana.

Men from the pumpkin pie districts think and feel alike, judging world
politics by the yard-stick method that prevailed in their villages when
they were young men. They are not always aware that political ruts cause
social ructions.

The all-wool-and-a-yard-wide politician was home-spun and honestly
patriotic, but what you need is a home-spun thinker whose vision has got
beyond the yard-stick measure and can take in the whole world.

An old-school president, at this juncture, will have little more authority
than a Congo king would have at a conference of jurists in Paris.

Has anyone taken the trouble to find out just what distinguishes the
minority from the majority?

While the home-spun politician was eating cookies and buckwheat cakes made
by his mother in the Middle West, some millions in New York, Chicago,
Cleveland, and other foreign centers, were partaking of wienerwurst,
sauerkraut, Swiss cheese and rye bread, and clinking beer glasses,
according to the custom of Continental Europe.

If we say that a statesman represents Americanism, the question arises
what kind of Americanism? The Yankee, the Southerner, each had his place
in the political economy of America from 1776 to the Emancipation
Proclamation in 1863, and even up to the Cleveland Administration, after
which conditions began to change with startling rapidity, when the
children born of foreign parents were beginning to come of age and the
European ferment began to leaven the lumps of sectional dough.

The man who occupies the White House in 1921 should take Time by the
forelock and the profiteer with the padlock, know how to translate "Es
ist verboten" into Russian, and say, "Get thee behind me, Satan," in
Esperanto.

If honesty, alone, is the best and only policy, our country would be safe,
but honesty is only one of the qualities necessary in these days to carry
a President through the mazes of a complex administration. Honesty does
not always imply clear vision or even ordinary common sense. The faculties
of diplomatic tact and political judgment are infinitely more important,
and experience still more so.

In America the roles enacted by professional politicians remind one of a
masquerade where everyone is trying to penetrate behind the masks and
guessing is the rule. If in this heterogeneous ball-room you slap your
partner on the back, you may elicit a grunt from a grouchy bolshevik or a
groan from a disgruntled "bohemian."

And yet Congress enacts laws for Americans who understand no dialect but
their own and who have to engage interpreters when they visit Paris. How
many wealthy Americans realize that these United States have outgrown the
cookie era, the buckwheat pancake era, the corn cob era, the wooden nutmeg
era, and arrived at the root-hog-or-die era?

Young America today no more resembles the young America of thirty years
ago than a butterfly resembles a caterpillar. Young men and women are
sixty per cent cosmopolitan and forty per cent rebel.

During the next five years the number of young people who will insist on
thinking for themselves will increase two-fold, because in that time many
thousands of children born of foreign parents in America will have become
mature enough to have fixed upon some sort of ideal.

Congress will realize the situation when it is too late for regrets to be
of any service. Which calls to mind a story apropos of this pressing
subject: A landlady, having no means of obtaining meat for her boarders,
made a stew out of a litter of kittens. The truth became known in a day or
two. One of the boarders said the very thought made her sick, to which the
landlady replied: "Feeling sick won't do no good; them kittens has all
been digested."




DON PIATT

(Late Editor of "The Capital," Washington, D. C.)


Where are the debaters whose rapier tongues ripped up the rag dolls of
Congress and kept the floor of the House supplied with fresh saw-dust,
whose fantastic fencing and heart-piercing thrusts were the delight of the
gallery and the terror of fire eaters. Gone, gone where the woodbine
twineth. What went they out for to see? A reed shaken by the wind? There
is a difference in reeds. Tom Reed of Maine shook the House, but the House
never shook him. What were his favorite drinks? There was plenty to choose
from in the Washington of his day. But note the difference between the wit
of the Maine Reed and that of the Missouri Reed.

On the other hand, where did Bryan get the "cross of gold" inspiration in
the old days? Did he do it on tannic acid released from tea leaves? Who
will ever know? One thing is certain--he never again rose to the same
level.

Is our planet revolving toward a second edition of puritanism? Probably.
The esprit de corps that animated the body politic begins to resemble a
corpse with the esprit evaporated.

The human mind needs moments of exaltation as well as relaxation.
Brilliant results are not produced by lukewarm sentiments expressed in a
voice that lacks enthusiasm.

Washington is now a resort for celluloid cynics and a refuge for asbestos
patriots whose marmorian snobbery makes me think of the ruins of temples
abandoned by the gods and forgotten by man.

The great blunder of the prohibitionists was made when they condemned beer
and light wine. Nature abhors abruptness. Progress is not made by sudden
jerks and violent laws passed in a hurry.

If a few persons living in an obscure village in Ohio can bring about a
movement like prohibition, the same influence can bring about a return of
the old Connecticut blue laws.

Violent actions are followed by violent reactions. From this there is no
escape.

The fundamental objection to prohibition, as it stands, lies in the cold
fact that provincialism, no matter how sincere, can never compete with
international common sense and cosmopolitan culture.

Village residents are ignorant of the laws that govern society in the most
intelligent centers of the world. What will be the result in the long run?
Antagonism between the people of the cities and the people of the country.

When they prohibit tobacco, a war of cuss words will be followed by a
battle of cuspidors, and the very crows will cuss the crocuses.




BENJAMIN DISRAELI


Some Members of Parliament have lost their reason, the majority have lost
their wits, all are without vision.

Lloyd George presents the curious spectacle of a man of the people who
observes them through the glasses of a Welsh Calvinist. He is a democrat
with the demeanor of a lord, a radical who has fallen between the two
stools of the middle-class and the landed aristocracy. Nonconformist
sentimentality, on one hand, and titled wealth on the other, have blinded
him to the imperative needs of the time and the dangers that confront the
Empire.

The English people of the past twenty years have suffered as much from
misgovernment as the Germans and the Russians, but they cannot stop the
present stream of progress by clatter in the House and appeals to
patriotism.

For years England has been saddled with cabinets composed of professional
humorists and hum-drum moralists.

Augustine Birrell was a diluted edition of Sydney Smith, and Bonar Law
should have been a professor of theology in a Presbyterian seminary. Sir
Edward Carson played the role of an unfrocked priest in the service of
demiurgos. Earl Curzon is a political derelict whose presence in the
Council Chamber prevents unity and impedes progress.

History will record their acts as the most amazing in the annals of Great
Britain. I see nothing for the old order but unconditional surrender. The
hand-writing on the wall was visible in 1909, but no preparation was made
for the change which is now sweeping the country with cyclonic force.

We, from our side, can do no more than utter some words of warning for the
few who have ears to hear, the tidal wave of change not being confined to
particular countries or regions.

I, too, when Prime Minister, was blind to the reality, having been born
and reared in an atmosphere as foreign to that of the masses as the
atmosphere of the Winter Palace was foreign to the peasants of Russia.

We staggered under the load of a wealthy and titled upper class. They
consumed the people's time and imposed infinite misery on some millions of
toilers, and for these things we rewarded the men at the top with fresh
titles.

As you know, I led the Conservative Party in England for many years, but
that Party was, and still is, avid for power.

The Liberal Party was made up of men using Nonconformity as an instrument
of advancement. They placed opportunity above the truth, position above
principle, power above progress. We were all intellectual automatons, set
in motion by springs wound up by leaders who were themselves automatons.

England goes by machinery. Her very existence is mechanical. Now, when a
loose screw stops the evolution of the wheels, the whole nation stops.

In what way can we be said to excel in probity of conduct the people of
Ireland? In what way are we superior to Irish politicians? The scandals
that occurred in London during the war would not have been tolerated in
Dublin under an Irish Parliament. And still England is being led by a
Welsh Calvinist, opposed by a Scottish humorist who says his prayers,
backed by Anglican agnostics and middle-class dissenters overwhelmed with
fear.

We always imitate the French, but while we accepted Voltairianism in
principle, the French had the courage to put it into practice.

While the French became practical pagans in 1789, we became practical
hypocrites.

It is this element that has created the moral indifference of the Anglican
Church and the intellectual apathy of the so-called Nonconformist
conscience. This is why there is no stability behind the old phraseology,
the old ceremonials, the old confessions of faith--now so many catch-words
which the people abhor. And this is why the working men find it so easy to
send their leaders to Parliament. For the same reason Russian radicalism
is certain of a warm welcome on English soil.

It is true that this hypocrisy is subconscious, having had its origin
during the French Revolution. This renders it far more dangerous because
political leaders in England today are mentally incompetent to realize the
danger that lies before them.

We cannot reason with people whose vision is dulled by four generations of
moral apathy. Hence they will continue to "kick against the pricks" to the
bitter end. There will be strife added to strife, confusion to confusion,
and they, themselves, will invite the drastic events which must follow so
much stubborn resistance to the demands of common justice and the progress
of civilization.




PRINCE BISMARCK

Recorded November 3d, 1920


When I imposed an indemnity of five billion francs on the French people in
1870 we knew that the money could and would be paid. But there is no
parallel between Germany in 1920 and France in 1870. The Reparations
Commission has only succeeded in proving its incompetence. The German
delegates have shown that the Allied war claims amount to more than five
hundred billion marks (gold), which is nearly four thousand billions at
the present rate of exchange.

This fantastic sum, one hundred times more than France paid to Germany in
1870, is expected of a country on the verge of revolution and chaos. I
charge this Commission with incompetence, extravagance, luxurious living,
and claims at once absurd and ridiculous.

You punish some of the most dangerous criminals by indeterminate
sentences, which frequently end after a year's imprisonment, but you
expect to hold the German people in financial bondage for more than a
generation to come because of the criminal blunders of less than a hundred
individuals.

I was blinded by material factors at the time of my seeming triumphs but
now I can see some of the things which will never come to pass. The French
and the English are repeating some of the blunders I made fifty years ago.
They are counting on conditions which will never exist, like a bird
sitting on a nest of mixed eggs from which the cuckoo will eventually oust
all the other birds.

French people are under the illusion that Russia will meet the obligations
undertaken by the late Czar. To expect such a thing shows the child-like
illusions under which French fanatics are living. They are still wrapped
in the swaddling clothes of politics.

We committed crimes that have brought civilization to the brink of chaos,
but we are not capable of such naivete.

The logic of a Frenchman is no better than the mysticism of a Russian or
the sentimentality of an Englishman. French people learned nothing from
the blunders of Napoleon III and the debacle of Sedan. And the reason?
They have remained provincial while the Germans imitated the commercial
cosmopolitanism of the English.

Advice is the cheapest of all things. Nevertheless, I advise your
statesmen to place no reliance on sentimental contracts written on paper
foredoomed to become "scraps."

I do not hesitate to declare that no agreement signed since 1913 is worth
more than the seals. In Europe, leaders and rulers have passed from an
international game of chess to a national gamble with marked cards.

You have now to deal with an element which did not exist in my time. This
element embraces all factions of the new radicalism, no matter in what
country or under what leader. Some of these elements may unite, but they
are not going to change. How, then, can you undertake to insure the future
by contracts signed and sealed by elderly gentlemen with good intentions
and poor judgment?

The war gave the new factions the long wished-for opportunity. They seized
it in Russia, in Germany, in Poland, in Britain, and other countries. But
the opportunities created by the war are one thing, the opportunities of
tomorrow will be different, and it is this contingency for which your
leaders are not prepared. You will have to select men of vision who will
judge events as they arrive, without regard to the distant future, which
belongs to no man.

One of my greatest mistakes was in separating Protestant Prussia from the
interests of the Catholics of South Germany.

The new radicalism is opposed to some things which are irrevocably linked
with religious doctrine.

Without the Catholic Church all Europe would be in the throes of the
Commune. The principal cause of our disintegration was that we sanctioned
Protestant flirtation with modern materialism.

France is beginning to see that even a weak monarchy is better than a
radical government without a God.

You may expect a return of the monarchy in more than one country.
Agnostics and Protestants, moved by fear on one side, and disgust on the
other, will unite for a restoration as their last hope. There will be a
repetition of historic events.

Bonaparte was ushered in by the French Revolution, and his advent was
followed by three kings and one emperor.

The majority treat their rulers as children treat their toys: when the
novelty wears off a change is demanded.

Political psychology and religious sentiment are not the same thing.
Nevertheless, they must be considered together. The Germans are now
awaiting the hour when the inevitable change will be demanded. Events take
crowns from some heads and place them on others. If the ex-Kaiser ever
occupies the throne again a modern Nero will fiddle amidst the ruins of
German imperialism, for you know he meddled with fiddle strings as well as
with political wires.

You think it strange? The impossible is always happening. Never lose sight
of the fact that an organized minority is more formidable than a
disorganized majority. Three men brought about the coup d'etat that placed
the outcast Louis Napoleon on the throne, one man started the Russian
Revolution, I planned the overthrow of the Second Empire with the aid of
Count von Moltke. The majority put their trust in numbers, but the bigger
a thing grows the nearer it is to disintegration. An autocratic minority
ruled in Germany, an automatic majority rules in France and England. Two
men started the present rule in Moscow, both of them from the outside.

"God has been merciful to us," said Cavour, in the Italian Senate, "He has
made Spain one degree lower than Italy." God has been merciful to Germany,
He has made Russian communism more abhorrent than German socialism.

Nothing will be left undone by the French government to secure permanent
occupation of the coal district of the Rhine.

Conditions will not remain long as they are. They are preparing decisive
coups in Bavaria, Hanover, Austria and Hungary. New combinations will
amaze your statesmen and diplomats, who are ignorant of the fact that
changes and upheavals operate in cycles of three and seven. What they call
chance is the working of law. Spiritual forces operate through the
physical, and nature will take a hand in the reactions in Petrograd and
Moscow. Cold, hunger and starvation will dissipate the hopes of the ruling
minority. Untold numbers will be sacrificed.

During the French Revolution philosophers and thinkers were decapitated.
In Russia such men are killed by hunger, the difference being one of
method.

Such conditions will be repeated in different countries until people learn
that the spiritual cannot be separated from the material without pain and
slaughter.

After all the long-winded conferences and shorthand reports nothing is
left but a confusion of blots on the tissue paper of time.

I may say more on another occasion.




HENRY WARD BEECHER


The happy-go-lucky humor of the day is no match for the cool calculation
of European communists. English and American humorists do for the public
what the court jester once did for blase kings.

In the sardonic temper of the Russian revolutionist, I see a return of the
French temper of 1793.

Most of the sermons and speeches of the time are chameleon in character
and tepid in feeling. English humorists developed a flagrant cynicism,
spotted with a varioloid paradox, while French writers have halted between
the isolation of the hospital and the insularity of the home.

The war brought Anatole France to his senses, the last of the Gallic wits,
who possessed a greater charm than Voltaire without attaining his
universal prestige. Prince Bismarck declares that the French have learned
nothing since their defeat at Sedan. Yet French writers have learned more
from the great war than the writers of any other country.

English humor is meant to entertain a public lost in the cynical
buffooneries of materialism; American humor is meant to amuse a public
lost in the mazes of extravagant pleasures and provincial inanities.

English humor has a certain seal; American humor a certain mark--the
difference between sealing wax and a postage stamp. Both aim to fill the
ghastly gap left by the doctrine of evolution since it caught the fancy of
agnostic freebooters in 1870--forerunners of something grimmer than the
Soviet symbols of a return of puritanism even now creeping into view as
ivy creeps up the water spouts.

Laughter will vanish, since there will be nothing left to laugh at.
Dancing will cease, for curfew will ring at nine and people will begin
work at five.

Remember that all the great modern movements had an obscure origin.
Spiritualism began in a country farm-house, Christian Science developed
out of mediumship, prohibition was started in a village, woman's suffrage
was started by a Quakeress, Theosophy began at a farm-house in Vermont,
the Salvation Army was started by a group of obscure persons.

The new puritanism will start by a committee of persons unknown to the
public, chosen from the ranks of the Methodists, Baptists and
Presbyterians. Grim determinists, they will ignore satire, sarcasm and
irony, ignore party politics, ignore the opposition of luke-warm
Christians, form committees, in which they will be aided by drastic
reactions during the period of readjustment.

Centers will soon be formed in Atlanta, Nashville, Cleveland, Boston,
Hartford, Philadelphia and Washington, D. C.

What is causing so much crime? Not one, but many elements of decadence,
all operating together, among which I can name rag, jazz, high balls,
cabarets, free verse, neurotic art, sentimental optimism, cheap notions of
progress, neutral sermons, automobilism, lack of child discipline, absence
of fear among people under the age of forty--evils which you may apply to
all English-speaking countries.

The licence of the cities dominates country life and country thought. The
city minority rules the majority in the country, and it is in the country
that the reaction will begin.




JOHN MARSHALL

(Second Message)


Many of the smaller nations, instead of being content with their liberty,
have thrown it away for the licence that always goes with land grabbing.
For a nation is nothing more than an individual with a certain amount of
collective ambition.

Much of the work of the League of Nations will have to be undone. But it
will not be undone by any League. The nations will settle differences in
accordance with the law that permits the more powerful to wield control
commensurate with their geographical and intellectual importance.

All people have rights which ought to be respected, but some have
privileges as well as rights, and the privileged will hold the upper hand
as long as intelligence takes precedence of illiteracy, energy dominates
over lethargy, and the power of organized numbers rules over minorities.

Your statesmen and your mediators will have to learn the distinction
between rights and privileges. All are supposed to possess common rights
under the common law, but it is wisdom, supported by poise and power, that
constitutes privilege. David and Solomon were privleged. So were Alfred
the Great, Washington and Lincoln.

A nation is temperamental like an individual. The temperament may be
vascillating or it may be stolid; it may be logical or it may be
commercial; or a combination of the Saxon and the Celt.

The nations that will hold the balance of power in the future will be the
ones with the most will and poise, backed by number. Riches, alone, will
not save. Wealth did not save Germany from disaster, nor did it help
Nopoleon III to ward off the Prussian invasion in 1870. Wealth invites
invasion and conquest. This is why England and America will now be the
principal target for the ambitious and the discontented. This is why Japan
seeks a firm foothold in China, and the Russians an entrance to India
through Persia.

Without the prospects of loot there would be no war. When ambition and
glory lure a nation on, the desire for loot supplies the motor force. When
hunger forces a people to invade a nation, loot becomes a necessity.

What the wealthy of every nation refuse to understand, or even to
consider, is that material force engenders vanity, individualism, rivalry
and envy. All manifestations of force contain an element of
disintegration. The type of a nation will always represent the policy and
the trend of the nation.

The supreme blunder of the Peace Conference was made when the delegates,
with Mr. Wilson at their head, refused to face the fact that no nation can
rise above the ideals and idiosyncrasies of the national temperament, and
that sudden liberation from restraint is as dangerous for a country as it
is for an individual.

There is but one step between liberty and licence, and that step meant
pandemonium for all classes in Russia. For other peoples it may mean
political bondage and the total loss of a national spirit. For the Hindoos
it will mean civil wars between the different native rulers, for China it
has meant a series of revolutions and counter revolutions which may have
to be suppressed by the drastic hand of a Japanese Bonaparte.

The League Conference at Versailles took no account of the working of
natural law. Sentimentality was the key-note of Mr. Wilson's idealism, and
commercial expansion the dominant idea of his opponents.

As for religion exerting any fundamental influence for peace and right
thinking, it caused Protestants to fight Protestants and Catholics to
fight Catholics, while German and Austrian cardinals did all in their
power to aid in the invasion and conquest of Belgium and France, on one
hand, and Italy, the stronghold of the Papal See, on the other; and all
this in the face of the statement of the Kaiser that Catholicism must be
destroyed. Nothing like it has been known since the dawn of Christianity.

The only apparent reason for the quiescent attitude of some of the smaller
nations is that they are without the material means of waging war on their
neighbors.

Just as long as politicians are impelled by self-interest there will be
found nations that will have to use force for the suppression of licence
and the curtailment of liberty. In every country the people are getting
what their thoughts and deeds create for them.




ABRAHAM LINCOLN


Events come and go in cycles--there is a beginning, a middle and an end.
The League of Nations had a beginning and it will have an end. But what
kind of an end? Will it be one of victory or one of ignominy?

The two fatal blunders of the Kaiser and his cohorts consisted in the
delusion that England could not raise, equip and transport a body of
troops sufficient to offer adequate resistance to the invaders of France
in conjunction with the French and Belgian armies, and that America could
not or would not join the European Allies.

At the present juncture the inimical forces, both in continental Europe
and in America, are repeating the old blunders under fresh conditions.

History is a repetition of the old tunes with new variations. Just now the
fireworks of sophistry and rhetoric drown out the familiar tune and what
is heard is the buzz-saw of political machinery.

Hyenas are gnawing the bones left by the lion rampant of Czardom; and
Siberia, the remnant, is being consumed by jackals from Japan. It remains
to be seen how long voters with American pedigrees will be influenced by
demagogues who would induce them to part with their birthright for a mess
of pottage burnt on the bottom.

The longer you wink at anarchy in Europe the greater will be the menace of
social chaos at home. The worship of shibboleths cannot be kept up beyond
a point where the majority grow tired of hocus-pocus politics and
academical agnosticism.

There should be harmony of interests in dealing with the people of Mexico,
from whom you have much to learn in many ways.

The Obregon Government should be recognized at Washington and immediate
steps taken to insure cordial relations between the two countries.

The City of Mexico is a capital with a great future.

You are about to pass through a period of great confusion. Warnings have
been given but not heeded. Unless you cease to theorize, and propagate a
spirit of justice and judgment, the near future will develop something
more than storms in the blue china teapots of diplomacy.




ROBERT G. INGERSOLL


Washington needs a breaker of images.

The pedestrian sauntering down Pennsylvania Avenue cannot but note the
hefty Hancock on horseback, looking as if he had just left a meeting of
ward politicians, and, in another part of the city, McClellan, the Beau
Brummel of the Civil War, on a charger, sniffing the smoke of battle from
a safe distance, and others whose names are writ in water but whose
effigies remain in bronze.

To the scrap heap with these, and in their places erect memorials for the
women, who did as much for America as Joan of Arc did for France, the
intrepid pioneers of their race, the prophetic patriots of the nineteenth
century--Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott and Susan B. Anthony.

It would take a Lincoln Memorial to depict their serenity, a National
Capitol to symbolize their nobility, a Washington Monument to typify the
towering height of their achievement and the scope and clarity of their
vision.




STEPHEN A. DOUGLAS


A war between America and England would fill your homes with desolation
and bring ruin to the whole country. Do your sins of omission merit such a
punishment? I am here to tell you what to expect if such a hurricane of
disaster ever sweeps the two countries.

Millions of people are under the impression that the United States can act
independently of the conditions prevailing in the other great nations.
This suggestion, coming, as it did, from a professional joker in England,
has met with eager response from revolutionary emissaries now in your
midst, supported by political fillibusters who are masking the truth.

If England ever starts such a war she will lose India. Her direction of
the reins of civilization in many quarters of the world would cease on the
day hostilities began. But I am speaking for America.

A war with England would Russianize the United States within three months.
Even if the navy could keep the enemy at a safe distance the destructive
forces at home would loot the principal cities and spread terror from
ocean to ocean.

The first to lose in such an upheaval would be the wealthy propagandists
of disorder and violence, who, living in security now, would be hurled
with destructive force against the weapons of their own creation.




GENERAL BENJAMIN H. GRIERSON

Late Commander of the Military Department of Southern California, Arizona
and New Mexico


In 1914 western civilization was threatened by a military autocracy
centralized at Berlin. Europe is now threatened by a communistic tyranny
centralized at Moscow and by an autocratic aristocracy centered in Japan,
anti-Christian, anti-democratic, anti-American. You may call it fate or
destiny, it matters not so long as you know what the signs and portents
are.

We can see what is going on in the navy yards of the Nipponese Empire. We
have noted the strenuous efforts put forth in naval preparations there.

A Japanese Bonaparte will soon dominate China and prevent Christian
propaganda throughout Asia. I could give you the dates fixed for certain
maneuvers and events in connection with Japanese ambitions relating to
America, but they could change the dates. Suffice it to say they are
making ready as fast as possible, much faster than many in this country
could be made to believe. When the decisive moment arrives for action it
will come suddenly, like the invasion of Belgium by the Germans.

Here are some of their expectations:--

The invasion of the coast of Mexico and a coalition of Japanese forces
with some military faction in Mexico likely to be of practical aid, the
bombing of American cities on the Pacific Coast from the air, virtual
cessation of communication between certain sections east of the Rocky
Mountains and California, brought about not so much by physical means as
by revolutionary influences. They are counting on a Soviet revolution east
of the Rockies while they are gaining a foothold in California.

One of their first attempts would be to bomb the railway passes in the
Cascades and the Sierra Nevadas.

General Grant has warned you in regard to the Panama Canal and other
points that need immediate attention. Millions would be alarmed if they
could realize how much the Government at Washington resembles the British
Government just before the German descent into Belgium. Are they waiting
until they can spy the enemy through field glasses?

I could give a map of the plans of approach of the Japanese navy, intended
to operate in separate units, but it would do no good. They are ready to
change their tactics at any time, and have done so more than once.

Let me add that the bellicose attitude of the war party in Japan is such
that a war between England and America would be hailed as a symbol of
their divine destiny.

Do not be surprised when I say that they proclaim the end of Christian
civilization was reached when the Anglo-Saxons took possession of the
Pacific Coast.

In the Far East, British domination attained its zenith in India; in
America, Anglo-Saxon influence attained its limit in California. The
possession of the Pacific Coast of North America is, therefore, the limit
for the dominant white race. The tocsin has sounded for a Japanese avatar
who will unify the political, commercial and religious forces of Japan and
China, give the coup de grace to a tottering civilization and dominate the
world. So do they reason and preach.




ALEXANDER HAMILTON


What do the clouds on the social horizon predict? Is Nature a book of
fate? If so, is it sealed or open? Whoever understands the political
actions of the past can foresee the reactions of the future.

Human nature is always the same.

The two things brought to the surface by great upheavals are extreme
virtues and extreme vices. The virtue of self sacrifice, on the one hand,
the vice of self interest on the other. Vice is flexible, cunning,
adaptable.

You are living at a time when profiteers amaze by their cynical audacity,
but profiteers have always existed. Before the war the nobles of Russia
and Germany were profiteers in landed privileges and governmental
perquisites. The tillers of the soil were free in name, serfs in practice.
In England two or three hundred lords and peers possess the land. In
America food profiteering began during the Civil War. This national vice
has never been attacked at the roots.

Your age is characterized by a high level of predatory ability and a low
level of prophetic visibility.

The old hackneyed phrase, "This is a free country," has been applied in
varying degrees according to the caprice of the individual with the most
aggressive will.

New words, definitions, excuses, have been invented to meet the new
conditions, but of all the words yet brought into use, "camouflage" is the
only one that covers the cynical effrontery of predatory hypocrisy. It is
a vocable of universal utility. It applies to the cock-pits of commerce as
well as to the arena of bull and bear politics.

It depicts a Hindoo patience in the pulpit and a Hoodoo palsy in the pews.

The word "democracy" itself is the stripes painted on the sides of the old
Ship of State in her zig-zag course to elude the torpedoes of the
proletarian submarines.

A capitalistic profiteer is a high brow optimist who lives by the sweat of
the low brow pessimist. The stretching process will cease suddenly like
the snapping of a rubber string stretched beyond the limit.

The masses without a voice always find articulation in the unlooked-for
man, the unlooked-for group.

The people without a mouthpiece are a mob, and no mob can run itself for
more than a few days. It is the initiated who lead, and leadership
requires time, patience, judgment.

In the world of genius there are no upstarts.

The great leader never rises suddenly. Bonaparte was a military graduate,
Grant was a product of West Point, Lincoln was thirty years preparing for
the Presidency, Lenine spent twenty years in the study of economics. All
countries have the same experience.

Voltaire endowed the middle classes of France with a voice, united the
disaffected of all classes, and peppered their indignation with pungent
epigrams. He created an intellectual garden for lovers of liberty, and
from the realm of the mind flung the thorns of ridicule in the face of
titled imbeciles and crowned the heads of scholars with laurel.

The people of France were washed by Louis XIV, wrung by Louis XV, and
dried in the back yard of tyrannical economics by Louis XVI.

But it was the orators and pamphleteers who ironed out the frills and
furbelows of the old order.

Statistical facts may convince but they do not compel. Who knows how the
French Revolution would have ended had Mirabeau, orator of the great and
solemn days, survived to put into action the idealism of Rousseau?
Intellect alone never passes the halfway house. When intellect, reason and
emotion are fused in one, the summit of achievement is attained.




PHILLIPS BROOKS


The time for discipline is approaching. Happy are those who, under Divine
direction, consent to be led, for, in the words of Quintilian:--Nulla
poena est nisi invito, or as Seneca expressed it, Fata volentum ducunt,
involentem trahunt,--those who refuse will be dragged.

You must in some manner experience the ordeals common to other peoples,
and you have seen from a distance what has overtaken many cities and
nations, the inhabitants of which felt themselves as fixed as the rocks in
the soil. Yet, all that is happening is in harmony with Divine law. You
will find it in Isaiah and Jeremiah. The repetition is inevitable except
for those who possess vision.

The time for appeals is past.

"The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and fadeth, the
haughty people of the world do languish."

"When thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled, and when thou
shalt make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously
with thee."

Are the people astonished? Let them marvel at their own willfulness.

"The kings of the earth and all the inhabitants of the world would not
have believed that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into
the gates of Jerusalem."

Titus, with his army, destroyed the Holy City. The enemy entered the gates
from without but your adversaries have long been entrenched within.

Mammon is heavily laden and will fall from the top. Material power is
volatile.

In the day of trial, the retainer and the hireling will seek a refuge,
every man for himself. They will melt like the wax image before the heat
of the furnace. On that day humility will be as a precious gift and
poverty as a peace offering.

Blessed is he who uses the spade and the hoe, for by the sweat of his brow
he shall eat the bread of security.






End of Project Gutenberg's Psycho-Phone Messages, by Francis Grierson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PSYCHO-PHONE MESSAGES ***

***** This file should be named 35681.txt or 35681.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/6/8/35681/

Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
