The Project Gutenberg EBook of Historical sketch of the Fifteenth
Regiment, New Jersey Volunteers, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Historical sketch of the Fifteenth Regiment, New Jersey Volunteers
       First Brigade, First Division, Sixth Corps

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: March 27, 2011 [EBook #35697]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL SKETCH--15TH REGIMENT ***




Produced by Jeannie Howse and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. For     |
    | a complete list, please see the end of this document.     |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




  HISTORICAL SKETCH

  OF THE

  FIFTEENTH REGIMENT

  NEW JERSEY VOLUNTEERS.


  FIRST BRIGADE, FIRST DIVISION, SIXTH CORPS.


  TRENTON, N.J.:
  WM. S. SHARP, PRINTER AND STEREOTYPER.
  1880.




SKETCH.


Every regiment of soldiers has a character of its own. This
"character" is the sum of the elements of individual character, and
the circumstances affecting its organization and management.

The Fifteenth Regiment New Jersey Volunteers was organized at
Flemington. It was recruited in the "hill country" of the State--three
companies from Sussex, two each from Warren, Hunterdon and Morris, and
one from Somerset. There being no large cities in this district, it
was composed almost wholly of "freeholders" or the sons of
freeholders--young men who were well known in the communities from
which they came, who had a good name at home to adorn or lose, and
friends at home to feel a pride in their good behavior or suffer shame
at the reverse. They were an educated and intelligent class of men,
many of them of liberal education and in course of training for the
higher walks of business or professional life. They were men of a high
tone of moral character and of that sturdy and tenacious patriotism
which the history of every country, and especially of our own, shows
to reside more especially in the fixed population connected with the
soil as its owners or tillers. Reared in the mountain air they were
generally of vigorous and healthy physique. The writer saw much of
Union soldiers during four years of service--regulars, volunteers and
militia--and hopes he may be permitted to say, without invidious
comparison, that this regiment was marked for the high intellectual
and moral character of its enlisted men. Those accustomed to the
management and handling of troops know what this means on the battle
field and in active campaign. It was largely officered with men who
had already seen a year of active service, and who subjected it at
once to a rigid discipline.

It was mustered into service on the 25th of August, 1862. Two days
later it moved to "the front," at the perilous moment when Pope and
Lee were in their death-grapple about Bull Run. Pope being defeated,
and the rebels marching for Pennsylvania, the capital was to be more
completely fortified on the west and north, and prepared for possible
attack. The first duty assigned the regiment was to erect
fortifications at Tenallytown, Md., at which they toiled day and
night for about one month. On the 30th of September it proceeded to
join the victorious Army of the Potomac on the battle-field of
Antietam, and, by special request of the corps, division and brigade
commanders, was assigned to the First Brigade, First Division, Sixth
Corps--the already-veteran "First Jersey Brigade." It afforded much
gratification and a home-like feeling, to be brigaded with five other
regiments of the same State.

Whilst the Army of the Potomac was being re-fitted and supplied for
the fall campaign, the regiment enjoyed, in the midst of picket and
other duties, a much-needed month of opportunity for drill and
discipline at Bakersville, Maryland--a short time, as all experience
will attest, to convert into "soldiers" a thousand men fresh from the
untrammeled freedom of civil life, strangers to the rigor of military
discipline, the profession of arms, and the art of war. How
industriously, willingly, and effectively that month was employed, the
subsequent history of the regiment fully attests.

From this time forward, to the close of the war, its history is that
of the famous "Sixth Corps"--than which, probably, no corps ever did
more hard fighting and effective service, or achieved a more enviable
fame.

Its official fighting record, as made up by the Adjutant-General of
the State, is as follows:

Fredericksburg, Va., Dec. 13 and 14, 1862; Fredericksburg, Va., May 3,
1863; Salem Heights, Va., May 3 and 4, 1863; Franklin's Crossing, Va.,
June 6 to 14, 1863; Gettysburg, Pa., July 2 and 3, 1863; Fairfield,
Pa., July 5, 1863; Funktown, Md., July 10, 1863; Rappahannock Station,
Va., Oct. 12, 1863; Rappahannock Station, Va., Nov. 7, 1863; Mine Run,
Va., Nov. 30, 1863; Wilderness, Va., May 5 to 7, 1864; Spottsylvania,
Va., May 8 to 11, 1864; Spottsylvania C.H., Va., May 12 to 16, 1864;
North and South Anna River, May 24, 1864; Hanover C.H., Va., May 29,
1864; Tolopotomy Creek, Va., May 30 and 31, 1864; Cold Harbor, Va.,
June 1 to 11, 1864; Before Petersburg, Va., June 16 to 22, 1864;
Weldon Railroad, Va., June 23, 1864; Snicker's Gap, Va., July 18,
1864; Strasburg, Va., Aug. 15, 1864; Winchester, Va., Aug. 17, 1864;
Charlestown, Va., Aug. 21, 1864; Opequan, Va., Sept. 19, 1864;
Fisher's Hill, Va., Sept. 21 and 22, 1864; New Market, Va., Sept. 24,
1864; Mount Jackson, Va., Sept. 25, 1864; Cedar Creek and Middletown,
Va., Oct. 19, 1864; Hatcher's Run, Va., Feb. 5, 1865; Fort Steedman,
Va., March 25, 1865; Capture of Petersburg, Va., April 2, 1865;
Sailors' Creek, Va., April 6, 1865; Farmville, Va., April 7, 1865;
Lee's Surrender, (Appomattox, Va.,) April 9, 1865.

In the operations and battles of a large army or corps, a single
regiment is so swallowed up in the general mass; its movements and
conduct, under fire and out of range, are so intermingled with those
of many others, that, to write the history of one is to write that of
the army or corps as a whole. This would take volumes; it cannot be
done in these brief notes. It must be assumed that the glowing pages
which record the battles of the Rebellion are familiar to all; and
surely he is a doubtful patriot who has not followed them with deep
and absorbing interest. We can here only glance at the regiment at
some of those points in its career at which it was in some way
distinguished from the general mass, by position, or by special acts
of endurance and courage.

It received its baptism of fire at the disastrous battle of
Fredericksburg, December 13th, 1862. On the morning of the 12th, the
division crossed the Rappahannock at "Franklin's Crossing," below the
town, and advanced over the broad plain toward the high ground beyond,
under cover of a dense fog, to "find the enemy," whose position, below
the town, could not be seen--the Fifteenth on the right of the line.
Just before reaching "Deep Run," the enemy discovered the advance, and
opened with their heavy guns from the Heights to the right and front.
The long line of a full regiment did not waver in the least, though
new to the field of battle, and saluted suddenly, for the first time,
with the terrifying explosions of shells from guns of large calibre.
Carefully observed, they seemed to be nerved and animated by the
presence of danger. Patriotic resolve and high moral courage--which
had brought them to the field--mantled to their brows. Their commander
then and ever after knew and trusted his command. A few men were
wounded, but none killed, as the writer remembers. Arrived at the
ravine, it was permitted to remain under its cover during the balance
of the day, whilst a large army was getting into position, and plans
of attack matured. Before light on the morning of the 13th, it was
moved out of the ravine and silently deployed as a skirmish line,
under cover of the darkness and fog, so near to the rebel skirmish
line as to distinctly hear their conversation. Such close contact,
face to face with an armed enemy, gave rise to thoughts and emotions
new to them, and the gradual lifting of the darkness and fog was
watched with anxious faces; but not a man showed signs of flinching.
At the coming of light their sharp and obstinate skirmish fire opened
the first battle in which they took part. The memorable conflict of
the day swept chiefly to the right and left of their long line, but
involved four of the left companies, which participated in the charge
at that point with the Fourth and Twenty-third, and suffered serious
loss. During the following night the drum-corps carried rations from
the trains, several miles away, across the river, and distributed them
along the line, replenishing the exhausted haversacks--a hard night's
work, and a kind of drumming for which they felt they had not
enlisted; but they had new lessons in music yet to learn. In the
morning the regiment was relieved from its advanced position by the
One Hundred and Twenty-first New York, under a galling fire. The
battle was over, however, and the army re-crossed the river.

The regiment went into camp near by, at White Oak Church, and, after
participating in the fruitless expedition known as Burnside's "Mud
March," spent a dismal winter. Typhoid fever, the enemy which no army
can conquer, broke out with distressing virulence, and a considerable
number died of disease. In every regiment there is a somewhat uniform
number of constitutions which cannot resist the privations, hardships,
excitements and exposures of vigorous warfare. These must be
eliminated by death and permanent disability. In some cases the
process is gradual; in others, sudden and rapid, as was the case with
the Fifteenth, owing to its being suddenly taken from civil life and
thrust at once into the severest service, sustained by excitements and
courage until the campaign was over, and then dropped into a muddy
camp in very inclement weather. It was ever afterward free from
sickness to a marked degree.

In the May following came the "Chancellorsville" campaign under
Hooker. The part assigned to the Sixth Corps was to take the Heights
of Fredericksburg, and then strike the enemy in flank and rear, and
unite with the main army, which crossed the river at the upper fords.
Crossing the river at the same place as before, on the morning of the
3d of May, the Fifteenth was placed on the extreme left of the corps
line, to support a battery, and, with the balance of the brigade, to
hold in check a large force of the enemy formed on his right, to
strike the corps in flank and rear, as it attacked the Heights, which
was effectively done by a firm stand, though with considerable loss.
The balance of the corps having carried the Heights by a gallant
charge, it marched through the town, over the Heights, and up the
plank road to Salem Church, a few miles from Chancellorsville. Here it
encountered a large part of the rebel army, diverted to its front
after a successful checking of Hooker. A determined assault was
delivered, but failed to drive them from their well-chosen position.
The Fifteenth charged gallantly through a wood, pushed the enemy some
distance before them, and held the position until ordered to retire
about dark, the general attack having failed of its purpose. The night
was spent in caring for and removing the wounded. It is thought the
Fifteenth was one of the very few regiments which succeeded in getting
off all their wounded, which was mainly due here, as afterward, to one
of the most brave and faithful chaplains, who was ever with his men,
in battle as in camp, and serving them with sleepless and tireless
vigilance. The next day was spent in constant manoeuvering before a
rapidly concentrating enemy, and during the night the corps was
ordered to re-cross the river, at Banks' Ford. After another day spent
in drawing the artillery and pontoon trains through the mud to the
high ground, it returned to its old camp, after the loss of many of
its bravest and best men and officers.

At Gettysburg--the decisive victory of the war--during the pursuit of
the flying rebel army through Pennsylvania, Maryland, and down the
Katoctin valley, back to the line of the Rappahannock; again on the
advance up the Orange and Alexandria Railroad, nearly to its crossing
of the Rapidan, (where the Fifteenth reached the farthest point of any
regiment); back to Centreville by a rapid retreat parallel with the
enemy attempting to turn the Union flank; again forward to the battle
of Rappahannock Station, through the futile Mine Run expedition, and
back to winter-quarters at Brandy Station--the regiment bore an equal
and always honorable part with the other regiments of the corps, doing
its share of the fighting, and suffering its share of the loss.
Nothing is remembered, however, which distinguished it from the
balance of the corps, except, perhaps, that it covered the return from
the third crossing at Fredericksburg--(a demonstration made by the
First Division in the early part of June, to develop the movement of
Lee toward Pennsylvania)--and took up the pontoon bridge in the face
of the enemy--a delicate and difficult service, executed without loss,
in a driving rain.

The winter of 1863-4, at Brandy Station, was diversified by severe
picket and fatigue duty, and embraced an expedition by the brigade to
Madison Court House, as a diversion in favor of Kilpatrick's
celebrated raid to the fortifications of Richmond. The men, under the
lead of the chaplain, built a large and commodious house of logs, in
which religious services--never intermitted, when possible to be
held--and literary exercises were held. This was a great help to the
religious and moral tone of the regiment, as well as conducive to its
military effectiveness. A "Church" of one hundred and thirty members
was organized, and forty-six men were hopefully converted to the
Christian faith. The services were interesting and solemn, and were
attended by many even from distant camps. Two-thirds of the members of
this little church, doubly militant, afterward fell in action, bravely
battling for their country and their God. Who will question the
usefulness and value of a zealous religious instructor in the ranks of
an army in the field?

On the 4th of May, 1864, the army broke camp for the long and bloody
campaign from the Rapidan to Petersburg, and the 5th, 6th, and 7th
found the regiment engaged, with the balance of the army, in "the
Wilderness," doing its full duty with the regiments which fought by
its side. On the 8th, about noon, at the head of the corps, it reached
the front of Spottsylvania C.H., after a long night march, by a
circuitous route. Warren, whose corps (the Fifth) had moved by a more
direct route, and reached the position first, had met with a check. He
sent to Sedgwick--the grand old leader of the Sixth--for aid, and the
Jersey brigade was sent to his assistance. After some manoeuvering,
the Fifteenth, with the Third, (then little more than a detachment,
and used as a skirmish line,) was selected to make an assault on the
enemy, and develop his position and strength. No charge was ever more
gallantly delivered. With two armies looking on, it advanced across an
open field; when within about three hundred yards of the front of the
wood in which the enemy was posted, it fixed bayonets, and with a line
of glittering steel as steady as on dress-parade, dashed up to the
rebel position, to find them strongly entrenched and in full force. As
far as rifle-shot could reach, upon each flank they opened upon the
devoted little band. Notwithstanding the deadly fire, it drove the
enemy out of the work in its front, captured two prisoners, and, to
save annihilation, was ordered by its commander to retire. One hundred
and one of its brave officers and men were left upon the field, killed
or wounded. It may be doubted if a more perilous "forlorn hope" was
ever more daringly executed.

The Sixth Corps took position on the left of the line as it was
formed, its lamented commander falling on the same spot at which one
of the color-bearers of the Fifteenth had but just fallen; and on the
afternoon of the 9th the regiment was detached, with the First, to
turn the right flank of the enemy and gain possession of a
cross-roads. After wading a deep swamp, and a sharp brush with the
rebel skirmishers, the cross-roads was under their guns, and they were
separated some distance from the main army. The next morning, being
ordered to develop the flank of the enemy's main line, the two
regiments advanced, drove the rebel skirmish line before them for
about a mile, and finally struck the right of the rebel line, strongly
entrenched on the top of a high hill. This was the position afterward
known as "the bloody angle." The two regiments attacked vigorously,
but were forced back by a heavy musketry and artillery fire. Two more
regiments were sent to their assistance, and again they attacked, but
with no better success, and they were compelled to be content with
holding the position they had gained in an unequal contest. The
characteristic orders under which they were acting, issued by an able
general officer, afterward killed, and sadly missed, were--"Fight!
Fight! ---- it, fight!" Two days later, this was found to be the
strongest field-work ever attacked by the army.

On the afternoon of the same day, (the 10th,) a series of assaults was
organized along the different corps lines. The Second Division of the
Second Corps, which had come up by the crossroads taken as above
related, was to make the charge on the extreme left, and the two
detached regiments reported to, and participated in the charge with
it. Only one of these assaults was successful, (that of the Sixth
Corps,) and the line of works and many of the prisoners captured by it
had to be abandoned, owing to the failure of the attacks to the right
and left. That on the left being unsuccessful, and the troops retiring
from the hill, left the two detached regiments again alone to hold the
ground which had cost them a severe struggle. This they did until
relieved after dark, when, rejoining their brigade, they left the
position to the Second Corps, all of which was concentrated there on
the night of the 11th.

On the 12th came one of the most stubbornly-contested struggles of the
war. It was for the possession of the "bloody angle" which the
Fifteenth and First had repeatedly attacked two days previously. The
first charge was made by the Second Corps early in the morning, took
the rebels by surprise, carried a part of the line of works, captured
several thousand prisoners and a large number of guns. The Sixth Corps
was moved to the position as soon as practicable, to complete the
victory, the enemy having recovered from the shock and concentrated
his forces. The First Division was ordered to attack first, to the
right of the Second Corps, in _echelon_ of brigades, the First Brigade
on the right, and the Fifteenth Regiment on the extreme right of the
front line. It was placed in position, in a wood of low pines, by a
superior officer, in a drizzling rain. At the order to charge, it
dashed gallantly forward with bayonets fixed, and trailed to escape
the low branches, into the narrow strip of open ground, upon the
opposite margin of which was the rebel intrenched line, covered with
an _abattis_ of slashed brush. Its line being very oblique to that of
the enemy, it was compelled to execute a halfwheel, under a most
murderous fire. Again it dashed forward, carried the work at the point
of the bayonet, (and with some actual bayonet fighting, a very unusual
thing,) captured a stand of colors and all the rebels who did not fall
or run. It was the only regiment of the Sixth Corps which got inside
the enemy's fortifications that day. Its right flank, however, being
entirely "in the air," and a solid rebel line moving toward it,
subjected to the continued fire from a second rebel work in front and
from the numerous "traverses" of the line to the left which had not
been carried, it was compelled to retire again to the wood. This
desperate charge was made at fearful cost. More than half of the rank
and file, and seven of the most valued officers fell, killed or
wounded, inside or near the hostile works. Out of four hundred and
twenty-nine men and fourteen line officers who crossed the Rapidan on
the 4th, only one hundred and twenty-two men and four officers
remained.

It has been said that the other brigades did not get actual possession
of the works in their front. They did, however, gain and hold a
position so near as to command and hold them under their guns, until
abandoned during the night. How obstinate and determined was the rebel
defence was shown by the fact that the trench, full three feet deep,
was, in places, even full of rebel dead, and a pavement of mud
covering the uppermost bodies, told how they had stood upon their
fallen comrades and continued the fight. A large white oak tree was
cut off by bullets even with the top of the breastwork, and in its
fall pinned one rebel soldier to the ground.

From Spottsylvania to Petersburg--a sanguinary track, with every
here-and-there a fierce encounter with the foe--thence, in July, to
Washington, where Early was met at the head of Seventh street; thence
into the Shenandoah Valley, under Sheridan, the regiment shared the
successes and failures, the honors and losses, of the army and corps.
It was often detached for special service of responsibility and
danger. In the pursuit of Early's flying troops from the gates of
Washington, it became necessary to send a force across to the parallel
road on which the enemy were moving, to ascertain the position of the
rear of their column, and verify a suspected intention on their part
to halt and strike in flank our rapidly-advancing column. The
Fifteenth New Jersey was sent upon that mission, and executed it to
the satisfaction of the corps commander, but found no such design on
the part of the enemy. A few days later, Early contested the crossing
of the Shenandoah at Snicker's Ford, and it was desired to examine the
fords lower down the river. The Fifteenth was again sent, tested the
fords, the depth of water, bed of the stream, &c., under a skirmish
fire, and returned with its information--which was not needed, as the
upper ford was abandoned by the enemy during the night.

At Winchester, on the 17th of August, whilst Sheridan was retiring
before Early's army, reinforced by Longstreet, (not because unable to
cope with it, but because under orders from Grant not to accept or
deliver battle at that time,) the First Brigade was left, with the
cavalry, to obstruct their march whilst our army was crossing the
Opequan and getting into position. The Fifteenth Regiment was deployed
into a skirmish line, and posted across the turnpike by which they
were approaching, the other regiments being posted farther to the
left. From noon until nearly dark it held them in check, with the
assistance of two squadrons (dismounted) of the Third New Jersey
Cavalry, deluding them into the belief that Sheridan's whole army was
there in position to receive their attack. The men were carefully
posted along a small stream, behind stone fences, trees, and rocks.
Two rebel skirmish lines successively pushed against them, soon
retired, being badly punished, and Early's army ployed into columns of
attack. There was something seriously ludicrous in the sight. Twenty
thousand rebels could be distinctly seen from the hills on which our
right rested, carefully forming to attack a feeble line of
skirmishers. Our brigade numbered but eight hundred and fifty muskets,
all told; no supports but the color-guards. The cavalry, massed to the
rear, could render no assistance against heavy columns of infantry.
Whilst the formation was proceeding, the stubborn skirmish continued,
and, as we afterward learned, Early decided to postpone the attack
until the next day. Just before dark, however, Breckenridge, who
commanded Early's left division, was led in some way to suspect the
weakness of the force before him, and obtained permission to put his
left brigade in charge. The solid mass plunged directly through our
attenuated line of one man to every five or ten paces; then brigade
after brigade charged in _echelon_ from their left to right. The
fighting qualities of men were seldom more severely tested. It was
easy to get away, but to hold the enemy on the right, or so obstruct
them that the other regiments posted to the left could get out, was a
serious problem. The line was rallied and re-formed, from one stone
fence to another. In the darkness the men sometimes became
intermingled with the enemy, a Union officer, at one time, assuming
command of a rebel regiment. About eleven o'clock, in the outskirts of
the city, the contest was finally given up, all the left getting away
but a detachment of the Tenth, which got lost in the darkness, and a
few men of the Fifteenth and Fourth, surrounded unawares.

On the 19th of September came the battle of the Opequan--generally
known as the battle of Winchester. Viewed in all its relations, it was
one of the most important of the war. At the first onset of Sheridan's
army, the enemy were forced some distance from their position; but the
impetus of the assault being broken by an obstinate resistance, the
Union lines retired a short distance, and the enemy made a counter
advance. The Fifteenth was pushed forward on a double-quick, across a
ravine, to take possession of a hill and obstruct their advance,
whilst the lines were being reorganized. It was a perilous duty
gallantly discharged. One of our division commanders said the movement
saved the day. The re-formed lines again advanced, gathering up the
Fifteenth in their progress, and Early was sent "whirling up the
valley."

Three days later, (on the 22d,) at Fisher's Hill, which they regarded
as an impregnable position, the First New Jersey Brigade was
designated to lead the charge, being about the centre of the corps
line. Sweeping down through a ravine, clambering up the opposite rocks
to the grassy slope which fronted the rebel line, under a perfect
storm of bullets, which fortunately passed almost wholly just over
their heads, they rushed up to and entered the works in advance of any
other troops, capturing a number of guns, and pursued the flying enemy
across the plain until darkness covered their retreat. It was the
first brigade re-formed after the long charge, and ready for the night
march in pursuit.

At Cedar Creek, on the 19th of October--another famous victory--after
the left of the Union line, composed of parts of the Eighth and
Nineteenth Corps, had been routed by the enemy's successfully executed
surprise before daylight, the Sixth Corps moved rapidly by a flank
across the track of their advance, and the Jersey Brigade occupied the
most advanced and difficult position, holding it firmly under severe
fire. Once it was ordered back to the general alignment, but its
former place being considered a key position, it was ordered to retake
it, which it did, and held it tenaciously and successfully, until
again ordered to retire, with the whole corps, to the new line
selected for strategic reasons, (the first having been assumed in the
haste and confusion of the morning.) This was no "rout," as
represented by a popular ballad, but a movement deliberately planned
and executed by Gen. Wright, in the absence of Sheridan, who, upon
arrival, after his famous "ride," found the corps in a well
formed-line, and quietly taking their luncheon, preparatory to the
counter attack of the afternoon, which routed the army seven times
encountered within four months, captured a considerable part of it,
with guns and colors, and ended its existence as a separate command.
In this battle, one of the three field officers of the Fifteenth was
killed, and the other two wounded; the line, rank and file, suffered
severely.

From Cedar Creek, back to the main army before Petersburg, through the
remaining operations there, including the final assault and capture of
Petersburg and Richmond, along the rapid pursuit to Appomatox, we
cannot follow the regiment in detail. We have already exceeded our
limits. We must content ourselves with saying that, throughout these,
and those of previous campaigns which have been passed over without
mention, it always did its duty. In the long marches, by night and
day, in summer's heat and winter's cold, through loamy mud and mucky
swamp, in rain and snow, over frozen hummocks or glaze of ice,
burdened with arms, ammunition, rations, accoutrements and
equipments, often pressed to the limit of human endurance, it was
always in its place, and cheerfully responded to the word of command.
In the numerous minor fights and skirmishes, which often try the
soldier more than the general engagement, it did what was expected of
it. In the death-grapples of army with army, from 1862 to 1865, it
bore the stars and stripes with honor and distinction. No regiment
fought with more tenacious courage, or presented a more steady and
unbroken front to the foe. Where the fire was hottest, the charge most
impetuous, the resistance most stubborn, the carnage most fearful, it
was found. It was never ordered to take a position that it did not
reach it. It was never required to hold a post that it did not hold
it. It never assaulted a line of the enemy that it did not drive it.
It never charged a rebel work that it did not breach it. Whatever
might be the general result, the Fifteenth New Jersey Volunteers
always performed the part assigned it.

The sad part of the story--that at which eyes will moisten and hearts
ache--must be told in few lines. Such a record must be traced in
blood. When the roll is called, three hundred and sixty-one times it
must be answered, "Dead on the field of honor." They gave their lives
for the Union, for their country, for the cause of human liberty.
Their names should be written in gold, and hallowed by a grateful
people with affectionate remembrance. No other regiment from New
Jersey suffered nearly so heavy a loss, though most were much larger
in numbers. Add to this "roll of honor" the unknown number of those
crippled by wounds and wasted by incurable disease; remember that they
came chiefly from the original nine hundred and forty-seven, and some
idea may be formed of the horrid work of war. It is often a source of
painful reflections to look back over the history of this regiment and
think of the large number of promising young men, many of them the
brightest, bravest, purest, and best of our State, who fell along its
bloody pathway, from Fredericksburg to Appomattox. Who can estimate
their value to our State and country, if living? Fallen, who can
compute the loss?




CASUALTIES

DURING THE

WILDERNESS CAMPAIGN.


(_Correspondence of the Sussex Register._)

                                            SUNDAY, May 15, 1864.

I send you a list of casualties in our regiment up to the present
time. Most of those reported missing, are most likely killed or
wounded and prisoners. The desperation of our fighting has never been
equalled in this war. Our brigade is nearly used up. Col. Ryerson of
the 10th N.J., is killed, and Lieut. Col. Tay[1] a prisoner. Lieut.
Col. Wiebecke of the 2d, was killed yesterday. Capt. H.P. Cooke of the
2d, is a prisoner; Col. H.W. Brown of the 3d N.J., is wounded. Capt.
Van Blarcom was lost in a charge on Sunday last. Capt. Walker, Capt.
Shimer, Lieut. Van Voy, and Lieut. Justice were killed in a charge on
Thursday, the 12th inst. Capt. McDanolds was wounded at the same time
thro' the jaw and both legs, one of which has been amputated. Lieut.
H.M. Fowler was wounded at same time; also, Lieut. Penrose. Capt.
Hamilton[2] was wounded on the 6th inst., thro' both thighs (flesh
wound.) Capt. Vanderveer had the fingers of his left hand shot off. A
part of the 10th Regt. and a part of the 2d, were captured yesterday
while on picket. Lt. Col. Wiebecke was wounded and left on the
field--the rebels found and shot him and stripped him entirely naked.
We are very busy, and on duty night and day. All of us are nearly worn
out. We suppose that we are beating the enemy, but there is much
confusion of reports, &c. As I write this we are lying about a mile
and a half from Spottsylvania Court House, on the extreme left of our
lines. Sergt. Van Gilder, Co. K, will die of his wound--a canister
shot in the side--the ball remaining. Albert L. Carmer, Co. D, will
most likely die--shot through the lungs. There are many badly wounded.
Our regiment captured a battle-flag from the rebels. We took it off
their breastworks. Excuse this rather confused statement; it is as
good as I can do in the time I have.

                                     Very respectfully,
                                               MARSHALL B. STULL.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Lieut. Col. Tay has since been recaptured from the enemy, and is
now with his regiment.

[2] Capt. Hamilton has since died of his wound.




KILLED, WOUNDED AND MISSING,

DURING THE SERIES OF BATTLES FOUGHT IN SPOTTSYLVANIA COUNTY, VA., FROM
MAY 4th TO MAY 15th, 1864.


COMPANY A.

      Capt. C.C. Shimer, killed.
      Sergt. Paul Kuhl, killed.
      Sergt. Lucien A. Voorhees, killed.
      Lieut. George C. Justice killed.
      Sergt. William B. Dungan, wounded.
      Corp. John F. Servis, wounded.
      Corp. Jonathan P. Collins, killed.
      Corp. Joseph Runkle, wounded.
      Private David Allgard, missing.
      David Anthony, killed.
      Jacob Apgar, killed.
      Jacob Bryan, wounded.
      William B. Bryan, wounded.
      John Butler, wounded.
      John Burns, wounded.
      John Brogan, killed.
      Jacob Beam, wounded and missing.
      George S. Beaver, wounded.
      Andrew Closson, missing.
      Isaac Dayton, missing.
      Joseph Dawes, missing.
      Joseph Everett, killed.
      John Evans, missing.
      William Gulick, wounded.
      Geo. P. Henderson, killed.
      Lewis Higgins, missing.
      William L. Higgins, wounded.
      Silas Hockenberry, killed.
      Lemuel Hockenberry, wounded.
      Moses Housel, missing.
      John W. Henry, wounded and missing.
      Herman Helmbold, killed.
      Garret Hogan, missing.
      Henry P. Johnson, wounded.
      John Moser, wounded.
      Van Meter P. Hammet, wounded.
      Cornelius I. Nevius, killed.
      William N. Peer, killed.
      James C. Palmer, wounded.
      John Rouch, wounded.
      George Kessler, wounded.
      Robert Sorter, wounded.
      Joseph Sullivan, wounded.
      Henry C. Smith, killed.
      Charles Scherer, killed.
      Charles E. Smiley, wounded.
      Theodore Stammets, wounded.
      John Staats, missing.
      Abram Trauger, wounded.
      Peter I. Tenbroeck, wounded.


    COMPANY B.

      Capt. J.S. McDanolds, wounded.
      Sergt. E.B. Nicholas, wounded, thigh.
      Sergt. Samuel B. Danly, wounded, leg.
      Sergt. C.W. Beegle, wounded.
      Corp. D. Sharp, wounded.
      Corp. John L. Young, killed.
      Private John H. Allen, wounded, hand.
      James D. Baylor, killed.
      W.K. Barker, wounded.
      T.H. Barker, missing.
      F.M. Beegle, wounded.
      George Bilby, wounded, dangerously.
      H.H. Carr, wounded, leg.
      Thomas Dougherty, wounded.
      James Egbert, missing.
      Frank S. Fernald, killed.
      H.J.V. Heed, wounded.
      A.G. King, killed.
      Charles Hand, wounded, knee.
      William Lippencott, wounded, leg.
      Thomas Mitchell, wounded, hand.
      John Mott, wounded.
      Jared P. Minton, missing.
      John Ogden Martin, killed.
      William Schenck, wounded, head.
      Clinton Swick, wounded, knee.
      A.R. Skinner, wounded.
      William Sidner, killed.
      John Sherer, wounded.
      Patrick Timmons, wounded.
      Charles K. Vought, killed.
      George Vossler, killed.
      O.W. Vossler, killed.
      S.S. Van Ness, wounded.
      George Welter, killed.
      John A. Wilson, wounded.


    COMPANY C.

      Capt. Lewis Van Blarcom, missing.
      Lieut. William W. Van Voy, killed.
      Sergt. John Van Houten, killed.
      Corp. William Trelease, wounded and missing.
      Corp. Manuel Johnson, wounded.
      Corp. John A. Cliff, missing.
      Color Sergt. Samuel Rubadon, killed.
      Sergt. Israel D. Lum, wounded.
      Private Lewis Turner, wounded.
      William Bailey, missing.
      William D. Briggs, missing.
      Jeremiah Haycock, killed.
      Andrew J. Jennings, killed.
      John Guy, killed.
      Edwin C. Reger, killed.
      John Rutan, killed.
      John Miller, killed.
      Edgar A. Farrand, killed.
      Moses Laramie, missing.
      Charles H. Guerin, wounded.
      Samuel D. Doty, wounded.
      George Hull, wounded.
      Dennis Heffron, wounded.
      Alfred Mills Armstrong, wounded.
      Silas Trowbridge, wounded.
      Lewis L. Davis, wounded.


    COMPANY D.

      Capt. James Walker, killed.
      Sergt. William Doland, wounded, arm.
      Corp. Sanford Simmons, wounded seriously.
      Corp. Peter Gunderman, wounded.
      Corp. Wilbur F. Harris, killed.
      Corp. George Dennis, killed.
      Corp. James H. Terwilleger, missing.
      Private Albert L. Carmer, wounded.
      Private George T. Fallin, killed.
      Leonard Decker, killed.
      George W. Shipps, wounded.
      Jacob South, wounded.
      Wilson T. Labar, wounded.
      Austin Meeker, wounded, bowels.
      Wesley M. Ayres, missing.
      Isaac Sharp, missing.
      William S. Wooster, missing.
      William C. Dickerson, missing.
      Lorenzo D. Fulford, missing.
      Patrick Hughes, killed.
      John Hubbard, missing.
      Abraham Johnson, killed.
      Alfred B. Jackson, missing.
      John Moran, missing.
      William Stuart, wounded.
      Joseph E. Rogers, wounded.
      Abm. Hendershot, wounded.
      David Hendershot, wounded.
      John Bowman, wounded, slight.
      Alpheus Decker, wounded.
      John Emery, wounded.
      Martin Fredericks, killed.
      John Hopkins, wounded.
      Barnard Johnson, wounded.
      James Mangan, missing.
      Patrick Mullen, killed.
      John M. Minion, missing.
      William A. Ward, killed.
      Stephen Hankins, wounded.


    COMPANY E.

      Capt. John H. Vanderveer, wounded.
      Sergt. Benj. O. Scudder, killed.
      Sergt. Garret I. Schenck, wounded.
      Corp. Daniel Richardson, killed.
      Sergt. Wm. C.E. Gulick, killed.
      Private Abm. D. Baird, wounded.
      Peter S. Bennet, wounded.
      Nicholas Conover, killed.
      Andrew Cranney, missing.
      Peter Dennis, killed.
      William K. Dow, wounded.
      Francis Hughes, wounded.
      John H. Jones, wounded.
      James McKensey, killed.
      Thomas McConral, wounded.
      Benjamin Moulton, wounded.
      John W. Priestley, wounded.
      William H. Rose, killed.
      Jeremiah Slack, wounded.
      George Thompson, wounded.
      John L.S. Van Doren, wounded.


    COMPANY F.

      Capt. Ellis Hamilton, wounded.
      Lieut. James W. Penrose, wounded.
      Sergt. Enos G. Budd, wounded.
      Sergt. Phineas H. Skellinger, wounded.
      Sergt. Lewis H. Salmon, wounded.
      Corp. Alonzo Heddin, wounded.
      Corp. Joseph K. Crater, wounded, stomach.
      Corp. Charles L. Milligan, wounded, leg.
      Corp. W.H.K. Emmans, wounded.
      Corp. Peter J. Sutton, wounded, slight.
      Private Joseph Anthony, wounded, leg.
      Henry H. Berry, wounded, breast.
      Charles Covert, killed.
      George D. Foulds, killed.
      Isaiah Frutchey, wounded.
      James M. Ingle, wounded.
      Abm. Jacobus, wounded, slight.
      David C. Lantz, wounded, leg.
      Whitfield Lake, wounded, arm.
      James Latteret, wounded, head.
      Andrew J. Opdyke, wounded, back.
      Frank H. O'Neil, wounded.
      Jacob A. Peckwell, killed.
      Andrew F. Salmon, wounded, body.
      Lawrence H. Wise, wounded, shoulder.
      Elias Williamson, killed.


    COMPANY G.

      Lieut. Henry M. Fowler, wounded.
      Sergt. William E. Trimmer, killed.
      Sergt. Jacob J. Lair, wounded.
      Sergt. William M. Thompson, killed.
      Sergt. Jacob F. Thatcher, wounded.
      Corp. John Bocock, wounded.
      Corp. John Garren, missing.
      Private William Ashcroft, wounded.
      Nathan Culver, wounded.
      George Haney, missing.
      Cornelius King, missing.
      Simeon G. Peddrick, missing.
      John Reisinger, wounded.
      John M. Smith, killed.
      Levi Stull, killed.
      William H. Wyckoff, wounded.
      George D. Wagoner, wounded.
      James C. Myers, wounded.


    COMPANY H.

      Sergt. John B. Lunger, killed.
      Corp. James O. Dufford, killed.
      Corp. Albert H. Greely, killed.
      Sergt. James Donnelly, wounded.
      Corp. John Mowder, wounded.
      Corp. William G. Bailey, wounded.
      Private James Murphy, killed.
      William E. Archer, killed.
      William J. Bodine, killed.
      William S. Cearfos, killed.
      Joseph B. Steele, killed.
      William Crotsley, wounded.
      Abm. Rush, wounded.
      William Seguine, wounded.
      Jacob L. Lunger, wounded, hand.
      Samuel Trimmer, wounded, hand.
      William Black, wounded, neck.
      Simon W. Van Horn, wounded.
      Garner H. Deremer, wounded.
      George Dufford, wounded.
      Jacob D. Garretson, wounded.
      David Hoffman, wounded.
      Edward E. Kitchell, wounded.
      Isaac Medick, wounded, arm off.
      John Slack, wounded.
      Isaac K. Deremer, missing.
      William Howard, missing.


    COMPANY I.

      Sergt. James E. Cole, killed.
      Sergt. Charles C. Simpson, killed.
      Corp. John K. Fretz, killed.
      Corp. William Weed, killed.
      Corp. William H. Case, missing.
      Private David Moore, killed.
      Nicholas V. Bennet, wounded.
      Edward Dardis, killed.
      John Gunderman, killed.
      John A. Hunterdon, wounded.
      John D. Padgett, wounded.
      William N. Padgett, missing.
      Ephraim Shay, wounded.
      Alfred J. Taylor, wounded.
      John Drake, wounded.
      Annanias Drake, wounded, breast.
      Austin Gunderman, wounded, leg.
      Henry I. Hendershot, wounded.
      Nelson S. Hardick, wounded, slight.
      Henry Martin, wounded.
      Ira M. Stuart, wounded, hand.
      Nathan Earles, wounded in seven places.
      Moses Fenner, missing.
      Elijah Pelton, missing.


    COMPANY K.

      Sergt. Martin C. Van Gilder, wounded.
      Sergt. James W. Mullery, wounded.
      Corp. Peter Smith, wounded.
      Corp. James Cassedy, wounded.
      Private Isaac Byram, wounded, head.
      Monmouth Boyd, wounded, arm and side.
      Chileon Brown, wounded.
      Seaman Conklin, missing.
      John Card, Jr., wounded.
      Daniel L. Coykendall, missing.
      William Flannigan, wounded.
      Benjamin M. Hough, wounded.
      Mordecai W. Holly, wounded, arm.
      Lewis L. Kent, killed.
      James Lacy, missing.
      Sidney N. Monks, killed.
      Jesse Mullery, wounded, dangerously.
      Bowdewine Meddaugh, wounded.
      Isaac Paddock, wounded.
      Frederick Van Riper, wounded, hip.

Total officers and men killed, 76; wounded, 162; missing, 41. In all,
279.

Since the foregoing was in type, we have received a list of the killed
and wounded, drawn up by Chaplain Haines, which differs in a few
particulars. For instance--

In Co. B--the Chaplain puts down A.G. King as wounded, and O.W.
Vossler wounded and missing.

In Co. C--Capt. Lewis Van Blarcom, wounded and missing.

In Co. D--John Hubbard, wounded; John Moran, killed; Abraham Johnson,
missing; Barney Johnson, wounded in both arms and missing.

In Co. G--Lieut. H.M. Fowler, missing.

In Co. H--Jacob Garretson, killed.

In Co. I--Sergt. James E. Cole, wounded and missing; David Moore, do.;
Alfred J. Taylor, do.; Elijah Pelton, wounded.

In Co. K--Wm. Flannigan, missing; Benj. M. Hough, do.

By comparing these returns with the list made out by M.B. Stull, the
variations will be seen. We do not know which of the returns is the
more correct. Both have been very carefully compiled.

[When the army crossed the Rapidan on the 2d inst., the 15th regiment
mustered about 450 officers and men. After the series of battles from
the 4th to the 15th inst., there were but 157 fit for duty left.]


FIFTEENTH REGIMENT NEW JERSEY VOLUNTEERS.

  Officers originally mustered           38
  Enlisted men originally mustered      909
  Officers gained                        72
  Enlisted men gained                   852
                                        ---
      Total strength                        1871
  Officers mustered out                  18
  Enlisted men mustered out             398
  Officers resigned                      26
           discharged                     8
           promoted                      33
           transferred                   14
           died from diseases             1
                     wounds               8
           dismissed                      2
  Enlisted men discharged               189
               transferred              605
               promoted                  43
               died from disease         98
                         wounds         239
                   in prison             15
               deserted                 108
               not accounted for         66
                                        ---
           Total                           1871


LOSSES BY DEATH OF NEW JERSEY REGIMENTS THAT SERVED THREE YEARS.

  -----------+----------+---------+---------+---------+---------------
   Number of | Died of  | Died of | Died in |  Total  |
   Regiment. | Disease. | Wounds. | Prison. | Deaths. |
  -----------+----------+---------+---------+---------+---------------
       1     |    55    |   153   |    19   |   227   |
       2     |    39    |   100   |    21   |   160   |
       3     |    48    |   160   |     5   |   213   |
       4     |    74    |   158   |    25   |   257   |
       5     |    66    |   138   |     9   |   213   |
       6     |    48    |   122   |    10   |   180   |
       7     |   107    |   135   |    18   |   260   |
       8     |    94    |   173   |    17   |   284   |
       9     |   114    |    96   |    44   |   254   | 12 Companies.
      10     |   120    |   102   |    52   |   274   |
      11     |    83    |   130   |    20   |   233   |
      12     |    72    |   175   |    13   |   260   |
      13     |    35    |    68   |     3   |   106   |
      14     |    71    |   146   |    31   |   248   |
      15     |    99    |   247   |    15   |   361   |
    Cavalry. |          |         |         |         |
       1     |   137    |   124   |    37   |   298   | 12 Companies.
       2     |   142    |    52   |    40   |   234   | 12 Companies.
       3     |    49    |    49   |    47   |   145   | 12 Companies.
  -----------+----------+---------+---------+---------+---------------


RECAPITULATION OF NEW JERSEY THREE-YEARS REGIMENTS.

   A: Officers.
   B: Enlisted Men.
   C: Total strength.
   D: Resigned.
   E: Discharged.
   F: Promoted.
   G: Transferred.
   H: Died.
   I: Deserted.
   J: Dismissed.
   K: Not accounted for.
   L: Total.
  --------------+-----------+------------+------+-----------+
                |           |            |      |           |
   THREE-YEARS  |  Mustered |  Gained.   |      |  Mustered +
   REGIMENTS.   |  in.      |            |      |  out.     |
  --------------+----+------+-----+------+      +----+------+
                | A  |  B   | A   |  B   |  C   | A  |  B   |
  --------------+----+------+-----+------+------+----+------+
              1 | 38 |  996 |  61 | 302  | 1397 | 29 |  454 |
              2 | 38 | 1006 |  79 | 1075 | 2198 | 46 | 1083 |
              3 | 38 | 1013 |  76 | 148  | 1275 | 22 |  337 |
              4 | 38 |  871 |  99 | 1028 | 2036 | 41 |  742 |
              5 | 38 |  823 |  66 |  845 | 1772 | 16 |  184 |
              6 | 38 |  860 |  50 |  537 | 1485 | 20 |  159 |
              7 | 38 |  882 | 108 | 1878 | 2906 | 45 |  976 |
              8 | 38 |  851 |  87 | 1819 | 2795 | 45 |  941 |
   12 Co.'s.  9 | 42 | 1115 |  85 | 1495 | 2701 | 35 | 1235 |
             10 | 35 |  883 |  69 | 1597 | 2584 | 32 |  847 |
             11 | 39 |  940 |  57 |  804 | 1840 | 23 |  444 |
             12 | 39 |  953 |  57 |  850 | 1899 | 40 |  903 |
             13 | 38 |  899 |  57 |  444 | 1438 | 29 |  481 |
             14 | 39 |  968 |  47 |  330 | 1384 | 29 |  481 |
             15 | 38 |  909 |  72 |  852 | 1871 | 18 |  398 |
    Cavalry.    |    |      |     |      |      |    |      |
   12 Co.'s.  1 | 44 |  998 | 150 | 2125 | 3317 | 38 | 1329 |
   12 Co.'s.  2 | 44 | 1105 |  36 | 1715 | 2900 | 38 | 1216 |
   12 Co.'s.  3 | 47 | 1131 |  59 |  997 | 2234 | 38 |  994 |
  --------------+----+------+-----+------+------+----+------+
  --------------+---------------------------------------
                |               CASUALTIES
   THREE-YEARS  |--------------------------------------+
   REGIMENTS.   |         Commissioned Officers.       |
  --------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+---+
                | D  | E  | F  | G  | H  | I  | J  | K |
  --------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+---+
              1 | 24 |  6 | 25 |  1 | 10 |    |  4 |   |
              2 | 27 |  6 | 21 |  5 |  9 |  1 |  2 |   |
              3 | 23 |  7 | 46 |  2 | 10 |    |  4 |   |
              4 | 29 | 17 | 36 |  3 |  7 |  1 |  3 |   |
              5 | 23 |  4 | 26 | 19 | 13 |  2 |  1 |   |
              6 | 26 |  4 | 26 |  5 |  4 |    |  3 |   |
              7 | 30 | 12 | 29 | 10 | 13 |    |  7 |   |
              8 | 35 |  3 | 25 |  3 | 10 |    |  4 |   |
   12 Co.'s.  9 | 36 | 11 | 31 |  3 | 10 |    |  1 |   |
             10 | 20 | 25 | 21 |    |  5 |    |  1 |   |
             11 | 24 |  6 | 18 |  9 | 11 |    |  5 |   |
             12 | 14 | 12 | 18 |    |  9 |    |  3 |   |
             13 | 32 |  4 | 25 |  2 |  3 |    |    |   |
             14 | 20 |  9 | 14 |  5 |  8 |    |  1 |   |
             15 | 26 |  8 | 33 | 14 |  9 |    |  2 |   |
    Cavalry.    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |   |
   12 Co.'s.  1 | 42 | 22 | 63 |  7 | 16 |  1 |  5 |   |
   12 Co.'s.  2 | 13 |  5 | 17 |    |  3 |  2 |  2 |   |
   12 Co.'s.  3 | 17 | 13 | 23 |  2 |  5 |    |  8 |   |
  --------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+---+
  --------------+----------------------------------+------+
                |       CASUALTIES                 |      |
   THREE-YEARS  +----------------------------------+      |
   REGIMENTS.   |               Enlisted Men.      |      |
  --------------+-----+-----+----+-----+-----+-----+      |
                |  E  |  G  | F  |  H  |  I  |  K  |  L   |
  --------------+-----+-----+----+-----+-----+-----+------+
              1 | 326 | 112 | 37 | 217 | 124 |  21 | 1397
              2 | 372 | 205 | 47 | 151 | 204 |  19 | 2198
              3 | 376 |  93 | 38 | 203 | 111 |   3 | 1275
              4 | 302 |  78 | 47 | 250 | 371 | 109 | 2036
              5 | 392 | 523 | 40 | 201 | 251 |  77 | 1772
              6 | 360 | 309 | 27 | 176 | 209 | 157 | 1485
              7 | 362 | 405 | 44 | 247 | 656 |  70 | 2906
              8 | 428 | 333 | 31 | 274 | 416 | 247 | 2795
   12 Co.'s.  9 | 341 | 534 | 17 | 244 | 167 |  36 | 2701
             10 | 268 | 162 | 48 | 269 | 748 | 138 | 2584
             11 | 224 | 315 | 29 | 222 | 451 |  59 | 1840
             12 | 159 | 206 | 38 | 252 | 216 |  29 | 1899
             13 | 148 | 408 | 24 | 103 | 178 |   1 | 1438
             14 | 150 | 298 | 32 | 240 |  97 |     | 1384
             15 | 189 | 605 | 43 | 352 | 108 |  66 | 1871
    Cavalry.    |     |     |    |     |     |     |
   12 Co.'s.  1 | 298 | 448 | 76 | 282 | 425 | 238 | 3317
   12 Co.'s.  2 |  88 | 376 | 32 | 231 | 724 | 153 | 2900
   12 Co.'s.  3 |  70 | 274 | 24 | 140 | 439 | 187 | 2234
  --------------+-----+-----+----+-----+-----+-----+-------+

       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                   |
    |                                                           |
    | Page 17: FN 1: Liet. replaced with Lieut.                 |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Historical sketch of the Fifteenth
Regiment, New Jersey Volunteers, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL SKETCH--15TH REGIMENT ***

***** This file should be named 35697.txt or 35697.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/6/9/35697/

Produced by Jeannie Howse and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
