The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch 1893.07.29, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punch 1893.07.29

Author: Various

Editor: Sir Francis Burnand

Release Date: March 30, 2011 [EBook #35713]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH 1893.07.29 ***




Produced by Lesley Halamek, Malcolm Farmer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI

VOLUME 105, JULY 29TH 1893

_edited by Sir Francis Burnand_




MUSCULAR EDUCATION.

[Illustration]

Mr. PUNCH has much pleasure in recommending the following Prospectus
to the notice of parents desirous of finding a thoroughly practical
school where boys are educated according to the real requirements of
modern life.

CLOANTHUS HOUSE, MARKET DREPANUM, OXON.

Mr. J. PEN-RULLOX, M.A. Cambs., and the Rev. WILFRID BAILS, B.A.
Oxon, receive pupils to prepare for the great public schools and
universities.

The well-known qualifications of Mr. PEN-RULLOX, who rowed stroke in
his university boat in the celebrated race at Amwell in 1878, and of
the Rev. Mr. BAILS, who played for Oxford in the famous university
match in the Common Fields in 1882, will be sufficient guarantee that
the boys will be thoroughly well instructed.

Besides Rowing, Cricket, and Football; Swimming, Racquets, Boxing,
and Hockey, are specially attended to by competent Assistant-Masters,
under the personal supervision of the Principals.

Billiards, Lawn-tennis, Poker, Nurr and Spell, and some other minor
games, now too frequently neglected in the education of youth, will
find their due place in the curriculum of Cloanthus House.

It is in contemplation, should a sufficient number of boys show a
marked inclination for such studies, to engage a Board-school Master,
of approved competence, to direct literary and scientific work.

Terms, inclusive, L250 per annum, payable in advance: the only extras
at present being Reading, Writing, Polo, and Arithmetic.

Reference is kindly permitted to the following:--The Right Rev. the
Bishop of ISTHMIA; the Editor of the _Sporting Life_; the Rev. R.
E. D. HORGAN, M.A., Jesurum Col., Cambs; the Sports Editor of the
_Field_; the Warden of Mortlake College, Putney; Dr. S. A. GRACE,
LL.D.; the Hon. and Rev. HURLINGHAM PEEL.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BITTER CRY OF THE BROKEN-VOICED CHORISTER.

(_A long way after Tennyson._)

  Break, break, break,
    O voice on that clear top C!
  And I would that my throat could utter
    High notes as they used to be.

  O well for old BUNDLECOOP'S boy
    That he still shouts his full round A!
  O well for that tow-headed lad
    That he sings in his old clear way.

  And the anthems still go on
    With boy-trebles sharp and shrill;
  But O for _my_ "compass," so high and grand,
    And the voice that I _used_ to trill!

  Break, break, break,
    Like a creaky old gate, top C!
  But the high treble notes of a voice that is cracked,
    Will never come back to me!

       *       *       *       *       *

QUEER QUERIES.

THE WHITE CURRENCY QUESTION.--Can nothing be done to prevent the
Indian VICEROY from carrying out his monstrous proposal about the
Rupee? I was just off to Bombay (having recently completed a period
of enforced seclusion in Devonshire, occasioned by a too successful
competition with a monopolist Mint) on the strength of a newspaper
paragraph that "Free Coining of Silver" was permitted in that happy
land. Free Coining! In my opinion it beats "Free Education" hollow,
and is just what I have always wanted. I felt that my fortune was
made, when suddenly the news comes that the free coinage business is
stopped. What an injustice! In the name of the down-trodden Hindoo,
to whom my specially manufactured nickel-and-tin Rupee would have been
quite a new revelation, I protest against this interference with the
immemorial customs of our Oriental fellow-subjects.--JEREMIAH D'IDDLA.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTRIBUTED BY OUR OWN WELSH-HARPER'S MAGAZINE.--With the AP MORGANS,
AP RHYS, AP JONES, and many others, Wales is the ideal "'Appy Land."

       *       *       *       *       *

SEASONABLE.

(_By a future Lord Chancellor._)

  The close of the season, the close of the season,
  It leaves a man rifled of rhino and reason;
  And now, with hot rain and a westerly breeze on,
  I don't opine racketing London agrees on
  The whole with Society. "_Kyrie Eleison_"
  I'll chaunt when I stand with my wife and my wee son
  Some windy "Parade" or exuberant "Lees" on,
  In the splash of the salt and the flash of the free sun,
  And am garbed in a fashion that, sure, would be treason
  To Bond Street; and ruminate, sprawling at ease on
  The sands with their bands and extempore sprees on.--
  "Table d'Hote-ards," repair to your Homburgs or freeze on
  Cosmopolitan Alps, and eat kickshaws to tease one;
  But _me_ let the niggers marine and the sea's un-
  Translateable sing-song, and bathers with d----s on,
  Delight, and bare children, their noses and knees on,
  Till quite I forget Messrs. WELBY AND MEESON
  (Those despots of law) and my failures, and fees un-
  Liquidated as yet, and myself--and the season!

       *       *       *       *       *

AT COVENT GARDEN LAST THURSDAY.

[Illustration]

Production of new Opera, _Amy Robsart_, arranged (and very well
arranged, too) from Sir WALTER SCOTT'S novel, by Sir AUGUSTUS HARRIS
and PAUL MILLIET, the English adaptation by FREDERIC WEATHERLY, and
music by ISIDORE DE LARA. CALVE in the title _role_, splendid;
going through everything--three rather lengthy Acts, two impassioned
love-duets, and the trap-door in the bridge--with unflagging spirit
and charm.

In the Second Act, Kenilworth shown illuminated for the reception of
_Elizabeth_--_Leicester_ having evidently borrowed one of the band
kiosks from Earl's Court. _Elizabeth_, according to stage directions,
should have entered "seated upon a magnificent white horse," but
preferred to walk in. Possibly her steed detained by business
engagements. As represented by Madame ARMAND, an easy-going,
sunny-tempered sovereign, with an amiable dislike of any
"unpleasantness" among her courtiers. The _Earl of Sussex_ the most
impressive mute (next to his contemporary the _Earl of Burleigh_ in
_The Critic_) on the boards,--nothing to do but look haughty, and
at last, at the Queen's command, consent to become reconciled to
_Leicester_,--but the subtle suggestion in his "shake-hands" that
he did so on compulsion, and reserved himself the right of punching
_Leicester's_ head at the first convenient opportunity, very
artistically conveyed. Part most carefully thought out. The Revels cut
short by the inconsiderate appearance of _Amy Robsart_ when they were
just beginning, which must have been annoying for the Lady of the
Lake, who had just arrived to pay homage to the Queen, and found
herself obliged to get upon her floating island again, and go home in
the most ignominious manner, without waiting even for the "shower
of stars," which were to have fallen over the water. _Elizabeth_,
however, seemed quite unruffled by the interruption, perhaps thinking
that anything was a relief which put an end to the revels. _Finale_
to this Act dramatic, and well worked up. Third Act in two short
_tableaux_, concluding with a duel and explanation (in two lines)
between _Leicester_ and _Tressilian_, after which the opera ends
abruptly with _Varney's_ highly ungentlemanly practical joke upon poor
_Amy Robsart_, and _Leicester's_ request to _Tressilian_ to take his
sword and run him through--which, however, he had no time to grant,
as the curtain fell at that moment. After that, well-deserved
floral tributes to Madame CALVE, and enthusiastic calls for singers,
composer, manager, and carriages.

       *       *       *       *       *

"FOLLOW ON!"

(_A Cricketer's "Catch."_ AIR--"_Come Follow!_")

_First Voice._ Come follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow on!

_Second Voice._ Why then should I follow, follow, follow, why then
must I follow, follow on?

_Third Voice._ When you're Eighty runs or more behind our score you
follow on!

       *       *       *       *       *

ACCOMMODATING.

_G. O. M._ (_to Radical Member_). My dear Sir, will _you_ vote for
this clause?

_Rad. Mem._ I will, Sir. What is it?

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "TOO KIND BY HALF."

_John Bull, A.B._ "THE MAN WHO LAYS HIS HAND UPON A WOMAN----"
_Jacques Bonhomme._ "_PARDON, MON AMI!_ 'SAVE IN THE WAY OF
_KINDNESS_----'"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A NEW LANGUAGE.

_Mamma_ (_severely_). "DON'T SQUINT, EFFIE, MY DEAR!"

_Effie._ "I WASN'T SQUINTING, MAMMA. I WAS ONLY MAKING 'DINNER EYES'
AT MAJOR STUFFAM. I HEAR HE GIVES SUCH CHARMING DINNER PARTIES, AND I
SHOULD SO MUCH _LIKE TO BE ASKED!_"]

       *       *       *       *       *

TOO KIND BY HALF.

    ["The independence and integrity of Siam ... is a subject of
    great importance to the British, and more especially to the
    British Indian Empire."--_Lord Rosebery._ "We have in no way
    any intention of threatening the independence of Siam."--_M.
    Develle._]

_British Tar sings, someway after Mr. Rudyard Kipling's "Tommy."_

AIR--"_Mandalay._"

  "By the old Moulmein Pagoda, lookin' eastward to the sea,
  There's a Burma girl a settin'," an' she takes _'er_ time from _me_.
  But this Siam puss looks pooty, and I'm sorter bound to say
  "You stand back, you sailor Frenchy! that's a game as two can play!"
              'Twas _my_ game at Mandalay,
              And _you_ seem on the same lay:
  You can twig my Jack a-flaunting from the Nile to Mandalay;
              But this I've got to say,
              If your 'and on 'er you lay,
  I shall ask you to take a 'and in a game as _men_ can play!

  'Er petticoat is yaller, and 'er little cap is green,
  And--I shouldn't half object to interjuce 'er to my Queen!
  I don't want to see 'er suckin' of a Paris cigarette,
  And a-wastin' purchased kisses on French Bullyvards--you bet!
              No, I wouldn't shed no blood,
              But by Mekon's yaller mud,
  I 'ave always felt it "bizness" to take care no rival stud
              On my road to "far Cathay."

  Wot? She's fired upon your gunboats? Well, I'd like to know, yer see,
  If them gunboats wos cavortin' where they didn't ought to be.
  Your clutch upon 'er wrist, eh? Well, that's like your bloomin' cheek!
  She shrinks from you, my Frenchy. No, yer know if she _should_ squeak--
              Give a reglar woman's squeak,
              Though she looks carved out o' teak--
  I should think o' my own womankind, my friend, and I should--_speak_
              In the British sailor's way!

  You'll "respect 'er Independence and Integrity," you say?
  Well, a man who on a woman 'is 'and would dare to lay--
  Hay? _Save in the way o' kyindness!_ Why, you've capped me there, I own,
  Which I didn't think _that_ sentiment to Frenchies was beknown.
              It's a bit o' good old VIC.!
              But you've nicked it quick and slick.
  Well, I 'ope you'll square it fairly, and not lay it on too thick,
              In the brave old _Bismarck_ way!

  The idea o' wasting ivory, silk, and peacocks' tails, and such,
  Upon merchants who're a trifle too much like GEORGE CANNING'S "Dutch."[A]
  When a fair and square Free Trader, like--well, not _un_like myself,
  Could stand by for to purtect 'er, and 'elp 'er--and 'im--pile pelf,
              Well--I can quite understand
              She may find your 'eavy 'and
  Too _kyind_ by half, my Frenchy, and prefer the British land,
              And the British Tar's old way.

  Yes; our ROSEBERY and your DEVELLE do agree--in words, no doubt,
  But, yer see, the Ten Commandments, in Bangkok, git turned about!
  "Independence and Integrity" for pooty dear Miss SIAM,
  Is wot _you_'re "interested in" my Frenchy,--and so I am!
              Only--in the game we play,
              Cards do turn up in a way
  That would stagger sly AH SIN himself. If you git in my way
              On my road to "Old Cathay,"
              Or my aid this gyurl _should_ pray,
  I _might_ p'raps come down like thunder,--as I did in Mandalay!

[Footnote A:

  "In matters of commerce, the fault of the Dutch
  Is giving too little and asking too much."

    _Canning's "A Political Despatch."_]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BATTLE OF THE SEXES.--_Middlesex_ v. _Sussex_.

       *       *       *       *       *

AT THE WORLD'S WATER SHOW.

_The performance has begun._ Captain BOYTON _has just descended the
Chute in a boat, with a bevy of lightly-clad young ladies waving flags
with shrill enthusiasm. Canadians, Indians, and Negroes row various
craft containing Beauties of the Ballet about the Lake. An elderly
Negress stands on an island, and waves a towel encouragingly at things
in general. Two Clowns, accompanied by a futile individual disguised
as a Frog, start to run round the margin of the Lake with a gallant
determination to be funny, but abandon the attempt after making a
quarter of the distance, and complete the circuit with a subdued and
chastened demeanour._

_Mr. Bravo_ (_to_ Mr. BLAZZEY, _enthusiastically_). Capital show
this--wonderfully well arranged!

_Mr. Blazzey_ (_screwing up his eyes_). Y--yes. Better if they'd had
_water_ running down the incline, though, and sent _all_ the boats in
that way.

_Mr. Bravo._ Don't see how they could pump up water enough for that,
myself; and if they did, it would all run through at the sides!

_Mr. Blazz._ (_ignoring any hydraulic difficulties_). Oh, they could
have dodged that if they chose; anyway, that's how it _ought_ to have
been managed!

_Miss Frivell_ (_to Mr. Hoplight_). I can hardly believe this is the
same place where BUFFALO BILL gave his performance only last year, can
you? It all looks so different!

[Illustration: "I find no difficulty in recognising it, myself."]

_Mr. Hopl._ (_after ponderous consideration._) I find no difficulty in
recognising it, myself. The difference you observe is due to the fact
that the arena which was originally constructed for--er--displays of
horsemanship requires to undergo some considerable--er--structural
alterations before being equally well adapted to a performance in
which--er--boating and swimming form the--er--principal features.

_Miss Friv._ (_with exemplary gravity_). I see. You mean there must be
_water_?

_Mr. Hopl._ Water is undoubtedly an--er--indispensable element in such
an exhibition.

_Miss Friv._ How clever of you to know that! But perhaps someone told
you?

_Mr. Hopl._ (_modestly_). I arrived at it by the--er--light of my own
unassisted intelligence.

_Miss Friv._ Did you? Not _really_! "How far that little candle throws
his beams!" (_To herself._) I didn't mean to be so rude as that! But
he's no business to be such a bore!

_Mr. Bravo_ (_after the Sculling-race between_ ROSS _and_ BUBEAR).
That was a good race, eh? They're the champion scullers, you know.

_Mr. Blazz._ Don't see the point of setting 'em to race _here_,
though. Rather like running the Derby in a riding-school!

_A Sympathetic Lady_ (_during the Swimming-race_). How well those
girls do swim! I suppose they go under first, and then come up again.
But how damp they must get, to be sure, doing that twice a day! I
daresay they never get their hair properly dry from one week's end to
another. I should think that must be so uncomfortable for them, you
know. However, they seem to be having plenty of fun among themselves.
I wish we could hear what they are saying; but there's so much to look
at, that one misses most of it!

[_A Pontoon is moved out into the centre of the Lake, and three "Rocky
Mountain Wonders" give an entertainment on board. The first Wonder
constructs the letter A with himself and two high ladders, up which
the other two run nimbly. They meet at the top with mutual surprise,
and a touch of resentment, as if each had expected at least to find
solitude there. The Second Wonder lies down on his back resignedly,
and the Third, meanly availing himself of the opportunity, stands on
his friend's stomach, and strikes an attitude. Both descend and
bow, in recognition of applause, and then each starts up his ladder
again--only to meet once more at the top, more surprised and annoyed
than ever. The Third Wonder refuses to be appeased unless he is
allowed to hold the Second head downwards by the ankles. After further
amenities of this kind they come down, apparently reconciled, and are
towed back to the shore._

_Miss Friv._ Is that supposed to be an illustration of life on the
Rocky Mountains?

_Mr. Hopl._ (_bringing the full powers of his mind to bear on the
subject_). I should be inclined to doubt myself whether it afforded
any accurate idea of either the industry or the--er--relaxations
peculiar to that region, which can hardly be favourable to such
pursuits.

_Miss Friv._ They might find it useful for escaping from a grizzly,
mightn't they?

_Mr. Hopl._ Hardly, if, as I have always been given to understand, the
grizzly bear is an equally expert climber. I imagine their title of
"Rocky Mountain Wonders" is merely indicative of their--er--origin,
and that their performances would indeed excite more wonder in their
native country than anywhere else. One should always guard against
taking these things in too literal a spirit.

[Miss F. _assents demurely, and is suddenly moved to mirth, as she
is careful to explain, by the sight of a Nigger, which, Mr. H. very
justly remarks, is scarcely a subject for so much amusement_.

_Mr. Bravo_ (_after the Corps de Ballet have performed various
evolutions on a large raft_). I call that uncommonly pretty, all those
girls dancing there in the sunlight, eh?

_Mr. Blazz._ Pretty enough--in its proper place.

_Mr. Bravo_ (_losing his patience at last_). Why, hang it all, you
wouldn't have the Ballet danced under water, would you?

_Mr. Blazz._ Well, it would be more of a novelty, at any rate.

[Mr. BRAVO _decides that "it was a mistake to come out with a chap
like_ BLAZZEY."

IN THE SHILLING SEATS.

_A Small Sharp Boy_ (_with an admiring Father, Mother, and
Grandmother_). Father, why ha' them Injuns all got feathers stuck
round their 'eds like shuttlecocks, eh? Is it to show as they're in
the terbaccer line, eh, Father? Is the gentleman on the bicycle a real
demon, eh, Father? Ain't he like what a real demon is? _Why_ ain't you
never seen one, Father? Think you'll _ever_ see one, eh? Why's that
man going right up atop of that pole for? Why is he goin' to jump off?
Will he git drownded, eh, Father? Don't he _ever_ git drownded? Could
_you_ dive off from as 'igh as that with your legs tied? Could Uncle
BILL? Could Gran'ma, with _'er_ legs tied? [_&c., &c._

DURING THE WALRUS HUNT.

_Shilling and Sixpenny Spectators._ That's the police station on that
boat where the two Bobbies are.... 'Ere's a rummy couple coming along
in this boat! See the bloke with the bald 'ed, and the ole girl in a
pink bonnet?... There, they've run slap into them others, and the ole
bloke's got his 'eels in the air. Oh, dear, oh, dear!... Look at the
bobbies tryin' to run 'em in. Lor, they're all pourin' water on
to each other's 'eds as 'ard as they can go! 'Ere's the ole walrus
swimmin' up now, d'ye _see_? And the ole Clown a fishin' for 'im. 'E's
bin an' dragged 'im 'in 'ed foremost! Look at the walrus a duckin' o'
the ole woman. Hor, hor, if ever I see the like o' that! Is that like
'ow they 'unt walruses, Father, eh? Blest if the ole walrus ain't got
into the station 'ouse _after_ 'em. Look at 'em all gittin' out on the
roof--_in_ they jump! And the ole girl goin' in backards, hor, hor!
And the other bloke any'ow. See the 'ole admiral in the cocked 'at a
takin' sights through 'is spy-glorss! Now they're gittin' the 'arpoon
ready. There, they've copped 'im--it's all over! Well, that _was_ a
good lark, and no mistake!

AT THE LANDING-PLACE--AFTER SHOOTING THE CHUTES.

Oh, it was perfectly splendid! We put the rugs right over our heads,
and didn't get wet a bit!... I don't know if you're aware of it, my
dear, but you've got black streaks all down your face. Gracious! it's
the dye from my veil. Do I look very dreadful, dear? Well, it _shows_,
of course--but I wouldn't touch it, or you'll make it worse.... This
lot got a ducking, and no mistake--_look_ at 'em--ho, ho!... I say,
dear old chap, you _ought_ to have come too--it was ripping! Splashed?
No, nothing to speak of. Eh? "My hat?" What's _wrong_ with it? Oh,
confound it all! I only took a front seat to oblige those two girls.
Yes, _I_ can see they're giggling at me as well as you can. Look here,
old fellow, _do_ you know if there's a place here where I can get my
hat ironed, and buy a collar and tie? Because I've got to meet the
CHAFFINGTONS here, and dine with 'em and that. "So have _you_?" Then
_that_'s why you backed out of going down the Chute! Why the deuce
didn't you _say_ so? Oh, if you're going to stand there laughing like
a fool, I'm off! I may just have time to---- Hang it; there _are_ the
CHAFFINGTON girls! Is my collar too _beastly_ limp? you might _tell_ a
fellow!

       *       *       *       *       *

TO A DROSHKY-DRIVER.

(_By a Quondam Fare._)

[Illustration]

  Here's a health to you, GOSPODIN IVANOFF--
    Or whatever your name may chance to be--
  Of _vodka_ I'll toss you a full _stakan_ off
    (A tumbler, I mean, of _eau de vie_);
  And I'll sing you _fortissimo con furore_
    Your national hymn, in a cheerful key,
  ('Twill colour with local tone my story,
    To start with your "_Bozhe Tsarya khrani_").

  'Twas a lively morning, my hirsute Jehu,
    In Petersburg once we together spent;
  And now in my sketch-book I still can see you
    (The annexed for your portrait's humbly meant).
  Your costume resembled in part a butcher's--
    A dull blue gown of a vast extent,
  With top-boots, like each of the other _kutschers_
    And shocking bad hat, all "bashed" and bent.

  Ere long you called me your "little brother,"
    Or else--your knowledge of Court to show--
  (What one Russian "High Excellence" styles another)
    "_Vuisokoprevoskhoditelstvo._"
  You wanted to learn how to greet an acquaintance
    In English; I said, to be _comme il faut_,
  That "God save the Queen" was the proper sentence--
    I own that my hoax was a trifle low.

  A large percentage, my gay _izvostchik_,
    I failed of your jokes to understand;
  But I safely say you displayed the _most_ cheek
    Of any I've met by sea or land.
  When you pitched me clean out on the Nevski pavement,
    With syllable brief I loudly banned;
  But as _dam_ in your lingo "I'll give" (you knave!) meant,
    You grinned, and for "tea-money" held your hand.

  I shall never forget that awful jolting
    I got as you whirled me round about
  In your backless car; for your bumping, bolting,
    You really, my Vanka, deserved the knout.
  Well, I won't say "Good-bye," but "_Do svidanya_"--
    Though whether we'll meet again I doubt;
  If you ever _should_ wander to far BRITANNIA,
    I fear you will probably find me "Out."

       *       *       *       *       *

MOTTO FOR PROFESSORS OF PALMISTRY.-- "_Palmam qui meruit ferat._"
_i.e._, "Who has paid his money may bare his palm."

       *       *       *       *       *

It is proposed to establish a fire-station, "with fifty men, on the
Thames Embankment." For what purpose? In case of anybody setting the
Thames on Fire?

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. R. says she never has toast for breakfast, but always
"fresh-airated bread."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MOAN OF A THEATRE-MANAGER.

  Who gets, by hook or crook, from me
  Admittance free, though well knows he
  That myriads turned away will be?
                    The Deadhead.

  Who, while he for his programme pays
  The smallest silver coin, inveighs
  Against such fraud with eyes ablaze?
                    The Deadhead.

  Who to his neighbour spins harangues,
  On how he views with grievous pangs
  The dust that on our hangings hangs?
                    The Deadhead.

  Who, in a voice which rings afar,
  Declares, while standing at the bar,
  Our drinks most deleterious are?
                    The Deadhead.

  Who aye withholds the claps and cheers
  That others give? Who jeers and sneers
  At all he sees and all he hears?
                    The Deadhead.

  Who loudly, as the drama's plot
  Unfolds, declares the tale a lot
  Of balderdash and tommy-rot?
                    The Deadhead.

  Who dubs the actors boorish hinds?
  Who fault with all the scenery finds?
  Who with disgust his molars grinds?
                    The Deadhead.

  Who spreads dissatisfaction wide
  'Mongst those who else with all they spied
  Had been extremely satisfied?
                    The Deadhead.

  Who runs us down for many a day,
  And keeps no end of folks away
  That else would for admittance pay?
                    The Deadhead.

  Who keeps his reputation still,
  For recompensing good with ill
  With more than Pandemonium's skill?
                    The Deadhead.

  Who makes the bankrupt's doleful doom
  In all its blackness o'er me loom?
  Who'll bring my grey head to the tomb?
                    The Deadhead.

       *       *       *       *       *

"THE WAY THEY HAVE IN THE NAVY."

(_Adapted to the Requirements of the Army._)

"There was no doubt about it," queried the Quartermaster to the
Adjutant, "the Chief certainly desired me to execute him?"

"That is unquestionably my impression," replied the Adjutant.

"Yes, and it never does to question his orders," continued the
Quartermaster; "it makes him so wild if he fancies that you are
disobeying his commands."

"Quite so," admitted the Adjutant; "and so the best thing is to carry
them out. As you know, obedience is 'the first law of a soldier.'"

"Still, to shoot a man for nothing, does seem a _little_ hard."

"How do we know it's for nothing? You may be sure the Chief has his
own reasons for everything."

And so the two warriors walked to the barrack square and sent for the
unfortunate Private THOMAS ATKINS. As the order was conveyed to the
quarters of the rank and file, men lounged out of the mess-room, and
discussed the Colonel's orders. It seemed "a bit strange," but it
was not for them to dispute the chief's command. And, as they spoke,
Private THOMAS ATKINS was produced. He had a clean defaulter's sheet.

"On my word, I really trust that there may be some mistake," said a
Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel M.D. "But, as I am not now attached
to the battalion, I have no right to interfere."

Private THOMAS ATKINS was marched to a wall, ordered to right-about
turn, and then (under the command of the Quartermaster) shot.

Then the civil power, in the person of a police-constable, thought it
time to interfere, and arrested the officer immediately in command.

"Dear me!" exclaimed the Colonel, subsequently; "how exceedingly
absurd! I wanted the Quartermaster to give him a new suit, and he
thought I asked him to shoot him! You fellows really ought to be more
careful!"

But nothing could be done, because the matter had passed into the
hands of the civil power.

And, all things taken into consideration, it was just as well that
they had.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BALLAD OF DEPARTED PIPPINS.

(_Some Way after Villon and Rossetti._)

[Illustration]

  Tell me, now, where has _it_ departed,
    That fine old apple, the Ribstone Pippin,
  The rosy-coated, and juicy-hearted,
    I loved, when a "nipper," my teeth to slip in?

  Where is the Russet we boys thought rippin'?
    (Though its sharpness sometimes started the tears?)
  Oh! such-like often I've spent my "tip" in--
    But where are the apples of earlier years?

  Where's the King Pippin, the sun-brown one?
    And where is the Catshead, light Spring green?
  (Which gave, while eating, such glorious fun,
    If--after munching--some dule and teen)?
  And where is the Golden Knob, whose sheen
    Would draw the wasps all about our ears?
  (Sometimes in our mouths, if they were not seen)--
    But where are the apples of earlier years?

  White watery things from the land of the Yankee,
    And sugary shams from the Austral seas,
  They sell us--at sixpence per pound! No, thankee!
    I have no palate for frauds like these.
  There's not an apple that now could please
    Poor EVE so much as to waken fears.
  Ah, the luscious Pippins youth crunched at ease!
    But where are the apples of earlier years?

  Nay, never ask if your fruiterer's heard
    Of "a decent pippin" (the huckster sneers!)
  Except with this for, an overword--
    But where _are_ the apples of earlier years?

       *       *       *       *       *

RATHER MIXED.--In the sale of wines at CHRISTIE'S last week, Lot 136
is described as "3 dozen of sherry, 1842, been to West Indies, more or
less." Now, why this mystery? Why not make a clean breast of it? Is it
meant that the sherry called in at only one or two of the Indies? or
did it only set half way on the voyage to the group? We should learn
more or be told less.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FELINE AMENITIES.

_Fair Visitor._ "Do Play something, Dear! I love to hear your Music!"

_Fair Hostess._ "SORRY, DEAR, BUT THIS PIANO IS SO DREADFULLY OUT OF
TUNE! THAT'S THE WORST OF LIVING IN APARTMENTS! MY MUSIC-MASTER SAYS
THAT TO USE SUCH A PIANO AS THAT IS FATAL TO REAL PLAYING! BUT WON'T
_YOU_ PLAY SOMETHING, DEAR?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THROUGH THE LOCK.

Grand Old Puntsman pipes up:--

        "_Lock! Lock! Lock!_"
  Heaven be thanked, we're through it!
    Spite of crush, and jam, and shock,
      _That's_ the way to do it!
  Now for a fair "flowing tide,"
    Verdurous banks and shady!
  Yes, we're through. _I_'m glad, aren't _you_,
    Eh, my little lady?

        "_Lock! Lock! Lock!_"
  Trim the punt, sweet, prythee!
    You look nice in your new frock!
      Fresh as osier withy.
  How they strove your togs to tear;
    Hinder, or capsize us!
  But, hurroo! we've scrambled through!
    Nought need now surprise us!

        "_Lock! Lock! Lock!_"
  Faint cry, far before us!
    Lot of toffs my efforts mock;
      Menace us in chorus.
  Swear they'll swamp us at the weir.
    Fate there's no controlling,
  But the Grand Old River Hand
    Puts his faith in pol(l)ing!

Sit tight, my dear, and as we drop down with the tide towards the next
lock, I'll sing you a new river-song to an old air. [_Sings._

  And did you ne'er hear of a jolly old punting man,
    Who near Westminster his calling doth ply?
  He handles his pole with such skill and dexterity,
    Winning each "No" and enchanting each "Aye."
  He looks so neat, he steers so steadily,
  The ladies all flock to his punt so readily;
  And he's so celebrated for courage and care,
  That he's seldom in want of a freight or a fare.

  But o'er his last passenger rivals made merry.
    She _did_ look so feeble, and frightened withal:
  "A fair sample this of your fine Irish ladies!
    In a Party like yours won't she kick up a squall?"
  Thus oft they'd be chaffing, and shouting and jeering,
 But 'twas all one to WILLY; he stuck to his steering;
  For hissing or hooting he little did care,
  He handled his pole, and looked after his fare.

  And ah! just to think now how strangely things happen!
    He poled along, caring for no one at all;
  By a crush in the lock, foes his fare meant alarming,
    And hoped in deep water she fainting might fall.
  But he bade the young damsel to banish all sorrow,
  "If they block us to-day, dear, we'll get through to-morrow."
  And now the old Puntsman is through! But they swear
  They'll yet flummox the future of him and his fare!

       *       *       *       *       *

GOOD GRACIOUS!--Mrs. R. went to Lord's the other day, to see Doctor
GRACE play. She says, "Until then I had no idea he was a man of such
splendid _physic_."

       *       *       *       *       *

SYMPATHY.

_A Colloquy after the Eton and Harrow Cricket Match._

_Old Buffer to Small Boy, solicitously_:--

  Why are you hoarse, my little lad,
    So husky and so hoarse?
  Your voice is almost gone! 'Tis sad!
    You'll seek advice, of course?
  Diphtheria is much about!
    And--well you know, there's cancer!!!
  Dear me, you're choking now! Don't shout,
    But write me down an answer.

_Small Boy to Old Buffer, spasmodically_:--

  Cancer--be blowed!--_Cricket_--of course!
    Harrow--for years--has beaten;
  And--I've been howling till I'm hoarse
    To see 'em--licked by Eton!!!
                    Hooray!!!

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MOAN OF THE MINOR POET.

This (says Mr. JAMES PAYN) is what TOM HOOD wrote about the treatment
meted out to the Minor Poet in his time:--

  "What is a Modern Poet's fate?
  To write his thoughts upon a slate--
  The critic spits on what is done,
  Gives it a wipe--and all is gone."

And this (says _Mr. Punch_) is the Minor Poet's reply to-day:--

  I write not on a slate, but foolscap fair:
  It falls to the Waste-paper Basket's care.
  If _not_, the Minor Poet's still ill-fated,
  'Tis by some Minor Critic now he's "slated."
  Far better than that stabber's spiteful lunge,
  Were "a clean slate" and kind oblivion's "sponge."

[Illustration: "THROUGH THE LOCK."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: QUITE A LITTLE PARABLE.

_The Rector (returning from day's fishing--in reply to usual
question)._ "SPORT? OH! WRETCHED!! WRETCHED!!! TRIED EVERY DODGE I
COULD THINK OF, BUT NOTHING WOULD TEMPT 'EM."

_Canny Scot (who rather suspects the Rector of a fondness for good
living)._ "A--WEEL RECTHOR, NA DOOT THEY SET SOME ON US A POORFUL
EXAMPLE I' NO GIVIN' WAY TO THEIR CARNAL PROCLEEVITIES, AND REFUSIN'
TO BE TA'EN IN BY THE FA'SE BLANDISHMENTS O' THE DEEVIL, I' THE SHAPE
O' YER _AWN_ ARTIFEECIAL FLEES."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE VOICE OF THE THAMES.

  Leave, dweller in the smoke-bound street,
    Your native London's ceaseless noise.
  With aching head and weary feet
    Turn from the town's delusive joys.
  On dusty terrace, grimy square,
    A dismal pall seems settling down;
  Be not the Season's slave, and dare,
    Oh town-bred man, to leave the town.

  The town can spare you; it may chance
    The Park will fill without your aid;
  And still at many a matron's dance
    Moist man will whirl with panting maid.
  Vast dinners still will be as slow,
    The night will still be turned to day,
  And all the giddy round will go
    As wild and well with you away.

  But here the days are passing fair,
    The sun shines bright, the leaves are green;
  Cool on your forehead breathes the air,
    The very smoke seems fresh and clean.
  And over all the winding miles,
    Where erst his foaming torrents ran,
  The clear, calm Thames breaks forth in smiles
    Of welcome to the London man.

  Bend to your oars, away, away!
    Then rest awhile, or deftly steer
  Where topped with rainbow clouds of spray
    The waters tumble o'er the weir.
  Nor scorn the man whom, moored for hours,
    Nor failure daunts nor jeers affront,
  Who sits, unheeding sun or showers,
    A fishless angler in a punt.

  Then, when at eve the ringdove's call
    Is hushed upon the wooded hill,
  And slowly lengthening shadows fall
    On field and stream, and all is still,
  Drift homewards, thanking Heaven that made
    You free to dream awhile your dream
  In this fair scene of sun and shade,
    On gentle Thames's crystal stream.

       *       *       *       *       *

EXAMINATION PAPER FOR LADIES.

(_To be set to Debutantes who have completed their first Season._)

1. What do you think of London in comparison with the country?

2. Write a short Essay upon your initial ball, giving your impressions
of (1) your partners, (2) your dances, and (3) the supper.

3. Given three dances a night six evenings a week, what will be the
cost of bouquets a quarter?

4. Show how three dresses, with a clever ladiesmaid, and a deposit
account at the Army and Navy Stores, can be made to do duty as a
couple of dozen entirely different gowns.

5. Give a short history of the Opera Season, pointing out any special
features of importance, and estimating the receipts of the Command
Night.

6. Give a short biography of any two of the following Society lions:
Signor MASCAGNI, Lord ROBERTS, Mr. OSCAR WILDE, Captain BOYTON, and
the Siamese Ambassador.

7. Supply the true stories associated with "the lost opera-glass
at Ascot," "the sun-shade at the garden party," "the ride to the
horse-chestnuts," and "the interrupted honeymoon."

8. Show in a rough sketch the latest mode of shaking hands.

9. Give a brief account of any two of the following Society functions:
(1) The Royal Wedding, (2) the Eton and Harrow match, (3) Sandown,
(4) a first night at the Lyceum, (5) a wedding at St. Peter's, Eaton
Square, and (6) Henley.

10. Correct the mistakes (if any) in the following passage:--"Mr.
ALEXANDER, the Lessee of Drury Lane, appeared at the Haymarket as
_Becket_, in Mr. PINERO'S sparkling comedy of that name. He was
supported by Miss ELLEN TERRY as the _Second Mrs. Tanqueray_, and Lady
MONCKTON as _Portia_--the woman of no importance. After a successful
career of five hundred nights, Becket was transferred to Chicago, with
the cast strengthened by Mrs. BERNARD-BEERE, who consented to
accept, as a mark of respect to the management, the comparatively
insignificant part of _Charley's Aunt_."

11. Give a list of the eligible _partis_ of the season, with their
rent-rolls, distinguishing idiots from sensible men.

12. In conclusion, after four months' hard work at Society functions,
trace the benefit you have derived from your novel surroundings.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PROPRIETORS' VADE MECUM.

(_A Supplement for the Newspaper Press._)

_Question._ What is the duty of a Newspaper Proprietor?

_Answer._ To use his periodical for the benefit of the public by
obtaining and affording information.

_Q._ Is he expected to expose abuses?

_A._ Certainly, or he would be thought to be degrading the noble
profession to which he has the honour to belong.

_Q._ What is the customary result of an _expose_?

_A._ An action for libel.

_Q._ By whom is it frequently brought?

_A._ By a man of straw.

_Q._ And what is the alleged libel?

_A._ That the plaintiff was described as being manufactured of no more
substantial material.

_Q._ If a man is made of straw, how can he obtain assistance from a
solicitor?

_A._ By approaching a member of the junior branch of the legal
profession who possesses no rooted objection to speculation.

_Q._ What is a speculative action?

_A._ It is an action brought to give a solicitor a chance of getting
costs.

_Q._ Is the length of trial a matter of importance to the plaintiff?

_A._ Certainly not, because he stands to win one way and not to lose
on the other.

_Q._ What does a long trial mean to the defendant?

_A._ Solicitor's fees by the score and "refreshers" by the dozen.

_Q._ What is the outcome of the proceedings?

_A._ After many days, a verdict.

_Q._ In whose favour?

_A._ The defendant's.

_Q._ Does the defendant benefit in consequence?

_A._ Not at all--the reverse. For after the finding of the jury, he is
at liberty to pay his own costs.

_Q._ Why does he pay his own costs?

_A._ Because his statement that the plaintiff is and was a man of
straw is practically corroborated.

_Q._ But does not the _expose_ prove that he has done an action
well-deserving of his country?

_A._ Certainly; but this consideration does not give him unmixed
satisfaction.

_Q._ Why does it not give him unmixed satisfaction?

_A._ Because, although losing a huge sum of money may be patriotic and
large-minded, it is scarcely business-like.

_Q._ Are not newspapers intended to benefit the public?

_A._ Unquestionably, but in that public the individuality of the
proprietor should not be entirely overlooked.

_Q._ Then what would you recommend?

_A._ That instead of being regarded as prey, newspapers should be made
to pay.

_Q._ And how can that be carried out?

_A._ By making a law calling upon a would-be plaintiff, in a
questionable action for libel, to give security for costs.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A DELICATE SNUB.

_Sir Pompey Bedell._ "OH--ER--MOSSOO LE BARRONG,
ESKER-VOO--ER--ESKER-VOO SAVVY--ER--ESKER-VOO SAVVY KER VOOS AVAY
LE--LA--ER--ER----"

_Monsieur le Baron._ "Do not Sir Pompey, do _not_ continue to speak
French! You speak it so well--ah! But _so_ well--zat you make me feel
quite _'Ome-sick!_"]

       *       *       *       *       *

O WISE YOUNG JUDGE!--Mr. Justice HAWKINS has scored over and over
again during the first act of the ZIERENBERG _v._ LABOUCHERE trial.
One witness in cross-examination said "he thought he could tell people
who were overworked." So Mr. Justice HAWKINS asked him, "Do you see
anybody in this court who looks like being overworked?" Of course the
witness looked straight at the Judge, but Sir HENRY was ready with a
very practical answer to his own question, as he instantly rose to the
occasion and adjourned the case till next day, and from next day till
next term.

       *       *       *       *       *

AT THE T. R. H.--Mr. TREE substituted IBSEN for WILDE. Some evenings
at the T. R. Haymarket may be pleasantly passed, _i.e._, _"Wilde"
away_.

       *       *       *       *       *

ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.

_House of Commons, Monday, July 17._--"_Et tu, Bowlsey!_" said
GRANDOLPH, a tear glistening on his long eyelashes. Of course he
should have said "_Brute_," but that is not Member for King's Lynn's
name. Remark followed upon incident that ruffled unusually dull
evening. TOMMY was making one of his rare speeches; instructing Chief
Secretary on intricate point in Home-Rule Bill; complaining of an
omission in Amendment under discussion. GRANDOLPH, turning round,
explained to him the bearing of things. Audacious, it is true. "The
attempt," as JEMMY LOWTHER said, "to instruct your grandmother in
the art of imbibing light but nutritious refreshment a slight thing
compared with the temerity of teaching Tommy anything." When he
detected GRANDOLPH in attempt, he for moment fixed him with surprised
stare. Enough in ordinary circumstances to paralyse a rhinoceros.
GRANDOLPH, who from precarious retreat in a tree-top in Central Africa
has watched the noon slumbers of a horde of thirty lions, did not
flinch. Then through the startled House rang TOMMY'S withering rebuke:
"Pray hold your tongue!" an injunction which drew from GRANDOLPH the
pained remark quoted above.

Coming from such a source it was doubly painful. Always understood
that TOMMY founded his Parliamentary style upon GRANDOLPH'S earlier
manner. Whispered that Member for King's Lynn had dreamed a dream of
a new Fourth Party. He of course would play the part of GRANDOLPH;
HANBURY (selected chiefly on account of his height and slimness of
his figure) would stand for Arthur Balfour before he came into his
Princedom. The glories of Gorst would live again in BARTLEY; and TOMMY
had spent sleepless night in doubt as to whether he should enlist
PARKER SMITH or AMBROSE in place of WOLFFY, who now, in distant
Madrid, wears a sombrero, drapes his _svelte_ figure in a cloak, and
interlards his conversation with cries of "_Carramba!_"

This point was decided by curious incident. One afternoon TOMMY came
upon PARKER SMITH conversing with TOMLINSON.

"Don't you think PARKER SMITH'S getting something of a bore?" TOMMY
asked, when that eminent statesman moved away.

[Illustration: "ANGELS IN 'THE HOUSE.'"]

"Now that's very odd indeed," said TOMLINSON. "Just as you came up
PARKER SMITH said to me 'Here comes TOMMY BOWLES; good fellow; means
well; but don't you think he's making himself something of a bore?'"

So PARKER SMITH lost his chance, and perhaps will never know how or
why. Thinking of these things 'tis quaint to find TOMMY turning and
biting the hand which, so to speak, held for him the Parliamentary
bottle. "_Et tu, Bowlsey!_" GRANDOLPH sighed again, thinking of the
days that are no more. "But I ought to have remembered that he who
plays at BOWLES must expect rubbers."

_Business done._--TOMMY declines to make room for his Uncle GRANDOLPH;
even rudely repulses avuncular advances.

_Tuesday._--SEXTON magnanimously relieved Mr. G., JOHN MORLEY, and,
by implication, SQUIRE OF MALWOOD and other Members, from embarrassing
imputation. Sometimes, when gentlemen in PRINCE ARTHUR'S suite have
nothing nastier to say, they sketch lurid pictures of Mr. G. and the
rest drawn at wheels of SEXTON'S chariot. All very well, they say, to
talk of Cabinet Meetings, and statesmanship at Irish Office. The real
boss, as TIM would put it, the arbiter of situation, is SEXTON. When
these things are said, JOHN MORLEY smiles grimly; Mr. G. pretends not
to hear; SQUIRE OF MALWOOD audibly raps fingers on his manly breast;
Liberals cheer ironically; SEXTON blushes, and looks across to see if
JOHN REDMOND is listening.

To-night he feels this thing has gone far enough. There may, perhaps,
be some smattering of truth in it; but its disclosure cannot be
pleasant to his right hon. friends on Treasury Bench. Accordingly
SEXTON rose, and, taking Mr. G. by the hand, as it were, and giving a
finger to JOHN MORLEY, declared that there was no foundation for the
imputation. It was true he had from time to time offered suggestions,
the appositeness and value of which it was not for him to determine.
Occasionally they might have been accepted by the Government. That was
due not to the pressure of dictation, but to the force of reason. Mr.
MORLEY was a statesman not unacquainted with affairs, whilst Mr. G.
had reached an age at which he might be trusted with some share in the
conduct of a Bill. He could assure the House that he was not, in
this matter, dictator. Such a charge was, he added, in burst of
uncompromising self-abnegation, "imbecile."

"And they say," cried WEBSTER, for him unusually mixed, "that Irishmen
have no sense of humour."

_Business done._--SEXTON generously puts Mr. G. right in eyes of
Universe.

[Illustration: "He declared that there was no foundation for the
imputation."]

_Thursday Night._--Been remarked of late, in quarter behind Front
Opposition Bench, that THEOBALD has appeared preternaturally
preoccupied. Thought he was brooding over the drought, or the
prospects of Home Rule. Secret out to-night. Been concocting a joke;
taken him some time; but, then, consider the quality. Some weeks ago
order issued in Ireland prohibiting hoisting of flags on hotels,
and other private buildings. THEOBALD diligently concentrating his
thoughts upon this fresh iniquity, gradually worked out his joke.
Appeared on paper to-night in shape of question addressed to JOHN
MORLEY. Supposing (so it runs) HER MAJESTY should visit Ireland, and
stay in an hotel, would the Government take measures to legalise the
hoisting of the Royal Standard on the building?

Delightful to watch THEOBALD when he had fired this bolt; fixed his
eye attentively on Mr. G., to see how he took it, the paper in his
hand trembling with excitement. Didn't often make a joke; doesn't
remember a former occasion. Work somewhat exhausting, especially in
hot weather; but when he did take his coat off and set to it must be
admitted he turned out a rare article. All very well for JOHN MORLEY
to affect to make light of the business. Not very probable that when
the QUEEN visited Ireland she would put up at an hotel; a hypothetical
question; deal with the question when it arises, and all the rest of
Ministerial commonplaces. THEOBALD'S shaft had gone home, and when he
saw Mr. G. wince, and SQUIRE OF MALWOOD grow pale, he felt that the
continuous labour of nights and days was rewarded.

"Didn't think I could do it," he said when I warmly congratulated him.
"Not used to that sort of thing, you know. Never know what you can
do till you try. A little hard at first. The thing is to keep pegging
away. Still, I'm glad it's over. Shan't try another this year. Shall
go away now for a bit of a holiday to recruit."

_Business done._--Got through Clauses Home-Rule Bill. Shall begin now
to pick up dropped threads.

_Friday._--Not heard much lately of HENNIKER-HEATON. Compared with
what my dear old friend RAIKES used to suffer from this quarter,
ARNOLD MORLEY'S withers are unwrung. "You've not given up the crusade,
have you?" I asked HENNIKER, meeting him in the Lobby just now.

"No," he said; "I do not mean to rest till not only I get Ocean Penny
Postage, but have introduced at home a smaller but much-needed reform.
Custom here at Christmas is, as I daresay you know, to give postman
present. That I hold to be a criminal reversal of natural course
of events. It's the Post-Office should give its customers a
Christmas-box, as in some places doth the grocer and eke the milkman.
This tax upon the general public on behalf of a department of
the State is another evidence of the grasping disposition of St.
Martin's-le-Grand. I'll be up and at 'em again soon. Fact is, of late
I've had my own troubles. Have mentioned them in letter to _Times_,
so don't mind talking to you on a subject that has brought me from
unknown admirers many expressions of sympathy, the comfort of which
has, it is true, been somewhat lessened by the fact that postage was
unpaid. It's this Australian Bank business. You know the proud motto
of that great Colony beyond the Sea, 'Advance, Australia!' Well,
having lived there sometime, I thought it only polite to fall in with
the suggestion. I advanced Australia a good deal of money in the way
of purchase of bank stock, which has melted away like snow on the
river. CURRAN'S in the same box: but we shall get over this, and you
may bet a shilling postage-stamp to a halfpenny newspaper-cover we'll
Advance Australia no more."

_Business done._--Entered last compartment Home-Rule Bill.

       *       *       *       *       *

"VOCES STELLARUM."

A great crowd of theatrical astronomers and star-gazers assembled at
the Lyceum Observatory last Saturday night for the purpose of watching
the movements of the brilliant Lyceum group. HENRY IRVING of the first
magnitude, ELLEN TERRY one of the brightest of the astral bodies, and
the Mars-like TERRIS, with the other lesser brilliancies, all of whom
we shall be unable to reckon as among the "Fixed Stars" until next
Spring, when they shall have returned from their American tour.
Enthusiastic reception from all parts of the House of IRVING-BECKET'S
parting address, which he delivered, standing before the Curtain,
in his monk's habit (one of the old "Orders," "not admitted after
seven"), and wearing the _pallium_, which is the special and peculiar
"property" of the Lyceum See. _Mr. Punch_ wishes them "_Bon voyage_,"
and many happy "returns" after every performance, ending with the
happiest return of all, their reappearance at the Lyceum.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONS. FOR THE CHAIR.

_On very Old Models._

_Q._ Why should a MELLOR put on a "considering cap"?--_A._ To keep his
head cool. _Q._ When is a "Chair" not a "Chair"?--_A._ When it is "sat
upon." _Q._ When does the Closure a Premier surprise?--_A._ When he
finds the "Noes" above the "Ayes." _Q._ Where was PEEL when he put the
SEXTON out?--_A._ In a passion. _Q._ Why does an angry Party "cross"
the House?--_A._ To get on the other side.

       *       *       *       *       *

An Unpleasant Paradox.

  That "great conflagration" at "Simmery Axe"
  Brings woe to the burthened with Rate and Tax,
  For it tells him that Rating must still go higher--
  He must "raise the Wind" to keep down the Fire!

       *       *       *       *       *

GOOD LEGAL SECURITIES.--De-Benchers of Lincoln's Inn.

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Note:

Sundry missing or damaged punctuation has been repaired.

Page 41: 'everthing' corrected to 'everything' ... "You may be sure
the Chief has his own reasons for everything."

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch 1893.07.29, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH 1893.07.29 ***

***** This file should be named 35713.txt or 35713.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/7/1/35713/

Produced by Lesley Halamek, Malcolm Farmer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
