The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch,or The London Charivari, Volume 105,
July 22nd, 1893, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punch,or The London Charivari, Volume 105, July 22nd, 1893

Author: Various

Editor: Sir Francis  Burnand

Release Date: March 31, 2011 [EBook #35734]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH,OR THE LONDON ***




Produced by Lesley Halamek, Malcolm Farmer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI

VOLUME 105, JULY 22nd 1893

_edited by Sir Francis Burnand_




A LONDON PEST.

To an impartial observer the public, philanthropic, and municipal
attempts to honour the memory of the great and good, if sometimes
mistaken, Earl of SHAFTESBURY, appear to have been singularly
unfortunate. The West-End Avenue that bears his name is more full
of music-halls, theatres, pot-houses, and curious property, than
any street of equal length and breadth in the whole Metropolis. Lord
SHAFTESBURY may not have been a Puritan, but he was essentially a
serious man, and his sympathies were more with Exeter Hall than with
the Argyle Rooms; and yet, in the street which is honoured by his
name, it has been found impossible to remove the old title of this
historic place from the stone _facade_ of the Trocadero.

The fountain at Piccadilly Circus, which has been unveiled as the
second of the SHAFTESBURY memorials, is surmounted by--what? Some
writers have called it a girl, some have called it a boy; many of the
public, no doubt, regard it as a mythological bird, and it certainly
looks like the Bolognese Mercury flying away with the wings of St.
Michael. We are told, on authority, that it represents Eros, the Greek
god of love, and his shaft is directed to a part of London that, more
than any other part, at night, requires the bull's-eye and the besom
of authority. The "Top of the Gaymarket" is in just as bad a condition
as it was when _Punch_ directed attention to it more than ten years
ago, and the _virus_ since then has extended as far eastward as St.
Martin's Lane. Moll Flanders' Parade now begins at St. James's Church
and ends with Cranbourne Street. It is unfortunate, to say the least
of it, that Eros has been selected to point at this London Pestiduct,
and the sooner it is thoroughly cleansed and the neighbourhood made
worthy of the Shaftesbury Fountain, the better.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AWFUL MOMENT!

"CONF----! I'VE FORGOTTEN MY DRESS COAT!!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

DELENDA EST DRUBILANA!--The Drury Lane Committee, headed by the
dauntless JAMES O'DOWD, have decided upon approaching the Duke of
BEDFORD with a protest against his Grace's present expressed intention
of pulling down the Old Theatre within the next two years. Probably
the result of this, the latest incident in the interesting annals of
Old Drury, will simply be to make another addition to the well-known
collection of "Rejected Addresses."

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR OPERA.

  To hear sweet strains by GLUeCK or GOUNOD,
  MASCAGNI, WAGNER, one must, you know,
              Pass slums; at dark it
  Is nice in Endell Street and Bow Street;
  Still better in that fragrant nose treat--
              "Mudsalad Market."

  Inside, say, _Orpheus_ sings in Hades
  To gallant men and noble ladies--
              Rank, wealth, and beauty;
  Outside, Elysium is forgotten.
  To clear away these slums, half rotten,
              Is no one's duty.

  Inside, MASCAGNI'S _Intermezzo_,
  Though heard in many places, yet so
              Delightful ever;
  Outside, cab touts and paper sellers,
  And other people's pert _Sam Weller's_,
              Delightful never!

  Inside, some day, the newest, _Falstaff_,
  Will occupy a far from small staff
              Of band and chorus;
  Outside, as now, old slums ill-smelling,
  And costermongers, shouting, yelling,
              Will be before us.

  Once someone started building greatly,
  Walls rose, arranged to form quite stately
              House, _foyers_, lobbies.
  They stopped, extremely gaunt and lonely,
  And, now the site is used, it's only
              A haunt of bobbies.

  So still Euterpe's home is hidden
  In ill-paved slums, through which we've ridden
              With jolts that jerk us.
  How unlike Paris! Did we follow
  Her taste, we should enshrine Apollo
              At Regent Circus.

       *       *       *       *       *

JUST CAUSE.

  I love you for your splendid hair,
    Your violet eyes, your swaying waist,
    Whose curves exactly suit my taste;
  Your radiant smile, your dimples rare.

  I love you for your store of pelf,
    Of course; but most of all, my sweet,
    Because of this--whene'er we meet,
  _You let me talk about myself!_

       *       *       *       *       *

ODE DE KNILL--AND CO.

_Making Something of Nothing!!_--Lord Mayor KNILL has been created a
Baronet. Sheriffs WILKIN and RENALS, as being next to Nil, have been
knighted.

  "Nobodies" have been Baronets, but still
  'Tis wondrous to create one out of _Nil_!
  The Middlesex Artillery Volunteers
  Will "make the _Wilkin_ ring" with hearty cheers.
  And for the last, he'll bear his honours meekly,
  He's RENALS "going strong," not "_Renals Weakly_."

    (For the last, understand _Reynolds' Weekly_.)

       *       *       *       *       *

GOOD EGG-SAMPLE!--One egg was sold the other day for L60 18_s._ _Vide
Times_ of Wednesday last. The egg was a perfect specimen of that _rara
avis in terris_, the gigantic _Aepyornis Maximus_ of Madagascar. What
did Mr. STEVENS do with it? Did he have it made into several omelettes
for a breakfast-party of a dozen? Of course it was a perfectly fresh
egg, and the only thing at all high about it was the price.

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM THE CAMP.--Just now Riflemen are Bis'ley engaged.

       *       *       *       *       *

A FALLEN ART.

    [A "lady palmist" has been fined ten shillings and costs for
    fortune-telling.--_Daily News._]

  She lived, this prophetess, too late,
  And plied an art that's out of date,
  Another age had seen her gain
  Her reputation not in vain,
  Had seen a crowd respectful wait
  Upon the arbiter of fate,
  While kings and rulers brought her gold
  To have futurity unrolled!

  In some Greek court where fountains play,
  Or dwelling by the Appian way,
  The prophetess would surely be
  Besought by each Leuconoe,
  And if for these she sometimes drew
  A future pleasanter than true,
  At least she gave them, you'll confess,
  Anticipated happiness!

  Ah! times are changed, and nowadays
  Such divination hardly pays;
  There comes no more the crowds that used,
  The fees are terribly reduced!
  And if our policemen caught the Sphinx
  Propounding "Missing Words," one thinks
  Our British justice could not fail
  To send her speedily to gaol!

       *       *       *       *       *

IMPY AND GARRY.--Colonel SAUNDERSON, "speaking as an Irishman" (did
anyone ever hear the gallant Colonel speak as an Englishman?), didn't
object to being classed among his countrymen, whom Mr. BRODRICK had
styled "impecunious and garrulous." He might have quoted the name
of one of their own national airs as emphasizing, by descriptively
[]abreviating, these two epithets, namely, "_Garryowen_." "_Garry_" is
clearly the short for "_garrulous_," and "_owen_" is the oldest form
of _"not payin'_."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A "TURKISH OCCUPATION;" OR, VISIONS IN SMOKE.

    ["The KHEDIVE has been the object of numerous marks
    of personal friendship on the SULTAN'S part."--_Times
    Correspondent at Constantinople._
]

_Sultan (amicably)._ Welcome, dear ABBAS! Take a seat, and a
pipe--take anything you have a mind to, and "make yourself at home,"
as the accursed Giaours say.

_Khedive (squatting)._ Thanks, my dear--Suzerain! Yildiz Kiosk feels,
indeed, very home-like. More than my own Cairo does--when CROMER'S
there. This Nichan-i-Imtiaz Order is really very becoming. Pity you
and I, ABDUL, have to take "orders" from anybody west of Alexandria!

_Sultan (sotto voce)._ And why _should_ we?

_Khedive (sulkily)._ Well, the sons of burnt fathers _have_ got the
upper hand of the Faithful, somehow--confound them!

_Sultan (reading)._ "Intelligence received here of late, from
trustworthy quarters in Egypt, indicates that the KHEDIVE'S journey is
to be made the point of departure for a _grande action diplomatique_
against British influence in the Valley of the Nile." That's from the
_Times_, my ABBAS!

_Khedive (moodily)._ Humph! Wish the Egyptian quarters _were_
"trustworthy." _Grande action diplomatique?_ Quite makes one's mouth
water!

_Sultan._ _Doesn't_ it? The same infernal--but influential--news-sheet
says: "The young KHEDIVE knows that not only would he meet with a
personally kindly reception, but that the grievances he is known to
be anxious to pour out would fall on ready ears." There, at least,
the Giaour "rag" is right. Pour away, my ABBAS! "Keep your eye on
your father--or Suzerain--and he will pull you through."
    [_Winks and whiffs._

_Khedive (whiffing and winking)._ Will he, though? And that Turkish
Bodyguard?

_Sultan (warmly)._ At your service at any moment, my dear ABBAS!

_Khedive (smoking furiously with closed eyes)._ Ah! if they would only
let me alone, let me rule my subjects in my own Oriental way--as you
do yours in Armenia, for example--then, indeed, I could have a good
time, and plenty of treasure.

_Sultan (significantly)._ Out of which my little formal trifle of
Tribute might come easily and _regularly_--eh, ABBAS?

_Khedive._ Quite so, Padishah! Bah! These brutal, blundering
Britishers don't understand the Art of Government as adapted to
Eastern Ideas.

_Sultan (soothingly)._ Well, never mind, ABBAS. We'll lay our heads
together, anon, now you _are_ here, and--who knows? Meanwhile, let's
enjoy ourselves. Something like a "Turkish Occupation" this--eh? And
how do you like this Turkish tobacco?

_Khedive (blowing vigorously)._ Smokes easily, and makes a big cloud.
In which I fancy I can see myself driving the British Lion out of the
Nile Valley at the point of the bayonet.

_Sultan (dreamily)._ And I picture myself comfortably replenishing my
Treasury with that Tribute! Like music, ABBAS?

_Khedive (uneasily)._ Ye-e-e-s. Why!

_Sultan (promptly)._ Then I'll tip you something soothing.
    [_Sings._

  I'll sing thee songs of Arabi,
    And tales of far Cash ne-ar!
  Strange yarns to move thee to a smile,
    Or melt thee to a te-ar!
  And dreams of delight shall hover bright,
    And smoke-born vi-i-sions rise
  Of artful "fake," which well may wake
    Wild wonder in thine eyes.
      I'll move thee to a smile
      With dreams of far Cash ne-e-e-e-ar!

      [_Left dreaming._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: LACONIC.

_Passenger._ "CAN YOU TELL ME WHAT ARE THE TIMES FOR THESE 'BUSSES TO
LEAVE THE SWISS COTTAGE?"

_Driver._ "Quarter after--'Arf after--Quarter to--and _At!_"]

       *       *       *       *       *

A VISION OF ROYALTY.

(_Written after a surfeit of the Illustrated Papers._)

  Ye Royalties of England, how beautiful ye are!
  The special artists claim you, they track you from afar.
  In uniforms and diamonds, with sceptre and with crown,
  In many a picture-paper those artists set you down.

  And thus the British public may gaze upon its Queen--
  They make her small, but dignified, of most majestic mien.
  She smiles--the artist marks her; she frowns--the artist quails,
  And soothes himself by drawing H.R.H. the Prince of WALES.

  He draws him at foundation stones, a trowel in his hand
  (The point of silver trowels I ne'er could understand);
  He draws him opening railways, or turning sods of grass,
  And he draws him as a Colonel, in helmet and cuirasse.

  We see him dressed for London, a-riding in the Row--
  I wonder if he ever finds his London pleasures slow;
  And we see him down at Sandringham, his country-home in Norfolk,
  Where the Royal pair are much beloved, especially by poor folk.

  And oft at public dinners, in Garter and in Star,
  We see his Royal Highness enjoying his cigar.
  I wish they wouldn't vary quite so much his Royal figure.
  For they sometimes make him leaner, and sometimes make him bigger.

  But, be that as it may, I feel that, while my life endures,
  I know by heart my Prince's face, my future King's contours.
  A stiff examination in the Prince of WALES I'd pass,
  And in all his princely attitudes they'd give me a first-class.

  The Duke of YORK, our Sailor Prince, I think I've got him pat;
  I've never seen him face to face, but what's the odds of that?
  In illustrated papers I have watched him every day
  Since he went and popped the question to the pretty Princess MAY.

  I've seen them plain or coloured in fifty different styles,
  Just like a pair of turtle-doves, all bills and coos and smiles.
  I never saw a turtle-dove that smiled upon its pet afore,
  But he who writes of bridal pairs is bound to use the metaphor.

  Oh, Princess MAY, oh, Princess MAY, in crayon or in oil you
  Are loveable and beautiful, they can't avail to spoil you.
  They did their worst, and did it well, those special-artist
          wretches,
  To make you like a stolid block in all their special sketches.

  So this, my meek petition, to those artists is addressed,
  Give Royalties of every sort a little welcome rest.
  I cannot bear my Royal ones--of loyalty I'm full--
  To look like wax and sawdust, with limbs of cotton-wool.

  And thus, when next you draw them (oh, may the time be long)
  To make them human beings will surely not be wrong.
  And if you'll take a hint from me you'll earn a nation's thanks,
  By drawing these prize princely ones a little less like blanks.

       *       *       *       *       *

LINES IN PLEASANT PLACES.--_Sala's Journal_, full of interesting and
entertaining matter, has lately been giving very sensible advice as to
Palmistry, which is again in vogue. The Palmists appear to be doing so
uncommonly well just now, that this year will be memorable, for them
at least, as "the Palmy days" of chiromancy.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ENGLISH AS SHE IS "SCHPOGEN."

_Herr Dumpling (a "Deacher of Englisch" who has made the most of his
holiday during the Royal Marriage week)._ "ZERTAINLY, I HAF ZEEN ZE
VEDDING-BROZESS, ZE GWEEN, AND ZE GLIDDERING GOACHES, AND ZE NAIDIVE
DROOBS; AND IN ZE EVENING NEFFER HAF I ZEEN SO PEUDIFUL GAS-WORKS!
BOT, ACH HIMMEL, HOW VAS I OFERGROWDED!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

SEEING THE ROYAL WEDDING PRESENTS.

(_A Sketch at the Imperial Institute_.)

SCENE--_The North Gallery on a Saturday afternoon, with the
thermometer at considerably over 80 deg. in the shade. The presents are
arranged behind a long barrier, in front of which the Spectators form
a double "queue," the outer rank facing in the opposite direction to
the inner line, and both moving at an average rate of one foot every
five minutes._

_The Attendants (spasmodically)._ Pass along there, please. Keep
moving!

    [_The crowd close to the barrier either cannot or will not pay
    the slightest attention to these injunctions, and remain placidly
    gazing at whatever happens to be in front of them; the people in
    the outside line, who can see just enough to tantalise them, begin
    to exhibit signs of impatience._

_A Sour-looking Spinster._ Well, I'm sure! They _might_ remember
there's others that would like to have a look besides themselves!
Some of them seem to have made up their minds to spend the whole _day_
here! (_With a withering glance at a stout lady in the inner rank._)
How anyone can call herself a lady and spend fifteen minutes downright
gloating at nothing but cigarette cases--well, I should be sorry to be
so disobliging _myself_!

    [_The stout lady, who has exhausted the cigarette cases long ago,
    but can't move on until those in front of her have thoroughly
    inspected the jewels, fans herself with a pocket-handkerchief,
    and pretends not to have heard._

_A Cheery Old Lady (to her Grand-daughter)._ Well, they _do_ make you
wait, there's no denying--but we shall see everythink some time or
other. 'Ot, MINNIE? Yes, it _is_ 'ot, and they're pushing in front as
well as beyind, now; but lor, my dear, we must put up with sech things
when we come out like this. And you can ketch a glimpse in and between
like, as it is. I can see the top of a Grandfather's Clock. It won't
take us 'alf an hour now, at the rate we're going, to git round the
turn, and then we shall be next the barrier, and 'ave a little more
room. There, they're beginning to move a bit. (_The line advances
about a yard._) Now we're getting along beautiful!

_A Purple-faced Old Gentleman (in a perspiration)._ It's scandalous!
These people inside aren't _attempting_ to move along. (_To the inner
rank._) Will you kindly pass on, and give others a chance? _Do_
pass along there! (_The people in the inner row maintain a bland
unconsciousness, which is too much for his feelings._) D--n it! why
can't you pass along when you're asked to?

_The Usual Comic Cockney._ It's no good torkin' perlitely to 'em,
guv'nor; you touch some on 'em up with your umberella. Why, there's
two old ladies aside o' me that 'ave gone and 'ipnotised theirselves
starin' at silver kendlesticks!

_A Plaintive Female (to a smart young constable)._ Oh, Mr. Policeman,
_do_ make 'em 'urry up there!

    [_The constable prudently declines to attempt the impossible, and
    merely smiles with pitying superiority._

_Mrs. Lavender Salt (who has insisted on her husband escorting her)._
LAVENDER, what a frightful crush! I don't believe we've moved for the
last twenty minutes, and I'm nearly dead with the heat!

_Mr. L. S. (with irritating common sense)._ Well, MIMOSA, you don't
suppose _I'm_ enjoying myself? After all, if you don't like the crush,
the remedy's simple. You've only to step out of it into the grounds,
you know--there is some air _there_!

_Mrs. L. S._ What? and give up our places after going through so much?
No, LAVENDER, it would be too absurd to have to go away without seeing
the Royal Presents after all!

_Mr. L. S._ But is it worth all this pushing and squeezing? Why, you
can see much the same sort of thing any day in perfect comfort by
simply walking down Bond Street!

_Mrs. L. S._ You wouldn't say so if you had the least scrap of
imagination! It isn't the things themselves one comes to see--it's the
sentiment _attached_ to them!

_Mr. L. S._ Oh, is _that_ it? Well, I can make out the upper part of
a weighing machine over your shoulder, but I can't say I discover any
particular sentiment attached to _that_.

_Mrs. L. S. (impatiently)._ Oh, if you choose to sneer at _everything_,
of course you can, but it's looking at things like these that makes us
the loyal nation we are, LAVENDER!

_Mr. L. S._ My dear MIMOSA, I give you my solemn word that if I remain
opposite those Chippendale bookcases ten minutes longer I shall become
a gibbering anarchist! Surely we can be loyal without such a painful
resemblance to a box of dried figs.

    [Mrs. L. S. _shudders at these revolutionary sentiments_.

_A New Comer (arriving with a friend, and craning curiously over the
shoulders of the spectators_ in posse, _to their intense indignation_).
'Ere they are, JOE. I can see a lot o' silver inkstands. We'll get a
view if we shove in 'ere.

    [_He attempts to edge through the double rank._

_The Purple-faced Old Gentleman._ I protest against your pushing in
here, Sir. We're hot enough already without that. It's monstrously
unfair!

_The New Comer._ I s'pose I've got as much right to see the bloomin'
Presents as what _you_ 'ave?

_The P.-f. O. G._ You've no right to push in out of your turn, Sir.
You must take your proper place down at the end of the _queue_ and
wait, like everybody else.

_The New Comer._ What, all the way down there, and 'ow long might I
have to wait, now?

_The P.-f. O. G. (with tremendous dignity)._ That I can't say, Sir. I
can only tell you this--that I have been standing here myself for
over three-quarters of an hour without advancing ten yards or seeing
anything distinctly, and so have all these ladies and gentlemen.

_The New Comer._ Hor, hor, hor! D'jear that, JOE? Ten yards in
three-quarters of an hour! What price snails, eh? Well, Sir, if that's
_your_ ideer of amusin' yourself on a warm afternoon, it ain't mine,
so you'll excuse me and my friend 'ere joinin' your little percession.
Don't lose 'art, Sir, keep on at it. You'll _git_ there afore bedtime
if you don't overexert yourselves. Take it easy now!

    [_They pass on with ribald laughter, to the general relief.
    Eventually, after infinite delay and maddening exhortations to
    "keep moving," the outer queue succeed to the barrier and to the
    unpopularity enjoyed by their predecessors._

ALONG THE BARRIER.

Now we shan't be _nearly_ so squeeged, MINNIE! There's nothing
partickler to look at just yet, except kerridges.... It's not the
smallest use telling us to hurry, my good woman, because we can't
move till those in front choose to go on.... Look at the 'arness,
MINNIE--pretty 'arness, ain't it? with their crest on it and all!...
Well, I call it shabby givin' 'em a kerridge without even so much as
a old moke to dror it. I'd ha' done it 'ansome, or not at all.... Lor,
look at the dust on all the furniture--it _will_ want cleanin' up!...
That's a beautiful gong, MINNIE; see, that's the thing they 'it it
with.... Ain't that a comfortable looking chair in red moroccer?
That'll be for the 'all porter to set in, I expect--there's a 'at in
it. Lor no, my dear, it 'ud ha' been a better lookin' 'at than what
that is, if it was one of the presents, depend on it! There's a
weighin' machine.... Fancy goin' and givin' them a thing like that!
Oh, I expect it's for them to weigh theirselves with. Ah, 'ere come
the _Jewels_ now. Now we _shall_ see somethink!... I don't see _our_
present yet, do you, 'ARRIET? There's old Uncle BILL'S. See, that
dimond and pearl necklace. Well, if they ain't gone and put it down
as "Persented by six 'undred and fifty ladies of England!" And the old
man savin' up his screw for weeks for it--he _will_ be 'urt when he
'ears of it! Some bloke's gone and given 'em a pillar-post box. I
thought of sendin' the one at our corner, on'y it wouldn't come out
easy: and what with the copper bein' on his beat--why, I decided I'd
give 'em somethink else.... Walking-sticks? Why, he wouldn't want
more if he was a--a centipede!... I wonder where they'll _put_ all the
things, I'm sure! 'Ullo, a pearl and dimond tiarer, made o' cardboard.
I 'ope they thanked 'im nicely for _that_! Why, that's on'y a model,
like. Well, and a very good model, too, what I call eckernomical....
Look at those _lovely_ toast-racks!... LAVENDER, what a magnificent
old mirror!--Elizabethan, I expect. I wonder who gave _that?_... Oh,
me and 'ARRIET give 'er _that_, mum.... Oh, dear, I wish I was them,
to have all these presents.... Why, my dear, it doesn't matter to
_them_--they have everything lovely as it is!... 'ARRIET, when you
and me git married, we'll 'ave a show of all _our_ presents--not 'ere,
there won't be no room. We'll take the Agricultural 'All, and have a
catalogue and everythink. "Set of Elizabethian sheep's trotters, from
the Hearl of ALAMODE." eh? "Pound of Queen Anne saveloys, from the
Markis o' MILE-END." "Yard o' flypaper, from the Dook o' SHOREDITCH."
"Packet of 'airpins, persented by seven 'underd lydies of Whitechapel."
"Donkey-barrer an' kerridge-rug, from the residents in the Ole Kent
Road." Etceterer ... I do wish you wouldn't go on so foolish! Why, if
someone hain't sent her a set o' straw soles to keep her shoes dry--what
_next_, I wonder!... And a very sensible thing too.... Well, my dear,
I'm sure nothing can't be too good for her, and they've certainly been
set up with every blessing a young couple can require--and may they
live long to enjoy them!

    [_And so says Mr. Punch._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A SLAVE TO COURTESY.

_He._ "DO YOU MIND STOPPIN' A BIT NOW. I GET RATHER GIDDY,
DON'TCHERKNOW."

_She._ "BUT IF YOU GET GIDDY, WHY DO YOU COME TO DANCES?"

_He._ "WELL, I'M A BACHELOR AND THAT SORT OF THING, AND IT'S THE ONLY
WAY I CAN SEE OF REPAYIN' HOSPITALITY."]

       *       *       *       *       *

Parliamentary Declension.

_Nominative_--M.P. "named." _Genitive_--M.P. in possession of the
House. _Dative_--Giving it hot to M.P. _Accusative_--Charge against
M.P. _Vocative_--"O! O!" and (pro-vocative cries). _Ablative_--M.P.
is removed in custody of Serjeant-at-Arms.

       *       *       *       *       *

The subject of conversation in the presence of Mrs. R. was the
Darlington magistrates' decision in the palmistry case. "Yet,"
remarked our old friend, thoughtfully, "palmistry is very ancient,
and practised professionally by most excellent and good people.
Isn't DAVID always spoken of as 'The Palmist'?"

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SONG OF THE SHOPKEEPER.

  Will the Season be long?
    Will the Season be short?
  Parliament's going strong!
    Plenty of stir at Court!
  Cholera rumours abroad,
    Summer weather at home,
  Us a chance may afford;
    I only hope it may come!
  Royal Marriage over!
    Money remarkably "tight"!
  Landlords _may_ live in clover.
    Shopkeepers' pull seems slight.
  Will some of our Oracles clever
    Tell a poor chap what he axes?
  For three things go on for ever,
    And those are Rents, Rates, and Taxes!

       *       *       *       *       *

THE VOLUNTEERS' VADE MECUM.

(_For the Centre Weeks of July._)

_Question._ Do you prefer Bisley to Wimbledon?

_Answer._ Officially, yes; as a civilian, no.

_Q._ Why do you make the distinction?

_A._ Because I go to Bisley in a double capacity.

_Q._ Why do you prefer Bisley to Wimbledon officially?

_A._ Because there are no distractions, and the ranges are less
subject to atmospheric interruption.

_Q._ Why do you prefer Wimbledon to Bisley as a civilian?

_A._ Because Wimbledon was an extremely cheery place, where you could
entertain your friends to your heart's content, and have a generally
good time of it.

_Q._ Can you not obtain the same advantages at Bisley?

_A._ Certainly not. You are in the neighbourhood of Woking Cemetery,
and that melancholy spot influences its surroundings.

_Q._ But were you not always regretting the attractions of Wimbledon
when you were in Surrey?

_A._ Certainly, because they lured me from work.

_Q._ Do you still regret them?

_A._ More than ever, because they were certainly pleasanter than the
attractions of Bisley.

_Q._ And now, in conclusion, what do you think of this year's
shooting?

_A._ The same as former years.

_Q._ What do you mean by that?

_A._ That those who win owe their good shots to flukes, and those who
fail have to thank their rifles, and the state of the weather.

       *       *       *       *       *

"SO LIKE THEM!"--Of all the numerous "memorials" of the Royal Wedding,
Count WALERY'S "Wedding Number of Photographic Portraits" takes the
wedding cake. It is priced at three shillings and sixpence, and for
this you get one English sovereign and "royalties." If this isn't good
value for money we don't know what is.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SKIRT-DANCER, OR UNLIMITED LOIE-ABILITY.--When a theatre is doing
"good business," and is crammed in every part, placards are exhibited,
announcing "Pit Full, Stalls Full, Boxes Full," &c., &c. But at the
Gaiety just now, where Miss LOIE FULLER is appearing, the management
might simply put up outside the simple statement of fact--"FULLER
EVERY EVENING!"

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ECLIPSE RIDDLE.--Why didn't _La Fleche_ win the Eclipse
Stakes?--Because she wanted to keep out of _Orme's_ way.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THINGS ONE WOULD RATHER HAVE EXPRESSED DIFFERENTLY.

_Sir Pompey (so much in earnest that he forgets his Grammar)._ "WELL,
ALL I CAN SAY IS THIS, THAT WHAT I GIVE IN CHARITY IS NOTHING TO
NOBODY!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. NICKLEBY IN THE CHAIR.

_A Song of Sympathetic Suggestion._

    ["Poor Mrs. NICKLEBY, who had at no time been remarkable for
    the possession of a very clear understanding, had been reduced
    by the late changes in affairs to a most complicated state of
    perplexity....

    "'I don't know what to think, one way or other, my dear,' said
    Mrs. NICKLEBY; 'NICHOLAS is so violent, and your uncle has
    so much composure, that I can only hear what he says, and not
    what NICHOLAS does. Never mind--don't let us talk any more
    about it.'...

    "Now Mrs. NICKLEBY was not the sort of person to be told
    anything in a hurry, or rather to comprehend anything of
    peculiar delicacy or importance on a short notice....

    "'Anybody who had come in upon us suddenly would have supposed
    that I was confusing and distracting, instead of making things
    plainer; upon my word they would.'...

    "'I am very sorry indeed,' said Mrs. NICKLEBY. 'I am very
    sorry indeed for all this. I really don't know what would be
    the best to do, and that's the truth;... but if it could be
    settled in any friendly manner--and some fair arrangement was
    come to, so that we undertook to have fish twice a week, and
    a pudding once, or a dumpling, or something of that sort, I
    do think it might be very satisfactory and pleasant for all
    parties.'

    "This compromise, which was proposed with abundance of tears
    and sighs, not exactly meeting the point at issue, nobody took
    any notice of it."

    _Dickens's "Nicholas Nickleby._"]

AIR--"_Nickledy Nod._"

  Oh! where are we next to be carried,
    My own dear NICKLEBY NOD?
  We're worried, and hurried, and harried!
    In pickle has _no one_ a rod?
  Obstruction's becoming a bore;
    We're victims of boor, clown, and cad.
  It seems of our "noble six hundred"
    A solid majority's mad!

  DICKENS was surely prophetic,
    My own dear NICKLEBY NOD!
  The plight of yourself is pathetic,
    The state of the House appears odd.
  _Can't_ we live quiet and decent?
    The shindy makes common sense sad:
  It seems from occurrences recent
    The mass of the House _must_ be mad!

  Whom should we ask to protect us,
    My own dear NICKLEBY NOD?
  A rowdy rot seems to infect us
    And Nemesis looks leaden-shod.
  Shouldn't we look to the Chair
    To save us from garrulous fad,
  When row-de-dow fills all the air,
    And the bulk of the House is gone mad?

  Cynics may find it amusing,
    My own dear NICKLEBY NOD,
  This venomous mutual abusing.
    Thersites seems ranked as a god.
  Billingsgate sways our big swells,
    Talent plays Brummagem Cad.
  'Tis worse than Sarcasm of Sadler's Wells.
    You're mild--and your House is mad!

  More is to come in the Autumn,
    My own poor NICKLEBY NOD!
  We trust by that time you'll have taught 'em
    Some decency--e'en by the rod.
  "Not say any more about it?"
    _That_ will scarce answer, my lad!
  Patience _may_ soothe, but I doubt it
    Much--when the culprits are mad!

  "Settled in some friendly manner?"
    My own poor NICKLEBY NOD,
  CHAMBERLAIN, SEXTON, and TANNER
    (Say) as "fair friends" would look odd.
  GLADSTONE, and BALFOUR, and SAUNDERSON,
    _Might_ keep the peace, and be glad;
  But while malignity maunders on
    NICKLEBY policy's--mad!

  "Some fair arrangement?"--_with RUSSELL?_
    My own poor NICKLEBY NOD,
  Hark how they howl, shriek, and hustle!
    Nay; you must whip out the rod.
  Wish you had brought it forth sooner.
    NICKLEBY _role_, my dear lad,
  Of mild, muddled, well-meaning mooner,
    Won't work--with a House gone _mad_!

       *       *       *       *       *

NEWS FROM UGANDA.--"A conference," so the _Times_ special lately
wrote, "took place between Bishop TUCKER and Monseigneur HIRTH," with
a view to amicably arranging their respective missions. Monseigneur
HIRTH wished to sing the old nigger melody of "_Out ob de way ole
Dan Tucker_." Imperial Commissioner objected. Bishop TUCKER, lineal
descendant of the celebrated little _Thomas_ who "cried for his
supper," wanted to have all the black and white bread to himself
according to the ancient nursery tradition of the TUCKER family.
Commissioner, quite a GALLIO in his way, wouldn't hear of it.
Ultimately the two ecclesiastical antagonists came to terms, the
Commissioner (Our Own) wisely observing that "as the object of both
missions was a spiritual one, there ought to be no Hirthly ground for
disagreement."

[Illustration: MRS. NICKLEBY IN THE CHAIR.]

       *       *       *       *       *

LAYS OF MODERN HOME.

THE FIRST COOK!

[Illustration]

  Oh! the first Cook, in that ambrosial, unwithering
    Halcyon, rapturous, and honeymooning prime!--
  She, who, aware of HELEN'S babyish and blithering
    Innocence, did a lot of mischief in her time.

  Oh! for her soup, a weird, insuperable fearfulness,
    Compound of arrowroot, and gelatine, and lard;
  Hard, to reject it, when a bride besought, with tearfulness,
    Hard, to accept, and to assimilate it, hard!

  Oh! for her leather-like, her nauseating omelette,
    Oh! for her cutlets and potatoes black as ink!
  Oft, of necessity, would I the Buttons, TOMMY, let
    Batten on luxuries that bothered him, I think.

  And she would mingle, would that woman who did _that_ to me,
    Proofs incontestable with everything I ate,
  Whereby the veriest beginner of anatomy
    Knew that she must be in complexion a _brunette_.

  Wild were her sauces, like herself, devoid of reasoning;
    Still I have never been indubitably clear,
  _Why_ the invariable factor in her seasoning
    Always reminded me so forcibly of Beer.

  Why, when my darling sighed, "The weekly books are ready, TED,"
    And I rejoined that _we_ were thin while _they_ were fat,--
  Why, their increasing superfluities were credited
    All to a manifestly unoffending cat.

  Why, when a joint of whatsoever solid vastiness
    Quitted the dining-room, it never came again;
  Why my allusions to her culinary nastiness
    Only encouraged her, it beats me to explain.

  True, for our wages, which were somewhere near the "Twenty-ones,"
    Great expectations would have been a trifle rash.
  Still, as her perquisites, I know, were cent.-per-cent.-y ones,
    Ah! how I wish a _Chef_ had fed us for the cash!

  Oh! my first Cook! A gem with so much rare and rich in her,
    Irreconcileable, impenetrable soul,
  How I exulted when she fell against the kitchener,
    Urged by a Nemesis (and legs) beyond control.

  How, when my fluttered pet, believing her immaculate,
    Hied to her aid, and heard, "_You ain't a Lady, Mum!_"
  How I was forced to rather brutally ejaculate,
    "Rum! Very rum!--you see the cause of it is '_rum_.'"

  Oh! that first year of married paradise! My attitude
    Somehow, my sweet, on this our second Wedding-day,
  Needs must be one of unadulterated gratitude,
    Since we survive the Cook, you wept to send away!

       *       *       *       *       *

"HAS LEFT BUT THE NAME."--The intention of the original starters of
the Aquarium was presumably to exhibit fish of all sorts, all alive
oh! and quite at home. Nowadays, very little about fish is to be found
in the advertisements. The fish are, it may be supposed, "taken for
granted." They are conspicuous by their absence; but instead you
read how "a human being dives," how somebody conjures, how there are
"miraculous feats," and "four-legged dancers," and "baby elephants"
waltzing and drum-playing; how somebody of some importance "walks
upside down in mid-air;" how there are "serpentine" dancers,
"pantomimists," "duettists," and, finally, the "boxing kangaroo," so
that altogether the Aquarium may still congratulate itself on a show
of about the "queerest, oddest fish" in the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

WHAT'S IN A NAME?

    ["At the World's Fair, in Chicago, the other day, the Rev.
    JOHN JAMESON, of Virginia, smashed a stand containing an
    exhibit of Irish Whiskey."]

  What's this? Am I dreaming? I fancy I am:
  But no--it is printed without any flam.
  "The Reverend gentleman stood by the stand,
  With a hickory cudgel upraised in his hand.
  Then, with fury and fire in his clerical eye,
  This temperate priest on the bottles let fly."
  Oh, the waste of good liquor; to think there should be
  A man who with whiskey would dare to make free;
  And to think--which but adds to the sin and the shame--
  That the spoiler of whiskey should own such a name.
  One might sooner expect that some learned Q. C.
  Should abjure what he lives by, and welcomes--a fee;
  That a judge should break laws, or a gaoler break chains,
  Or a "guinea-pig" turn in disgust from his gains;
  That a bookie should preach, or a bishop should bet,
  That a slave of the Season should break etiquette;
  A landlord proclaim his dislike of his rent,
  Sleek MOSES protest against eighty per cent;
  That a priest should cast doubts on a stole or a cope,
  Or PE*RS hint a fault in the worth of his soap.
  Such sights would be strange, but they cannot compare
  With the sight that was seen t'other day at the Fair,
  When JOHN JAMESON smashed (or the newspapers fib it)
  With his hickory cudgel a whiskey-exhibit.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LATEST PARISIAN "ROMANCE."

(_Translated from the original French Canard._)

THEY were hunting him down. They had traced him from spot to spot. Now
he was in the barracks bribing the Army, now in the Ministerial Bureau
offering gold to the Members of the Government, now in the office of
the leading newspaper arranging for back pages in advertisements at
double the scale price. His pernicious influence was felt everywhere.
The whole body was permeated with a poisonous atmosphere of
corruption.

"We shall have him now," said the first detective, as he looked to the
lock of his revolver.

"No doubt about it," returned the other, as he loosed his sword in its
scabbard. "He cannot escape us."

Then the force of cavalry, infantry and artillery in attendance raised
a stealthy cheer. It had been difficult to bring the charges home to
the accused, but they had succeeded. It seemed impossible to prove his
identity, but now they had surrounded him. It was only a question of a
few minutes, and he would be their prisoner.

The detectives entered the _cafe_. They looked around them. They could
see no one answering to his description. All who were there had black
beards, black shaggy hair. They could see no red tresses, no yellow
Dundreary whiskers and prominent front teeth. Where could he be?

"Yes, there is one diner who has ordered a singular meal," replied a
_garcon_, in reply to a question. "He has asked for turtle-soup, raw
herrings, raw beef, raw mutton chops, plum-pudding and a barrel of
porter-beer."

"It must be he," cried the detectives, in a breath; "only an
Englishman would want such a meal."

"And he asked for the _Times_ and _Punch_," added the waiter.

"Proof conclusive of nationality;" and in a moment the man was
surrounded and seized.

"You dare not touch me," he shouted, battling with his captors. "I
am sacred, and if you offer violence you pledge your country to a
terrible war!"

Impressed by the stranger's vehemence, the detectives released him.
Once free, he threw off his black wig, took off his false nose, and
put on his blue spectacles. Then he gazed around him proudly.

"We ask your pardon, M. l'Ambassadeur," said the police.

"It is granted," returned their now-released prisoner, and he entered
his carriage. "I would have preferred to preserve my _incognito_, but
your interference has compelled me to reveal my identity. And now,
home."

And the coachman drove the Ambassador to a grand mansion in the Rue
Faubourg St. Honore.

SEQUEL (_from the original English_).

And when the Ambassador read the above, he came back to his native
land, and observed, "I think I have had enough of this."

And everyone at home agreed with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

BY OUR OUT-AND-OUT-EVERY-EVENING MAN.--_Mem._ The only endurable
"Squash" in this hot weather is "Lemon Squash."

       *       *       *       *       *

QUEER ENGLISH.

We are delighted--everyone is delighted, and that is much the same
thing--to know that Mrs. BANCROFT is by this time on the high road to
recovery from the effects of what might have been a serious accident.
The "inimitable" was in a Hansom, when the horse suddenly fell. Had
Mrs. BANCROFT been only what is professionally known as "A Walking
Lady," this could not have happened. The _Daily Telegraph's_ account
of it informed us that "Mr. BLAKELEY, now of the Criterion Theatre,
and once a member of Mr. and Mrs. BANCROFT'S own company, who was
happily passing immediately after the occurrence, was the means of
having the lady taken to her private residence." Mr. BLAKELEY is
always "happy" in any part he undertakes, _nihil tetigit quod non
ornavit_, and no doubt he was "happily passing," perhaps gaily
whistling, lightly stepping, merrily twirling a stick, and walking
along "thinking of nothing at all," when he became aware of the danger
to the popular ex-manageress, which at once changed his note from a
tenner to an alto: in fact alto-gether altered it. [The above comment
would have been impossible had the reporter stated that, "Happily for
Mrs. BANCROFT, Mr. BLAKELEY, &c., &c., was passing at the moment, and,
&c., &c."]

       *       *       *       *       *

"BEN TROVATO!"--Yes, found at last; this Ben is Mr. BEN DAVIES, who
sang five songs before the QUEEN, that is--to avoid all appearance of
rudeness--in Her Gracious Majesty's presence, one day last week. He is
now "Big Ben Trovato-re" in chief, and long may he remain so.

       *       *       *       *       *

A PROPER NAME.--That peculiar but not uncommon ornithological species
known as "Gaol-birds" ought to be kept in a _Knave-iary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TOO CONSCIENTIOUS BY HALF.

"IS THAT ENOUGH, SIR?"

"YES; THAT'LL DO VERY WELL. AND NOW SHAVE ME, PLEASE."

"I OUGHT TO MENTION THAT SHAVING IS THREEPENCE EXTRA, SIR. DO YOU
REALLY THINK IT'S WORTH WHILE?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM PROFESSOR MUDDLE.

DEAR MR. PUNCH,--Your poet (in this week's issue) reminds me of my own
unfortunate experience. Ever since I read that inspired work, _Alice
in Blunderland_, I do not seem to be able to give a correct version of
any of the poems I have long been accustomed to repeat or sing. After
dinner the other night I was asked to sing, and gave a well-known song
as follows:--

  Think of me only with thy nose,
    No words need then be said;
  Or kiss me sweetly with thine ears,
    No lips are half so red.
  The thirst that in my body burns
    Demands both food and wine,
  So when I next shall call on thee
    You'll know I've come to dine.
  Thou sent'st me late a rose-bud fair,
    Not so much honouring me
  As hoping near my heart I'd wear
    It all for love of thee.
  But I returned it through the post--
    Forgive me, if you can--
  Since when I trow thou hast found out
    I'm not a marrying man.

       *       *       *       *       *

DE TROP.--The last item of the _menu_, as given in the _World_, of
the Royal Wedding Breakfast, after the sweets, was named in plain
English,--all the previous dishes being given in French,--"cold roast
fowls." But how on earth after four courses and sweets, finishing with
"_Patisserie assortie_," could anyone have the conscience--we put it
in this way--to ask for and to eat any portion of "cold roast fowls"?

       *       *       *       *       *

"THIS IS A GOAK."--The _Weekly Register_, recording the event of a
Baronetcy being conferred on the present LORD MAYOR, remarks, "With
him we know the honour will be no _barren_ one." Very good, _W. R._
The italics are ours, just to emphasize the pun.

       *       *       *       *       *

ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.

_House of Commons, Monday, July 10._--Glad the sitting's over; often
get a little mixed here; never so magnificently as to-night.
Reached 9th Clause Home-Rule Bill, which settles question of Irish
Representation in Imperial Parliament. When Mr. G. brought in his Bill
in 1886, he proposed to exclude Irish Members. Remember very well
the cheer that filled the Chamber when that announcement made on
introduction of Bill. Those were, as PAT O'BRIEN used to say, "the
days of all-night sittings." Irish Members stood in bitter implacable
attitude of obstruction. At prospect of clearing them out, giving
Great Britain some peace in its own Parliament, the hearts of Members
leaped for joy. Seemed at moment as if this bribe would be enough to
carry the Bill.

Then came time for reflection; chance of reviewing opportunities.
JOSEPH'S rapid insight perceived in this arrangement a stab at the
Union. In phrase which SQUIRE OF MALWOOD to-night obligingly recalled
he had written, "The key of the position is the maintenance of the
full representation of Ireland in the Imperial Parliament."

Mr. G., profiting by experience, proposes in present Bill to maintain
Irish representation in slightly modified number. That would seem to
cut ground from under JOSEPH'S clinging feet. What he passionately,
persistently demanded in 1886, is conceded in 1893. If he cannot
abear other provisions of the Bill, he must surely defend the one that
retains Irish Members at Westminster. Must he, indeed? Those who think
so, know not JOSEPH. For some men the fence might seem a hopelessly
stiff one. JOSEPH takes it as an ordinary item in the day's work. No
apology; no retraction; no explanation. Black was black in 1886. He,
at risk of severing long friendships, said so, and was right. In 1893
black is white. He, anxious only for the prevalence of truth, says so,
and is right again.

This would have been pretty picture for a July night; but anyone could
have drawn it. In House of Commons it's as common as pastels on
the pavement. JOSEPH went the step further that marks the wide gulf
between genius and mediocrity. Having declared that in 1893 he,
impelled by irresistible conscience and unfathomable love for
his country, would vote against what in 1886 he (subject to same
influence) described as the key of the position, JOEY C. turned upon
his right hon. friends on the Treasury Bench, and with manly emotion
that brought tears to the eyes of the Member for Sark, deplored their
inconsistency.

"What I like about JOSEPH," said the Member for Sark, "is his
thoroughness. On finding himself in this new pit, he might have
stopped at the bottom and said nothing till the storm had blown over.
Or, thinking that a mean evasion, he might have defended the course he
has adopted. Those are the alternatives presented to ordinary
mankind: only to JOSEPH comes the idea of standing up and indignantly
belabouring Mr. G. and JOHN MORLEY for indulgence in the unpardonable
sin of inconsistency!"

_Business done._--PRINCE ARTHUR, JOSEPH, SAGE OF QUEEN ANNE'S GATE,
and JOHN REDMOND, unite their forces against Government. Mr. G. saved
by skin of the teeth and majority of 14.

[Illustration: A PARLIAMENTARY BEAR-GARDEN.]

_Tuesday._--TIM HEALY is an honest man and a loyal colleague. But
we are all weak on some point. Temptation irresistible to TIM is
to appropriate other people's rows. To-night's row distinctly and
exclusively SEXTON'S. Yet TIM promptly came to the front, and remained
there throughout the storm. The one clear impression amidst confusing
uproar was that TIM was bobbing on top of the turbulence like a cork
on the apex of a water-spout.

BRODRICK began it, and while storm raged sat silent, astonished at
his own moderation. Had merely remarked that the Irish people were
impecunious and garrulous. As an Irishman himself ought to know
something on point. SAUNDERSON, another member of a gifted race,
explained that, on the whole, he was inclined to regard remark
as complimentary. SEXTON, taking a different view, retorted with
observation that BRODRICK'S language was grossly impertinent.
Chairman, appealed to on point of order, gave a nice ruling. It is now
established among Parliamentary precedents that the phrase "grossly
impertinent," if addressed to an individual, is rank blasphemy; when
applied to a thing 'tis but a choleric word. Committee might usefully
have applied itself to consideration of this delicate distinction.
"Instead of which," as the magistrate once said, it went about roaring
like a famished lion.

For some minutes everyone seemed on his legs. CARMARTHEN had advantage
over most Members by reason of his more than six feet length;
GRANDOLPH, feeling old emotions stirred within him, took prominent
part in the fray; Mr. G., leaning across the table, fixed his glowing
eyes on GRANDOLPH, and warned him that his conduct was not calculated
to assist the Committee in its dilemma; the voice of T. W. RUSSELL
was heard in the land; PRINCE ARTHUR had much to say; Dr. TANNER broke
long silence with a shout; even JUSTIN MCCARTHY was seen on his feet,
and was howled at as if he had been discovered in the act of stealing
the Chairman's pocket-handkerchief. But TIM topped them all. They were
intermittent; he continuous. Whenever there was approach to pause
in the clamour, TIM'S strident voice filled it up with genial
observation, "Name! Name!" they roared at him. "Drag him out," was the
advice given by one forlorn legislator. In delirious delight of
the rapturous hour TIM took no notice of these objurgations and
interruptions. "It's not your funeral," an envious countryman snarled
in his ear. Certainly not; but that should make no difference. TIM
would improve the opportunity to whomsoever it might belong; and he
did.

_Business done._--None. But we had a cheerful row.

[Illustration: "Waiting to Spring."]

_Thursday._--Some excellent speaking to-night, and a walking-match,
in which, lap after lap, Government won. WALLACE led off with speech
sparkling with point; the more effective by contrast with stolid
manner. House crowded and applausive; always grateful to have
something fresh; get it from WALLACE, both in manner and matter.
PRINCE ARTHUR, following later, unusually bitter; pegged away at Bill
and Government for half an hour, and sat down with assertion that
such a Government was not worth attacking. Mr. G., who had listened
to WALLACE'S home-thrusts with face appreciative of their humour,
was unaccountably disturbed by PRINCE ARTHUR'S commentaries. He sat
immediately opposite, waiting to spring; meanwhile, with legs crossed
and arms tightly folded, literally holding himself in. On his feet
with catapultic force when PRINCE ARTHUR, gracefully gathering his
skirts, sat down. A Government not worthy of attack. Ho! A Government
that had failed to adhere to the main principles of its policy. Ha!
But there was another Government which, in 1886, had denounced as
dishonest a revision of judicial rents in Ireland, and a few months
later had passed Bill revising them. Had PRINCE ARTHUR belonged to
that Government? If so, how did he uplift this lofty standard of
action, than which no Pharisee that ever lived in Judea carried it
higher? This and much more Mr. G. declaimed at top of voice, with
flashing eyes, and exuberant gestures, cheers and counter cheers
filling House. Naturally JOSEPH followed with some kind words about
"my right hon. friend." SQUIRE OF MALWOOD, long silent, could not
resist temptation to plunge in. House went off to dinner exhausted by
the tornado of bitter, brilliant speech.

Dull enough after dinner, when walking-match began. Performance
announced for ten o'clock; began punctually; MELLOR acted as starter.
Course, round the Division Lobbies and back to seats. Time, by
Benson's chronometer, varied from 16 mins. 25 secs. to 18 mins. 3
secs. Programme included eighteen races; numbered Clause 9 to
26 inclusive; betting 5 to 1 on Government to pull through; some
uncertainty round first division; talk about plungers in Ministerial
team; when made known that majority was 27, it was seen that
Government were safe. Interest in subsequent races fell away as
Government majority mounted up. For some of the events the Opposition
did not appear at starting-post; Government walked over.

"Demmit, DOUGLAS," said Lord NOM TODDY, coming in mopping his brow,
after eighth Division, "this is not good enough. Next Thursday I shall
send my man down, and let him do the walking round. No use keeping a
dog and barking yourself."

_Business done._--Clauses 9 to 26 added to Home-Rule Bill.

_Friday._--DON'T KEIR HARDIE made bold bid to-day for cheap
advertisement. Motion for Address to QUEEN in congratulation on Royal
Marriage. DON'T KEIR tacked himself on to performance with attempted
Amendment on behalf of the poor and needy. Found no probability of
anyone seconding his Amendment, which therefore could not be put.
Still, served his purpose; suggested visions of portrait of Benefactor
of the People (penny plain, twopence coloured) hung in all the cottage
homes of England.

"Curious," says the Member for Sark, "how rapidly DON'T KEIR HARDIE
has played himself out; perhaps rather notable than curious. House of
Commons is the quickest machine ever invented for taking the measure
of a man. Has looked at Member for West Ham, measured him, weighed
him, and set him aside. When, less than a year ago, he came down, with
his brass band and his trumpets tootling, he was DON'T KEIR HARDIE.
Now, if I may say so, the boot's on the other leg; it's the House of
Commons that Don't Keir for Hardie."

_Business Done._--More about Home-Rule Scheme.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUEER QUERIES.

A MUNICIPAL HALL.--I see the County Council are thinking of spending
nearly a million of the ratepayers' money in buying a site for a
municipal palace in Parliament Street, because the members--pending
the time when they are all elected to the Legislature--want to be
as close to it as possible. Why not let them be still closer, in
Westminster Hall itself, which is now untenanted? Or if the members
don't like that, why not make a working arrangement with the House
of Commons to use that chamber in the mornings before the M.P.'s come
down to it? This would be something like an "in-and-out" clause, and
would save no end of money.

  TRUE ECONOMIST.

REWARDS TO RACONTEURS.--I am considered a first-rate storyteller and
conversationalist; indeed, few dinner parties (at Lower Tooting) can
get on without me. Do you think I could get elected to the Reform Club
without paying the entrance subscription? I see that some members of
that club have been left L2000 each as a reward for "brightening
the evenings" of a deceased member, and I feel certain that had the
testator known _me_, he would have increased my legacy to L4000 at
least. My sparkling powers of conversation are often called a "gift,"
but I don't want them to be a gift if I could get anything for them.

  SYDNEY MACAULAY HAYWARD SMITH.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRESENT! FIRE! BANG-KOK!--"Three Frenchmen killed, two wounded; twenty
Siamese killed, and twelve wounded,"--such is the first result of
French _Humann_-ising influence in Siam.

       *       *       *       *       *

A NEW MARITIME RESORT.--"I'm sure," observed Mrs. R., "that a really
pleasant thing to do in the summer holidays would be to take a trip to
the Specific Islands."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GREATEST AUTHORITY ON THE WORKING OF THE "IN-AND-OUT"
CLAUSES.--Mr. SEXTON, M.P.!

       *       *       *       *       *

GOING AGAINST THE GREIN.--Refusing to patronise the Independent
Theatre.

       *       *       *       *       *

FRENCH BILLIARDS AT SIAM.--The Cannon Game.

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Note:

This issue contains some dialect.

Sundry damaged or missing punctuation has been repaired.

Page 25: 'abreviating' corrected to 'abbreviating'.
"... as emphasizing, by descriptively abbreviating, these two
epithets,..."

Page 30: 'Nickledy Nod' is correct.
[www . archive.org/stream/laysandlyrics00hawkgoog#page/n124].
(From: "Lays and Lyrics": Nickledy Nod.
Dedicated to the "Sweet Girl Graduates of the School of Cookery."
(After Punch.))

Page 33: 'where corrected to 'were'.

  "True, for our wages, which were somewhere near the "Twenty-ones,"
  Great expectations would have been a trifle rash."

Page 34: 'nihil tetigit quod non ornavit' = 'he touched nothing
without embellishing it'.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch,or The London Charivari, Volume
105, July 22nd, 1893, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH,OR THE LONDON ***

***** This file should be named 35734.txt or 35734.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/7/3/35734/

Produced by Lesley Halamek, Malcolm Farmer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
