The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pearl of Peace, by Madeline Leslie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Pearl of Peace
       or, The Little Peacemaker

Author: Madeline Leslie

Release Date: April 1, 2011 [EBook #35746]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEARL OF PEACE ***




Produced by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)











[Illustration: Cover: MRS. LESLIE'S BIBLE PEARLS.]




The Pearl of Peace:

OR,

THE LITTLE PEACE-MAKER.


_BY MRS. MADELINE LESLIE._

          "Blessed are the peace-makers; for they shall be
          called the children of God." MATTHEW 5:9.

          BOSTON:
          PUBLISHED BY A. F. GRAVES,
          20 CORNHILL.


          Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1868, by

          REV. A. R. BAKER,

          In the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the District of
          Massachusetts.


          J. E. FARWELL & CO., PRINTERS,
          37 Congress Street.




          To

          FRANK RANDALL, RUTH, MAY, RANDOLPH MORGAN,
          AND JAMES WALDINGFIELD,

          CHILDREN OF

          D. F. APPLETON, ESQ., NEW YORK,

          THESE "BIBLE PEARLS" ARE AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED
          BY THE AUTHOR.




MRS. LESLIE'S

PEARL SERIES.


Series for Girls.

          VOL.  I.  THE PEARL OF FAITH.

           "   II.   "    "   "  DILIGENCE.

           "  III.   "    "   "  MEEKNESS.

           "   IV.   "    "   "  FORGIVENESS.

           "    V.   "    "   "  CONTENTMENT.

           "   VI.   "    "   "  PEACE.





MRS. LESLIE'S

PEARL SERIES.

Series for Boys.


          VOL. I. THE PEARL OF LOVE.

           "  II.  "    "   "  CHARITY.

           " III.  "    "   "  OBEDIENCE.

           "  IV.  "    "   "  PENITENCE.

           "   V.  "    "   "  HOPE.

           "  VI.  "    "   "  PATIENCE.




CONTENTS.


          CHAPTER I.
          THE QUARREL,                 11

          CHAPTER II.
          SALLIE'S HOME TROUBLES,      22

          CHAPTER III.
          HATTY'S PEACEFUL HOME,       34

          CHAPTER IV.
          THE PEACE-MAKER,             46

          CHAPTER V.
          MATILDA'S CONSCIENCE,        59

          CHAPTER VI.
          THE QUARREL SETTLED,         72

          CHAPTER VII.
          THE SICK GIRL,               86

          CHAPTER VIII.
          THE PEACEFUL DEATH,         102




The Pearl of Peace.




CHAPTER I.

THE QUARREL.


"SHE'S the meanest girl I ever saw! If she is my cousin, I'll say so. I
wont speak to her again this term; see if I do!"

Sallie Munson was greatly excited, and walked in quick jerks by the side
of her companion.

Matilda had been repeating to her, with some exaggeration, the remarks
of Cynthia Manning, concerning her dress; but Matilda did not expect or
intend to excite so much anger, and was almost frightened at Sallie's
warmth.

"What are you talking about?" called a cheerful voice from behind. "I've
been running my breath all away, trying to catch you; but I couldn't
make you hear my call; I could only see Sallie gesturing away, as if
she were practising her exhibition piece."

Matilda had only time to whisper hurriedly, "Don't tell her a word of
what I said," when Harriet Maynard joined them.

One glance into her good-humored, serene face, would have put Sallie's
anger to flight, if it had not been for a sly pinch Matilda gave her
arm.

"Did you ever see the brook look so lovely, girls? I should have
overtaken you sooner, only that I stopped at the bridge to see the
water dash over Montworth Falls, as I have named that pretty cascade. I
threw in a piece of wood, and over it went among the foam just like that
boat we read of, over Niagara."

She rattled away in a gay tone, looking as smiling as a May Queen; but
at last she could not help noticing that neither of her companions were
in good humor.

"Why, what's the matter, Sallie?" she asked, affectionately. "You look
as if you were in a high fever, and Matilda, too, is as solemn as a
church. What is it?"

There was no answer; and, presently, a shadow crept over Hatty's smiling
countenance.

"Sallie, Matilda," she exclaimed, eagerly, "you must tell. Have I done
anything? Have I hurt your feelings?"

"No; oh, no, indeed!" answered Sallie, turning quickly to her friend.
"It's nothing that you have anything to do with." She cast a quick
glance down at her own dress, eager to know whether Hatty had also
condemned it as low and vulgar; but her friend said, still more
earnestly,--

"Tell me all about it, can't you? Do you know I begin to be jealous of
Matilda? You have told her all your troubles."

"No, indeed! Matilda told me,--I"--

There was another pinch of the arm, and she stopped suddenly.

"Well, good-bye, then; I wish you were going my way: but I have the
brook for company."

Then she laughingly waved her adieu, calling out after they were at some
distance, "I've finished all those hard sums."

"What a girl Hatty is," exclaimed Sallie. "I wish I were always as happy
as she is. I don't believe she ever cried in her life."

"Yes, she's gay," answered Matilda, "and good company; but still I do
like people that have some feeling. She laughs a good deal. She knows
that's her best look. She's awful proud of her white teeth."

"Now, Matilda, that's too bad! I don't believe she ever thinks of that
in all her life. She laughs because she's happy; and, as for feeling, I
think she has more than any of us. She's the best friend I have, any
way. I never get angry when I'm with her."

"I didn't mean to say a word against her, I'm sure. I like her
first-rate."

"Well, I shouldn't think you liked me first-rate, if I heard that you
called me unfeeling and proud."

Sallie drew her arm from her companion, and walked on by herself in a
dignified manner. Before long, Matilda reached her own home, and, with a
pleasant good-bye, ran inside the gate.

When Sallie was left to her own reflections, her face grew more flushed
and serious than ever. She was very angry with her cousin Cynthia, for
criticizing her dress. She was angry with her mother, for obliging her
to wear a gown that looked as if it came out of the ark. She was angry
with Matilda for repeating her cousin's ill-natured remarks; and she was
angry with herself for listening to them. It was only when she thought
of Hatty, sweet Hatty Maynard, with her gay tone and pleasant, placid
smile, that her forehead relaxed from the deep frown which had gathered
upon it.

"I wonder," she said to herself, "why Hatty is so much happier than
anybody else I know. She's real poor, and has to wait on that cross old
uncle, and her deformed sister; she dresses old-fashioned, too; only she
never seems to care. When she has on anything odd, she just laughs the
more, and says, gayly,--

"'You know my dressmaker doesn't visit the city often.' Well, I suppose
it's her way, and I wish 'twas my way, too."




CHAPTER II.

SALLIE'S HOME TROUBLES.


SALLIE MUNSON was the daughter of a man who had sailed as Captain of a
schooner, bound for the West Indies, more than five years before the
date of our story. He left a wife and seven children, of whom Sallie was
the youngest, and the only daughter. At the time he left home she was
just past six, and was therefore now eleven.

Five long, weary, waiting years of watching, suspense and anxiety, had
left Mrs. Munson careworn and old before her time. Her eldest son was
married and settled at a distance; the second had gone with his father
as a sailor; the sixth boy, her darling, blue-eyed Jamie, was buried at
the end of her little garden; leaving four children dependant on her
labor for their support. To be sure, Abner, the oldest at home, was
nearly seventeen; but though steady and honest, he lacked energy and
thrift. When away from home he was the butt and laughing-stock of his
more shrewd companions; and so his patient mother obtained what
employment she could for him, under her own eye, and sent his brother
Joseph, a stout, fun-loving lad of fifteen, to work in a neighboring tan
yard.

Edward and Sallie went to school during the short sessions both in
summer and winter, though the care and pains it cost their mother to fit
them out in clothes and books, I can hardly describe.

Once a year Mrs. Barnes, the Captain's sister, came to the sea-shore to
spend a few days, and always brought with her a bundle of half-worn
clothes, out of which the widow made useful, if not fashionable,
garments for her family.

It was shortly after one of these visits, that Sallie wore to school a
dress, made from one given her by her aunt. It was a bright plaid, and
with great pains had been made to fit her neatly. Whether the boddice
and sleeves were in the prevailing mode, she was ignorant, until
informed by her school-mate, Matilda.

This young girl had some good traits of character. She was diligent in
her studies, and prompt in obliging a friend. But she had one terrible
failing; a love of gossip or mischief-making, which rendered her
dangerous to the peace of those with whom she associated.

This habit often led her much farther than she anticipated, and betrayed
her into sundry exaggerations which she sometimes keenly regretted.

At recess, Cynthia Manning refused to lend a new book to Matilda; and to
show her spite, she determined to make a quarrel between the cousins.
The two girls lived not far apart, and usually walked home together in
company with Hatty.

This time Matilda hurried her friend along, and began at once to say:

"It's strange you can't have anything new, without Cynthia being so
envious. Just because you've got a handsome new gown, she's so mad, she
can't say enough against it. She made all manner of fun of it behind
your back, and called it real dowdy. 'I do declare,' she said, tossing
back her head, 'for all Sallie is so set up with her new dress, I
wouldn't be seen wearing such a vulgar-looking thing.'"

This was what had made Sallie exclaim in anger against her cousin. The
reason Matilda was unwilling her companion should explain why she looked
feverish, was because she well knew Hatty's character as a peace-maker;
and her conscience loudly whispered that she had told much more than was
true.

After the girls parted, and she went into her own home, do you think she
was happy? Are quarrelsome people generally so? We shall see.

Matilda was the eldest of five children. The baby, as Master Tom, a
sturdy little fellow of two years was called, was playing near the steps
as she walked up the path from the gate. He gave a shout of welcome; but
she pushed over his pile of stones with her foot, laughed at his cry of
disappointment, and opened the door, with a frown on her face.

It was Wednesday; and the afternoon was a holiday. She felt quite sure
there would be no play for her, and was resolved to show her displeasure
at once.

She threw her pile of books into a chair, tossed her hat on another,
and, passing through the common sitting-room, asked in a complaining
tone,--

"Isn't dinner most ready?"

"Oh, Matilda!" said her mother, "you're just in time; run back as quick
as you can to the store, and ask Mr. Pratt to cut you a thick slice of
ham. Your father will be home in ten minutes, and be angry if dinner
isn't ready. There, catch up your hat, and run quick."

"It's always the way," pouted Matilda, snatching the plate her mother
held toward her. "I wanted to eat my dinner, and go nutting; but I never
can do any thing."

She did not hurry in the least; but, just outside the gate, met her two
brothers, who were quarreling about a jack-knife, one of them had found.

Instead of trying to make peace, she entered into the quarrel, and soon
had both of them railing at her.

When her father came from his toil, hungry and impatient for his dinner,
his wife was fretting; and his daughter nowhere in sight.




CHAPTER III.

HATTY'S PEACEFUL HOME.


NOW, let us follow Hatty as she ran gayly up the narrow lane toward her
humble home. The brook, she loved so well, tumbled on over the stones
and pebbles at her side, dancing and sparkling in the sunlight, as happy
as she.

"Oh, how pretty these everlastings are!" she said to herself, stopping
to take a nearer view of the late fall flowers; and there's dear Esther
sitting at her sewing.

"Am I late?" she asked, running into their one room, which served for
parlor, sitting-room and kitchen.

"Oh, no, dear!"

There was an affectionate kiss between the two sisters, and then Hatty,
after hanging up her school hat and sack, laid some fresh sticks into
the stove, filled the tea-kettle, and put some potatoes already washed
into the oven to bake. Then she proceeded to lay on a cloth very coarse,
but white as snow; and to set out the common plates they used, her
tongue running merrily all the while.

"Oh, Esther! I wish you could see Montworth Falls. The water foams, and
dashes, and sparkles so beautifully, I stood a moment to look at it; and
then I had to run to catch the girls."

Esther smiled; a patient, calm face hers was, almost always lighted
with that trusting, placid smile.

"I can see it," she answered, "almost as well as if I were there. You
are my eyes, you know."

"Oh, sister!" Hatty went on, after bringing from the cellar a dish of
cold meat and a plate of large cucumber pickles, "the girls are going
nutting. Do you suppose I could go? Ethel Frost says chestnuts and
shagbarks are ever so thick. There's one reason, specially, why I want
to go to-day."

Esther quite laughed this time.

"You know I tell you everything," Hatty went on, her face growing a
little anxious. "Sallie Munson is in trouble. I want to make her feel
better; and I guess I can."

"Well, my dear peace-maker, you can go as well as not. You know uncle
Oliver likes nuts in winter. They remind him of old times. You'd better
carry them up stairs and dry them, and then give him a pleasant
surprise."

"So I will!"

Hatty peeped into the oven to see how the potatoes were coming on,
singing a line of her favorite hymn:--

          "Oh how happy are they
           Who their Saviour obey,
             And have laid up their treasure above,
           No tongue can express,
           The sweet comfort and peace,
             Of a soul in its earliest love."

Just as the tea was drawn (uncle Oliver was as set in his way as an old
smoker, and declared that he couldn't live without tea with every meal),
the old man made his appearance. He was bent a good deal with
rheumatism; his face was wrinkled, and his hair grew low down on his
forehead. His shaggy eyebrows nearly met over his nose, and his deep
grey eyes looked cold to a stranger, but, notwithstanding all this, his
nieces loved him. Years ago when his only sister, who was their mother,
died, he promised her, that as well as he knew how, he would be a father
to her daughters; and faithfully had he kept his word.

He had only a little money; but that little was freely given for their
necessities. When they first came to live with him, people called him
hard and crusty, an odd stick; but Esther and Hatty had crept into his
heart and made it soft and tender.

For their mother's sake he had allowed Hatty to attend church and
Sabbath school; and in this way a blessing had come home to all of them.
Hatty was not only eyes to her deformed sister, and described to her the
beauties of nature which she seldom saw herself, but she was ears to
both of them. Every word she could remember of the Sunday teachings was
stored to be repeated at home; and thus both the old man and his
deformed niece had learned to love the sacred truths of the Bible.
Indeed a blessed peace had settled on the whole household, a peace and
contentment at which many of their neighbors wondered.

When Hatty heard her uncle's step, she ran to the door to welcome him.
If he had been the handsomest man in America, she couldn't have looked
more lovingly in his face. She playfully took off his hat, hung it on
its hook, and then seated him at the table.

"Come, Esther," she exclaimed, "dinner's ready; and here's your chair."

It was no wonder uncle Oliver smiled as he watched her flitting about,
first to lay Esther's work on a small table away from harm, then to push
up her chair before her plate, snatching a kiss for her pains, and last
seating herself demurely while the old man said grace. It was no wonder
at all that he asked God to bless every one of them, and continue life
and health to the child who was the joy of their hearts as well as the
delight of their eyes.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV.

THE PEACE-MAKER.


HATTY had a special reason for hurrying through her after-dinner work.
She did not think it right to tell even Esther that her school-mate had
tried to make hard feeling between cousins; but she did tell her
heavenly Father, and asked his blessing on her effort to make peace
between them.

Then with a parting kiss to Esther, who sat patiently at her sewing, she
ran off to call for Sallie before Matilda joined the party.

"I've come begging," she said, laughing gayly, as she found her friend
lingering over her afternoon task of picking beans for her mother to
bake. "Here, let me help you; and I'll tell you what I want. You and I
are just the same size; and I admired your new dress so much I'm going
to get Esther to cut mine just like it. I want you to wear it over to
our house, and let her see it; and then I can try it on. If it does fit
me, and I'm sure it will, I can borrow your mother's pattern, and that
will make it so easy for Esther, you know."

Sallie's cheeks grew crimson. She thought at first that Hatty must be
joking. She had begun to hate that dress, but then, if Hatty liked it,
it must be pretty, for every one in school acknowledged Hatty's good
taste.

She sat thinking of this, while her friend took up handful after handful
of beans, and put them into the pan.

"I'm going to try, and make it all myself," she went on gayly. "I am old
enough now; and Esther has so much to do."

"Mother will lend you her pattern," answered Sallie, "but now really,
Hatty, do you like my dress?"

"Yes, indeed; or I wouldn't wish mine like it; and I heard ever so many
of the girls say how prettily it looked. Cynthia said those bright
colors were very becoming, you're so pale, you know."

"Cynthia! did she say that?"

"Yes, she didn't like the tight sleeves at first; but I told her I did;
and besides it's the fashion. You know," she added with a merry laugh,
"when the fashion is a sensible one, we ought to follow it."

"But Hatty, Matilda says, Cynthia talked horridly about my dress. I got
awfully angry about it, and said I wouldn't speak to her again this
term."

"Oh, Sallie! that would be unkind and unforgiving, even if she had done
all that Matilda says; but I do really think, Matilda is mistaken; I
heard Cynthia praise the dress myself."

"No, she was not mistaken," cried Sallie in great excitement. "She meant
to make a fuss. She's always trying to get people into a quarrel. There,
the beans are done; and I'm going right to her house to tell her I've
found her out; and I want nothing more to do with her."

"But Sallie, it's time we were going to the grove. The best nuts will
all be gone; and I want to get good ones for uncle Oliver."

"Come on, then, I'm ready. Mother, is Edward going with us?"

"He's been gone with Ethel for an hour. He has a chance to sell a
bushel, if he can pick them."

"I hope Matilda wont be there," said Sallie. "If she is, I sha'n't speak
to her."

"I shall," added Hatty in a decided tone; "because, though I'm afraid
she's done wrong, I don't think that would be the way to cure her, I
think it would be best to let her see that we all love each other too
well to allow a few hasty words to make us quarrel."

"I hate people who are always making a fuss."

Hatty laughed. "Matilda can't make a fuss with me," she said, showing
all her white teeth.

"She tried to," answered Sallie. "She called you proud, and said you
laughed to show your handsome teeth; but I wouldn't hear you talked
against; and I told her so. After that she shut her mouth pretty quick."

"I'm afraid I do laugh too much," said Hatty, blushing crimson; "but I'm
so happy, I can't help it. I hope I'm not proud, though I try to be
thankful."

"You're the dearest girl in the world," exclaimed Sallie, putting her
arms tightly around her friend's neck. "If it hadn't been for you, I
should have had a quarrel with Cynthia; and mother would have worried
awfully about it, for we're own cousins, you know."

"Well, dear Sallie, for my sake, forgive Matilda too. She was to blame
for what she said; but we must pity her. I don't think Matilda is very
happy."

Sallie shook her head, but presently asked,--

"What makes you always want people to forgive? I don't see how it will
make you any happier."

"Oh, yes indeed it will! It seems dreadful to me to see two school-mates
feeling unkindly to each other; and then, you know," she added with a
deeper blush, "who has said, 'Be of one mind, live in peace, and the God
of love and peace shall be with you;' don't you remember what a
blessing is promised to the peace-makers?"

"No, I don't."

"Why, Sallie! The minister preached about it last winter. I remembered
ever so much of the sermon for uncle Oliver and Esther. You know I have
to preach it over again to them. Esther says, she thinks it's one of the
most beautiful verses in the Bible:"

"Blessed are the peace-makers; for they shall be called the children of
God."

Sallie remained silent for a few moments. When they came in sight of the
grove, she caught her friend's hand and said earnestly,--

"Oh, Hatty! I wish I were like you, and could claim that promise. I see
now why you're always so happy. You--"

"'Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee,'"
added her companion, with a reverent glance upward.




CHAPTER V.

MATILDA'S CONSCIENCE.


MATILDA did not make her appearance in the grove. Her father was so
angry at her tardiness in bringing the ham for his dinner that he
forbade her the pleasure. She passed the afternoon in a very unhappy
state of mind, continually quarrelling with her brothers and sisters,
and stirring up strife in the whole household.

From her chamber window she saw Hatty and Sallie walk on, arm in arm,
swinging their baskets; and conscience whispered,--"They will talk of
you, and you have no one but yourself to blame for all your
wretchedness."

Disgusted with herself, she still sat gazing from the window, when
serious thoughts began to arise.

"Why can't I be happy?" she asked herself. "I have a better home than
either of those girls. That is, the rooms look better, and father has
more money. But things never go right. Mother always wants errands done
so quick; and father gets angry and cross; and the boys are so
touchy,"--

"And Matilda, the eldest daughter is worse than all the rest; for she
might be a help to her mother, a comfort to her father, and an example
of love and peace to the whole family."

This was what conscience said; and conscience this time was determined
to be heard.

"You hate yourself now," the inward monitor went on, "but not so badly
as you will by and by. Every day that you indulge in these evil
passions, you will grow worse and worse. Try to reform. Begin to-day,
and take this verse for your motto: 'If it be possible, as much as lieth
in you, live peaceably with all men.'"

"That is Hatty's rule," exclaimed Matilda, starting from her seat.
"I'll try it. I'm sorry now, I told Sallie that Cynthia didn't like her
dress. I'm afraid there'll be a fuss about that. Sallie wont speak; and
her cousin will find out what I said, and then the blame will all come
on me."

"Where it belongs," urged conscience again.

"Well, I'll never tell tales again; that is, if I can help it. I mean to
try and be like Hatty. Father and mother will wonder what has come over
me; I wish I knew what I ought to do first."

Already she felt happier than for a long time. She ran down to the sink,
bathed her face and eyes; then back to her room and combed her hair,
confining it in her net, after which she joined her mother in the
sitting-room.

"Where's that little apron," she began, "that you cut out yesterday? I'm
going to make it."

Mrs. Manning glanced up from her work in surprise. "What has happened?"
she asked herself; but she smilingly directed her daughter where she
might find the apron.

Before her needle was threaded, baby Tom fell from the steps and began
to scream with all his might.

Mrs. Manning started up, letting her sewing fall to the floor. "I
sha'n't sew a stitch at this rate," began Matilda impatiently; but
recovering herself, she exclaimed,--

"Come here, Tommy. I'll show you the bossy;" and they trotted off
together to the barn.

The other boys were there playing in the hay, and at any other time
Matilda would have begun to quarrel directly; but with her good resolves
fresh in mind she began to coax them to come off the hay, and show her
how to make bossy stand on his feet.

Her tone was so pleasant that they came at once, wondering at the
change; and for the next half hour they had a merry time together.

Then she returned to the house with the baby mounted on her back.

When her father came home to supper, he evidently expected to find her
cross and impatient at having been kept from accompanying her companions
to the grove. He heard her singing before he reached the gate, and was
not a little delighted to find his wife sitting at her sewing, and
Matilda putting the last dishes on the table for tea.

"Well, now, this is as it ought to be," he said heartily, as they drew
their chairs about the table. "Wife, you said you wanted a new gown, and
here's money to buy cloth for you and Matilda, too. I'm always ready
with the cash for good daughters."

A few hours later, when the young girl retired to her bed, she said to
herself,--"It isn't so very hard to do right after all. How pleased
father was. Now if I only knew that Sallie wouldn't say anything about
what I told her, I should be happier than I have been for a month."

I wish Hatty had been there to remind her that she ought to thank her
heavenly Father for help to keep her resolutions, else she could not
have done one right thing. As it was, Hatty was giving uncle Oliver and
Esther an account of her call at Mrs. Munson's; and they were
thinking,--"What a blessing our dear girl is to us, and how lonely our
cottage would be without her."

The nuts, a peck of each, were safely stored in the attic to dry, before
the old man came home to supper; and then Hatty had time to run to a
neighbor's with the vest Esther had just completed.

In the evening they had family-prayers, a service the two girls
commenced by themselves, but which uncle Oliver soon joined; and then
after Hatty's account of her afternoon, they retired to rest for the
night, the blessing which God has promised the peace-makers resting upon
them.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI.

THE QUARREL SETTLED.


IT was scarcely a week after the nutting party, when one morning Sallie
was missing from school. This was so unusual that the teacher inquired
of the scholars whether any of them knew why she was not in her place.

But no one had seen her that day; and as her brother Edward was also
absent, nothing could be ascertained till night.

When the teacher called, she found the family of Mrs. Munson greatly
afflicted. Three of the children were in bed with fever, and the widow
was scarcely able to drag herself about.

"I've had trouble on trouble," she said, sighing. "Month after month,
for five long years, I've stood at the door where I could see the ocean,
and watched for the ship that never came. I've laid one child beneath
the sod, and now it's likely three more will follow. Still I can
say,--'Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusteth in thee.'"

At school, both Edward and Sallie were greatly missed, the first
question in the morning being: "Have you heard from Mrs. Munson's? Is
Sallie better?"

Hatty went about her studies with a sad countenance. She was much
afraid that her friend would die without having given her heart to the
Saviour.

One day, when she was going home from school, she passed two boys who
were quarrelling terribly about a book one of them had lost.

The young girl lingered near them for a few moments, wishing, yet
scarcely daring to speak. At last she said,--

"Oh Ethel! how can you quarrel when one of your companions is so very
sick? Think if you were to be taken down with the fever, how sorry you
would be that you had called any one such hard names."

The boy hung his head, somewhat ashamed, but then said,--

"It's too bad to lose a new book. I'm sure Bill took it home with him."

"I didn't. I haven't seen it since Ethel showed it to me at recess. I
don't see why he need to lay it to me."

"At recess?" murmured Ethel. "Oh dear! Bill, wait a minute."

He was off without a word, and in ten minutes more he came running at
full speed, shouting,--

"I've found it. Here 'tis, all safe. I left it on the rock when we were
playing ball."

"And now you're sorry you charged Bill with carrying it home," exclaimed
Hatty, eagerly.

"Yes, I am. As soon as he spoke about recess I thought where I laid
it."

"Don't you think it would be a good plan to ask him to forgive you?"
inquired the little peace-maker, drawing him aside.

He made a wry face and hesitated.

"You know, you said some awful hard things," she urged. "I thought then
he was pretty good-tempered not to take offense."

She looked in his face so eagerly that he laughed outright.

[Illustration: "Look here, Bill, Hatty thinks I ought to ask your
pardon." Vol. VI, p. 9.]

"Well," he said, "for your sake, I will. You always have everything
your own way, you know."

"Look here, Bill," he exclaimed, walking back to the fence where his
companion stood, and holding out his hand, "I was wrathy and called you
names you didn't deserve. Hatty thinks I ought to ask your pardon."

"Oh, Ethel! don't tell him that. You owned you were sorry first."

"So I am; and if Bill will say quits, I'll do him as good a turn some
other time."

"All right," said Bill, giving his hand.

"Here, Hatty," cried Ethel, "you must shake hands too. You're better
than Squire Morse to settle up quarrels."

She laughed and blushed, giving her little hand first to one, and then
to the other.

"Now promise me," she said, "that you'll never quarrel again."

"That's pretty steep. I wouldn't dare venture," cried Ethel, growing
very red.

"Oh!" urged Hatty, "I always thought you two the bravest boys in school.
Such good scholars ought to be brave."

"I promise to _try_ to be peaceable," answered Bill.

"And I'll agree to think of you, Hatty Maynard, when I want to call hard
names. I guess that will cool off the hot blood."

"You must think of somebody better than I am," she urged, growing very
serious. "Don't you recollect what the minister said, about living in
peace? And the Bible tells us, to 'follow peace with all men,' to
'follow after the things that make for peace.' Esther says that means,
we must be kind and affectionate, one to another; we must show our
companions that we love them; and if we ever do wrong, we must ask
forgiveness as you did, Ethel. I think Bill was real generous to forgive
so quick; but I knew he would, if you told him how sorry you were."

"Come on, Bill," exclaimed Ethel, laughing. "I guess we sha'n't be
fighting again in a hurry, after all the compliments we've had to-day."

The next morning, when Hatty went down from her unfurnished attic to
make a fire in the stove, she found a string of nice, fresh fish laid on
the kitchen table. There was a small piece of soiled paper tied to the
end of the string, on which was written in a school boy's hand,--

"For Hatty Maynard, peace-maker to the town of Shrewsbury; from Ethel
and Bill."

"'Blessed are the peace-makers, for they shall be called the children of
God,'" repeated Hatty, tears gushing to her eyes. "I do love to make
peace; and I may call myself his child."

She was so full of joy that she ran up the steep stairs again to her low
couch, and there kneeling down, she asked her heavenly Father to make
her indeed his own child, and by and by to take her to dwell with him
in heaven, where all was peace, and love, and joy, forever and ever.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VII.

THE SICK GIRL.


DAY after day went by and still Sallie lay in bed. Edward and his
brother were able to sit up for a few hours, and take a little broth;
but their sister was very, _very_ ill.

One afternoon a neighbor knocked at Mr. Maynard's door and asked for
Hatty.

"I have been watching with poor Sallie Munson," she said. "The widow is
clear worn out; and I couldn't refuse. Sallie has come to her senses.
She thinks she's going to die, and she wants to see Hatty."

"Why don't they send for the minister?" asked uncle Oliver.

"They have sent; but he wont be at home till to-morrow."

Esther's countenance changed, and at last she said,--

"I'm afraid to have sister go; the fever is very contagious."

"Well, I wont deny that; but perhaps if she ties a bag of camfire round
her neck, she wont catch it, I've got one round mine this blessed
minute; and I've made Sarah Ann wear one ever since the fever come into
town."

"Hatty'll want to go," suggested uncle Oliver. "'Twill be just like her
not to think a mite of herself. It's 'stonishing what harum-scarum
creaters girls be. They don't valley their own lives a mite, if they
want to do anything."

"Well, if you just heard Sallie a calling, 'Hatty, dear Hatty, do come,
I'm going to die. Come and tell me what I must do,' you'd say 'twas
heart-rending."

"I suppose she will go," faltered Esther, growing very white. "I'll tell
her as soon as she comes home from school."

"Tell her, and let her judge for herself," muttered the old man. "I'd
rather give every cent, I'm worth in the world than to venter her there;
but God can keep her from all harm. She's a good girl, Hatty is, and
knows a sight more'n some folks."

Esther did tell Hatty, and the consequence was that she went; but not
until she had kneeled by her straw couch once more to ask God to bless
her endeavors to do Sallie good. She did not think of herself. She felt
sure her heavenly Father would take care of her. If he wished her to
live longer, he would preserve her from the fever. If he meant to call
her home to heaven now, she was ready to go. In her soul all was peace.

But for her dear companion, she was troubled. As she hurried along, she
thought how they had loved each other; that never a word of unkindness
had separated them; and she put up a little prayer to God that if
consistent with his will, Sallie might be spared to her mother for many
years.

Mrs. Munson saw her running toward the house, and met her at the door.

Poor Mrs. Munson! how hard during all these weeks of anxious care, had
she tried to say, "It is the Lord; let him do with his own, what seemeth
to him best."

"Sallie wants you badly, dear," she said, after kissing the child; "but
aren't you afraid you'll take the fever? You know Cynthia came down with
it yesterday."

"No, I hadn't heard."

Hatty's chin quivered, and the widow noticing her agitation said
softly,--

"I wouldn't urge you for any thing. The minister'll be home to-morrow.
May be Sallie'll forget it again."

"Hatty! why don't Hatty come?" called out the sick child.

"I'll go now, ma'am. Is any body with her?"

"Nobody but Edward."

"Will you please call him out? I'd rather see her alone."

Hatty was only thirteen years old; and you will not be surprised that
when she saw her companion's pale face and wild, protruded eyes, her
heart grew faint within her. She sank into a chair, and covered her face
with her hands.

"I knew you'd come, I knew you'd be sorry for me," began Sallie, talking
with feverish excitement. "Did mother tell you I am going to die?"

"No one but God can know that," murmured Hatty, slowly rising and
approaching the bed. "Esther told me you wanted to see me, and I've
come."

"Yes; I called you all night; but nobody would go. I'm afraid, Hatty; I
don't want to die. Oh, I wish I was good."

"The Bible says nobody ever was good enough to go to heaven."

"What do you mean? Tell me quick!"

"I can't explain very well. I mean that if we're ever so good, as you
call it, we couldn't get into heaven without Jesus. Our goodness is
badness in God's sight, because he is so much holier than we are; but if
we love Jesus, for his sake, God will forgive our sins."

"How can I love him? Mother has been telling me I must accept him as my
Saviour, but I don't know how. Oh! I wish somebody would tell me! I'm
dying, and I can't find out anything."

"Sallie, listen to me a minute. In my last Sabbath school paper was an
account of a little heathen girl, who felt as you do. She wanted to love
Christ, but she didn't know how to give her heart to him. The
missionaries talked to her and prayed with her, but she only cried the
more. At last one said, 'Jesus never sinned; but you are a great
sinner.'

"'Yes, yes! I understand that.'

"'Well, you have offended God, and he has threatened to punish you; but
now Jesus promises to receive the punishment for you, and for that he
died on the cross.'

"'Oh, yes! yes! yes!' cried the heathen girl. 'I understand now. I must
make a bargain with Jesus. I will give him all my badness, and he will
give me all his goodness. Oh, I see! I see!! I do love him. Oh, how good
he is!'"

Sallie folded her hands on her breast and closed her eyes, though her
lips moved as if she were praying. Presently she said softly, "I
understand now, Hatty; but will Jesus make a bargain with me?"

"Yes, yes, he will; he says so in the Bible."

"Don't stay any longer, Hatty; but come again if Esther will let you.
I'm going to pray now. Shut the door tight."

Hatty walked through the kitchen without speaking. Mrs. Munson had sat
near the door and had heard every word. She asked God to bless his own
truth to her dear, dying daughter.

It was scarcely light the next morning before Abner, Sallie's older
brother, knocked at the door of uncle Oliver's house.

"I've come with a message for Hatty," he explained. "She's happy now,
and sings all the verses she can think of. She wants me to say, she's
made a bargain with Jesus, and she isn't afraid to die."

"Tell her I'll go and see her before school," Hatty answered, her eyes
full of joyful tears.

She did go, but the sick girl was quietly asleep, and, more than this,
the Doctor said her symptoms were a great deal better.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VIII.

THE PEACEFUL DEATH.


IN three days Sallie was out of danger, and from this time she recovered
rapidly. The minister and her Sabbath school teacher visited her often,
but she wondered Hatty did not come. At last, one day when she was able
to sit up, her mother told her Hatty had taken the fever the day she
visited her, and now she was very sick.

"Who will take care of her?" asked Sallie, beginning to cry.

"They sent for her aunt, who has never been near them since their mother
died, and she's there now. She has money, and she says the poor child
shall not want for anything that money will buy."

"Oh, mother! to think that I have killed her! I feel almost sure she
will die. She's so good, I used to tell the girls, she ought to go to
heaven; but it is dreadful that I killed her."

Sallie sobbed so violently that her mother became alarmed; but for some
time she tried in vain to soothe her.

"They'll all blame me. I never shall dare to see uncle Oliver or Esther
again. They can't live without her. Oh, oh dear! I wish she never had
come. Mother, do please go over there quick, and tell them how very
sorry I am. Hatty taught me to love the Saviour, and how can I let her
die?"

To please her child the widow went. Hatty lay in the bedroom adjoining
the sitting-room, which was usually occupied by uncle Oliver. Close by
her side sat Esther, looking pale and wan as if months instead of hours
of racking anxiety had passed over her. Mrs. Foster was preparing some
medicine near the window, while the old man, with a heart almost broken
with sorrow, was cutting up wood at the side of the house farthest from
the chamber.

As the widow entered the room, Hatty turned her eyes to the door and
recognized her.

"Are you in much pain?" she asked, greatly moved.

"Jesus helps me bear it all."

This was said with a gasp.

"She never complains," faltered Esther, with quivering lips.

"Sallie, how is she?" murmured the sick girl.

"Much better, if she were not so distressed about you."

"I am safe with Jesus. He gives me perfect peace."

Her aunt began to weep.

"Don't cry, dear aunty," she said caressingly. "You will come too; you
and Esther, and uncle Oliver. We shall all be there. Mother will be
there, too, for Esther says she used to pray."

She paused for a moment, quite exhausted; but presently looked up with a
smile and added, "I shall see Mr. Munson and tell him about Sallie.
Wont he be glad?"

The widow was quite overcome but tried to control herself.

"Tell him," she said, "that I'm almost through. I'm trying to bear his
loss with patience. Tell him God has been true to his promise: 'As thy
day is so shall thy strength be.' I trust we shall meet soon and never
be parted again."

She stooped silently over the sick child, kissed her, and was going out
when Hatty whispered,--

"Tell Sallie good-bye. It's all peace here," laying her hand on her
heart. "I'm not afraid to trust my Saviour."

Mrs. Foster followed her to the door. "It's a scene I never shall
forget," she said, sobbing. "Such a lesson as that child has taught me.
Oh, if I'd only done my duty, she might have lived for years."

"Jesus loves her and wants her with him," answered Mrs. Munson. "You
know he prayed his Father that those who loved him might be with him
where he is, that they may behold his glory. Think how happy she will
be."

As hours passed on, that room became almost like heaven. An
indescribable expression of peace was stamped on the pale features.
Heaven had indeed come down into her own heart. For hours she lay in a
kind of rapture. Once or twice she sung a part of her favorite hymn,
repeating over and over the lines,

          "No words can express,
           The sweet comfort and peace
           Of a soul in its earliest love."

Through this day and the next the house was thronged with schoolmates
and friends, come to take a last look of one so dear. Matilda and
Cynthia, Ethel and Bill, pressed forward to thank her for the example
she had always set them.

"What shall we do," cried Ethel, sobbing aloud, "when our peace-maker
has gone?"

With a heavenly smile she replied, "You shall be peace-maker. See how
God keeps his promise to me. 'They shall be called the children of God.'

"Ethel," she went on, "you've always been like a real brother to me. For
my sake will you be kind to Esther?"

"Yes, I will."

"And I too," sobbed Bill; "but we shall miss you dreadfully."

"Give your hearts to Jesus, and 'twont be long before we shall meet
again."

The end came at last. Hatty's sufferings were nearly over. She lay
propped up with pillows, her head resting against her aunt's breast.
Esther sat near, holding her hand, which she continually covered with
kisses. Uncle Oliver sat in his arm-chair, at the foot of the bed, his
face shaded with his hands, his breast heaving convulsively.

The minister stood where Hatty's eyes rested on him. He was reading from
the twenty-third Psalm: "The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want....
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil, for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort
me."

"Yes, yes," murmured the white lips. "He is with me. I'm not afraid. He
has pardoned all my sins, and washed me in the fountain filled with
blood; I'm--going to be--with him--forever,--I'm so--so happy!"

She lay so quiet that all feared her soul had fled away; but presently,
with a bright smile, she murmured,--

"I--I'm going now--good-bye--all. He gives me peace--perfect--peace;"
and then fell sweetly asleep in Jesus. "He giveth his beloved sleep,"
repeated the kind minister. "Look at her now! The peace of God which
passeth all understanding dwells in her now and forevermore."

The next Sabbath her body was carried to the church, where a sermon was
preached from her favorite text,--"Blessed are the peace-makers for they
shall be called the children of God."

The clergyman reminded the children of her who had so truly and
earnestly been a peace-maker, and entreated them to follow her example,
that they might have peace in life and triumph in death.

The influence of Hatty was long felt. By her entreaties on her dying
bed, her aunt and uncle Oliver, long estranged, were brought together,
and ever after lived as she would have had them, caring tenderly for
poor Esther, till her own peaceful death, two years later.

My dear little reader, will you not try to be a peace-maker?

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Text spells the contraction "won't" without the apostrophe (wont). This
was retained.

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 62, "peacably" changed to "peaceably" (peaceably with all men)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pearl of Peace, by Madeline Leslie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEARL OF PEACE ***

***** This file should be named 35746.txt or 35746.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/7/4/35746/

Produced by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
