The Project Gutenberg EBook of Our Katie, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Our Katie

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 2, 2011 [EBook #35757]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR KATIE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David E. Brown and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  OUR KATIE.




  PUBLISHED BY THE

  AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY,

  150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK.




  OUR KATIE.


  [Illustration: "She taught us how to live, and--Oh, too high
                 The price of knowledge--taught us how to die."]


Katie was born in Ireland, but at an early age her parents emigrated to
this country and settled in Brooklyn, not a great distance from the Lee
Avenue Sabbath-school. She was one of a family of ten children, of whom
several were older than herself, yet from her earliest childhood she
appeared to be a ruling spirit among them. Naturally quick and apt to
learn, she readily adapted herself to the manners and customs of the new
people she was with, and it was her earnest desire that her family
should do the same.

Katie was not beautiful, nor even pretty, but there was an earnest look
in her large dark eyes, and an expression of frankness in her
countenance. Her amiable disposition endeared her to every one, and the
influence she possessed among both old and young was truly surprising.
At an early age she began to take charge of the younger children; and
here her care was like that of a mother. She was anxious they should
learn habits of order and cleanliness, and she used to offer some little
reward to the one who excelled for a certain length of time in these
virtues.

It is related of Katie, as showing her obliging disposition, that when
at home, it was her custom on every Monday, the general wash-day, to
collect around her all the children of her acquaintance, and amuse and
entertain them, to the intense delight of their grateful mothers; for
the little ones all loved Katie, and would oftentimes yield to her a
more willing obedience than to those better entitled to receive it.

Katie's connection with the Sabbath-school began with its organization,
her name being the tenth enrolled upon the register. And little did the
Secretary think, as he glanced upon the little Irish girl standing so
timidly before him, that beneath that rough exterior was hidden such a
noble spirit as was afterwards manifested--nor that the humble name then
recorded was yet to be known throughout the land, and that its sound was
to bring tears into eyes which never beheld the owner.

From the first, Katie manifested the most absorbing interest in the
school, which continued unabated till her death. The second Sabbath she
brought all her younger brothers and sisters; and during the entire
period of her sojourn here, though the school increased from ten to ten
hundred members, there was not one more regular and punctual in
attendance than they. None were more entirely devoted to the interest of
the school than Katie. It was to her more than meat or drink. No weather
was so inclement as to detain her from any of its meetings. There was no
clothing, however poor and dilapidated, which could not, under Katie's
skilful fingers, be made to assume an appearance of neatness, at least
long enough for her to attend Sabbath-school. Is not here a lesson for
many a richer child who, with every possible advantage, yet seizes upon
the slightest pretext for remaining absent from her class, careless
alike of the blessing she refuses and the pain she causes an anxious
teacher.

Katie was always the first one of her class present, and here her sweet
disposition manifested itself most forcibly. Extremely neat in her own
person, the want of neatness in others annoyed her exceedingly, and that
any one should come to school with soiled clothing, or dirty face and
hands, was to her almost an unpardonable sin; therefore each new arrival
was scrutinized most closely, and the pump near the school-room has
witnessed many and many of her charitable ablutions. She generally
carried a small comb in her pocket, which she never scrupled to use; and
it was often difficult to recognize in the clean-faced, smooth-haired
child who returned with her from one of these cold-water expeditions,
the wretched little object she had "carried out."

Katie was one of our home missionaries, and a more devoted, faithful one
it would be difficult to find. Her ardent love for the Sabbath-school,
and the instruction she there received, made her anxious that others
should share the same blessing. It appeared to be a rule of her life
never to come alone. Much of her spare time was occupied in searching
through the lanes and hovels for those unblessed with religious
influence, and bringing them in to the Sabbath-school. The locality in
which she resided was inhabited mostly by the lower class of Irish
Catholics, who were bitterly opposed to the cause for which she so
unweariedly labored. Yet, although the difficulties she encountered were
neither few nor easily surmounted, she was very successful, and the
numbers which through her means were added to our school were very
large. It was her custom either to call for them herself at their homes,
or else meet them at some place she should appoint, and then with her
little band to start for the school, taking the pump in her way if she
thought it necessary.

She was willing to be placed in any class, or to make any sacrifice the
superintendent required; and the welfare of the school was always
preferred to her own pleasure. No teacher ever had Katie in her charge,
but felt that she was indeed a blessing to the class. Studious and
attentive, she always knew her lessons perfectly, and it was no
uncommon thing for her to repeat several hundred verses from the Bible
and hymn-book at one time.

Her own recitations completed, her attention was next given to the other
members of the class; and if, as was too often the case, there were any
unprepared with lessons, Katie always considered it her especial duty to
assist them as much as possible, finding easy places in the Testament or
short hymns for them to learn. In this way many who would otherwise have
been totally deficient, were enabled to recite a dozen verses before
leaving the room.

Her knowledge of Scripture was, for one so young, truly marvellous.
Every great historical event recorded on those sacred pages she knew by
heart. With the beautiful Psalms of David, the sublime prophecies of
Isaiah, and the solemn, yet mysterious revelations of John, she was
equally familiar; and on being once questioned by a teacher in whose
class she was temporarily placed, where she had learned so much about
the Bible, she replied, "I learned it all in Sabbath-school." She could
commit to memory with great facility; and being very fond of reading, no
spare moment found Katie without a book or paper in her hands.

Katie belonged, for some time, to an Industrial school in Brooklyn; and
the teachers and managers bear a willing testimony to the high character
she maintained while there. Diligent, attentive, and obedient, her
lovely disposition soon rendered her here, as everywhere else, a
universal favorite; while her prompt and efficient aid in all the minor
duties of the school, made her almost invaluable as an assistant.

But it is time to speak of Katie's spiritual life; and short as the
record must necessarily be, it is yet sufficient to prove that "not by
might, nor by power," but by the Holy Spirit alone are we made wise unto
salvation. When she first entered the school, the Bible was to her
almost a sealed book. True, she was not unacquainted with the name of
Christ, nor that he lived and died for sinners; but beyond the knowledge
of this simple fact, she was entirely ignorant. That she was personally
interested in the matter was something she had never dreamed of. This
life alone occupied all her thoughts; and it was left for a
Sabbath-school teacher first to open her eyes to the necessity of a
preparation here for the life beyond; to teach her the true significance
of that sorrowful life which Jesus led on earth, the thorny crown and
the agonizing death on the cross; to show her that it was for her sake
he suffered, for her sins he was numbered with transgressors. It was all
new to Katie, something she had never heard of before; and the interest
she at first manifested became more and more intense, as week after week
some new truth was unfolded, some new idea gained of the great plan of
redemption through a crucified Saviour.

The influence of the Holy Spirit upon Katie's mind was like the rising
dawn, not a sudden change from midnight darkness to the full and glowing
splendor of noonday. She could not, probably, have given a connected
account of her experience, and pointed to the day and hour in which she
first felt the love of Christ, nor to the moment when for the first time
she felt the joy of pardoned sin through his perfect merits. All she
knew was, that whereas once she was blind, now she saw; and she was
content.

One Sabbath a new teacher, in whose class Katie was placed a few months
previous to her death, took occasion privately to address her on the
duty of personal religion, urging upon her the importance of giving her
heart to Jesus while in her youth. With a bright, happy smile, Katie
replied,

"Why, teacher, I do love Jesus now."

"Well, Katie, I am glad; but you must love him with all your heart, so
much that you will be willing to give up all your own wishes for his
sake; to do any thing he requires, however hard it may seem, and to work
for him all your life; and to try and grow more and more like him every
day. This is the kind of love I mean."

Katie humbly replied, "I think I love him a great deal, but I know it is
not enough--it is only a little child's love; but when I get older,
then I will love him as much as grown persons do."

Only a child's love! The teacher's eye grew dim as she remembered the
words of the blessed Master: "Suffer the little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of heaven."

Katie seldom spoke of herself. Deeds, not words, alone spoke of the
change within. Yet her life bore beautiful testimony to the profession
she made. And what better evidence could be required that the love she
professed was genuine, than that her life daily assimilated more and
more to the divine pattern which Christ hath given? He himself said, "By
their fruits shall ye know them."

As may already have been inferred, Katie's parents were extremely poor,
with a large family of small children to support; and the father being
out of employment much of the time, they often wanted even the
necessaries of life, and it was no uncommon thing for Katie to go
supperless and hungry to bed. Therefore, as soon as she was old enough,
she felt that she must do something to assist her parents in supporting
the family. Only one path was open to her, and that was domestic
service. Unhesitatingly she availed herself of it. Whatever her strength
was equal to, Katie was willing and glad to do; and in seeking a place,
she had but one stipulation to make--which was, that she should be
allowed the privilege of going to Sabbath-school on Sunday afternoons.
Some kind friend procured for her a situation in New York, where she
would have light work and high wages. The distance appeared to make no
impression whatever on Katie, as she asked the usual question, "Can I
go to Sunday-school every week?" On being told that it would not be
convenient to have her absent on that day, no persuasions could induce
her to accept it. And it was so in every instance.

Though she began service at the early age of twelve years, yet in no
case did she ever fail of giving satisfaction. Faithful in the discharge
of her duties, active, and obliging, she invariably won the love and
esteem of all who employed her. But she did not change often. With one
family, the first she entered, she remained over eighteen months, and
then only left because sickness demanded her presence at home.

She devoted all the wages she received to the wants of the family, never
retaining a penny for herself. Once when urged by her mother to do so,
Katie replied, "Yes, mother, just as soon as the children get fixed up."
But, poor child, this seemed a hopeless task--there were so many of
them, and little shoes will wear out, little frocks will get torn--so
that Katie never came home without finding it necessary to supply some
article of clothing. Yet she always did it cheerfully, thankful that it
was in her power to assist at any sacrifice. Thus this noble girl toiled
on month after month, looking for and receiving no reward, save in
beholding the happiness she conferred at home, and each day studying how
she might increase it. Surely of her it might well be said, "She hath
done what she could."

About six weeks previous to her death, she obtained a situation in a
highly estimable Christian family in Brooklyn. And here she appeared to
grow more spiritually lovely, more tender and affectionate in her
manner, more thoughtful for the comfort and welfare of others than
ever. The new friends with whom she was living had lately been called to
pass through peculiarly severe affliction. One after another of the
loved voices in that family circle had been hushed and silent in death,
and yet that dread messenger who had summoned them away still lingered.
The husband and father of that stricken band had for a long time been
ill, and all felt that in his death their bereavement was soon to be
complete.

Katie soon endeared herself to every one in the house. She was to them
like an own child, and as such was treated. Seeing her destitute
condition, they at once furnished her with suitable clothing. Katie's
gratitude was unbounded, and the affectionate manner in which she always
spoke of them showed how truly she appreciated their kindness. Her quick
and ready sympathies were awakened as she learned of their repeated
trials, and by every means in her power she endeavored to console them.
A daughter near her own age, whom they had recently lost, appeared to
interest her most deeply. She never wearied talking of her, and would
frequently say to the mother, "I am sure I shall see and know your dear
R---- in heaven." With the invalid father, Katie was a great favorite,
and when she was not otherwise engaged, he loved to have her with him.
Katie would then take her little Bible and read to him the sweet
promises of Jesus, or sing some of the many beautiful hymns she learned
at Sabbath-school. Her simple comments on what she read at once amused
and interested him, while her glowing faith seemed to quicken and
increase his own. Who shall say that the ministrations of this blessed
child were not instrumental in lightening his pathway to the tomb;
dispelling the doubts and fears which cluster round it, and revealing
more distinctly the smiling face of Jesus to him who was so soon to pass
through the dark valley?

A favorite hymn was the following:

  I'm a pilgrim, and I'm a stranger,
    I can tarry, I can tarry but a night;
  Do not detain me, for I am going
  To where the streamlets are ever flowing;
      I'm a pilgrim, and I'm a stranger,
      I can tarry, I can tarry but a night.

  There the sunbeams are ever shining,
    I am longing, I am longing for the sight;
  Within a country unknown and dreary,
  I have been wandering, forlorn and weary.
      I'm a pilgrim, etc.

  Of that country to which I'm going
    My Redeemer, my Redeemer is the light;
  There is no sorrow, nor any sighing,
  Nor any sin there, nor any dying.
      I'm a pilgrim, etc.

[Illustration]

Katie was soon known to every child in the neighborhood. During her
hours of recreation she would gather them all about her on the steps,
and tell them stories from the Bible, talk about heaven, or sing with
them from her hymn-book; and the eager attention which they gave her
proved that they were well entertained. Though living now at a distance
of over three miles from the Sabbath-school, yet she never failed of
being present, generally starting from ten to fifteen minutes earlier
then was otherwise necessary, in order to stop at home and see that the
other children were ready, for Katie would never consent to their being
absent. To be sure, she always had the whole of them to wash and dress,
but that was no hardship, for she was too active to allow of its
consuming much time, and in an incredible short space she would be seen
marching down the street with her little band in regular order, teaching
them a lesson to repeat as she went along; for in this, as in every
thing else, they depended entirely upon Katie.

The last Sabbath Katie ever passed on earth found her in her usual
place; but her sad look attracted the attention of her teacher, who
kindly inquired the cause. With tearful eyes she replied, "The gentleman
I live with is very sick; we do not think he can live till next Sunday."
Her foreboding proved true, and on the following Tuesday he died. Then
it was that Katie seemed almost an angel of mercy. She not only consoled
them with words of hope and encouragement, but endeavored in every way
to relieve them of all care or thought, apart from the one great sorrow
which overshadowed them; while the delicacy and tenderness of feeling
she manifested throughout this whole trying season, would not have
shamed the most fastidious refinement. But at last it was all over. The
precious dust had been laid in its last resting-place, and now the busy
cares of life may not longer be forgotten. The day after the funeral,
thinking that Katie looked pale, and that the air would do her good,
Mrs. D---- sent her out towards evening for a short walk. On her return
it was found that she had been several miles out of the way, to procure
something she knew the physicians had ordered for a little grandchild of
Mrs. D----, and which they had not known where to obtain. Thus was she
to the very last thoughtful and careful for others.

That evening after the rest of the family had retired, Mrs. D---- and
Katie remained in the parlor, speaking of the home their departed friend
had gained. Katie then took a small lamp in her hand, and sat down to
read. It is supposed that, overcome by fatigue, she fell asleep, when
the lamp slid from her grasp to the floor and ignited the bottom of her
dress. In an instant she was enveloped in flames. Mrs. D---- seized a
rug and sprang to her assistance; but Katie, frightened, ran through the
hall into the yard, where she fell. By this time their screams had
brought assistance. The poor child was raised and carried into the
house, but every particle of her light summer clothing had been
consumed, and her body burned in the most shocking manner. Medical aid
was instantly summoned, and every thing possible done to alleviate her
sufferings, but it was at once perceived she could survive only a few
hours. Katie received the intelligence with a smile of joy, and
instantly remarked, "Now I shall indeed see your daughter, very, very
soon." She requested them to send for her own family, and also for her
Superintendent, that she might see them once again before she died, or
rather hear them, for her sight was entirely destroyed. Her mother was
soon beside her, and her agony as she beheld her child was
heart-rending. Katie took her hand, saying, "Dear mother, please don't
cry so; if you do I cannot talk to you, and I have so much to say. See,
I am not crying. Oh, please don't." Katie then told her about the
accident, and how happy she felt in view of death; and said, "Oh,
mother, it is so blessed to feel that I am going to be with Jesus for
ever." Then, with a clear, sweet voice, she sung,

  "My heavenly home is bright and fair,
  No pain nor death can enter there;
  Its glittering towers the sun outshine,
  That heavenly mansion shall be mine.
  I'm going home, I'm going home,
  I'm going home, to die no more."

All through those hours of terrible agony, not a complaint, scarcely a
groan, escaped her; but words of prayer and praise were continually upon
her lips. "Jesus is my best, my only friend," she said; "he is close
beside me now, and I know he will not let me perish." Again she sung
this beautiful hymn,

  "Rock of ages, cleft for me,
  Let me hide myself in thee;
  Let the water and the blood,
  From thy side a healing flood,
  Be of sin the double cure,
  Save from wrath and make me pure.

  Could my tears for ever flow,
  Could my zeal no languor know,
  This for sin could not atone;
  Thou must save, and thou alone.
  In my hand no price I bring,
  Simply to thy cross I cling.

  While I draw this fleeting breath,
  When my eyelids close in death,
  When I rise to worlds unknown,
  And behold thee on thy throne,
  Rock of ages, cleft for me,
  Let me hide myself in thee."

When she concluded, there was not a dry eye in the room. Perceiving that
she was sinking rapidly, the physicians ordered stimulants to be
administered; but the moment Katie felt them upon her lips, she turned
away and absolutely refused them.

"Don't you know," she exclaimed, "that I belong to the Band of Hope?"

"But, Katie," urged her friends, "your superintendent would give it to
you himself, were he here now."

"Well, when he comes and says so, then I will take it."

"But, Katie, you may die before he comes, if you don't take a little
now."

"Then I will die," exclaimed the noble girl, "but I won't break my
pledge."

She appeared to appreciate every thing which was done for her, and her
expressions of gratitude were most touching. Several times she said,
"Oh, how I do love everybody, but Jesus best of all;" and then, with
clasped hands, she prayed. And as the words of holy trust fell from her
lips, there was not one present but felt it was "well with the child."

Her mind appeared to dwell much on the Sabbath-school: "I shall never
see it again," she once said, "but Oh, I shall see heaven so soon!" and
then, in a sweet, but feeble voice, she sang two verses of a favorite
hymn:

  "I'm travelling home to heaven above,
    Will you go? will you go?
  To sing the Saviour's dying love,
    Will you go? will you go?

  The crown of life I then shall wear,
    The conqueror's palm my hands shall bear,
  And all the joys of heaven I'll share;
    Will you go? will you go?"

Not a doubt or fear appeared to dim the glory of her faith. The last
hour, so terrible to many, brought to her only the most ineffable joy
and peace.

Fearing that Mr. Johnson her superintendent would not arrive in time,
she left a most affectionate message for him.

She then bade all her friends good-by, thanked them for the care and
attention shown her, and entreated them all to meet her in heaven.
Sinking back, she murmured, in an exhausted tone, "_Dear_, DEAR
Saviour."

Mr. Johnson now entered, but too late, for it was thought Katie was
gone. She lay a few moments longer, silent and motionless; scarcely a
breath came from these parted lips to indicate that she yet lived.
Suddenly collecting all her remaining strength, with uplifted hand, she
exclaimed, in a glad, exultant voice, "Oh death, where is thy sting? Oh
grave, where is thy victory?" The raised hand slowly drooped upon her
bosom, a few fluttering breaths, and Katie was ours no longer.

A solemn silence filled the chamber, unbroken by even a single sob. It
was a season never to be forgotten by the few who stood round that lowly
couch. What, Oh what but the religion of Jesus could have stood the test
of that awful hour? What but his infinite love could have enabled her to
endure such terrible sufferings--to go singing into the swelling waves
of Jordan, and even as its billows closed over her, to send back the
triumphant cry, "Oh death, where is thy sting? Oh grave, where is thy
victory?"




Transcriber's Notes:


  Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.

  Obvious errors in spelling and hyphenation have been corrected
  from the original:

      Page 20: eomments correct to comments
      Page 29: wont corrected to won't

  Punctuation has been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Our Katie, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR KATIE ***

***** This file should be named 35757.txt or 35757.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/7/5/35757/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David E. Brown and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
