The Project Gutenberg EBook of Letter to the Right Honourable Lord
Viscount Melbourne on the Cause of the Higher Average Price of Grain in Britain than on the the Continent, by George Grant Suttie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Letter to the Right Honourable Lord Viscount Melbourne on the Cause of the Higher Average Price of Grain in Britain than on the the Continent

Author: George Grant Suttie

Release Date: April 14, 2011 [EBook #35870]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRICE OF GRAIN ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)







LETTER
TO
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
LORD VISCOUNT MELBOURNE,
ON THE CAUSE OF THE
HIGHER AVERAGE PRICE OF GRAIN
IN
BRITAIN THAN ON THE CONTINENT.

By SIR GEORGE GRANT SUTTIE,
BARONET, OF PRESTON GRANGE.

EDINBURGH:
PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS.
1839.

EDINBURGH:
Printed by Andrew Shortrede, Thistle Lane.




LETTER.


The average price of grain in Britain has, for a long series of years,
been higher than in the neighbouring countries of Europe. It is of the
utmost importance to ascertain the cause or causes of this higher price.
The following appear to be the principal:--1st, Scarcity, the effect of
monopoly; 2d, The higher rate of taxation in this than in the
neighbouring nations; 3d, The higher rate of the real wages of labour in
this than in the other countries of Europe.

If it can be proved, that the first is the only cause of the higher
average price of grain in Britain, there can be no doubt that it is the
interest of every class in the community to have it removed: If the
second cause, the higher rate of taxation in Britain, has the slightest
influence on the price of grain, the question assumes a very different
aspect: And if the third cause, the higher real wages of labour in
Britain, has any connection whatever with the higher average price of
grain in Britain, the question of the Corn Laws would then evidently
connect itself with the best interests of the country. Those who
advocate the abolition of the Corn Laws, assume it to be proved, that
the higher average price of grain in Britain arises from scarcity, the
effect of monopoly: as, therefore, the cause of the higher price of
grain in Britain would be removed by the abolition of the Corn Laws,
they assert that the price here would be brought nearly to a level with
the price on the Continent, and that the evils which they consider
Britain labours under from a scarcity of food would be removed. Now, I
believe it will be admitted, that at no period of the history of Britain
has the average price of grain so far exceeded the price on the
Continent as during the present century; and I think it will also be
admitted, that at no period of the history of Britain, or of any other
nation, has so rapid an increase taken place in the amount of the
population, in the wealth, and, above all, in the amount of taxation
actually levied from the people. The state of the case is this: It is
asserted, that, for the last thirty-eight years, the inhabitants of
Britain have been labouring under the evil effects of a scarcity of
food, as proved by the higher average price of grain in Britain, when
compared with the price on the Continent. During the same period, the
population has increased in a greater degree than during any former
period; and the wealth of the country has increased to such an extent as
to excite the wonder and envy of the world; and the substantial nature
of this wealth is proved by the amount of the revenue raised from it by
taxation, greatly exceeding the revenue of any other country. This view
of the question must, I think, dispose any dispassionate person to
doubt, that an absolute scarcity of food for the last thirty-eight years
in Britain has been the sole cause of the higher average price of grain
during that period. In order to prove that a certain effect is produced
by a given cause, it is desirable to shew, that the same effect could
not be produced by any other cause; and this naturally leads me to
consider how far the higher average price of grain in Britain may arise
from the other two causes. I think it is admitted, even by those who
advocate the abolition of the Corn Laws, that the price of grain is
influenced by taxation in the same way, but only to the same extent, as
the price of manufactures. They admit that the wages of the labourers
must be increased in proportion to the increase by taxation on the price
of commodities consumed by them; and the great leading cause of
complaint at the present moment on the part of the abolitionists and
manufacturers, is, that in all articles requiring much manual labour,
Britain is at present, and must continue to be, undersold in future by
the cheaper labour of the Continent. Now, it will not be denied, that
manual labour enters to an infinitely greater extent into the production
of food than into the production of any other manufacture. If, therefore
the manufacturers complain, with justice, that the higher rate of
taxation, by raising wages, prevents them from competing with
continental manufacturers, the same argument applies to the
agriculturist, only with infinitely greater force, in proportion to the
trifling assistance which machinery has as yet afforded to manual labour
in the production of food. The whole population of Britain would not be
able to do for the manufacturers in a year what the steam engine does
for them in a day; but coal, the food, or moving power of the steam
engine is absolutely cheaper in Britain than in any country in the
world. If it is admitted that the higher rate of taxation has any
influence whatever in raising or maintaining the price of grain in this
country, it must also be admitted, that some degree of protection is
just and necessary. With respect to the higher real wages of labour, if
there should appear the slightest ground for thinking that a higher rate
of real wages has any tendency to raise or maintain the average price of
grain in Britain above the average price of the Continent, any attempt
to reduce that price by enabling foreign grain to supplant that of
British growth in the home market, must be deprecated as an experiment
of the most dangerous nature for the labouring classes of the community.
I am aware that I am not entitled to assume, that the real wages of
Britain are higher than the real wages of the Continent. Those who
advocate abolition of the Corn Laws, point unceasingly to the difference
in price between the principal continental markets, such as Hamburgh,
Danzig, Berlin, and this country. I might, in the same way, point to the
wages in Britain as being at least four times the wages of these
countries; but neither would be a fair mode of arriving at the true
state of the case. Divide the quarter of wheat, at the average price of
each country, by the wages of each country, that will give the real
wages of each. Fortunately, Mr Jacob's report on the Corn Trade affords
the most satisfactory means for instituting a comparison both as to the
price of grain and the rate of real wages _in Britain and in those
countries_. From his report it appears that the average price of the
quarter of wheat for five years, ending with 1824, was 27s. in Prussia.
The average price of Britain was, for the same period, 55s. The wages of
Prussia are stated to be 2s. 6d. per week, and of Britain, 10s. per
week. The real wages, therefore, the quantity of wheat the labourers
could purchase, was double in Britain what it was in Prussia. In a
national point of view, labour is the true standard of value; if it is
admitted that labour in Britain exchanges for a greater quantity of
grain than it does in Prussia, it follows that grain is cheaper in
Britain.

I shall now advert to what may almost be termed a fourth cause for the
higher average price of grain in Britain--the cultivation of poor land.
This the abolitionists maintain to be the necessary and natural
consequence of monopoly. It would be an arduous task to enumerate all
the pamphlets that have been written to prove the immense extent of poor
lands at present cultivated in Britain, that must be thrown out of
cultivation, in order to supply the labouring population with cheaper
bread. It must be borne in mind that Britain, for the last thirty-eight
years, has been on a starving system, as proved by the higher average
price of grain during that period. The abolitionists being, however, a
little startled at the fact, that a people in a state of starvation, as
compared with Prussia or Poland, should have increased in population, in
wealth, and in the ability to bear taxation, call to their aid the
theory of the cultivation of poor lands. They say the people have not
been absolutely starved, but their food has been raised on poor land by
an immense and unnecessary expenditure of labour, and their infallible
remedy is to throw these poor lands, amounting to a half, a third, or a
fourth of the soils of Britain, according to the theory of the different
writers, out of cultivation. Import, they say, the cheap grain, the
produce of the fertile soils of Prussia and Poland, which being cheaper
must be the produce of much less labour. Though volumes have been
written to prove the evil effects of cultivating the poor soils of
Britain, no one has yet, that I am aware of, devoted a single sentence
to prove the fact. It is much easier to take the fact for granted, and
then proceed to argue on it. The only argument I have ever heard adduced
in favour of the theory, that poorer lands are cultivated in Britain
than in Prussia or elsewhere, is, that the average price of grain is
higher; but I never can admit the force of an argument deduced from such
premises as these, that corn is high because poor land is cultivated,
and that poor land is cultivated because corn is high.

I shall now proceed to state a few facts taken from Mr Jacob's report,
which prove the very reverse to be the truth. I may begin by observing,
that to any one who has travelled over the north of Germany or Poland,
any argument to prove that poorer land is cultivated in these countries
than in Britain is superfluous--the general aspect of these countries
being that of a sandy desert. Mr Jacob states, that the land in Prussia
is cultivated by a class of persons in some respects slaves, and, in
most respects, but little removed from that state; and that there is no
class in this country with whom their condition can be compared. He
states, that the average return of wheat, oats, barley, and rye, is four
for one--in Britain the same average is, at least, eight for one. He
states, that the stock of sheep and cattle, in proportion to the
surface, will be at least four times greater in Britain than in Prussia.
In a country such as Britain, maintaining four times the number of
cattle, and giving double the return of grain per acre, it is rather too
much to assume, without even an attempt at inquiry, that an immense
extent of poor and unprofitable land is cultivated. The cultivation of
poorer land in Britain than in other countries, being the key-stone of
the arch on which such a mass of argument rests, it seems most strange
that no attempt should ever have been made to establish the fact. The
higher price of grain may so clearly be produced by other causes besides
monopoly, and the consequent cultivation of poorer land, that the
abolitionists were bound to prove monopoly to be the sole agent. So far
from doing this, many of their own champions admit the force of other
causes, as being most efficient in maintaining the higher averages of
grain in Britain. Colonel Torrance, who, I believe, is considered a high
authority with the abolitionists, states, that if, by taxing our land,
we increase the expense of growing corn at home beyond the expense of
producing it in other countries, our prices will be higher than theirs.
In this opinion I fully agree with Colonel Torrance, though I do as
decidedly differ in an opinion he states immediately preceding that
above quoted, where he asserts that the happiest consequences follow
from leaving importation free. When what he terms artificial sterility
is produced by the pressure of taxation on the land, the Colonel does
not explain, in his elaborate work, how, if the cause of higher price is
taxation, the same amount of taxation is to be paid by the land, when
the value of its produce is reduced from the effects of importation. But
even if we admit that a great reduction in the value of the agricultural
produce in Britain would not make it more difficult to collect the
immense revenue required by this country, still the debt is considered
to press with sufficient weight on the energies of the country as it is.
As a permanent reduction in the value of the agricultural produce of
Britain would give the national creditor the power to purchase a much
larger quantity of it than he now enjoys, to that extent it would
increase the pressure of the debt, by adding most materially to its real
value. In short, the British labourer consumes, or has the power of
consuming, at least double the quantity of wheat that a Prussian or
Polish labourer has. The soil of Britain, in proportion to its
cultivated surface, produces double the quantity of grain, and maintains
four times the number of cattle that is maintained by the land in
Prussia or Poland. Taxation is admitted by all to raise the money price
of grain; and, according to Colonel Torrance, taxation will even produce
artificial sterility in land. The amount of the population engaged in
British agriculture is less in proportion to the amount engaged in
trade and manufactures than in any country in the world, yet this small
proportion of the people of Britain raises a larger supply of food for
the whole population than is enjoyed by any nation of similar magnitude:
the whole population consume, or has the power of consuming, double the
quantity of food that the Poles or Prussians have.

From these facts it is evident that the food of Britain is produced by
much less labour than the food of Poland or Prussia. Indeed, if this was
not the case, how could the immense population engaged in manufactures,
and concentrated in the large cities of the empire, be supported? I
hold, therefore, that I am justified in asserting that the higher rate
of taxation in Britain, and the higher rate of real wages, have a very
powerful influence in maintaining the higher average price of grain in
Britain as estimated in money; that the theory of the cultivation of
poorer land in Britain than in the countries from which it is proposed
we should obtain our supplies of grain, is utterly without foundation in
fact; and that, on the contrary, the agricultural produce of Britain is
the result of less labour than in the neighbouring countries of Europe;
that labour in Britain produces more grain, and also exchanges for more.
It therefore follows, that the mode of introducing foreign corn into
this country ought to be regulated so as not to interfere with the
extension of cultivation in Britain, or to prevent the produce from
increasing, as it has hitherto done, in proportion to the increase of
the population.


EDINBURGH:

Printed by ANDREW SHORTREDE, Thistle Lane.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Letter to the Right Honourable Lord
Viscount Melbourne on the Cause of the Higher Average Price of Grain in Britain than on the the Continent, by George Grant Suttie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRICE OF GRAIN ***

***** This file should be named 35870.txt or 35870.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/8/7/35870/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
