The Project Gutenberg eBook, Sir Noel's Heir, by May Agnes Fleming


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Sir Noel's Heir
       A Novel


Author: May Agnes Fleming



Release Date: April 22, 2011  [eBook #35931]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIR NOEL'S HEIR***


E-text prepared by Robert Cicconetti, Mary Meehan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Early Canadiana Online
(http://www.canadiana.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Early Canadiana Online. See
      http://www.canadiana.org/ECO/ItemRecord/17010?id=991eb2932c65376b





SIR NOEL'S HEIR.

A Novel.

by

Mrs. MAY AGNES FLEMING

Author of "Guy Earlscourt's Wife," "A Terrible Secret," "A Wonderful
Woman," Etc.







New York:
The Federal Book Company,
Publishers.




CONTENTS

   CHAPTER I.    SIR NOEL'S DEATH-BED.
   CHAPTER II.   CAPT. EVERARD.
   CHAPTER III.  "LITTLE MAY."
   CHAPTER IV.   MRS. WEYMORE.
   CHAPTER V.    A JOURNEY TO LONDON.
   CHAPTER VI.   GUY.
   CHAPTER VII.  COLONEL JOCYLN.
   CHAPTER VIII. LADY THETFORD'S BALL.
   CHAPTER IX.   GUY LEGARD.
   CHAPTER X.    ASKING IN MARRIAGE.
   CHAPTER XI.   ON THE WEDDING EVE.
   CHAPTER XII.  MRS. WEYMORE'S STORY.
   CHAPTER XIII. "THERE IS MANY A SLIP."
   CHAPTER XIV.  PARTED.
   CHAPTER XV.   AFTER FIVE YEARS.
   CHAPTER XVI.  AT SORRENTO.
   CHAPTER XVII. AT HOME.




SIR NOEL'S HEIR.




CHAPTER I.

SIR NOEL'S DEATH-BED.


The December night had closed in wet and wild around Thetford Towers. It
stood down in the low ground, smothered in trees, a tall, gaunt, hoary
pile of gray stone, all peaks, and gables and stacks of chimneys, and
rook-infested turrets. A queer, massive, old house, built in the days of
James the First, by Sir Hugo Thetford, the first baronet of the name,
and as staunch and strong now as then.

The December day had been overcast and gloomy, but the December night
was stormy and wild. The wind worried and wailed through the tossing
trees with whistling moans and shrieks that were desolately human, and
made me think of the sobbing banshee of Irish legends. Far away the
mighty voice of the stormy sea mingled its hoarse-bass, and the rain
lashed the windows in long, slanting lines. A desolate night and a
desolate scene without; more desolate still within, for on his bed, this
tempestuous winter night, the last of the Thetford baronets lay dying.

Through the driving wind and lashing rain a groom galloped along the
high road to the village at break-neck speed. His errand was to Dr.
Gale, the village surgeon, which gentleman he found just preparing to go
to bed.

"For God's sake, doctor!" cried the man, white as a sheet, "come with me
at once! Sir Noel's killed!"

Dr. Gale, albeit phlegmatic, staggered back, and stared at the speaker
aghast.

"What? Sir Noel killed?"

"We're afraid so, doctor; none of us knows for certain sure, but he lies
there like a dead man. Come quick, for the love of goodness, if you want
to do any service!"

"I'll be with you in five minutes," said the doctor, leaving the room to
order his horse and don his hat and great coat.

Dr. Gale was as good as his word. In less than ten minutes he and the
groom were flying recklessly along to Thetford Tower.

"How did it happen?" asked the doctor, hardly able to speak for the
furious pace at which they were going. "I thought he was at Lady
Stokestone's ball."

"He did go," replied the groom; "leastways he took my lady there; but he
said he had a friend to meet from London at the Royal George to-night,
and he rode back. We don't, none of us, know how it happened; for a
better or surer rider than Sir Noel there ain't in Devonshire; but Diana
must have slipped and threw him. She came galloping in by herself about
half an hour ago all blown; and me and three more set off to look for
Sir Noel. We found him about twenty yards from the gates, lying on his
face in the mud, and as stiff and cold as if he was dead."

"And you brought him home and came for me?"

"Directly, sir. Some wanted to send word to my lady; but Mrs. Hilliard,
she thought how you had best see him first, sir, so's we'd know what
danger he was really in before alarming her ladyship."

"Quite right, William. Let us trust it may not be serious. Had Sir Noel
been--I mean, I suppose he had been dining?"

"Well, doctor," said William, "Arneaud, that's his _valet de chambre_,
you know, said he thought he had taken more wine than was prudent going
to Lady Stokestone's ball, which her ladyship is very particular about
such, you know, sir."

"Ah! that accounts," said the doctor, thoughtfully; "and now William, my
man, don't let's talk any more, for I feel completely blown already."

Ten minutes' sharp riding brought them to the great entrance gates of
Thetford Towers. An old woman came out of a little lodge, built in the
huge masonry, to admit them, and they dashed up the long winding avenue
under the surging oaks and chestnuts. Five minutes more and Dr. Gale was
running up a polished staircase of black, slippery oak, down an equally
wide and black and slippery passage, and into the chamber where Sir Noel
lay.

A grand and stately chamber, lofty, dark and wainscoted, where the wax
candles made luminous clouds in the darkness, and the wood-fire on the
marble hearth failed to give heat. The oak floor was overlaid with
Persian rugs; the windows were draped in green velvet and the chairs
were upholstered in the same. Near the center of the apartment stood the
bed, tall, broad, quaintly carved, curtained in green velvet, and on it,
cold and lifeless, lay the wounded man. Mrs. Hilliard, the housekeeper,
sat beside him, and Arneaud, the Swiss valet, with a frightened face,
stood near the fire.

"Very shocking business this, Mrs. Hilliard," said the doctor, removing
his hat and gloves--"very shocking. How is he? Any signs of
consciousness yet?"

"None whatever, sir," replied the housekeeper, rising. "I am so thankful
you have come. We, none of us, know what to do for him, and it is
dreadful to see him lying there like that."

She moved away, leaving the doctor to his examination. Ten minutes,
fifteen, twenty passed, then Dr. Gale turned to her with a very pale,
grave face.

"It is too late, Mrs. Hilliard. Sir Noel is a dead man!"

"Dead?" repeated Mrs. Hilliard, trembling and holding by a chair. "Oh,
my lady! my lady!"

"I am going to bleed him," said the doctor, "to restore consciousness.
He may last until morning. Send for Lady Thetford at once."

Arneaud started up. Mrs. Hilliard looked at him, wringing her hands.

"Break it gently, Arneaud. Oh, my lady! my dear lady! So young and so
pretty--and only married five months!"

The Swiss valet left the room. Dr. Gale got out his lancet, and desired
Mrs. Hilliard to hold the basin. At first the blood refused to flow--but
presently it came in a little, feeble stream. The closed eyelids
fluttered; there was a restless movement and Sir Noel Thetford opened
his eyes in this mortal life once more. He looked first at the doctor,
grave and pale, then at the housekeeper, sobbing on her knees by the
bed. He was a young man of seven-and-twenty, fair and handsome, as it
was in the nature of the Thetfords to be.

"What is it?" he faintly asked. "What is the matter?"

"You are hurt, Sir Noel," the doctor answered, sadly; "you have been
thrown from your horse. Don't attempt to move--you are not able."

"I remember--I remember," said the young man, a gleam of recollection
lighting up his ghastly face. "Diana slipped, and I was thrown. How long
ago is that?"

"About an hour."

"And I am hurt? Badly."

He fixed his eyes with a powerful lock on the doctor's face, and that
good man shrunk away from the news he must tell.

"Badly?" reiterated the young baronet, in a peremptory tone, that told
all of his nature. "Ah! you won't speak, I see! I am, and I feel--I
feel. Doctor, am I going to die?"

He asked the question with a sudden wildness--a sudden horror of death,
half starting up in bed. Still the doctor did not speak; still Mrs.
Hilliard's suppressed sobs echoed in the stillness of the vast room.

Sir Noel Thetford fell back on his pillow, a shadow as ghastly and awful
as death itself lying on his face. But he was a brave man and the
descendant of a fearless race; and except for one convulsive throe that
shook him from head to foot, nothing told his horror of his sudden fate.
There was a weird pause. Sir Noel lay staring straight at the oaken
wall, his bloodless face awful in its intensity of hidden feeling. Rain
and wind outside rose higher and higher, and beat clamorously at the
windows; and still above them, mighty and terrible, rose the far-off
voice of the ceaseless sea.

The doctor was the first to speak, in hushed and awe-struck tones.

"My dear Sir Noel, the time is short, and I can do little or nothing.
Shall I send for the Rev. Mr. Knight?"

The dying eyes turned upon him with a steady gaze.

"How long have I to live? I want the truth."

"Sir Noel, it is very hard, yet it must be Heaven's will. But a few
hours, I fear."

"So soon?" said the dying man. "I did not think----Send for Lady
Thetford," he cried, wildly, half raising himself again--"send for Lady
Thetford at once!"

"We have sent for her," said the doctor; "she will be here very soon.
But the clergyman, Sir Noel--the clergyman. Shall we not send for him?"

"No!" said Sir Noel, sharply. "What do I want of a clergyman? Leave me,
both of you. Stay, you can give me something, Gale, to keep up my
strength to the last? I shall need it. Now go. I want to see no one but
Lady Thetford."

"My lady has come!" cried Mrs. Hilliard, starting to her feet; and at
the same moment the door was opened by Arneaud, and a lady in a
sparkling ball-dress swept in. She stood for a moment on the threshold,
looking from face to face with a bewildered air.

She was very young--scarcely twenty, and unmistakably beautiful. Taller
than common, willowy and slight, with great, dark eyes, flowing dark
curls, and a colorless olive skin. The darkly handsome face, with pride
in every feature, was blanched now almost to the hue of the dying man's;
but that glittering, bride-like figure, with its misty point-lace and
blazing diamonds, seemed in strange contradiction to the idea of death.

"My lady! my lady!" cried Mrs. Hilliard, with a suppressed sob, moving
near her.

The deep, dark eyes turned upon her for an instant, then wandered back
to the bed; but she never moved.

"Ada," said Sir Noel, faintly, "come here. The rest of you go. I want no
one but my wife."

The graceful figure in its shining robes and jewels, flitted over and
dropped on its knees by his side. The other three quitted the room and
closed the door. Husband and wife were alone with only death to
overhear.

"Ada, my poor girl, only five months a wife--it is very hard on you; but
it seems I must go. I have a great deal to say to you, Ada--that I can't
die without saying. I have been a villain, Ada--the greatest villain on
earth to you."

She had not spoken. She did not speak. She knelt beside him, white and
still, looking and listening with strange calm. There was a sort of
white horror in her face, but very little of the despairing grief one
would naturally look for in the dying man's wife.

"I don't ask you to forgive me, Ada--I have wronged you too deeply for
that; but I loved you so dearly--so dearly! Oh, my God! what a lost and
cruel wretch I have been."

He lay panting and gasping for breath. There was a draught which Dr.
Gale had left standing near, and he made a motion for it. She held it to
his lips, and he drank; her hand was unsteady and spilled it, but still
she never spoke.

"I cannot speak loudly, Ada," he said, in a husky whisper, "my strength
seems to grow less every moment; but I want you to promise me before I
begin my story that you will do what I ask. Promise! promise!"

He grasped her wrist and glared at her almost fiercely.

"Promise!" he reiterated. "Promise! promise!"

"I promise," she said, with white lips.

"May Heaven deal with you, Ada Thetford, as you keep that promise.
Listen now."

The wild night wore on. The cries of the wind in the trees grew louder
and wilder and more desolate. The rain beat and beat against the
curtained glass; the candles grettered and flared; and the wood-fire
flickered and died out.

And still, long after the midnight hour had tolled, Ada, Lady Thetford,
in her lace and silk and jewels, knelt beside her young husband, and
listened to the dark and shameful story he had to tell. She never once
faltered, she never spoke or stirred; but her face was whiter than her
dress, and her great dark eyes dilated with a horror too intense for
words.

The voice of the dying man sank lower and lower--it fell to a dull,
choking whisper at last.

"You have heard all," he said huskily.

"All?"

The word dropped from her lips like ice--the frozen look of blank horror
never left her face.

"And you will keep your promise?"

"Yes."

"God bless you! I can die now! Oh, Ada! I cannot ask you to forgive me;
but I love you so much--so much! Kiss me once, Ada, before I go."

His voice failed even with the words. Lady Thetford bent down and
kissed him, but her lips were as cold and white as his own.

They were the last words Sir Noel Thetford ever spoke. The restless sea
was sullenly ebbing, and the soul of the man was floating away with it.
The gray, chill light of a new day was dawning over the Devonshire
fields, rainy and raw, and with its first pale ray the soul of Noel
Thetford, baronet, left the earth forever.

An hour later, Mrs. Hilliard and Dr. Gale ventured to enter. They had
rapped again and again; but there had been no response, and alarmed they
had come in. Stark and rigid already lay what was mortal of the Lord of
Thetford Towers; and still on her knees, with that frozen look on her
face, knelt his living wife.

"My lady! my lady!" cried Mrs. Hilliard, her tears falling like rain.
"Oh! my dear lady, come away!"

She looked up; then again at the marble form on the bed, and without a
word or cry, slipped back in the old housekeeper's arms in a dead faint.




CHAPTER II.

CAPT. EVERARD.


It was a very grand and stately ceremonial, that funeral procession from
Thetford Towers. A week after that stormy December night they laid Sir
Noel Thetford in the family vault, where generation after generation of
his race slept their last long sleep. The gentry for miles and miles
around were there, and among them came the heir-at-law, the Rev. Horace
Thetford, only an obscure country curate now, but failing male heirs to
Sir Noel, successor to the Thetford estate and fifteen thousand a year.

In a bedchamber, luxurious as wealth can make a room, lay Lady Thetford,
dangerously ill. It was not a brain fever exactly, but something very
like it into which she had fallen, coming out of the death-like swoon.
It was all very sad and shocking--the sudden death of the gay and
handsome young baronet, and the serious illness of his poor wife. The
funeral oration of the Rev. Mr. Knight, rector of St. Gosport, from the
text, "In the midst of life we are in death," was most eloquent and
impressive, and women with tender hearts shed tears, and men listened
with grave, sad faces. It was such a little while--only five short
months--since the wedding-bells had rung, and there had been bonfires
and feasting throughout the village; and Sir Noel, looking so proud and
so happy, had driven up to the illuminated hall with his handsome bride.
Only five months; and now--and now.

The funeral was over and everybody had gone back home--everybody but the
Rev. Horace Thetford, who lingered to see the result of my lady's
illness, and if she died, to take possession of his estate. It was
unutterably dismal in the dark, hushed old house, with Sir Noel's ghost
seeming to haunt every room--very dismal and ghastly this waiting to
step into dead people's shoes. But then there was fifteen thousand a
year, and the finest place in Devonshire; and the Rev. Horace would have
faced a whole regiment of ghosts and lived in a vault for that.

But Lady Thetford did not die. Slowly but surely, the fever that had
worn her to a shadow left her; and by-and-bye, when the early primroses
peeped through the first blackened earth, she was able to come
down-stairs--to come down feeble and frail and weak, colorless as death
and as silent and cold.

The Rev. Horace went back to Yorkshire, yet not entirely in despair.
Female heirs could not inherit Thetford--he stood a chance yet; and the
widow, not yet twenty, was left alone in the dreary old mansion. People
were very sorry for her, and came to see her, and begged her to be
resigned to her great loss; and Mr. Knight preached endless homilies on
patience, and hope, and submission, and Lady Thetford listened to them
just as if they had been talking Greek. She never spoke of her dead
husband--she shivered at the mention of his name; but that night at his
dying bed had changed her as never woman changed before. From a bright,
ambitious, pleasure-loving girl, she had grown into a silent, haggard,
hopeless woman. All the sunny spring days she sat by the window of her
boudoir, gazing at the misty, boundless sea, pale and mute--dead in
life.

The friends who came to see her, and Mr. Knight, the rector, were a
little puzzled by this abnormal case, but very sorry for the pale young
widow, and disposed to think better of her than ever before. It must
surely have been the vilest slander that she had not cared for her
husband, that she had married him only for his wealth and title; and
that young soldier--that captain of dragoons--must have been a myth. She
might have been engaged to him, of course, before Sir Noel came, that
seemed to be an undisputed fact; and she might have jilted him for a
wealthier lover, that was all a common case. But she must have loved her
husband very dearly, or she never would have been broken-hearted like
this at his loss.

Spring deepened into summer. The June roses in the flower-gardens of the
Thetford were in rosy bloom, and my lady was ill again--very, very ill.
There was an eminent physician down from London, and there was a frail
little mite of babyhood lying among lace and flannel; and the eminent
physician shook his head, and looked portentously grave as he glanced
from the crib to the bed. Whiter than the pillows, whiter than snow,
Ada, Lady Thetford, lay, hovering in the Valley of the Shadow of Death;
that other feeble little life seemed flickering, too--it was so even a
toss up between the great rival powers, Life and Death, that a straw
might have turned the scale either way. So slight being that baby-hold
of gasping breath, that Mr. Knight, in the absence of any higher
authority, and in the unconsciousness of the mother, took it upon
himself to baptize it. So a china bowl was brought, and Mrs. Hilliard
held the bundle of flannel and long white robes, and the child was
named--the name which the mother had said weeks ago it was to be called,
if a boy--Rupert Noel Vandeleur Thetford; for it was a male heir, and
the Rev. Horace's cake was dough.

Days went by, weeks, months, and to the surprise of the eminent
physician neither mother nor child died. Summer waned, winter returned;
and the anniversary of Sir Noel's death came round, and my lady was able
to walk down-stairs, shivering in the warm air under all her wraps. She
had expressed no pleasure or thankfulness in her own safety, or that of
her child. She had asked eagerly if it were a boy or a girl; and hearing
its sex, had turned her face to the wall, and lay for hours and hours
speechless and motionless. Yet it was very dear to her, too, by fits and
starts as it were. She would hold it in her arms half a day, sometimes
covering it with kisses, with jealous, passionate love, crying over it,
and half smothering it with caresses; and then, again, in a fit of
sullen apathy, would resign it to its nurse, and not ask to see it for
hours. It was very strange and inexplicable, her conduct, altogether;
more especially, as with her return to health came no return of
cheerfulness and hope. The dark gloom that overshadowed her life seemed
to settle into a chronic disease, rooted and incurable. She never went
out; she returned no visits; she gave no invitations to those who came
to repeat theirs. Gradually people fell off; they grew tired of that
sullen coldness in which Lady Thetford wrapped herself as in a mantle,
until Mr. Knight and Dr. Gale grew to be almost her only visitors.
"Mariana, in the Moated Grange," never led a more solitary and dreary
existence than the handsome young widow, who dwelt a recluse at Thetford
Towers; for she was very handsome still, of a pale moonlit sort of
beauty, the great, dark eyes, and abundant dark hair, making her fixed
and changeless pallor all the more remarkable.

Months and seasons went by. Summers followed winters, and Lady Thetford
still buried herself alive in the gray old manor--and the little heir
was six years old. A delicate child still, puny and sickly, and petted
and spoiled, and indulged in every childish whim and caprice. His
mother's image and idol--no look of the fair-haired, sanguine, blue-eyed
Thetford sturdiness in his little, pinched, pale face, large, dark eyes,
and crisp, black ringlets. The years had gone by like a slow dream; life
was stagnant enough in St. Gosport, doubly stagnant at Thetford Towers,
whose mistress rarely went abroad beyond her own gates, save when she
took her little son out for an airing in the pony phaeton.

She had taken him out for one of those airings on a July afternoon, when
he had nearly accomplished his seventh year. They had driven seaward
some miles from the manor-house, and Lady Thetford and her little boy
had got out, and were strolling leisurely up and down the hot, white
stands, while the groom waited with the pony-phaeton just within sight.

The long July afternoon wore on. The sun that had blazed all day like a
wheel of fire, dropped lower and lower into the crimson west. The wide
sea shone red with the reflections of the lurid glory in the heavens,
and the numberless waves glittered and flashed as if sown with stars. A
faint, far-off breeze swept over the sea, salt and cold; and the
fishermen's boats danced along with the red sunset glinting on their
sails.

Up and down, slowly and thoughtfully, the lady walked, her eyes fixed on
the wide sea. As the rising breeze met her, she drew the scarlet shawl
she wore over her black silk dress closer around her, and glanced at her
boy. The little fellow was running over the sands, tossing pebbles into
the surf, and hunting for shells; and her eyes left him and wandered
once more to the lurid splendor of that sunset on the sea. It was very
quiet here, with no living thing in sight but themselves; so the lady's
start of astonishment was natural when, turning an abrupt angle in the
path leading to the shore, she saw a man coming toward her over the
sands. A tall, powerful-looking man of thirty, bronzed and handsome, and
with an unmistakably military air, although in plain black clothes. The
lady took a second look, then stood stock still, and gazed like one in a
dream. The man approached, lifted his hat, and stood silent and grave
before her.

"Captain Everard!"

"Yes, Lady Thetford--after eight years--Captain Everard again."

The deep, strong voice suited the bronzed, grave face, and both had a
peculiar power of their own. Lady Thetford, very, very pale, held out
one fair jeweled hand.

"Captain Everard, I am very glad to see you again."

He bent over the little hand a moment, then dropped it, and stood
looking at her silent.

"I thought you were in India," she said, trying to be at ease. "When did
you return?"

"A month ago. My wife is dead. I, too, am widowed, Lady Thetford."

"I am very sorry to hear it," she said, gravely. "Did she die in India?"

"Yes; and I have come home with my little daughter."

"Your daughter! Then she left a child?"

"One. It is on her account I have come. The climate killed her mother. I
had mercy on her daughter, and have brought her home."

"I am sorry for your wife. Why did she remain in India?"

"Because she preferred death to leaving me. She loved me, Lady
Thetford!"

His powerful eyes were on her face--that pale, beautiful face, into
which the blood came for an instant at his words. She looked at him,
then away over the darkening sea.

"And you, my lady--you gained the desire to your heart, wealth, and a
title? Let me hope they have made you a happy woman."

"I am not happy!"

"No? But you have been--you were while Sir Noel lived?"

"My husband was very good to me, Captain Everard. His death was the
greatest misfortune that could have befallen me."

"But you are young, you are free, you are rich, you are beautiful. You
may wear a coronet next time."

His face and glance were so darkly grave, that the covert sneer was
almost hidden. But she felt it.

"I shall never marry again, Captain Everard."

"Never? You surprise me! Six years--nay, seven, a widow, and with
innumerable attractions. Oh, you cannot mean it!"

She made a sudden, passionate gesture--looked at him, then away.

"It is useless--worse than useless, folly, madness, to lift the veil
from the irrevocable past. But don't you think, don't you, Lady
Thetford, that you might have been equally happy if you had married
_me_?"

She made no reply. She stood gazing seaward, cold and still.

"I was madly, insanely, absurdly in love with pretty Ada Vandeleur in
those days, and I think I would have made her a good husband; better,
however--forgive me--than I ever made my poor dead wife. But you were
wise and ambitious, my pretty Ada, and bartered your black eyes and
raven ringlets to a higher bidder. You jilted me in cold blood, poor
love-sick devil that I was, and reigned resplendent as my Lady Thetford.
Ah! you knew how to choose the better part, my pretty Ada!"

"Captain Everard, I am sorry for the past--I have atoned, if suffering
can atone. Have a little pity, and let me alone!"

He stood and looked at her silently, gravely. Then said, in a voice deep
and calm:

"We are both free! Will you marry me now, Ada!"

"I cannot!"

"But I love you--I have always loved you. And you--I used to think you
loved me!"

He was strangely calm and passionless, voice and glance and face. But
Lady Thetford had covered _her_ face, and was sobbing.

"I did--I do--I always have! But I cannot marry you. I will love you all
my life; but don't, _don't_ ask me to be your wife!"

"As you please!" he said, in the same passionless voice. "I think it is
best myself; for the George Everard of to-day is not the George Everard
who loved you eight years ago. We would not be happy--I know that. Ada,
is that your son?"

"Yes."

"I should like to look at him. Here, my little baronet! I want to see
you."

The boy, who had been looking curiously at the stranger, ran up at a
sign from his mother. The tall captain lifted him in his arms and gazed
in his small, thin face, with which his bright tartan plaid contrasted
harshly.

"He hasn't a look of the Thetfords. He is your own son, Ada. My little
baronet, what is your name?"

"Sir Rupert Thetford," answered the child, struggling to get free. "Let
me go--I don't know you!"

The captain set him down with a grim smile; and the boy clung to his
mother's skirts, and eyed the tall stranger askance.

"I want to go home, mamma! I'm tired and hungry."

"Presently, dearest. Run to William, he has cake for you. Captain
Everard, I shall be happy to have you at dinner."

"Thanks; but I must decline. I go back to London to-night. I sail for
India again in a week."

"So soon! I thought you meant to remain."

"Nothing is further from my intentions. I merely brought my little girl
over to provide her a home; that is why I have troubled _you_. Will you
do me this kindness, Lady Thetford?"

"Take your little girl? Oh, most gladly--most willingly!"

"Thanks! Her mother's people are French, and I know little about them;
and, save yourself, I can claim friendship with few in England. She will
be poor; I have settled on her all I am worth--some three hundred a
year; and you, Lady Thetford, you can teach her, when she grows up, to
catch a rich husband."

She took no notice of the taunt; she looked only too happy to render him
this service.

"I am so pleased! She will be such a nice companion for Rupert. How old
is she?"

"Nearly four."

"Is she here?"

"No; she is in London. I will fetch her down in a day or two."

"What do you call her?"

"Mabel--after her mother. Then it is settled, Lady Thetford, I am to
fetch her?"

"I shall be delighted! But won't you dine with me?"

"No. I must catch the evening train. Farewell, Lady Thetford, and many
thanks! In three days I will be here again."

He lifted his hat and walked away. Lady Thetford watched him out of
sight, and then turned slowly, as she heard her little boy calling her
with shrill impatience. The red sunset had faded out; the sea lay gray
and cold under the twilight sky, and the evening breeze was chill.
Changes in sky and sea and land told of coming night; and Lady Thetford,
shivering slightly in the rising wind, hurried away to be driven home.




CHAPTER III.

"LITTLE MAY."


On the evening of the third day after this interview, a fly from the
railway drove up the long, winding avenue leading to the great front
entrance of the Thetford mansion. A bronzed military gentleman, a nurse
and a little girl, occupied the fly, and the gentleman's keen, dark eyes
wandered searchingly around. Swelling meadows, velvety lawns, sloping
terraces, waving trees, bright flower-gardens, quaint old fish-ponds,
sparkling fountains, and a wooded park, with sprightly deer--that was
what he saw, all bathed in the golden halo of the summer sunset. Massive
and grand, the old house reared its gray head, half overgrown with ivy
and climbing roses. Gaudy peacocks strutted on the terraces; a graceful
gazelle flitted out for an instant amongst the trees to look at them and
then fled in afright; and the barking of half a dozen mastiffs greeted
their approach noisily.

"A fine old place," thought Captain Everard. "My pretty Ada might have
done worse. A grand old place for that puny child to inherit. The
staunch old warrior-blood of the Thetfords is sadly adulterated in his
pale veins, I fancy. Well, my little May, and how are you going to like
all this?"

The child, a bright-faced little creature, with great sparkling eyes and
rose-bloom cheeks, was looking in delight at a distant terrace.

"See, papa! See all the pretty peacocks! Look, Ellen," to the nurse,
"three, four, five! Oh, how pretty!"

"Then little May will like to live here, where she can see the pretty
peacocks every day?"

"And all the pretty flowers, and the water, and the little boy--where's
the little boy, papa?"

"In the house--you'll see him presently; but you must be very good,
little May, and not pull his hair, and scratch his face, and poke your
fingers in his eyes, like you used to do with Willie Brandon. Little May
must learn to be good."

Little May put one rosy finger in her mouth, and set her head on one
side like a defiant canary. She was one of the prettiest little fairies
imaginable, with her pale, flaxen curls, and sparkling light-gray eyes,
and apple-blossom complexion; but she was evidently as much spoiled as
little Sir Rupert Thetford himself.

Lady Thetford sat in the long drawing-room, after her solitary dinner,
and little Sir Rupert played with his rocking-horse and a pile of
picture-books in a remote corner. The young widow lay back in the
violet-velvet depths of a carved and gilded _fauteuil_, very simply
dressed in black and crimson, but looking very fair and stately withal.
She was watching her boy with a half smile on her face, when a footman
entered with Captain Everard's card. Lady Thetford looked up eagerly.

"Show Captain Everard up at once."

The footman bowed and disappeared. Five minutes later, and the tall
captain and his little daughter stood before her.

"At last!" said Lady Thetford, rising and holding out her hand to her
old lover, with a smile that reminded him of other days--"at last, when
I was growing tired waiting. And this is your little girl--my little
girl from henceforth? Come here, my pet, and kiss your new mamma."

She bent over the little one, kissing the pink cheeks and rosy lips.

"She is fair and tiny--a very fairy; but she resembles you,
nevertheless, Capt. Everard."

"In temper--yes," said the captain. "You will find her spoiled, and
willful, and cross, and capricious and no end of trouble. Won't she,
May?"

"She will be the better match for Rupert on that account," Lady Thetford
said, smiling, and unfastening little Miss Everard's wraps with her own
fair fingers. "Come here, Rupert, and welcome your new sister."

The young baronet approached, and dutifully kissed little May, who put
up her rose-bud mouth right willingly. Sir Rupert Thetford wasn't tall,
rather undersized, and delicate for his seven years; but he was head and
shoulders over the flaxen-haired fairy, with the bright gray eyes.

"I want a ride on your rocking-horse," cried little May, fraternizing
with him at once; "and oh! what nice picture books and what a lot!"

The children ran off together to their distant corner, and Captain
Everard sat down for the first time.

"You have not dined?" said Lady Thetford. "Allow me to----" her hand was
on the bell, but the captain interposed.

"Many thanks--nothing. We dined at the village; and I leave again by the
seven-fifty train. It is past seven now, so I have but little time to
spare. I fear I am putting you to a great deal of trouble; but May's
nurse insists on being taken back to London to-night."

"It will be of no consequence," replied Lady Thetford, "Rupert's nurse
will take charge of her. I intend to advertise for a nursery governess
in a few days. Rupert's health has always been so extremely delicate,
that he has not even began a pretext of learning yet, and it is quite
time. He grows stronger, I fancy; but Dr. Gale tells me frankly his
constitution is dangerously weak."

She sighed as she spoke, and looked over to where he stood beside little
May, who had mounted the rocking-horse boy-fashion. Sir Rupert was
expostulating.

"You oughtn't to sit that way--ask mamma. You ought to sit side-saddle.
Only boys sit like that."

"I don't care!" retorted Miss Everard, rocking more violently than ever.
"I'll sit whatever way I like! Let me alone!"

Lady Thetford looked at the captain with a smile.

"Her father's daughter, surely! bent on having her own way. What a fairy
it is! and yet such a perfect picture of health."

"Mabel was never ill an hour in her life, I believe," said her father;
"she is not at all too good for this world. I only hope she may not grow
up the torment of your life--she is thoroughly spoiled."

"And I fear if she were not, I should do it. Ah! I expect she will be a
great comfort to me, and a world of good to Rupert. He has never had a
playmate of his own years, and children need children as much as they
need sunshine."

They sat for ten minutes conversing gravely, chiefly on business matters
connected with little May's annuity--not at all as they had conversed
three days before by the seaside. Then, as half-past seven drew near,
the captain arose.

"I must go; I will hardly be in time as it is. Come here, little May,
and bid papa good-bye."

"Let papa come to May," responded his daughter, still rocking. "I can't
get off."

Captain Everard laughed, went over, bent down and kissed her.

"Good-bye, May; don't forget papa, and learn to be a good girl. Good
bye, baronet; try and grow strong and tall. Farewell, Lady Thetford,
with my best thanks."

She held his hand, looking up in his sun-burned face with tears in her
dark eyes.

"We may never meet again, Captain Everard," she said hurriedly. "Tell me
before we part that you forgive me the past."

"Truly, Ada, and for the first time. The service you have rendered me
fully atones. You should have been my child's mother--be a mother to her
now. Good-bye, and God bless you and your boy!"

He stooped over, touched her cheek with his lips reverentially, and then
was gone. Gone forever--never to meet those he left behind this side of
eternity.

Little May bore the loss of papa and nurse with philosophical
indifference--her new playmate sufficed for both. The children took to
one another with the readiness of childhood--Rupert all the more readily
that he had never before had a playmate of his own years. He was
naturally a quiet child, caring more for his picture-books and his
nurse's stories than for tops, or balls, or marbles. But little May
Everard seemed from the first to inspire him with some of her own
superabundant vitality and life. The child was never, for a single
instant, quiet; she was the most restless, the most impetuous, the most
vigorous little creature that can be conceived. Feet and tongue and
hands never were still from morning till night; and the life of Sir
Rupert's nurse, hitherto one of idle ease, became all at once a misery
to her. The little girl was everywhere--everywhere; especially where she
had no business to be; and nurse never knew an easy moment for trotting
after her, and rescuing her from all sorts of perils. She could climb
like a cat, or a goat, and risked her neck about twenty times per diem;
she sailed her shoes in the soup when let in as a treat to dinner, and
washed her hands in her milk-and-water. She became the intimate friend
of the pretty peacocks and the big, good-tempered dogs, with whom, in
utter fearlessness, she rolled about in the grass half the day. She
broke young Rupert's toys, and tore his picture-books and slapped his
face, and pulled his hair, and made herself master of the situation
before she had been twenty-four hours in the house. She was thoroughly
and completely spoiled. What India nurses had left undone, injudicious
petting and flattery on the homeward passage had completed--and her
temper was something appalling. Her shrieks of passion at the slightest
contradiction of her imperial will rang through the house, and rent the
tortured tympanums of all who heard. The little Xantippe would fling
herself flat on the carpet, and literally scream herself black in the
face, until, in dread of apoplexy and sudden death, her frightened
hearers hastened to yield. Of course, one such victory insured all the
rest. As for Sir Rupert, before she had been a week at Thetford Towers,
he dared not call his soul his own. She had partly scalped him on
several occasions, and left the mark of her cat-like nails in his tender
visage: but her venomous power of screeching for hours at will had more
to do with the little baronet's dread of her than anything else. He fled
ingloriously in every battle--running in tears to mamma, and leaving the
field and the trophies of victory triumphantly to Miss Everard. With all
this, when not thwarted--when allowed to smash toys, and dirty her
clothes, and smear her infantile face, and tear pictures, and torment
inoffensive lapdogs; when allowed, in short, to follow "her own sweet
will," little May was as charming a fairy as ever the sun shone on. Her
gleeful laugh made music in the dreary old rooms, such as had never been
heard there for many a day, and her mischievous antics were the delight
of all who did not suffer thereby. The servants petted and indulged her,
and fed her on unwholesome cakes and sweetmeats, and made her worse and
worse every day of her life.

Lady Thetford saw all this with inward apprehension. If her ward was
completely beyond her power of control at four, what would she be a
dozen years hence?

"Her father was right," thought the lady. "I am afraid she _will_ give
me a great deal of trouble. I never saw so headstrong, so utterly
unmanageable a child."

But Lady Thetford was very fond of the fairy despot withal. When her son
came running to her for succor, drowned in tears, his mother took him in
her arms and kissed him and soothed him--but she never punished the
offender. As for Sir Rupert, he might fly ignominiously, but he never
fought back. Little May had all the hair-pulling and face-scratching to
herself.

"I must get a governess," mused Lady Thetford. "I may find one who can
control this little vixen; and it is really time Rupert began his
studies. I shall speak to Mr. Knight about it."

Lady Thetford sent that very day to the rectory her ladyship's
compliments, the servant said, and would Mr. Knight call at his earliest
convenience. Mr. Knight sent in answer to expect him that same evening;
and on his way he fell in with Dr. Gale, going to the manor-house on a
professional visit.

"Little Sir Rupert keeps weakly," he said; "no constitution to speak of.
Not at all like the Thetfords--splendid old stock, the Thetfords, but
run out--run out. Sir Rupert is a Vandeleur, inherits his mother's
constitution--delicate child, very."

"Have you seen Lady Thetford's ward!" inquired the clergyman, smiling;
"no hereditary weakness there, I fancy. I'll answer for the strength of
her lungs, at any rate. The other day she wanted Lady Thetford's watch
for a plaything; she couldn't have it, and down she fell flat on the
floor in what her nurse calls 'one of her tantrums.' You should have
heard her, her shrieks were appalling."

"I have," said the doctor, with emphasis; "she has the temper of the old
demon. If I had anything to do with that child, I should whip her within
an inch of her life--that's all she wants, lots of whipping! The Lord
only knows the future, but I pity her prospective husband!"

"The taming of the shrew," laughed Mr. Knight. "Katherine and Petruchio
over again. For my part, I think Lady Thetford was unwise to undertake
such a charge. With her delicate health it is altogether too much for
her."

The two gentlemen were shown into the library, whilst the servant went
to inform his lady of their arrival. The library had a French window
opening on a sloping lawn, and here chasing butterflies in high glee,
were the two children--the pale, dark-eyed baronet, and the
flaxen-tressed little East Indian.

"Look," said Dr. Gale. "Is Sir Rupert going to be your Petruchio? Who
knows what the future may bring forth--who knows that we do not behold a
future Lady Thetford?"

"She is very pretty," said the rector thoughtfully, "and she may change
with years. Your prophecy may be fulfilled."

The present Lady Thetford entered as he spoke. She had heard the remarks
of both, and there was an unusual pallor and gravity in her face as she
advanced to receive them.

Little Sir Rupert was called in, and May followed, with a butterfly
crushed to death in each fat little hand.

"She kills them as fast as she catches them," said Sir Rupert, ruefully.
"It's cruel, isn't it, mamma?"

Little May, quite unabashed, displayed her dead prizes, and cut short
the doctor's conference by impatiently pulling her play-fellow away.

"Come, Rupert, come," she cried. "I want to catch the black one with the
yellow wings. Stick your tongue out and come."

Sir Rupert displayed his tongue, and submitted his pulse to the doctor,
and let himself be pulled away by May.

"The gray mare in that span is decidedly the better horse," laughed the
doctor. "What a little despot in pinafores it is."

When her visitors had left, Lady Thetford walked to the window and stood
watching the two children racing in the sunshine. It was a pretty sight,
but the lady's face was contracted with pain.

"No, no," she thought. "I hope not--I pray not. Strange! but I never
thought of the possibility before. She will be poor, and Rupert must
marry a rich wife, so that if----"

She paused, with a sort of shudder, then added:

"What will he think, my darling boy, of his father and mother if that
day ever comes?"




CHAPTER IV.

MRS. WEYMORE.


Lady Thetford had settled her business satisfactorily with the rector of
St Gosport.

"Nothing could be more opportune," he said. "I am going to London next
week on business which will detain me upward of a fortnight. I will
immediately advertise for such a person as you want."

"You must understand," said her ladyship, "I do not require a young
girl. I wish a middle-aged person--a widow, for instance, who has had
children of her own. Both Rupert and May are spoiled--May particularly
is perfectly unmanageable. A young girl as governess for her would never
do."

Mr. Knight departed with these instructions and the following week
started for the great metropolis. An advertisement was at once inserted
in the _Times_ newspaper, stating all Lady Thetford's requirements, and
desiring immediate application. Another week later, and Lady Thetford
received the following communication:

     "DEAR LADY THETFORD--I have been fairly besieged with
     applications for the past week--all widows, and all professing
     to be thoroughly competent. Clergyman's widows, doctors'
     widows, officers' widows--all sorts of widows. I never before
     thought so many could apply for one situation. I have chosen
     one in sheer desperation--the widow of a country gentleman in
     distressed circumstances, who, I think, will suit. She is
     eminently respectable in appearance, quiet and lady-like in
     manner, with five years' experience in the nursery-governess
     line, and the highest recommendation from her late employers.
     She has lost a child, she tells me, and from her looks and
     manner altogether, I should judge she was a person conversant
     with misfortune. She will return with me early next week--her
     name is Mrs. Weymore."

Lady Thetford read this letter with a little sigh of relief--some one
else would have the temper and outbreaks of little May to contend with
now. She wrote to Captain Everard that same day, to announce his
daughter's well-being, and inform him that she had found a suitable
governess to take charge of her.

The second day of the ensuing week the rector and the new governess
arrived. A fly from the railway brought her and her luggage to Thetford
Towers late in the afternoon, and she was taken at once to the room that
had been prepared for her, whilst the servant went to inform Lady
Thetford of her arrival.

"Fetch her here at once," said her ladyship, who was alone, as usual, in
the long drawing-room with the children, "I wish to see her."

Ten minutes after the drawing-room door was flung open, and "Mrs.
Weymore, my lady," announced the footman.

Lady Thetford arose to receive her new dependent, who bowed and stood
before her with a somewhat fluttered and embarrassed air. She was quite
young, not older than my lady herself, and eminently good-looking. The
tall, slender figure, clad in widow's weeds, was as symmetrical as Lady
Thetford's own, and the full black dress set off the pearly fairness of
the blonde skin, and the rich abundance of fair hair. Lady Thetford's
brows contracted a little; her fair, subdued, gentle-looking, girlish
young woman, was hardly the strong-minded, middle-aged matron she had
expected to take the nonsense out of obstreperous May Everard.

"Mrs. Weymore, I believe," said Lady Thetford, resuming her
_fauteuil_, "pray be seated. I wished to see you at once, because
I am going out this evening. You have had five years' experience as a
nursery-governess, Mr. Knight tells me."

"Yes, my lady."

There was a little tremor in Mrs. Weymore's low voice, and her blue eyes
shifted and fell under Lady Thetford's steady and somewhat haughty gaze.

"Yet you look young--much younger than I imagined, or wished."

"I am twenty-seven years old, my lady."

That was my lady's own age precisely, but she looked half a dozen years
the elder of the two.

"Are you a native of London?"

"No, my lady, of Berkshire."

"And you have been a widow, how long?"

What ailed Mrs. Weymore? She was all white and trembling--even her
hands, folded and pressed together in her lap, shook in spite of her.

"Eight years and more."

She said it with a sort of sob, hysterically choked. Lady Thetford
looked on surprised, and a trifle displeased. She was a very proud
woman, and certainly wished for no scene with her hired dependents.

"Eight years is a tolerable time," she said, coolly. "You have lost
children?"

"One, my lady."

Again that choked, hysterical sob. My lady vent on pitilessly.

"Is it long ago?"

"When--when I lost its father?"

"Ah! both together? That was rather hard. Well, I hope you understand
the management of children--spoiled ones particularly. Here are the two
you are to take charge of. Rupert--May come here."

The children came over from their corner. Mrs. Weymore drew May toward
her, but Sir Rupert held aloof.

"This is my ward--this is my son. I presume Mr. Knight has told you. If
you can subdue the temper of that child, you will prove yourself,
indeed, a treasure. The east parlor has been fitted up for your use; the
children will take their meals there with you; the room adjoining is to
be the school-room. I have appointed one of the maids to wait on you. I
trust you will find your chamber comfortable."

"Exceedingly so, my lady."

"And the terms proposed by Mr. Knight suit you?"

Mrs. Weymore bowed. Lady Thetford rose to close the interview.

"You must need refreshment and rest after your journey. I will not
detain you longer. To-morrow your duties will commence."

She rang the bell--directed the servant who came to show the governess
to the east parlor and see to her wants, and then to send nurse for the
children. Fifteen minutes after she drove away in the pony-phaeton,
whilst the new governess stood by the window of the east parlor and
watched her vanish in the amber haze of the August sunset.

Lady Thetford's business in St. Gosport detained her a couple of hours.
The big, white, August moon was rising as she drove slowly homeward, and
the nightingales sang its vesper lay in the scented hedge-rows. As she
passed the rectory she saw Mr. Knight leaning over his own gate enjoying
the placid beauty of the summer evening, and Lady Thetford reined in her
ponies to speak to him.

"So happy to see your ladyship! Won't you alight and come in? Mrs.
Knight will be delighted."

"Not this evening, I think. Had you much trouble about my business?"

"I had applicants enough, certainly," laughed the rector. "I had reason
to remember Mr. Weller's immortal advice, 'Beware of widders.' How do
you like your governess?"

"I have hardly had time to form an opinion. She is younger than I could
desire."

"She looks much younger than the age she gives, I know; but that is a
common case. I trust my choice will prove satisfactory--her references
are excellent. Your ladyship has had an interview with her?"

"A very brief one. Her manner struck me unpleasantly--so odd, and shy,
and nervous. I hardly know how to characterize it; but she may be a
paragon of governesses, for all that. Good evening; best regards to Mrs.
Knight. Call soon and see how your _protege_ gets on."

Lady Thetford drove away. As she alighted from the pony-carriage and
ascended the great front steps of the house, she saw the pale governess
still seated at the window of the east parlor, gazing dejectedly out at
the silvery moonlight.

"A most woeful countenance," thought my lady. "There is some deeper
grief than the loss of a husband and child eight years ago, the matter
with that woman. I don't like her."

No, Lady Thetford did not like the meek and submissive looking
governess, but the children and the rest of the household did. Sir
Rupert and little May took to her at once--her gentle voice, her tender
smile seemed to win its way to their capricious favor; and before the
end of the first week she had more influence over them than mother and
nurse together. The subdued and gentle governess soon had the love of
all at Thetford Towers, except its mistress, from Mrs. Hilliard, the
stately housekeeper, down. She was courteous and considerate, so anxious
to avoid giving trouble. Above all, that fixed expression of hopeless
trouble on her sad, pale face, made its way to every heart. She had full
charge of the children now; they took their meals with her, and she had
them in her keeping the best part of the day--an office that was no
sinecure. When they were with their nurse, or my lady, the governess sat
alone in the east parlor, looking out dreamily at the summer landscape,
with her own brooding thoughts.

One evening when she had been at Thetford Towers over a fortnight, Mrs.
Hilliard, coming in, found her sitting dreamily by herself neither
reading nor working. The children were in the drawing-room, and her
duties were over for the day.

"I am afraid you don't make yourself at home here," said the
good-natured housekeeper; "you stay too much alone, and it isn't good
for young people like you."

"I am used to solitude," replied the governess with a smile, that ended
in a sigh, "and I have grown to like it. Will you take a seat?"

"No," said Mrs. Hilliard. "I heard you say the other day you would like
to go over the house; so, as I have a couple of hours leisure, I will
show it to you now."

The governess rose eagerly.

"I have been wanting to see it so much," she said, "but I feared to give
trouble by asking. It is very good of you to think of me, dear Mrs.
Hilliard."

"She isn't much used to people thinking of her," reflected the
housekeeper, "or she wouldn't be so grateful for trifles. Let me see,"
aloud, "you have seen the drawing-room and library, and that is all,
except your own apartments. Well, come this way, I'll show you the old
south wing."

Through the long corridors, up wide, black, slippery staircases, into
vast, unused rooms, where ghostly echoes and darkness had it all to
themselves, Mrs. Hilliard led the governess.

"These apartments have been unused since before the late Sir Noel's
time," said Mrs. Hilliard; "his father kept them full in the hunting
season, and at Christmas time. Since Sir Noel's death, my lady has shut
herself up and received no company, and gone nowhere. She is beginning
to go out more of late than she has done ever since his death."

Mrs. Hilliard was not looking at the governess, or she might have been
surprised at the nervous restlessness and agitation of her manner, as
she listened to these very commonplace remarks.

"Lady Thetford was very much attached to her husband, then?" Mrs.
Weymore said, her voice tremulous.

"Ah! that she was! She must have been, for his death nearly killed her.
It was sudden enough, and shocking enough, goodness knows! I shall never
forget that dreadful night. This is the old banqueting-hall, Mrs.
Weymore, the largest and dreariest room in the house."

Mrs. Weymore, trembling very much, either with cold or that
unaccountable nervousness of hers, hardly looked round at the vast
wilderness of a room.

"You were with the late Sir Noel, then, when he died?"

"Yes, until my lady came. Ah! it was a dreadful thing! He had taken her
to a ball, and riding home his horse threw him. We sent for the doctor
and my lady at once; and when she came, all white and scared like, he
sent us out of the room. He was as calm and sensible as you or me, but
he seemed to have something on his mind. My lady was shut up with him
for about three hours, and then we went in--Dr. Gale and me. I shall
never forget that sad sight. Poor Sir Noel was dead, and she was
kneeling beside him in her ball dress, like somebody turned to stone. I
spoke to her, and she looked up at me, and then fell back in my arms in
a fainting fit. Are you cold, Mrs. Weymore, that you shake so?"

"No--yes--it is this desolate room, I think," the governess answered,
hardly able to speak.

"It _is_ desolate. Come, I'll show you the billiard-room, and then we'll
go up-stairs to the room Sir Noel died in. Everything remains just as it
was--no one has ever slept there since. If you only knew, Mrs. Weymore,
what a sad time it was; but you do know, poor dear! you have lost a
husband yourself!"

The governess flung up her hands before her face with a suppressed cry
so full of anguish that the housekeeper stared at her aghast. Almost as
quickly she recovered herself again.

"Don't mind me," she said, in a choking voice, "I can't help it. You
don't know what I suffered--what I still suffer. Oh, pray, don't mind
me!"

"Certainly not my dear," said Mrs. Hilliard, thinking inwardly the
governess was a very odd person, indeed.

They looked at the billiard-room, where the tables stood, dusty and
disused, and the balls lay idly by.

"I don't know when it will be used again," said Mrs. Hilliard; "perhaps
not until Sir Rupert grows up. There was a time," lowering her voice,
"that I thought he would never live to be as old and strong as he is
now. He was the puniest baby, Mrs. Weymore, you ever looked at--nobody
thought he would live. And that would have been a pity, you know; for
then the Thetford estate would have gone to a distant branch of the
family, as it would, too, if Sir Rupert had been a little girl."

She went on up-stairs to the inhabited part of the building, followed by
Mrs. Weymore, who seemed to grow more and more agitated with every word
the housekeeper said.

"This is Sir Noel's room," said Mrs. Hilliard, in an awe-struck whisper,
as if the dead man still lay there; "no one ever enters here but me."

She unlocked it as she spoke, and went in. Mrs. Weymore followed, with a
face of frightened pallor that struck even the housekeeper.

"Good gracious me! Mrs. Weymore, what is the matter? You are as pale as
a ghost. Are you afraid to enter a room where a person has died?"

Mrs. Weymore's reply was almost inaudible; she stood on the threshold,
pallid, trembling, unaccountably moved. The housekeeper glanced at her
suspiciously.

"Very odd," she thought, "very! The new governess is either the most
nervous person I ever met, or else--no, she can't have known Sir Noel in
his lifetime. Of course not."

They left the chamber after a cursory glance around--Mrs. Weymore never
advancing beyond the threshold. She had not spoken, and that white
pallor made her face ghastly still.

"I'll show you the picture-gallery," said Mrs. Hilliard; "and then, I
believe, you will have seen all that is worth seeing at Thetford
Towers."

She led the way to a long, high-lighted room, wainscoted and antique,
like all the rest, where long rows of dead and gone Thetfords looked
down from the carved walls. There were knights in armor, countesses in
ruffles and powder and lace, bishops in mitre on head and crozier in
hand, and judges in gown and wig. There were ladies in pointed
stomachers and jeweled fans, with the waists of their dresses under
their arms, but all fair and handsome, and unmistakably alike. Last of
all the long array, there was Sir Noel, a fair-haired, handsome youth of
twenty, with a smile on his face and a happy radiance in his blue eyes.
And by his side, dark and haughty and beautiful, was my lady in her
bridal-robes.

"There is not a handsomer face amongst them all than my lady's," said
Mrs. Hilliard, with pride. "You ought to have seen her when Sir Noel
first brought her home; she was the most beautiful creature I ever
looked at. Ah! it was such a pity he was killed. I suppose they'll be
having Sir Rupert's taken next and hung beside her. He don't look much
like the Thetfords; he's his mother over again--a Vandeleur, dark and
still."

If Mrs. Weymore made any reply the housekeeper did not catch it; she was
standing with her face averted, hardly looking at the portraits, and was
the first to leave the picture-gallery.

There were a few more rooms to be seen--a drawing-room suite, now closed
and disused; an ancient library, with a wonderful stained window, and a
vast echoing reception-room. But it was all over at last, and Mrs.
Hilliard, with her keys, trotted cheerfully off; and Mrs. Weymore was
left to solitude and her own thoughts once more.

A strange person, certainly. She locked the door and fell down on her
knees by the bedside, sobbing until her whole form was convulsed.

"Oh! why did I come here? Why did I come here?" came passionately with
the wild storm of sobs. "I might have known how it would be! Nearly nine
years--nine lone, long years, and not to have forgotten yet!"




CHAPTER V.

A JOURNEY TO LONDON.


Very slowly, very monotonously went life at Thetford Towers. The only
noticable change and that my lady went rather more into society, and a
greater number of visitors came to the manor. There had been a
children's party on the occasion of Sir Rupert's eighth birthday, and
Mrs. Weymore had played for the little people to dance; and my lady had
cast off her chronic gloom, had been handsome and happy as of old. There
had been a dinner-party later--an imprecedented event now at Thetford
Towers; and the weeds, worn so long, had been discarded, and in diamonds
and black velvet Lady Ada Thetford had been beautiful, and stately, and
gracious, as a young queen. No one knew the reason of the sudden change,
but they accepted the fact just as they found it, and set it down,
perhaps, to woman's caprice.

So slowly the summer passed: autumn came and went, and it was December,
and the ninth anniversary of Sir Noel's death.

A gloomy day--wet, and wild, and windy. The wind, sweeping over the
angry sea, surged and roared through the skeleton trees; the rain lashed
the windows in rattling gusts; and the leaden sky hung low and frowning
over the drenched and dreary earth. A dismal day--very like that other,
nine years ago, that had been Sir Noel's last.

In Lady Thetford's boudoir a bright-red coal fire blazed. Pale-blue
curtains of satin damask shut out the wintry prospect, and the softest
and richest of foreign carpets hushed every footfall. Before the fire,
on a little table, my lady's breakfast temptingly stood; the silver, old
and quaint; the rare antique porcelain sparkling in the ruddy firelight.
An easy chair, carved and gilded, and cushioned in azure velvet, stood
by the table; and near my lady's plate lay the letters and papers the
morning's mail had brought.

A toy of a clock on the low marble mantle chimed musically ten as my
lady entered. In her dainty morning negligee, with her dark hair
rippling and falling low on her neck, she looked very young, and fair,
and graceful. Behind her came her maid, a blooming English girl, who
took off the cover and poured out my lady's chocolate.

Lady Thetford sank languidly into the azure velvet depths of her
_fautenuil_, and took up her letters. There were three--one a note from
her man of business; one an invitation to a dinner-party; and the third,
a big official-looking document, with a huge seal, and no end of
postmarks. The languid eyes suddenly lighted; the pale cheeks flushed as
she took it eagerly up. It was a letter from India from Capt. Everard.

Lady Thetford sipped her chocolate, and read her letter leisurely, with
her slippered feet on the shining fender. It was a long letter, and she
read it over slowly twice, three times, before she laid it down. She
finished her breakfast, motioned her maid to remove the service, and
lying back in her chair, with her deep, dark eyes fixed dreamily on the
fire, she fell into a reverie of other days far gone. The lover of her
girlhood came back to her from over the sea. He was lying at her feet
once more in the long summer days, under the waving trees of her
girlhood's home. Ah, how happy! how happy she had been in those by-gone
days, before Sir Noel Thetford had come, with his wealth and his title,
to tempt her from her love and truth.

Eleven struck, twelve from the musical clock on the mantle, and still my
lady sat living in the past. Outside the wintry storm raged on; the rain
clamored against the curtained glass, and the wind worried the trees.
With a long sigh my lady awoke from her dream, and mechanically took up
the _Times_ newspaper--the first of the little heap.

"Vain! vain!" she thought, dreamily; "worse than vain those dreams now.
With my own hand I threw back the heart that loved me; of my own free
will I resigned the man I loved. And now the old love, that I thought
would die in the splendor of my new life, is stronger than ever--and it
is nine years too late."

She tried to wrench her thoughts away and fix them on her newspaper. In
vain! her eyes wandered aimlessly over the closely-printed columns--her
mind was in India with Capt. Everard. All at once she started, uttered a
sudden, sharp cry, and grasped the paper with dilated eyes and whitening
cheeks. At the top of a column of "personal" advertisements was one
which her strained eyes literally devoured.

     "If Mr. Vyking, who ten years ago left a male infant in charge
     of Mrs. Martha Brand, wishes to keep that child out of the
     work-house, he will call, within the next five days, at No. 17
     Wadington Street, Lambeth."

Again and again, and again Lady Thetford read this apparently
uninteresting advertisement. Slowly the paper dropped into her lap, and
she sat staring blankly into the fire.

"At last!" she thought, "at last it has come. I fancied all danger was
over--the death, perhaps, had forestalled me; and now, after all these
years, I am summoned to keep my broken promise!"

The hue of death had settled on her face; she sat cold and rigid,
staring with that blank, fixed gaze into the fire. Ceaselessly beat the
rain; wilder grew the December day; steadily the moments wore on, and
still she sat in that fixed trance. The armula clock struck two--the
sound aroused her at last.

"I must!" she said, setting her teeth. "I will! My boy shall not lose
his birthright, come what may!"

She rose and rang the bell--very pale, but icily calm. Her maid answered
the summons.

"Eliza," my lady asked, "at what hour does the afternoon train leave St.
Gosport for London!"

Eliza stared--did not know, but would ascertain. In five minutes she was
back.

"At half-past three, my lady; and another at seven."

Lady Thetford glanced at the clock--it was a quarter past two.

"Tell William to have the carriage at the door at a quarter past three;
and do you pack my dressing case, and the few things I shall need for
two or three days' absence. I am going to London."

Eliza stood for a moment quite petrified. In all the nine years of her
service under my lady, no such order as this had ever been received. To
go to London at a moment's notice--my lady, who rarely went beyond her
own park gates! Turning away, not quite certain that her ears had not
deceived her, my lady's voice arrested her.

"Send Mrs. Weymore to me; and do you lose no time in packing up."

Eliza departed. Mrs. Weymore appeared. My lady had some instructions to
give concerning the children during her absence. Then the governess was
dismissed, and she was again alone.

Through the wind and rain of the wintry storm, Lady Thetford was driven
to the station, in time to catch the three-fifty train to the
metropolis. She went unattended; with no message to any one, only saying
she would be back in three days at the furthest.

In that dull household, where so few events ever disturbed the stagnant
quiet, this sudden journey produced an indescribable sensation. What
could have taken my lady to London at a moment's notice? Some urgent
reason it must have been to force her out of the gloomy seclusion in
which she had buried herself since her husband's death. But, discuss it
as they might, they could come no nearer the heart of the mystery.




CHAPTER VI.

GUY.


The rainy December day closed in a rainier night. Another day dawned on
the world, sunless, and chilly, and overcast still.

It dawned on London in murky, yellow fog, on sloppy, muddy streets--in
gloom and dreariness, and a raw, easterly wind. In the densely populated
streets of the district of Lambeth, where poverty huddled in tall, gaunt
buildings, the dismal light stole murkily and slowly over the crowded,
filthy streets and swarming purlieus.

In a small upper room of a large dilapidated house, this bad December
morning, a painter stood at his easel. The room was bare and cold, and
comfortless in the extreme; the painter was middle-aged, small, brown
and shriveled, and very much out at elbows. The dull, gray light fell
full on his work--no inspiration of genius by any means--only the
portrait, coarsely colored, of a fat, well-to-do butcher's daughter
round the corner. The man was Joseph Legard, scene-painter to one of the
minor city theatres, who eked out his slender income by painting
portraits when he could get them to paint. He was as fond of his art as
any of the great, old masters; but he had only one attribute in common
with those immortals--extreme poverty; for his salary was not large, and
Mr. Legard found it a tight fit, indeed, to "make both ends meet."

So he stood over his work this dull morning, however, in his fireless
room, with a cheerful, brown face, whistling a tune. In the adjoining
room he could hear his wife's voice raised shrilly, and the cries of
half a dozen Legards. He was used to it, and it did not disturb him; and
he painted and whistled cheerily, touching up the butcher's daughter's
snub nose and fat cheeks and double chin, until light footsteps came
running up-stairs, and the door was flung wide by an impetuous hand. A
boy of ten, or thereabouts, came in--a bright-eyed, fair-haired lad,
with a handsome, resolute face, and eyes of cloudless, Saxon blue.

"Ah, Guy!" said the scene-painter, turning round and nodding
good-humoredly. "I've been expecting you! What do you think of Miss
Jenkins?"

The boy looked at the picture with the glance of an embryo connoisseur.

"It's as like her as two peas, Joe; or would be, if her hair was a
little redder, and her nose a little thicker, and the freckles were
plainer. But it looks like her as it is."

"Well, you see, Guy," said the painter, going on with Miss Jenkins's
left eyebrow, "it don't do to make 'em too true--people don't like it;
they pay their money, and they expect to take it out in good looks. And
now, any news this morning, Guy?"

The boy leaned against the window and looked out into the dingy street,
his bright, young face growing gloomy and overcast.

"No," he said, moodily; "there is no news, except that Phil Darking was
drunk last night, and savage as a mad dog this morning--and that's no
news, I'm sure!"

"And nobody's come about the advertisement in the _Times_?"

"No, and never will. It's all humbug what granny says about my belonging
to anybody rich; if I did, they'd have seen after me long ago. Phil says
my mother was a house-maid, and my father a valet--and they were only
too glad to get me off their hands. Vyking was a valet, granny says she
knows; and it's not likely he'll turn up after all these years. I don't
care, I'd rather go to the work-house; I'd rather starve in the streets,
than live another week with Phil Darking."

The blue eyes filled with tears, and he dashed them passionately away.
The painter looked up with a distressed face.

"Has he been beating you again, Guy?"

"It's no matter--he's a brute! Granny and Ellen are sorry, and do what
they can; but that's nothing. I wish I had never been born!"

"It is hard," said the painter, compassionately, "but keep up heart,
Guy; if the worst comes, why you can stop here and take pot-luck with
the rest--not that that's much better than starvation. You can take to
my business shortly, now; and you'll make a better scene-painter than
ever I could. You've got it in you."

"Do you really think so, Joe?" cried the boy, with sparkling eyes. "Do
you? I'd rather be an artist than a king----Halloo!"

He stopped short in surprise, staring out of the window. Legard looked.
Up the dirty street came a handsome cab, and stopped at their own door.
The driver alighted, made some inquiry, then opened the cab-door, and a
lady stepped lightly out on the curb-stone--a lady, tall and stately,
dressed in black and closely veiled.

"Now, who can this visitor be for?" said Legard. "People in this
neighborhood ain't in the habit of having morning calls made on them in
cabs. She's coming up-stairs!"

He held the door open, listening. The lady ascended the first flight of
stairs, stopped on the landing, and inquired of some one for "Mrs.
Martha Brand."

"For granny!" exclaimed the boy. "Joe, I shouldn't wonder if it was some
one about that advertisement, after all!"

"Neither should I," said Legard. "There! she's gone in. You'll be sent
for directly, Guy!"

Yes, the lady had gone in. She had encountered on the landing a sickly
young woman with a baby in her arms, who had stared at the name she
inquired for.

"Mrs. Martha Brand? Why, that's mother! Walk in this way, if you please,
ma'am."

She opened the door, and ushered the veiled lady into a small, close
room, poorly furnished. Over a smouldering fire, mending stockings, sat
an old woman, who, notwithstanding the extreme shabbiness and poverty of
her dress, lifted a pleasant, intelligent old face.

"A lady to see you, mother," said the young woman, hushing her fretful
baby and looking curiously at the veiled face.

But the lady made no attempt to raise the envious screen, not even when
Mrs. Martha Brand got up, dropping a respectful little servant's
courtesy and placing a chair. It was a very thick veil--an impenetrable
shield--and nothing could be discovered of the face behind it but that
it was fixedly pale. She sank into the seat, her face turned to the old
woman behind that sable screen.

"You are Mrs. Brand?"

The voice was refined and patrician. It would have told she was a lady,
even if the rich garments she wore did not.

"Yes, ma'am--your ladyship; Martha Brand."

"And you inserted that advertisement in the _Times_ regarding a child
left in your care ten years ago?"

Mother and daughter started, and stared at the speaker.

"It was addressed to Mr. Vyking, who left the child in your charge, by
which I infer you are not aware that he has left England."

"Left England, has he?" said Mrs. Brand. "More shame for him, then,
never to let me know or leave a farthing to support the boy!"

"I am inclined to believe it was not his fault," said the clear,
patrician voice. "He left England suddenly and against his will, and, I
have reason to think, will never return. But there are others
interested--more interested than he could possibly be--in the child, who
remain, and who are willing to take him off your hands. But first, why
is it you are so anxious, after keeping him all these years, to get rid
of him?"

"Well, you see, your ladyship," replied Martha Brand, "it is not me, nor
likewise Ellen there, who is my daughter. We'd keep the lad and welcome,
and share the last crust we had with him, as we often have--for we're
very poor people; but, you see, Ellen, she's married now, and her
husband never could bear Guy--that's what we call him, your
ladyship--Guy, which it was Mr. Vyking's own orders. Phil Darking, her
husband, never did like him somehow; and when he gets drunk, saving your
ladyship's presence, he beats him most unmercifully. And now we're going
to America--to New York, where Phil's got a brother and work is better,
and he won't fetch Guy. So, your ladyship, I thought I'd try once more
before we deserted him, and put that advertisement in the _Times_, which
I'm very glad I did, if it will fetch the poor lad any friends."

There was a moment's pause; then the lady asked, thoughtfully: "And when
do you leave for New York?"

"The day after to-morrow, ma'am--and a long journey it is for a poor old
body like me."

"Did you live here when Mr. Vyking left the child with you--in this
neighborhood?"

"Not in this neighborhood, nor in London at all, your ladyship. It was
Lowdean, in Berkshire, and my husband was alive at the time. I had just
lost my baby, and the landlady of the hotel recommended me. So he
brought it, and paid me thirty sovereigns, and promised me thirty more
every twelvemonth, and told me to call it Guy Vyking--and that was the
last I ever saw of him."

"And the infant's mother?" said the lady, her voice changing
perceptibly--"do you know anything of her?"

"But very little," said Martha Brand, shaking her head. "I never set
eyes on her, although she was sick at the inn for upward of three weeks.
But Mrs. Vine, the landlady, she saw her twice; and she told me what a
pretty young creeter she was--and a lady, if there ever was a lady yet."

"Then the child was born in Berkshire--how was it?"

"Well, your ladyship, it was an accident, seeing as how the carriage
broke down with Mr. Vyking and the lady, a-driving furious to catch the
last London train. The lady was so hurted that she had to be carried to
the inn, and went quite out of her head, raving and dangerous like. Mr.
Vyking had the landlady to wait upon her until he could telegraph to
London for a nurse, which one came down next day and took charge of her.
The baby wasn't two days old when he brought it to me, and the poor
young mother was dreadful low and out of her head all the time. Mr.
Vyking and the nurse were all that saw her, and the doctor, of course;
but she didn't die, as the doctor thought she would, but got well, and
before she came right to her senses Mr. Vyking paid the doctor and told
him he needn't come back. And then, a little more than a fortnight
after, they took her away, all sly and secret-like, and what they told
her about her poor baby I don't know. I always thought there was
something dreadful wrong about the whole thing."

"And this Mr. Vyking--was he the child's father--the woman's husband?"

Martha Brand looked sharply at the speaker, as if she suspected _she_
could answer that question best herself.

"Nobody knew, but everybody thought who. I've always been of opinion
myself that Guy's father and mother were gentlefolks, and I always shall
be."

"Does the boy know his own story?"

"Yes, your ladyship--all I've told you."

"Where is he? I should like to see him."

Mrs. Brand's daughter, all this time hushing her baby, started up.

"I'll fetch him. He's up-stairs in Legard's, I know."

She left the room and ran up-stairs. The painter, Legard, still was
touching up Miss Jenkins, and the bright-haired boy stood watching the
progress of that work of art.

"Guy! Guy!" she cried breathlessly, "come down-stairs at once. You're
wanted."

"Who wants me, Ellen?"

"A lady, dressed in the most elegant and expensive mourning--a real
lady, Guy; and she has come about that advertisement, and she wants to
see you."

"What is she like, Mrs. Darking?" inquired the painter--"young or old?"

"Young, I should think; but she hides her face behind a thick veil, as
if she didn't want to be known. Come, Guy."

She hurried the lad down-stairs and into their little room. The veiled
lady still sat talking to the old woman, her back to the dim daylight,
and that disguising veil still down. She turned slightly at their
entrance, and looked at the boy through it. Guy stood in the middle of
the floor, his fearless blue eyes fixed on the hidden face. Could he
have seen it he might have started at the grayish pallor which
overspread it at sight of him.

"So like! So like!" the lady was murmuring between her set teeth. "It is
terrible--it is marvelous!"

"This is Guy, your ladyship," said Martha Brand. "I've done what I could
for him for the last ten years, and I'm almost as sorry to part with him
as if he were my own. Is your ladyship going to take him away with you
now?"

"No," said her ladyship, sharply; "I have no such intention. Have you no
neighbor or friend who would be willing to take and bring him up, if
well paid for the trouble? This time the money shall be paid without
fail."

"There's Legard's," cried the boy, eagerly. "I'll go to Legard's,
granny. I'd rather be with Joe than anywhere else."

"It's a neighbor that lives up-stairs," murmured Martha, in explanation.
"He always took to Guy and Guy to him in a way that's quite wonderful.
He's a very decent man, your ladyship--a painter for a theatre; and Guy
takes kindly to the business, and would like to be one himself. If you
don't want to take away the boy, you couldn't leave him in better
hands."

"I am glad to hear it. Can I see the man?"

"I'll fetch him!" cried Guy, and ran out of the room. Two minutes later
came Mr. Legard, paper cap and shirt-sleeves, bowing very low to the
grand, black-robed lady, and only too delighted to strike a bargain. The
lady offered liberally; Mr. Legard closed with the offer at once.

"You will clothe him better, and you will educate him and give him your
name. I wish him to drop that of Vyking. The same amount I give you now
will be sent you this time every year. If you change your residence in
the meantime, or wish to communicate with me on any occurrence of
consequence, you can address Madam Ada, post office, Plymouth."

She rose as she spoke, stately and tall, and motioned Mr. Legard to
withdraw. The painter gathered up the money she laid on the table, and
bowed himself, with a radiant face, out of the room.

"As for you," turning to old Martha, and taking out of her purse a roll
of crisp, Bank of England notes, "I think this will pay you for the
trouble you have had with the boy during the last ten years. No
thanks--you have earned the money."

She moved to the door, made a slight, proud gesture with her gloved hand
in farewell, took a last look at the golden haired, blue eyed, handsome
boy, and was gone. A moment later and her cab rattled out of the murky
street, and the trio were alone staring at one another, and at the bulky
roll of notes.

"I should think it was a dream only for this," murmured old Martha,
looking at the roll with glistening eyes. "A great lady--a great lady,
surely! Guy, I shouldn't wonder if that was your mother."




CHAPTER VII.

COLONEL JOCYLN.


Five miles away from Thetford Towers, where the multitudinous waves
leaped and glistened all day in the sun-light, as if a-glitter with
diamonds, stood Jocyln Hall. An imposing structure of red brick, not yet
one hundred years old, with sloping meadows spreading away into the blue
horizon, and densely wooded plantations gliding down to the wide sea.

Colonel Jocyln, the lord of the boundless meadows and miles of woodland,
where the red deer disported in the green arcades, was absent in India,
and had been for the past nine years. They were an old family, the
Jocylns, as old as any in Devon, and with a pride that bore no
proportion to their purse, until the present Jocyln, had, all at once
become a millionaire. A penniless young lieutenant in a cavalry
regiment, quartered somewhere in Ireland, with a handsome face and
dashing manners, he had captivated, at first sight, a wild, young Irish
heiress of fabulous wealth and beauty. It was a love-match on her
side--nobody knew exactly what it was on his; but they made a moonlight
flitting of it, for the lady's friends were grievously wroth. Lieutenant
Jocyln liked his profession for its own sake, and took his Irish bride
to India, and there an heiress and only child was born to him. The
climate disagreed with the young wife--she sickened and died; but the
young officer and his baby girl remained in India. In the fullness of
time he became Colonel Jocyln; and one day electrified his housekeeper
by a letter announcing his intention of returning to England with his
little daughter Aileen for good.

That same month of December, which took Lady Thetford on that mysterious
London journey, brought this letter from Calcutta. Five months after,
when the May primroses and hyacinths were all abloom in the green
seaside woodlands, Colonel Jocyln and his little daughter came home.

Early on the day succeeding his arrival, Colonel Jocyln rode through the
bright spring sunshine, along the pleasant high road between Jocyln Hall
and Thetford Towers. He had met the late Sir Noel and his bride once or
twice previous to his departure for India; but there had been no
acquaintance sufficiently close to warrant this speedy call.

Lady Thetford, sitting alone in her boudoir, looked in surprise at the
card the servant brought.

"Colonel Jocyln," she said, "I did not even know he had arrived. And to
call so soon--ah! perhaps he fetches me letters from India."

She rose at the thought, her pale cheeks flushing a little with
expectation. Mail after mail had arrived from that distant land,
bringing her no letter from Captain Everard.

Lady Thetford descended at once. She had few callers; but she was always
exquisitely dressed and ready to receive at a moment's notice. Colonel
Jocyln--tall and sallow and soldierly--rose at her entrance.

"Lady Thetford? Ah, yes! Most happy to see your ladyship once more.
Permit me to apologize for this very early call--you will overlook my
haste when you hear my reason."

Lady Thetford held out her white hand.

"Allow me to welcome you back to England, Colonel Jocyln. You have come
for good this time, I hope. And little Aileen is well, I trust?"

"Very well, and very glad to be released from shipboard. I need not ask
for young Sir Rupert--I saw him with his nurse in the park as I rode up.
A fine boy, and like you, my lady."

"Yes, Rupert is like me. And now--how are our mutual friends in India?"

The momentous question she had been longing to ask from the first; but
her well-trained voice spoke it as steadily as though it had been a
question of the weather.

Colonel Jocyln's face clouded, darkened.

"I bring bad news from India, my lady. Captain Everard was a friend of
yours?"

"Yes; he left his little daughter in my charge."

"I know. You have not heard from him lately?"

"No, and I have been rather anxious. Nothing has befallen the captain, I
hope?"

The well-trained voice shook a little despite its admirable training,
and the slender fingers looped and unlooped nervously her watch-chain.

"Yes, Lady Thetford; the very worst that could befall him. George
Everard is dead."

There was a blank pause. Colonel Jocyln looked grave and downcast and
sad.

"He was my friend," he said, in a low voice, "my intimate friend for
many years--a fine fellow and brave as a lion. Many, many nights we have
lain with the stars of India shining on our bivouac whilst he talked to
me of you, of England, of his daughter."

Lady Thetford never spoke, never stirred. She was sitting gazing
steadfastly out of the window at the sparkling sunshine, and Colonel
Jocyln could not see her face.

"He was as glorious a soldier as ever I knew," the colonel went on; "and
he died a soldier's death--shot through the heart. They buried him out
there with military honors, and some of his men cried on his grave like
children."

There was another blank pause. Still Lady Thetford sat with that fixed
gaze on the brilliant May sunshine, moveless as stone.

"It is a sad thing for his poor little girl," the Indian officer said;
"she is fortunate in having such a guardian as you, Lady Thetford."

Lady Thetford awoke from her trance. She had been in a trance, and the
years had slipped backward, and she had been in her far-off girlhood's
home, with George Everard, her handsome, impetuous lover, by her side.
She had loved him then, even when she said no and married another; she
loved him still, and now he was dead--dead! But she turned to her
visitor with a face that told nothing.

"I am so sorry--so very, very sorry. My poor little May! Did Captain
Everard speak of her, of me, before he died?"

"He died instantaneously, my lady. There was no time."

"Ah, no! poor fellow! It is the fortune of war--but it is very sad."

That was all; we may feel inexpressibly, but we can only utter
commonplaces. Lady Thetford was very, very pale, but her pallor told
nothing of the dreary pain at her heart.

"Would you like to see little May? I will send for her."

Little May was sent for and came. A brilliant little fairy as ever,
brightly dressed, with shimmering golden curls and starry eyes. By her
side stood Sir Rupert--the nine-year-old baronet, growing tall very
fast, pale and slender still, and looking at the colonel with his
mother's dark, deep eyes.

Colonel Jocyln held out his hand to the flaxen-haired fairy.

"Come here, little May, and kiss papa's friend. You remember papa, don't
you?"

"Yes," said May, sitting on his knee contentedly. "Oh, yes! When is papa
coming home? He said in mamma's letter he would fetch me lots and lots
of dolls and picture-books. Is he coming home?"

"Not very soon," the colonel said, inexpressibly touched; "but little
May will go to papa some day. You and mamma, I suppose?" smiling at Lady
Thetford.

"Yes," nodded May, "that's mamma, and Rupert's mamma. Oh! I am so sorry
papa isn't coming home soon! Do you know"--looking up in his face with
big, shining, solemn eyes--"I've got a pony, and I can ride lovely; and
his name is Snowdrop, because it's all white; and Rupert's is black, and
_his_ name is Sultan? And I've got a watch; mamma gave it to me last
Christmas; and my doll's name--the big one, you know, that opens its
eyes and says 'mamma' and 'papa'--is Sonora. Have you got any little
girls at home?"

"One, Miss Chatterbox."

"What's her name!"

"Aileen--Aileen Jocyln."

"Is she nice?"

"Very nice, I think."

"Will she come to see me?"

"If you wish it and mamma wishes it."

"Oh, yes! you do, don't you, mamma? How big is your little girl--as big
as me?"

"Bigger, I fancy. She is nine years old."

"Then she's as big as Rupert--_he's_ nine years old. May she fetch her
doll to see Sonora?"

"Certainly--a regiment of dolls, if she wishes."

"Can't she come to-morrow?" asked Rupert. "To-morrow's May's birthday;
May's seven years old to-morrow. Mayn't she come!"

"That must be as mamma says."

"Oh, fetch her!" cried Lady Thetford, "it will be so nice for May and
Rupert. Only I hope little May won't quarrel with her; she does quarrel
with her playmates a good deal, I am sorry to say."

"I won't if she's nice," said May; "it's all their fault. Oh, Rupert!
there's Mrs. Weymore on the lawn, and I want her to come and see the
rabbits. There's five little rabbits this morning, mamma--mayn't I go
and show them to Mrs. Weymore?"

Lady Thetford nodded smiling acquiescence; and away ran little May and
Rupert to show the rabbits to the governess.

Col. Jocyln lingered for half an hour or upward, conversing with his
hostess, and rose to take his leave at last, with the promise of
returning on the morrow with his little daughter, and dining at the
house. As he mounted his horse and rode homeward, "a haunting shape, an
image gay," followed him through the genial May sunshine--Lady Ada
Thetford, fair, and stately and graceful.

"Nine years a widow," he mused. "They say she took her husband's death
very hard--and no wonder, considering how he died; but nine years is a
tolerable time in which to forget. She took the news of Everard's death
very quietly. I don't suppose there was ever anything really in that old
story. How handsome she is, and how graceful!"

He broke off in his musing fit to light a cigar, and see through the
curling smoke dark-eyed Ada, mamma to little Aileen as well as the other
two. He had never thought of wanting a wife before, in all these years
of his widowhood; but the want struck him forcibly now.

"And Aileen wants a mother, and the little baronet a father," he
thought, complacently; "my lady can't do better."

So next day at the earliest possible hour, came back the gallant
colonel, and with him a brown-haired, brown-eyed, quiet-looking little
girl, as tall, every inch, as Sir Rupert. A little embryo patrician,
with pride in her infantile lineaments already, an uplifted poise of the
graceful head, a light, elastic step, and a softly-modulated voice. A
little lady from top to toe, who opened her little brown eyes in wide
wonder at the antics, and gambols, and obstreperousness, generally, of
little May.

There were two or three children from the rectory, and half a dozen from
other families in the neighborhood--and the little birthday feast was
under the charge of Mrs. Weymore, the governess, pale and pretty, and
subdued as of old. They raced through the leafy arcades of the park, and
gamboled in the garden, and had tea in a fairy summer house, to the
music of plashing fountains--and little May was captain of the band.
Even shy, still Aileen Jocyln forgot her youthful dignity, and raced and
laughed with the best.

"It was so nice, papa!" she cried rapturously, riding home in the misty
moonlight. "I never enjoyed myself so well. I like Rupert so
much--better than May, you know; May's so rude and laughs so loud. I've
asked them to come and see me, papa; and May said she would make her
mamma let them come next week. And then I'm going back--I shall always
like to go there."

Col. Jocyln smiled as he listened to his little daughter's prattle.
Perhaps he agreed with her; perhaps he, too, liked to go there. The
dinner-party, at which he and the rector of St. Gosport, and the
rector's wife were the only guests, had been quite as pleasant as the
birthday fete. Very graceful, very fair and stately, had looked the lady
of the manor, presiding at her own dinner-table. How well she would look
at the head of his.

The Indian officer, after that, became a very frequent guest at Thetford
Towers--the children were such a good excuse. Aileen was lonely at home,
and Rupert and May were always glad to have her. So papa drove her over
nearly every day, or else came to fetch the other two to Jocyln Hall.
Lady Thetford was ever most gracious, and the colonel's hopes ran high.

Summer waned. It was October, and Lady Thetford began talking of leaving
St. Gosport for a season; her health was not good, and change of air was
recommended.

"I can leave my children in charge of Mrs. Weymore," she said. "I have
every confidence in her; and she has been with me so long. I think I
shall depart next week; Dr. Gale says I have delayed too long."

Col. Jocyln looked up uneasily. They were sitting alone together,
looking at the red October sunset blazing itself out behind the Devon
hills.

"We shall miss you very much," he said, softly. "I shall miss you."

Something in his tone struck Lady Thetford. She turned her dark eyes
upon him in surprise and sudden alarm. The look had to be answered;
rather embarrassed, and not at all so confident as he thought he would
have been, Col. Jocyln asked Lady Thetford to be his wife.

There was a blank pause. Then,

"I am very sorry, Col. Jocyln, I never thought of this."

He looked at her, pale--alarmed.

"Does that mean no, Lady Thetford?"

"It means no, Col. Jocyln. I have never thought of you save as a friend;
as a friend I still wish to retain you. I will never marry. What I am
to-day I will go to my grave. My boy has my whole heart--there is no
room in it for anyone else. Let us be friends, Col. Jocyln," holding out
her white jeweled hand, "more, no mortal man can ever be to me."




CHAPTER VIII.

LADY THETFORD'S BALL.


Years came and years went, and thirteen passed away. In all these years
with their countless changes, Thetford Towers had been a deserted house.
Comparatively speaking, of course; Mrs. Weymore, the governess, Mrs.
Hilliard, the housekeeper, Mr. Jarvis, the butler, and their minor
satellites, served there still, but its mistress and her youthful son
had been absent. Only little May had remained under Mrs. Weymore's
charge until within the last two years, and then she, too, had gone to
Paris to a finishing school.

Lady Thetford came herself to the Towers to fetch her--the only time in
these thirteen years. She had spent them pleasantly enough, rambling
about the Continent, and in her villa on the Arno, for her health was
frail, and growing daily frailer, and demanded a sunny Southern clime.
The little baronet had gone to Eton, thence to Oxford, passing his
vacation abroad with his mamma--and St. Gosport had seen nothing of
them. Lady Thetford had thought it best, for many reasons, to leave
little May quietly in England during her wanderings. She missed the
child, but she had every confidence in Mrs. Weymore. The old aversion
had entirely worn away, but time had taught her she could trust her
implicitly; and though May might miss "mamma" and Rupert, it was not in
that flighty fairy's nature to take their absence very deeply to heart.

Jocyln Hall was vacated, too. After that refusal of Lady Thetford, Col.
Jocyln had left England, placed his daughter in a school abroad, and
made a tour of the East.

Lady Thetford he had not met until within the last year, when Lady
Thetford and her son, spending the winter in Rome, had encountered Col.
and Miss Jocyln, and they had scarcely parted company since. The
Thetfords were to return early in the spring to take up their abode once
more in the old home, and Col. Jocyln announced his intention of
following their example.

Lady Thetford wrote to Mrs. Weymore, her vice-roy, and to her steward,
issuing her orders for the expected return. Thetford Towers was to be
completely rejuvenated--new furnished, painted and decorated. Landscape
gardeners were set at work in the grounds; all things were to be ready
the following June.

Summer came and brought the absentees--Lady Thetford and her son, Col.
Jocyln and his daughter; and there were bonfires and illuminations, and
feasting of tenantry, and ringing of bells, and general jubilation, that
the heir of Thetford Towers had come to reign at last.

The week following the arrival, Lady Thetford issued invitations over
half the country for a grand ball. Thetford Towers, after over twenty
years of gloom and solitude, was coming out again in the old gayety and
brilliance that had been its normal state before the present heir was
born.

The night of the ball came, and with nearly every one who had been
honored with an invitation, all curious to see the future lord of one of
the noblest domains in broad Devonshire.

Sir Rupert Thetford stood by his mother's side, and met her old friends
for the first time since his boyhood--a slender young man, pale and
dark, and handsome of face with dreamy slumbrous eyes of darkness, and
quiet manners, not at all like his father's fair-haired, bright-eyed,
stalwart Saxon race; the Thetford blood had run out, he was his own
mother's son.

Lady Thetford grown pallid and wan, and wasted in all these years, and
bearing within the seeds of an incurable disease, looked yet fair and
gracious, and stately in her trailing robes and jewels, to-night,
receiving her guests like a queen. It was the triumph of her life, the
desire of her heart, this seeing her son, her idol, reigning in the home
of his fathers, ruler of the broad domain that had owned the Thetfords
lord for more years back than she could count.

"If I could but see her his wife," Lady Thetford thought, "I think I
should have nothing left on earth to desire."

She glanced across the wide room, along a vista of lights, and flitting
forms, and rich dresses, and sparkling jewels, to where a young lady
stood, the center of an animated group--a tall and eminently handsome
girl, with a proud patrician face, and the courtly grace of a young
empress--Aileen Jocyln, heiress of fabulous wealth, possessor of
fabulous beauty, and descendant of a race as noble and as ancient as his
own.

"With her for his wife, come what might in the future, my Rupert would
be safe," the mother thought; "and who knows what a day may bring forth?
Ah! if I dared only speak, but I dare not; it would ruin all. I know my
son."

Yes, Lady Thetford knew her son, understood his character thoroughly,
and was a great deal too wary a conspirator to let him see her cards.
Fate, not she, had thrown the heiress and the baronet constantly
together of late, and Aileen's own beauty and grace was surely
sufficient for the rest. It was the one desire of Lady Thetford's heart;
but she never said to her son, who loved her dearly, and would have done
a great deal to add to her happiness. She left it to fate, and leaving
it, was doing the wisest thing she could possibly do.

It seemed as if her hopes were likely to be realized. Sir Rupert had an
artist's and a Sybarite's love for all things beautiful, and could
appreciate the grand statuesque style of Miss Jocyln's beauty, even as
his mother could not appreciate it. She was like the Pallas Athine, she
was his ideal woman, fair and proud, uplifted and serene, smiling on
all, from the heights of high-and-mightydom, but shining upon them, a
brilliant far-off star, keeping her warmth and sweetness all for him. He
was an indolent, dreamy Sybarite, this pale young baronet, who liked his
rose-leaves unruffled under him, full of artistic tastes and
inspirations, and a great deal too lazy ever to carry them into effect.
He was an artist, and he had a studio where he began fifty gigantic
deeds at once in the way of pictures, and seldom finished one. Nature
had intended him for an artist, not country squire; he cared little for
riding, or hunting, or fishing, or farming, or any of the things wherein
country squires delight; he liked better to lie on the warm grass, with
the summer wind stirring in the trees over his head, and smoke his
Turkish pipe, and dream the lazy hours away. If he had been born a poor
man he might have been a great painter; as it was, he was only an idle,
listless, elegant, languid dreamer, and so likely to remain until the
end of the chapter.

Lady Thetford's ball was a very brilliant affair, and a famous success.
Until far into the gray and dismal dawn, "flute, violin, bassoon," woke
sweet echoes in the once ghostly rooms, so long where silence had
reigned. Half the county had been invited, and half the county were
there; and hosts of pretty, rosy girls, in arcophane and roses, and
sparkling jewelry, baited their dainty traps, and "wove becks and nods,
and wreathed smiles," for the special delectation of the handsome
courtly heir of Thetford Towers.

But the heir of Thetford Towers, with gracious greetings for all, yet
walked through the rose strewn pitfalls all secure, whilst the starry
face of Aileen Jocyln shone on him in its pale, high-bred beauty. He had
not danced much; he had an antipathy to dancing as he had to exertion of
any kind, and presently he stood leaning against a slender white column,
watching her in a state of lazy admiration. He could see quite as
clearly as his mother how eminently proper a marriage with the heiress
of Col. Jocyln would be; he knew by instinct, too, how much she desired
it; and it was easy enough, looking at her in her girlish pride and
beauty, to fancy himself very much in love, and though anything but a
coxcomb, Sir Rupert Thetford was perfectly aware of his own handsome
face and dreamy artist's eyes, and his fifteen thousand a year, and
lengthy pedigree, and had a hazy idea that the handsome Aileen would not
say no when he spoke.

"And I'll speak to-night, by Jove!" thought the young baronet, as near
being enthusiastic as was his nature, as he watched her, the brilliant
center of a brilliant group. "How exquisite she is in her statuesque
grace, my peerless Aileen, the ideal of my dreams. I'll ask her to be my
wife to-night, or that inconceivable idiot, Lord Gilbert Penryhn, will
do it to-morrow."

He sauntered over to the group, not at all insensible to the quick,
bright smile and flitting flush with which Miss Jocyln welcomed him.

"I believe this waltz is mine, Miss Jocyln. Very sorry to break upon
your _tete-a-tete_, Penryhn, but necessity knows no law."

A moment and they were floating down the whirling tide of the dance,
with the wild, melancholy waltz music swelling and sounding, and Miss
Jocyln's perfumed hair breathing fragrance around him, and the starry
face and dark, dewy eyes downcast a little, in a happy tremor. The cold,
still look of fixed pride seemed to melt out of her face, and an
exquisite rosy light came and went in its place, and made her too lovely
to tell; and Sir Rupert saw and understood it all, with a little
complacent thrill of satisfaction.

They floated out of the ball-room into a conservatory of exquisite
blossom, where tropic plants of gorgeous hues, and plashing fountains,
under the white light of alabaster lamps, made a sort of garden of Eden.
There were orange and myrtle trees oppressing the warm air with their
sweetness, and through the open French windows came the soft, misty
moonlight and the saline wind. There they stopped, looking out of the
pale glory of the night, and there Sir Rupert, about to ask the supreme
question of his life, and with his heart beginning to plunge against his
side, opened conversation with the usual brilliancy in such cases.

"You look fatigued, Miss Jocyln. These grand balls are great bores,
after all."

Miss Jocyln laughed frankly. She was of a nature far more impassioned
than his, and she loved him; and she felt thrilling through every nerve
in her body the prescience of what he was going to say; for all that,
being a woman, she had the best of it now.

"I am not at all fatigued," she said; "and I like it. I don't think
balls are bores--like this, I mean; but then, to be sure, my experience
is very limited. How lovely the night is! Look at the moonlight, yonder,
on the sea--a sheet of silvery glory. Does it not recall Sorrento and
the exquisite Sorrentine landscape--that moonlight on the sea? Are you
not inspired, sir artist?"

She lifted a flitting, radiant glance, a luminous smile, and the
star-like face, drooped again--and the white hands took to reckless
breaking off sweet sprays of myrtle.

"My inspiration is nearer," looking down at the drooping face.
"Aileen----" and there he stopped, and the sentence was never destined
to be finished, for a shadow darkened the moonlight, and a figure
flitted in like a spirit and stood before them--a fairy figure, in a
cloud of rosy drapery, with shimmering golden curls and dancing eyes of
turquoise blue.

Aileen Jocyln started back and away from her companion, with a faint,
thrilling cry. Sir Rupert, wondering and annoyed, stood staring; and
still the fairy figure in the rosy gauze stood, like a nymph in a stage
tableau, smiling up in their faces and never speaking. There was a blank
pause, a moment's; then Miss Jocyln made one step forward, doubt,
recognition, delight, all in her face at once.

"It is--it is!" she cried, "May Everard!"

"May Everard!" Sir Rupert echoed--"little May!"

"At your service, _monsieur_! To think you should have forgotten me so
completely in a decade of years. For shame, Sir Rupert Thetford!"

And then she was in Aileen Jocyln's arms, and there was an hiatus filled
up with kisses.

"Oh! what a surprise!" Miss Jocyln cried breathlessly. "Have you dropped
from the skies? I thought you were in France."

May Everard laughed, the calm, bright laugh of thirteen years ago, as
she held up her dimpled cheeks, first one and then the other, to Sir
Rupert.

"Did you? So I was, but I ran away."

"Ran away! From school?"

"Something very like it. Oh! how stupid it was, and I couldn't endure it
any longer; and I am so crammed with knowledge now that if I held any
more I should burst; and so I told them I had to come home; but I was
sent for, which was true, you know, for I felt an inward call; and as
they were glad to be rid of me, they didn't make much opposition or ask
unnecessary questions. And so," folding the fairy hands and nodding her
little ringleted head, "here I am."

"But, good heavens!" cried Sir Rupert, aghast, "you never mean to say,
May, you have come alone?"

"All alone," said May, with another nod. "I'm used to it, you know; did
it last vacation. Came across and spent it with Mrs. Weymore. I don't
mind it the least; don't know what sea-sickness is; and oh! didn't some
of the poor wretches suffer this time! Isn't it fortunate I'm here for
the ball? And, Rupert, good gracious! how you've grown!"

"Thanks. I can't see that you have changed much, Miss Everard. You are
the same curly-headed, saucy fairy I knew thirteen years ago. What does
my lady say to this escapade?"

"Nothing. Eloquent silence best expresses her feelings; and then she
hadn't time to make a scene. Are you going to ask me to dance, Rupert?
because if you are," said Miss Everard, adjusting her bracelet, "you had
better do it at once, as I am going back to the ball-room, and after I
once appear there you will stand no chance amongst the crowd of
competitors. But then, perhaps you belong to Miss Jocyln?"

"Not at all," Miss Jocyln interposed, hastily, and reddening a little;
"I am engaged, and it is time I was back, or my unlucky cavalier will be
at his wit's end to find me."

She swept away with a quicker movement than her wont, and Sir Rupert
laughingly gave his piquant little partner his arm. His notions of
propriety were a good deal shocked; but then it was only May Everard,
and May Everard was one of those exceptionable people who can do pretty
much as they please, and not surprise any one. They went back to the
ball-room, the fairy in pink on the arm of the young baronet, chattering
like a magpie. Miss Jocyln's partner found her and led her off; but Miss
Jocyln was very silent and _distrait_ all the rest of the night, and
watched furtively, but incessantly, the fluttering pink fairy. She had
reigned belle hitherto, but sparkling little May, like an embodied
sunbeam, electrified the rooms, and took the crown and the sceptre by
royal right. Sir Rupert had that one dance, and no more--Miss Everard's
own prophecy was true--the demand for her was such that even the son of
the house stood not the shadow of a chance.

Miss Jocyln held herself aloof from the young baronet for the remaining
hours of the ball. She had known as well as he the words that were on
his lips when May Everard interposed, and her eyes flashed and her dark
cheek flushed dusky red to see how easily he had been deterred from his
purpose. For him, he sought her once or twice in a desultory sort of
way, never noticing that he was purposely avoided, wandering contentedly
back to devote himself to some one else, and in the pauses to watch May
Everard floating--a sunbeam in a rosy cloud--here and there and
everywhere.




CHAPTER IX.

GUY LEGARD.


"He meant to have spoken that night; he would have spoken but for May
Everard. And yet that is two weeks ago, and we have been together since,
and----"

Aileen Jocyln broke off abruptly, and looked out over the far-spreading,
gray sea.

The morning was dull, the leaden sky threatening rain, the wind sighing
fitfully, and the slow, gray sea creeping up the gray sands. Aileen
Jocyln sat as she had sat since breakfast, aimless and dreary, by her
dressing-room window, gazing blankly over the pale landscape, her hair
falling loose and damp over her shoulders, and a novel lying listlessly
in her lap. The book had no interest; her thoughts would stray, in spite
of her, to Thetford Towers.

"She is very pretty," Miss Jocyln thought, "with that pink and white
wax-doll sort of prettiness some people admire. I never thought _he_
could, with his artistic nature; but I suppose I was mistaken. They call
her fascinating; I believe that rather hoidenish manner of hers, and all
those dashing airs, and that 'loud' style of dress and doings, take some
men by storm. I presume I was mistaken in Sir Rupert, I dare say pretty,
penniless May will be Lady Thetford before long."

Miss Jocyln's short upper-lip curled rather scornfully, and she rose up
with a little air of petulance and walked across the room to the
opposite window. It commanded a view of the lawn and a long wooded
drive, and, cantering airily up under the waving trees, she saw the
young lady of whom she had been thinking. The pretty, fleet-footed pony
and his bright little mistress were by no means rare visitors at Jocyln
Hall, and Miss Jocyln was always elaborately civil to Miss Everard. Very
pretty little May looked--all her tinseled curls floating in the breeze,
like a golden banner; the blue eyes more starily radiant than ever, the
dark riding-habit and jaunty hat and plume the most becoming things in
the world. She saw Miss Jocyln at the window, kissed her hand and
resigned Arab to the groom. A minute more and she was saluting Aileen
with effusion.

"You solemn Aileen! to sit and mope here in the house, instead of
improving your health and temper by a breezy canter over the downs.
Don't contradict; I know you were moping. I should be afraid to tell you
how many miles Arab and I have got over this morning. And you never came
to see me yesterday, either. Why was it?"

"I didn't feel inclined," Miss Jocyln answered, truthfully.

"No, you never _do_ feel inclined unless I come and drag you out by
force; you sit in the house and grow yellow and jaundiced over
high-church novels. I declare I never met so many lazy people in all my
life as I have done since I came home. One don't mind mamma, poor thing!
shutting herself up and the sunshine and fresh air of heaven out; but,
for you and Rupert! And, speaking of Rupert," ran on Miss Everard in a
breathless sort of way, "he wanted to commence his great picture of
'Fair Rosamond and Eleanor' yesterday--and how could he when Eleanor
never came? Why didn't you--you promised?"

"I changed my mind, I suppose."

"And broke your word--more shame for you, then! Come now."

"No; thanks. It's going to rain."

"Nothing of the sort; and Rupert is _so_ anxious. He would have come
himself, only my lady is ill to-day with one of her bad headaches, and
asked him to read her to sleep; and, like the good boy that he is in the
main, though shockingly lazy, he obeyed. Do come, Aileen; there's a
dear! Don't be selfish."

Miss Jocyln rose rather abruptly.

"I have no desire to be selfish, Miss Everard. If you will wait ten
minutes whilst I dress, I will accompany you to Thetford Towers."

She rang the bell and swept from the room, stately and uplifted. May
looked after her, fidgeting a little.

"Dear me! I suppose she's offended now at that word 'selfish.' I never
_did_ get on very well with Aileen Jocyln, and I'm afraid I never shall.
I shouldn't wonder if she were jealous."

Miss Everard laughed a little silvery laugh all to herself, and slapped
her kid riding-boot with her pretty toy whip.

"I hope I didn't interrupt a tender declaration that night in the
conservatory, but it looked like it. If I did, I am sure Rupert has had
fifty chances since, and I know he hasn't availed himself of them, or
Aileen would never wear that dissatisfied face. I know she's in love
with _him_, though, to be sure, she would see me impaled with the
greatest pleasure if she only thought I suspected it; but I'm not so
certain about him. He's a great deal too indolent in the first place, to
get up a grand passion for anybody, and I think he's inclined to look
graciously on me--poor little me--in the second. You may spare yourself
the trouble, my dear Sir Rupert; for a gentleman whose chief aim in
existence is to smoke Turkish pipes and lie on the grass and write and
read poetry is not at all the sort of man I mean to bless for life."

The two girls descended to the court-yard, mounted and rode off. Both
rode well, and both looked their best on horseback, and made a
wonderfully pretty picture as they galloped through St. Gosport in
dashing style, bringing the admiring population in a rush to doors and
windows. Perhaps Sir Rupert Thetford thought so, too, as he stood at the
great front entrance to receive them, with a kindling light in his
artist's eyes.

"May said she would fetch you, and May always keeps her word," he said,
as he walked slowly up the sweeping staircase; "besides, Aileen, I am to
have the first sitting for the 'Rosamond and Eleanor' to-day, am I not?
May calls me an idle dreamer, a useless drone in the busy human hive;
so, to vindicate my character and cleave a niche in the temple of fame,
I am going to immortalize myself over this painting."

"You'll never finish it," said May; "it will be like all the rest.
You'll begin on a gigantic scale and with super-human efforts, and
you'll cool down and get sick of it before it is half finished, and it
will go to swell the pile of daubed canvas in your studio now. Don't
tell me! I know you."

"And have the poorest possible opinion of me, Miss Everard?"

"Yes, I have! I have no patience when I think what you might do, what
you might become, and see what you are! If you were not Sir Rupert
Thetford, with a princely income, you might be a great man. As it
is----"

"As it is!" cried the young baronet, trying to laugh and reddening
violently, "I will still be a great man--a modern Murillo. Are you not a
little severe, Miss Everard? Aileen, I believe this is your first visit
to my studio?"

"Yes," said Miss Jocyln, coldly and briefly. She did not like the
conversation, and May Everard's familiar home-truths stung her. To her
he was everything mortal man should be; she was proud, but she was not
ambitious; what right had this penniless little free-speaker to come
between them and talk like this?

May was flitting about like the fairy she was, her head a little on one
side, like a critical canary, her flowing skirt held up, inspecting the
pictures.

"'Jeanne D'Arc before her Judges,' half finished, as usual, and never to
be completed; and weak--very, if it ever _was_ completed. 'Battle of
Bosworth Field,' in flaming colors, all confusion and smoke and red
ochre and rubbish; you did well not to trouble yourself any more with
that. 'Swiss Peasant'--ah! that _is_ pretty. 'Storm at Sea,' just
tolerable. 'Trial of Marie Antoinette.' My dear Rupert, why will you
persist in these figure paintings when you know your forte is landscape?
'An Evening in the Eternal City.' Now, that is what I call an exquisite
little thing! Look at the moon, Aileen, rising over those hill-tops; and
see those trees--you can almost feel the wind that blows! And that
prostrate figure--why, that looks like yourself, Rupert!"

"It _is_ myself."

"And the other, stooping--who is he?"

"The painter of that picture, Miss Everard; yes, the only thing in my
poor studio you see fit to eulogize is not mine. It was done by an
artist friend--an unknown Englishman, who saved my life in Rome three
years ago. Come in, mother mine, and defend your son from the two-edged
sword of May Everard's tongue."

For Lady Thetford, pale and languid, appeared on the threshold, wrapped
in a shawl.

"It's all for his good, mamma. Come here and look at this 'Evening in
the Eternal City.' Rupert has nothing like it in all his collection,
though these are the beginning of many better things. He saved your
life? How was it?"

"Oh! a little affair with brigands; nothing very thrilling, but I should
have been killed or captured all the same, if this Legard had not come
to the rescue. May is right about the picture; he painted well, had come
to Rome to perfect himself in his art. Very fine fellow, Legard."

"Legard!"

It was Lady Thetford who had spoken sharply and suddenly. She had put up
her glass to look at the Italian picture, but dropped it, and faced
abruptly round.

"Yes, Legard. Guy Legard, a young Englishman, about my own age.
By-the-bye, if you saw him, you would be surprised by his singular
resemblance to some of those dead and gone Thetfords hanging over there
in the picture-gallery--fair hair, blue eyes, and the same peculiar cast
of features to a shade. I was rather taken aback, I confess, when I saw
it first. My dear mother----"

It was not a cry Lady Thetford had uttered--it was a kind of wordless
sob. He soon caught her in his arms and held her there, her face the
color of death.

"Get a glass of water, May--she is subject to these attacks. Quick!"

Lady Thetford drank the water, and sunk back in the chair Aileen wheeled
up, her face looking awfully corpse-like in contrast to her dark
garments and dead black hair.

"You should not have left your room," said Sir Rupert, "after your
attack this morning. Perhaps you had better return and lie down. You
look perfectly ghastly."

"No," his mother sat up as she spoke and pushed away the glass, "there
is no necessity for lying down. Don't wear that scared face, May--it was
nothing, I assure you. Go on with what you were saying, Rupert."

"What I was saying? What was it?"

"About this young artist's resemblance to the Thetfords."

"Oh! well, there's no more to say; that is all. He saved my life and he
painted that picture, and we were Damon and Pythias over again during my
stay in Rome. I always _do_ fraternize with those sort of fellows, you
know; and I left him in Rome, and he promised, if he ever returned to
England--which he wasn't so sure of--he would run down to Devonshire to
see me and my painted ancestors, whom he resembles so strongly. That is
all; and now, young ladies, if you will take your places we will
commence on the Rosamond and Eleanor. Mother, sit here by this window if
you want to play propriety, and don't talk."

But Lady Thetford chose to go to her own room, and her son gave her his
arm thither and left her lying back amongst her cushions in front of the
fire. It was always chilly in those great and somewhat gloomy rooms, and
her ladyship was always cold of late. She lay there looking with gloomy
eyes into the ruddy blaze, and holding her hands over her painfully
beating heart.

"It is destiny, I suppose," she thought, bitterly; "let me banish him to
the farthest end of the earth; let me keep him in poverty and obscurity
all his life, and when the day comes that it is written, Guy Legard will
be here. Sooner or later the vow I have broken to Sir Noel Thetford must
be kept; sooner or later Sir Noel's heir will have his own."




CHAPTER X.

ASKING IN MARRIAGE.


A fire burned in Lady Thetford's room, and among piles of silken pillows
my lady, languid and pale, lay, looking into the leaping flame. It was a
hot July morning, the sun blazed like a wheel of fire in a sky without a
cloud, but Lady Thetford was always chilly of late. She drew the crimson
shawl she wore closer around her, and glanced impatiently now and then
at the pretty toy clock on the decorated chimney-piece. The house was
very still; its one disturbing element, Miss Everard, was absent with
Sir Rupert for a morning canter over the sunny Devon hills.

"How long they stay, and these solitary rides are so dangerous! Oh! what
will become of me if it is too late, after all! What shall I do if he
says no?"

There was a quick man's step without--a moment and the door opened, and
Sir Rupert, "booted and spurred" from his ride, was bending over his
mother.

"Louise says you sent for me after I left. What is it, mother--you are
not worse?"

He knelt beside her. Lady Thetford put back the fair brown hair with
tender touch, and gazed in the handsome face so like her own, with eyes
full of unspeakable love.

"My boy! my boy!" she murmured, "my darling Rupert! Oh! it _is_ hard, it
_is_ bitter to have to leave you!"

"Mother!" with a quick look of alarm, "what is it? Are you worse?"

"No worse, Rupert; but no better. My boy, I shall never be better again
in this world."

"Mother----"

"Hush, my Rupert--wait; you know it is true; and but for leaving you I
should be glad to go. My life has not been so happy since your father
died, that I should greatly cling to it."

"But, mother, this won't do; these morbid fancies are worst of all.
Keeping up one's spirits is half the battle."

"I am not morbid; I merely state a fact--a fact which must preface what
is to come. Rupert, I know I am dying, and before we part I want to see
my successor at Thetford Towers."

"My dear mother!" amazedly.

"Rupert, I want to see Aileen Jocyln your wife. No, no; don't interrupt
me, but believe me, I dislike match-making quite as cordially as you do;
but my days on earth are numbered, and I must speak before it is too
late. When we were abroad I thought there never would be occasion; when
we returned home I thought so, too. Rupert, I have ceased to think so
since May Everhard's return."

The young man's face flushed suddenly and hotly, but he made no reply.

"How any man in his senses could possibly prefer May to Aileen, is a
mystery I cannot solve; but then these things puzzle the wisest of us at
times. Mind, my boy, I don't really say you _do_ prefer May--I should be
very unhappy if I thought so. I know--I am certain you love Aileen best;
and I am equally certain she is a thousand times better suited to you.
Then, as a man of honor, you owe it to her. You have paid Miss Jocyln
such attentions as no honorable gentleman should pay any lady, save the
one he means to make his wife."

Lady Thetford's son rose abruptly, and stood leaning against the mantle,
looking into the fire.

"Rupert, tell me truly, if May Everard had not come here, would you not
ere this have asked Aileen to be your wife?"

"Yes--no--I don't know! Mother!" the young man cried, impatiently, "what
has May Everard done that you should treat her like this?"

"Nothing; and I love her dearly, and you know it. But she is not suited
to you--she is not the woman you should marry."

Sir Rupert laughed--a hard strident laugh.

"I think Miss Everard is much of your opinion, my lady. You might have
spared yourself all these fears and perplexities, for the simple reason
that I should have been refused had I asked."

"Rupert?"

"Nay, mother mine, no need to wear that frightened face. I haven't asked
Miss Everard in so many words to marry me, and she hasn't declined with
thanks; but she would if I did. I saw enough to-day of that."

"Then you don't care for Aileen?" with a look of blank consternation.

"I care for her very much, mother; and I haven't owned to being
absolutely in love with our pretty little May. Perhaps I care for one as
much as the other; perhaps I know in my inmost heart she is the one I
should marry. That is, if she will marry me."

"You owe it to her to ask her."

"Do I? Very likely; and it would make you happy, my mother?"

He came and bent over her again, smiling down in her wan, anxious face.

"More happy than anything else in this world, Rupert!"

"Then consider it an accomplished fact. Before the sun sets to-day
Aileen Jocyln shall say yes or no to your son."

He bent and kissed her; then, without waiting for her to speak, wheeled
round and strode out of the apartment.

"There is nothing like striking whilst the iron is hot," said the young
man to himself, with a grim sort of smile, as he ran down-stairs.

Loitering on the lawn, he encountered May Everard, still in her
riding-habit, surrounded by three or four poodle-dogs.

"On the wing again, Rupert? Is it for mamma? She is not worse?"

"No; I am going to Jocyln Hall. Perhaps I shall fetch Aileen back."

May's turquoise blue eyes were lifted with a sudden luminous,
intelligent flash to his face.

"God speed you! You will certainly fetch Aileen back!"

She held out her hand with a smile that told him she knew all as plainly
as he knew it himself.

"You have my best wishes, Rupert, and don't linger; I want to
congratulate Aileen."

Sir Rupert's response to these good wishes was very brief and curt. Miss
Everard watched him mount and ride off, with a mischievous little smile
rippling round her rosy lips.

"My lady has been giving the idol of her existence a caudle
lecture--subject, matrimony," mused Miss Everard, sauntering lazily
along in the midst of her little dogs: "and really it is high time, if
she means to have Aileen for a daughter-in-law, for the heir of Thetford
Towers is rather doubtful that he is not falling in love with me; and
Aileen is dreadfully jealous and disagreeable; and my lady is anxious
and fidgeted to death about it; and--oh-h-h! good gracious!"

Miss Everard stopped with a shrill, feminine shriek. She had loitered
down to the gates, where a young man stood talking to the lodge-keeper,
with a big Newfoundland dog gamboling ponderously about him. The big
Newfoundland made an instant dash into Miss Everard's guard of honor,
with one deep, bass bark, like distant thunder, and which effectually
drowned the yelps of the poodles. May flew to the rescue, seizing the
Newfoundland's collar and pulling him back with all the might of two
little white hands.

"You big, horrid brute!" cried May, with flashing eyes, "how dare you!
Call off your dog, sir, this instant! Don't you see how he is
frightening mine!"

She turned imperiously to the Newfoundland's master, the bright eyes
flashing, the pink cheeks aflame--very pretty, indeed, in her wrath.

"Down, Hector!" called the young man, authoritatively; and Hector, like
the well-trained animal he was, subsided instantly. "I beg your pardon,
young lady! Hector, you stir at your peril, sir! I am very sorry he has
alarmed you."

He doffed his cap with careless grace, and made the angry little lady a
courtly bow.

"He didn't alarm me," replied May, testily; "he only alarmed my dogs.
Why, dear me! how very odd!"

Miss Everard, looking full at the young man, had started back with this
exclamation and stared broadly. A tall, powerful-looking young fellow,
rather dusty and travel-stained, but eminently gentlemanly, with frank
blue eyes and profuse fair hair, and a handsome, candid face.

"Yes, Miss May," struck in the lodge-keeper, "it is odd! I see it, too!
He looks enough like Sir Noel, dead and gone, to be his own son!"

"I beg your pardon," said May, becoming conscious of her wide stare,
"but is your name Legard, and are you a friend of Sir Rupert Thetford?"

"Yes, to both questions," with a smile that May liked. "You see the
resemblance too, then. Sir Rupert used to speak of it. Is he at home?"

"Not just now; but he will be very soon, and I know will be glad to see
Mr. Legard. You had better come in and wait."

"And Hector," said Mr. Legard. "I think I had better leave him behind,
as I see him eying your guard of honor with anything but a friendly eye.
I believe I have the pleasure of addressing Miss Everard? Oh!" laughing
frankly at her surprised face, "Sir Rupert showed me a photograph of
yours as a child. I have a good memory for faces, and knew you at once."

Miss Everard and Mr. Legard fell easily into conversation at once, as if
they had been old friends. Lady Thetford's ward was one of those people
who form their likes and dislikes at first sight, and Mr. Legard's face
would have been a pretty sure letter of recommendation to him the wide
world over. May liked his looks; and then he was Sir Rupert's friend,
and she was never over particular about social forms and customs; and so
they dawdled about the grounds and through the leafy arcades, in the
genial sunshine, talking about Sir Rupert and Rome, and art and artists,
and the thousand and one things that turn up in conversation; and the
moments slipped by, half hour followed half hour, until May jerked out
her watch at last, in a sudden fit of recollection, and found, to her
consternation, it was past two.

"What will mamma say!" cried the young lady, aghast. "And Rupert; I dare
say he's home to luncheon before this. Let us go back to the house, Mr.
Legard. I had no idea it was half so late."

Mr. Legard laughed frankly.

"The honesty of that speech is the highest flattery my conversational
powers ever received, Miss Everard. I am very much obliged to you. Ah!
by Jove! Sir Rupert himself!"

For riding slowly up under the sunlit trees came the young baronet. As
Mr. Legard spoke, his glance fell upon them, the young lady and
gentleman advancing so confidentially with half a dozen curly poodles
frisking about them. To say Sir Rupert stared would be a mild way of
putting it--his eyes opened in wide wonder.

"Guy Legard!"

"Thetford! My dear Sir Rupert!"

The baronet leaped off his horse, his eyes lighting, and shook hands
with the artist, in a burst of heartiness very rare with him.

"Where in the world did you drop from, and how under the sun did you
come to be _like this_ with May?"

"I leave the explanation to Mr. Legard," said May, blushing a little
under Sir Rupert's glance, "whilst I go and see mamma, only premising
that luncheon hour is past, and you had better not linger."

She tripped away, and the two young men followed more slowly into the
house. Sir Rupert led his friend to his studio, and left him to inspect
the pictures.

"Whilst I speak a word to my mother," he said; "it will detain me hardly
an instant."

"All right!" said Mr. Legard, boyishly. "Don't hurry yourself on my
account, you know."

Lady Thetford lay where her son had left her--lay as if she had hardly
stirred since. She looked up and half rose as he came in, her eyes
painfully, intensely anxious. But his face, grave and quiet, told
nothing.

"Well," she panted, her eyes glittering.

"It is well, mother. Aileen Jocyln has promised to become my wife."

"Thank God!"

Lady Thetford sunk back, her hands clasped tightly over her heart, its
loud beating plainly audible. Her son looked down at her, his face
keeping its steady gravity--none of the rapture of an accepted lover
there.

"You are content, mother?"

"More than content, Rupert. And you?"

He smiled and, stooping, kissed the warm, pallid face. "I would do a
great deal to make you happy, mother; but I would _not_ ask a woman I
did not love to be my wife. Be at rest; all is well with me. And now I
must leave you, if you will not go down to luncheon."

"I think not; I am not strong to-day. Is May waiting?"

"More than May. A friend of mine has arrived, and will stay with us for
a few weeks."

Lady Thetford's face had been flushed and eager, but at the last words
it suddenly blanched.

"A friend, Rupert! Who?"

"You have heard me speak of him before," he said carelessly; "his name
is Guy Legard."




CHAPTER XI.

ON THE WEDDING EVE.


The family at Thetford Towers were a good deal surprised, a few hours
later that day, by the unexpected appearance of Lady Thetford at dinner.
Wan as some spirit of the moonlight, she came softly in, just as they
entered the dining-room, and her son presented his friend, Mr. Legard,
at once.

"His resemblance to the family will be the surest passport to your
favor, mother mine," Sir Rupert said, gayly. "Mrs. Weymore met him just
now, and recoiled with a shriek, as though she had seen a ghost.
Extraordinary, isn't it--this chance resemblance?"

"Extraordinary," Lady Thetford said, "but not at all unusual. Of course,
Mr. Legard is not even remotely connected with the Thetford family?"

She asked the question without looking at him. She kept her eyes fixed
on her plate, for that frank, fair face before her was terrible to her,
almost as a ghost. It was the days of her youth over again, and Sir
Noel, her husband, once more by her side.

"Not that I am aware of," Mr. Legard said, running his fingers through
his abundant brown hair. "But I may be for all that. I am like the hero
of a novel--a mysterious orphan--only, unfortunately, with no
identifying strawberry mark on my arm. Who my parents were, or what my
real name is, I know no more than I do of the biography of the man in
the moon."

There was a murmur of astonishment--May and Rupert vividly interested,
Lady Thetford white as a dead woman her eyes averted, her hand trembling
as if palsied.

"No," said Mr. Legard, gravely, and a little sadly, "I stand as totally
alone in this world as a human being can stand--father, mother, brother,
sister, I never have known; a nameless, penniless waif, I was cast upon
the world four-and-twenty years ago. Until the age of twelve I was
called Guy Vyking; then the friends with whom I had lived left England
for America, and a man--a painter, named Legard--took me and gave me his
name. And there the romance comes in: a lady, a tall, elegant lady, too
closely veiled for us to see her face, came to the poor home that was
mine, paid those who had kept me from my infancy, and paid Legard for
his future care of me. I have never seen her since; and I sometimes
think," his voice failing, "that she may have been my mother."

There was a sudden clash, and a momentary confusion. My lady, lifting
her glass with that shaking hand, had let it fall, and it was shivered
to atoms on the floor.

"And you never saw the lady afterward?" May asked.

"Never. Legard received regular remittances, mailed, oddly enough, from
your town here--Plymouth. The lady told him, if he ever had occasion to
address her--which he never did have, that I know of--to address Madam
Ada, Plymouth! He brought me up, educated me, taught me his art and
died. I was old enough then to comprehend my position, and the first use
I made of that knowledge was to return 'Madam Ada' her remittances, with
a few sharp lines that effectually put an end to hers."

"Have you never tried to ferret out the mystery of your birth and this
Madam Ada?" inquired Sir Rupert.

Mr. Legard shook his head.

"No; why should I? I dare say I should have no reason to be proud of my
parents if I did find them, and they evidently were not very proud of
me. 'Where ignorance is bliss,' etc. If destiny has decreed it, I shall
know, sooner or later; if destiny has not, then my puny efforts will be
of no avail. But if presentiments mean anything, I shall one day know;
and I have no doubt, if I searched Devonshire, I should find Madam Ada."

May Everard started up with a cry, for Lady Thetford had fallen back in
one of those sudden spasms to which she had lately become subject. In
the universal consternation Guy Legard and his story were forgotten.

"I hope what _I_ said had nothing to do with this," he cried, aghast;
and the one following so suddenly upon the other made the remark natural
enough. But Sir Rupert turned upon him in haughty surprise.

"What _you_ said! Lady Thetford, unfortunately, has been subject to
these attacks for the past two years, Mr. Legard. That will do, May; let
me assist my mother to her room."

May drew back. Lady Thetford was able to rise, ghastly and trembling,
and, supported by her son's arm, walked from the room.

"Lady Thetford's health is very delicate, I fear," Mr. Legard murmured,
sympathetically. "I really thought for a moment my story-telling had
occasioned her sudden illness."

Miss Everard fixed a pair of big, shining eyes in solemn scrutiny on his
face--that face so like the pictured one of Sir Noel Thetford.

"A very natural supposition," thought the young lady; "so did _I_."

"You never knew Sir Noel?" Guy Legard said, musingly; "but, of course,
you did not. Sir Rupert has told me he died before he was born."

"I never saw him," said May; "but those who have seen him in this
house--our housekeeper, for instance--stand perfectly petrified at your
extraordinary likeness to him. Mrs. Hilliard says you have given her a
'turn' she never expects to get over."

Mr. Legard smiled, but was grave again directly.

"It is odd--odd--very odd!"

"Yes," said May Everard, with a sagacious nod; "a great deal, too, to be
a chance resemblance. Hush! here comes Rupert. Well, how have you left
mamma?"

"Better; Louise is with her. And now to finish dinner; I have an
engagement for the evening."

Sir Rupert was strangely silent and _distrait_ all through dinner, a
darkly thoughtful shadow glooming his ever pale face. A supposition had
flashed across his mind that turned him hot and cold by turns--a
supposition that was almost a certainty. This striking resemblance of
the painter Legard to his dead father was no freak of nature, but a
retributive Providence revealing the truth of his birth. It came back to
his memory with painfully acute clearness that his mother had sunk down
once before in a violent tremor and faintness at the mere sound of his
name. Legard had spoken of a veiled lady--Madam Ada, Plymouth, her
address. Could his mother--his--be that mysterious arbiter of his fate?
The name--the place. Sir Rupert Thetford wrenched his thoughts, by a
violent effort, away, shocked at himself.

"It cannot be--it cannot!" he said to himself passionately. "I am mad to
harbor such thoughts. It is a desecration of the memory of the dead, a
treason to the living. But I wish Guy Legard had never come here."

There was one other person at Thetford Towers strangely and strongly
affected by Mr. Guy Legard, and that person, oddly enough, was Mrs.
Weymore, the governess. Mrs. Weymore had never even seen the late Sir
Noel that any one knew of, and yet she had recoiled with a shrill,
feminine cry of utter consternation at sight of the young man.

"I don't see why you should get the fidgets about it, Mrs. Weymore,"
Miss Everard remarked, with her great, bright eyes suspiciously keen;
"you never knew Sir Noel."

Mrs. Weymore sunk down on a lounge in a violent tremor and faintness.

"My dear, I beg your pardon. I--it seems strange, Oh, May!" with a
sudden, sharp cry, losing self-control, "who _is_ that young man?"

"Why, Mr. Guy Legard, artist," answered May, composedly, the bright eyes
still on the alert; "formerly--in 'boyhood's sunny hours,' you
know--Master Guy. Let--me--see! Yes, Vyking."

"Vyking!" with a spasmodic cry; and then Mrs. Weymore dropped her white
face in her hands, trembling from head to foot.

"Well, upon my word," Miss Everard said, addressing empty space, "this
does cap the globe! The Mysteries of Udolpho were plain reading compared
to Mr. Guy Vyking and the effect he produces upon the people. He's a
very handsome young man, and a very agreeable young man; but I should
never have suspected he possessed the power of throwing all the elderly
ladies he meets into gasping fits. There's Lady Thetford: he was too
much for her, and she had to be helped out of the dining-room; and
here's Mrs. Weymore going into hysterics because he used to be called
Guy Vyking. I thought my lady might be the veiled lady of his story; but
now I think it must have been you."

Mrs. Weymore looked up, her very lips white.

"The veiled lady? What lady? May, tell me all you know of Mr. Vyking."

"Not Vyking now--Legard," answered May; and there-upon the young lady
detailed the scanty _resume_ the artist had given them of his history.

"And I'm very sure it isn't chance at all," concluded May Everard,
transfixing the governess with an unwinking stare; "and Mr. Legard is as
much a Thetford as Sir Rupert himself. I don't pretend to divination, of
course, and I don't clearly see how it is; but it is, and you know it,
Mrs. Weymore; and you could enlighten the young man, and so could my
lady, if either of you chose."

Mrs. Weymore turned suddenly and caught May's two hands in hers.

"May, if you care for me, if you have any pity, don't speak of this. I
_do_ know--but I must have time. My head is in a whirl. Wait, wait, and
don't tell Mr. Legard."

"I won't," said May; "but it is all very strange and very mysterious,
delightfully like a three-volume novel or a sensation play. I'm getting
very much interested in the hero of the performance, and I'm afraid I
shall be deplorably in love with him shortly if this sort of thing keeps
on."

Mr. Legard himself took the matter much more coolly than any one else;
smoked cigars philosophically, criticised Sir Rupert's pictures, did a
little that way himself, played billiards with his host and chess with
Miss Everard, rode with that young lady, walked with her, sang duets
with her in a deep melodious bass, made himself fascinating, and took
the world easy.

"It is no use getting into a gale about these things," he said to Miss
Everard when she wondered aloud at his constitutional phlegm; "the
crooked things will straighten of themselves if we give them time. What
is written is written. I know I shall find out all about myself one
day--like little Paul Dombey, 'I feel it in my bones.'"

Mr. Legard was thrown a good deal upon Miss Everard's resources for
amusement; for, of course, Sir Rupert's time was chiefly spent at Jocyln
Hall, and Mr. Legard bore this with even greater serenity than the
other. Miss Everard was a very charming little girl, with a laugh that
was sweeter than the music of the spheres and hundreds of bewitching
little ways; and Mr. Legard undertook to paint her portrait, and found
it the most absorbing work of art he had ever undertaken. As for the
young baronet spending his time at Jocyln Hall, they never missed him.
His wooing sped on smoothest wings--Col. Jocyln almost as much pleased
as my lady herself; and the course of true love in this case ran as
smooth as heart could wish.

Miss Jocyln, as a matter of course, was a great deal at Thetford Towers,
and saw with evident gratification the growing intimacy of Mr. Legard
and May. It would be an eminently suitable match, Miss Jocyln thought,
only it was a pity so much mystery shrouded the gentleman's birth.
Still, he was a gentleman, and, with his talents, no doubt would become
an eminent artist; and it would be highly satisfactory to see May fix
her erratic affections on somebody, and thus be doubly out of her--Miss
Jocyln's--way.

The wedding preparations were going briskly forward. There was no need
of delay; all were anxious for the marriage--Lady Thetford more than
anxious, on account of her declining health. The hurry to have the
ceremony irrevocably over had grown to be something very like a
monomania with her.

"I feel that my days are numbered," she said, with impatience, to her
son, "and I cannot rest in my grave, Rupert, until I see Aileen your
wife."

So Sir Rupert, more than anxious to please his mother, hastened on the
wedding. An eminent physician, summoned down from London, confirmed my
lady's own fears.

"Her life hung by a thread," this gentleman said, confidentially to Sir
Rupert, "the slightest excitement may snap it at any moment. Don't
contradict her--let everything be as she wishes. Nothing can save her,
but perfect quiet and repose may prolong her existence."

The last week of September the wedding was to take place; and all was
bustle and haste at Jocyln Hall. Mr. Legard was to stay for the wedding,
at the express desire of Lady Thetford herself. She had seen him but
very rarely since that first day, illness had compelled her to keep her
room; but her interest in him was unabated, and she had sent for him to
her apartment, and invited him to remain. And Mr. Legard, a good deal
surprised, and a little flattered, consented at once.

"Very kind of Lady Thetford, you know, Miss Everard," Mr. Legard said,
sauntering into the room where she sat with her ex-governess--Mr. Legard
and Miss Everard were growing highly confidential of late--"to take such
an interest in an utter stranger as she does in me."

May stole a glance from under her eyelashes at Mrs. Weymore; that lady
sat nervous and scared-looking, and altogether uncomfortable, as she had
a habit of doing in the young artist's presence.

"Very," Miss Everard said, dryly. "You ought to feel highly
complimented, Mr. Legard, for it's a sort of kindness her ladyship is
extremely chary of to utter strangers. Rather odd, isn't it, Mrs.
Weymore?"

Mrs. Weymore's reply was a distressed, beseeching look. Mr. Legard saw
it, and opened very wide his handsome, Saxon eyes.

"Eh?" he said, "it doesn't mean anything, does it? Mrs. Weymore looks
mysterious, and I'm so stupid about these things. Lady Thetford doesn't
know anything about me, does she?"

"Not that _I_ know of," May said, with significant emphasis on the
personal pronoun.

"Then Mrs. Weymore does! By Jove! I always thought Mrs. Weymore had an
odd way of looking at me! And now, what is it?"

He turned his fair, resolute face to that lady with a smile hard to
resist.

"I don't make much of a howling about my affairs, you know, Mrs.
Weymore," he said; "but for all that, I am none the less interested in
myself and my history. If you can open the mysteries a little you will
be conferring a favor on me I can never repay. And I am positive from
your look you can."

Mrs. Weymore turned away, and covered her face with a sort of sob. The
young lady and gentleman exchanged startled glances.

"You can then?" Mr. Legard said, gravely, but growing very pale. "You
know who I am?"

To his boundless consternation Mrs. Weymore rose up and fell at his
feet, seizing his hands and covering them with kisses.

"I do! I do! I know who you are, and so shall you before this wedding
takes place. But before I tell you I must speak to Lady Thetford."

Mr. Legard raised her up, his face as colorless as her own.

"To Lady Thetford! What has Lady Thetford to do with me?"

"Everything! She knows who you are as well as I do. I must speak to her
first."

"Answer me one thing--is my name Vyking?"

"No. Pray, pray don't ask me any more questions. As soon as her ladyship
is a little stronger, I will go to her and obtain her permission to
speak. Keep what I have said a secret from Sir Rupert, and wait until
then."

She rose up to go, so haggard and deploring-looking, that neither strove
to detain her. The young man stared blankly after her as she left the
room.

"At last!" he said, drawing a deep breath, "at last I shall know!"

There was a pause; then May spoke in a fluttering little voice.

"How very strange that Mrs. Weymore should know, of all persons in the
world."

"Who is Mrs. Weymore? How long has she been here? Tell me all you know
of her, Miss Everard."

"And that 'all' will be almost nothing. She came down from London as a
nursery-governess to Rupert and me, a week or two after my arrival here,
selected by the rector of St. Gosport. She was then what you see her
now, a pale, subdued creature in widow's weeds, with the look of one who
had seen trouble. I have known her so long, and always as such a white,
still shadow, I suppose that is why it seems so odd."

Mrs. Weymore kept altogether out of Mr. Legard's way for the next week
or two. She avoided May also, as much as possible, and shrunk so
palpably from any allusion to the past scene, that May good naturedly
bided her time in silence, though almost as impatient as Mr. Legard
himself.

And whilst they waited the bridal eve came round, and Lady Thetford was
much better, not able to quit her room, but strong enough to lie on a
sofa and talk to her son and Col. Jocyln, with a flush on her cheek and
sparkle in her eye--all unusual there.

The marriage was to take place in the village church; and there was to
follow a grand ceremonial of a wedding-breakfast; and then the happy
pair were to start at once on their bridal-tour.

"And I hope to see my boy return," Lady Thetford said, kissing him
fondly. "I can hardly ask for more than that."

Late in the afternoon of that eventful wedding-eve, the ex-governess
sought out Guy Legard, for the first time of her own accord. She found
him in the young baronet's studio, with May, putting the finishing
touches to that young lady's portrait. He started up at sight of his
visitor, vividly interested. Mrs. Weymore was paler even than usual, but
with a look of deep, quiet determination on her face no one had ever
seen there before.

"You have come to keep your promise," the young man cried--"to tell me
who I am?"

"I have come to keep my promise," Mrs. Weymore answered; "but I must
speak to my lady first. I wanted to tell you that, before you sleep
to-night, you shall know."

She left the studio, and the two sat there, breathless, expectant. Sir
Rupert was dining at Jocyln Hall, Lady Thetford was alone in high
spirits, and Mrs. Weymore was admitted at once.

"I wonder how long you must wait?" said May Everard.

"Heaven knows! Not long, I hope, or I shall go mad with impatience."

An hour passed--two--three, and still Mrs. Weymore was closeted with my
lady, and still the pair in the studio waited.




CHAPTER XII.

MRS. WEYMORE'S STORY.


Lady Thetford sat up among her pillows and looked at her hired dependent
with wide open eyes of astonishment. The pale, timid face of Mrs.
Weymore wore a look altogether new.

"Listen to your story! My dear Mrs. Weymore, what possible interest can
your story have for me?"

"More than you think, my lady. You are so much stronger to-day than
usual, and Sir Rupert's marriage is so very near that I must speak now
or never."

"Sir Rupert!" my lady gasped. "What has your story to do with Sir
Rupert?"

"You will hear," Mrs. Weymore said, very sadly. "Heaven knows I should
have told you long ago; but it is a story few would care to tell. A
cruel and shameful story of wrong and misery; for, my lady, I have been
cruelly wronged by one who was once very near to you."

Lady Thetford turned ashen white.

"Very near to me! Do you mean----"

"My lady, listen, and you shall hear. All those years that I have been
with you, I have not been what I seemed. My name is not Weymore. My name
is Thetford--as yours is."

An awful terror had settled down on my lady's face. Her lips moved, but
she did not speak. Her eyes were fixed on the sad, set face before her,
with a wild, expectant stare.

"I was a widow when I came to you," Mrs. Weymore went on to say, "but
long before I had known that worst widowhood, desertion. I ran away from
my happy home, from the kindest father and mother that ever lived; I ran
away and was married and deserted before I was eighteen years old.

"He came to our village, a remote place, my lady, with a local celebrity
for its trout streams, and for nothing else. He came, the man whom I
married, on a visit to the great house of the place. We had not the
remotest connection with the house, or I might have known his real name.
When I did know him it was as Mr. Noel--he told me himself, and I never
thought of doubting it. I was as simple and confiding as it is possible
for the simplest village girl to be, and all the handsome stranger told
me was gospel truth; and my life only began, I thought, from the hour I
saw him first.

"I met him at the trout streams fishing, and alone. I had come to while
the long, lazy hours under the trees. He spoke to me--the handsome
stranger, whom I had seen riding through the village beside the squire,
like a young prince; and I was only too pleased and flattered by his
notice. It is many years ago, my lady, and Mr. Noel took a fancy to my
pink-and-white face and fair curls, as fine gentlemen will. It was only
fancy--never, at its best, love; or he would not have deserted me
pitilessly as he did. I know it now; but then I took the tinsel for pure
gold, and would as soon have doubted the Scripture as his lightest word.

"My lady, it is a very old story, and very often told. We met by stealth
and in secret; and weeks passed and I never learned he was other than
what I knew him. I loved with my whole foolish, trusting heart, strongly
and selfishly; and I was ready to give up home, and friends and
parents--all the world for him. All the world, but not my good name, and
he knew that; and, my lady, we were married--really and truly and
honestly married, in a little church in Berkshire, in Windsor; and the
marriage is recorded in the register of the church, and I have the
marriage certificate here in my possession."

Mrs. Weymore touched her bosom as she spoke, and looked with earnest,
truthful eyes at Lady Thetford. But Lady Thetford's face was averted and
not to be seen.

"His fancy for me was as fleeting as all his fancies; but it was strong
enough and reckless enough whilst it lasted to make him forget all
consequences. For it was surely a reckless act for a gentleman, such as
he was, to marry the daughter of a village schoolmaster.

"There was but one witness to our marriage--my husband's servant--George
Vyking. I never liked the man; he was crafty, and cunning, and
treacherous, and ready for any deed of evil; but he was in his master's
confidence, and took a house for us at Windsor and lived with us, and
kept his master's secrets well."

Mrs. Weymore paused, her hands fluttering in painful unrest. The averted
face of Lady Thetford never turned, but a smothered voice bade her go
on.

"A year passed, my lady, and I still lived in the house at Windsor, but
quite alone now. My punishment had begun very early; two or three months
sufficed to weary my husband of his childish village girl, and make him
thoroughly repent his folly. I saw it from the first--he never tried to
hide it from me; his absence grew longer and longer, more and more
frequent, until at last he ceased coming altogether. Vyking, the valet,
came and went; and Vyking told me the truth--the hard, cruel, bitter
truth, that I was never to see my husband more.

"'It was the maddest act of a mad young man's life,' Vyking said to me,
coolly, 'and he's repented of it, as I knew he would repent. You'll
never see him again, mistress, and you needn't search for him, either.
When you find last winter's snow, last autumn's partridges, then you may
hope to find him.'

"'But I am his wife,' I said; 'nothing can undo that--his lawful, wedded
wife.'

"'Yes,' said Vyking, 'his wife fast enough; but there's the law of
divorce, and there's no witness but me alive, and you can do your best;
and the best you can do is to take it easy and submit. He'll provide for
you handsomely; and when he gets the divorce, if you like, I'll marry
you myself.'

"I had grown to expect some such revelation, I had been neglected so
long. My lady, I don't speak of my feelings, my anguish and shame, and
remorse and despair--I only tell you here simple facts. But in the days
and weeks which followed, I suffered as I never can suffer again in this
world.

"I was held little better than a prisoner in the house at Windsor after
that; and I think Vyking never gave up the hope that I would one day
consent to marry him. More than once I tried to run away, to get on the
track of my betrayer, but always to be met and foiled. I have gone down
on my knees to that man Vyking, but I might as well have knelt to a
statue of stone.

"'I'll tell you what we'll do,' he said, 'we'll go to London. People are
beginning to look and talk about here; there they know how to mind their
own business.'

"I consented readily enough. My one hope now was to find the man who had
wronged me, and in London I thought I stood a better chance that at
Windsor. We started, Vyking and I; but driving to the station we met
with an accident, our horse ran away and I was thrown out; after that I
hardly remember anything for a long time.

"Weeks passed before I recovered. Then I was told my baby had been born
and died. I listened in a sort of dull apathy; I had suffered so much
that the sense of suffering was dulled and blunted. I knew Vyking well
enough not to trust him or believe him; but I was powerless to act, and
could only turn my face to the wall and pray to die.

"But I grew strong, and Vyking took me to London, and left me in
respectably-furnished lodgings. I might have escaped easily enough here,
but the energy even to wish for freedom was gone; I sat all day long in
a state of miserable, listless languor, heart-weary, heart-sick, worn
out.

"One day Vyking came to my rooms in a furious state of passion. He and
his master had quarreled. I never knew about what; and Vyking had been
ignominiously dismissed. The valet tore up and down my parlor in a
towering passion.

"'I'll make Sir Noel pay for it, or my name's not Vyking,' he cried. 'He
thinks because he's married an heiress he can defy me now. But there's a
law in this land to punish bigamy; and I'll have him up for bigamy the
moment he's back from his wedding tour.'

"I turned and looked at him, but very quietly, 'Sir Noel,' I said. 'Do
you mean my husband?'

"'I mean Miss Vandeleur's husband now,' said Vyking. '_You'll_ never see
him again, my girl. Yes, he's Sir Noel Thetford, of Thetford Towers,
Devonshire; and you can go and call on his pretty new wife as soon as
she comes home.'

"I turned away and looked out of the window without a word. Vyking
looked at me curiously.

"'Oh! we've got over it, have we; and we're going to take it easy and
not make a scene? Now that's what I call sensible. And you'll come
forward and swear Sir Noel guilty of bigamy?"

"'No,' I said, 'I never will.'

"'You won't--and why not?'

"'Never mind why. I don't think you would understand if I told you--only
I won't.'

"'Couldn't you be coaxed?'

"'No.'

"'Don't be too sure. Perhaps I could tell you something that might move
you, quiet as you are. What if I told you your baby did not die that
time, but was alive and well?'

"I knew a scene was worse than useless with this man, tears and
entreaties thrown away. I heard his last words and started to my feet
with outstretched hands.

"'Vyking, for the dear Lord's sake, have pity on a desolate woman, and
tell me the truth.'

"'I am telling you the truth. Your boy is alive and well, and I've
christened him Guy--Guy Vyking. Don't you be scared--he's all safe; and
the day you appear in court against Sir Noel, that day he shall be
restored to you. Now don't you go and get excited, think it over, and
let me know your decision when I come back.'

"He left the room before I could answer, and I never saw Vyking again.
The next day, reading the morning paper, I saw the arrest of a pair of
house-breakers, and the name of the chief was George Vyking, late valet
to Sir Noel Thetford. I tried to get to see him in prison, but failed.
His trial came on, his sentence was transportation for ten years; and
Vyking left England, carrying my secret with him.

"I had something left to live for now--the thought of my child. But
where was I to find him, where to look? I, who had not a penny in the
wide world. If I had had the means, I would have come to Devonshire to
seek out the man who had so basely wronged me; but as I was, I could as
soon have gone to the antipodes. Oh! it was a bitter, bitter time, that
long, hard struggle, with starvation--a time it chills my blood even now
to look back upon.

"I was still in London, battling with grim poverty, when, six months
later, I read in the _Times_ the awfully sudden death of Sir Noel
Thetford, Baronet.

"My lady, I am not speaking of the effect of that blow--I dare not to
you, as deeply wronged as myself. You were with him in his dying
moments, and surely he told you the truth then; surely he acknowledged
the great wrong he had done you?"

Mrs. Weymore paused, and Lady Thetford turned her face, her ghastly,
white face, for the first time, to answer.

"He did--he told me all; I know your story to be true."

"Thank God! Oh, thank God! And he acknowledged his first marriage?"

"Yes; the wrong he did you was venial to that which he did me--I, who
never was his wife, never for one poor moment had a right to his name."

Mrs. Weymore sunk down on her knees by the couch, and passionately
kissed the lady's hand.

"My lady! my lady! And you will forgive me for coming here? I did not
know, when I answered Mr. Knight's advertisement, where I was coming;
and when I did, I could not resist the temptation of looking on his son.
Oh, my lady! you will forgive me, and bear witness to the truth of my
story."

"I will; I always meant to before I died. And that young man--that Guy
Legard--you know he is your son?"

"I knew it from the first. My lady, you will let me tell him at once,
will you not? And Sir Rupert? Oh, my lady! he ought to know."

Lady Thetford covered her face with a groan.

"I promised his father on his death-bed to tell him long ago, to seek
for his rightful heir--and see how I have kept my word. But I could
not--I could not! It was not in human nature--not in such a nature as
mine, wronged as I have been."

"But now--oh, my dear lady! now you will?"

"Yes, now, on the verge of the grave, I may surely speak. I dare not die
with my promise unkept. This very night," Lady Thetford cried, sitting
up, flushed and excited, "my boy shall know all--he shall not marry in
ignorance of whom he really is. Aileen has the fortune of a princess;
and Aileen will not love him less for the title he must lose. When he
comes home, Mrs. Weymore, send him to me, and send your son with him,
and I will tell them all."




CHAPTER XIII.

"THERE IS MANY A SLIP."


A room that was like a picture--a carpet of rose-buds gleaming through
rich green moss, lounges piled with downy-silk pillows, a bed curtained
in foamy lace, a pretty room--Aileen Jocyln's _chambre-a-coucher_, and
looking like a picture herself, in a flowing morning-robe, the rich,
dark hair falling heavy and unbound to her waist, Aileen Jocyln lay
among piles of scarlet cushions, like some young Eastern Sultana.

Lay and music with, oh! such an infinitely happy smile upon her
exquisite face; mused, as happy youth, loving and beloved, upon its
bridal-eve doth muse. Nay, on her bridal-day, for the dainty little
French clock on the bracket was pointing its golden hands to three.

The house was very still; all had retired late, busy with preparations
for the morrow, and Miss Jocyln had but just dismissed her maid. Every
one, probably, but herself, was asleep; and she, in her unutterable
bliss, was too happy for slumber. She arose presently, walked to the
window and looked out. The late setting moon still swung in the sky; the
stars still spangled the cloudless blue, and shone serene on the purple
bosom of the far-spreading sea; but in the east the first pale glimmer
of the new day shone--her happy wedding day. The girl slid down on her
knees, her hands clasped, her radiant face glorified with love and
bliss, turned ecstatically, as some faithful follower of the prophet
might, to that rising glory of the east.

"Oh!" Aileen thought, gazing around over the dark, deep sea, the
star-gemmed sky, and the green radiance and sweetness of the earth,
"what a beautiful, blissful world it is, and I the happiest creature in
it!"

Kneeling there, with her face still turned to that luminous East, the
blissful bride fell asleep; slept, and dreamed dreams as joyful as her
waking thoughts, and no shadow of that sweeping cloud that was to
blacken all her world so soon fell upon her.

Hours passed, and still Aileen slept. Then came an imperative knock at
her door--again and again, louder each time; and then Aileen started up,
fully awake. Her room was flooded with sunshine, and countless birds
sang their glorias in the swaying green gloom of the branches, and the
ceaseless sea was all a-glitter with sparkling sun-light.

"Come in," Miss Jocyln said. It was her maid, she thought--and she
walked over to an arm-chair and composedly sat down.

The door opened, and Col. Jocyln, not Fanchon, appeared, an open note in
his hand, his face full of trouble.

"Papa!" Aileen cried, starting up in alarm.

"Bad news, my daughter--very bad! very sorrowful! Read that."

The note was very brief, in a spidery, female hand.

     "DEAR COL. JOCYLN:--We are in the greatest trouble. Poor Lady
     Thetford died with awful suddenness this morning in one of
     those dreadful spasms. We are all nearly distracted. Rupert
     bears it better than any of us. Pray come over as soon as you
     can.

     "MAY. EVERARD."

Aileen Jocyln sunk back in her seat, pale and trembling.

"Dead! Oh, papa! papa!"

"It is very sad, my dear, and very shocking and terribly unfortunate
that it should have occurred just at this time. A postponed wedding is
ever ominous of evil."

"Oh! pray, papa, don't think of that! Don't think of me! Poor Lady
Thetford! Poor Rupert! You will go over at once, papa, will you not?"

"Certainly, my dear. And I will tell the servants, so that when our
guests arrive you may not be disturbed. Since it was to be," muttered
the Indian officer under his moustache. "I would give half my fortune
that it had been one day later. A postponed marriage is the most ominous
thing under the sun."

He left the room, and Aileen sat with her hands clasped, and an
unutterable awe overpowering every other feeling. She forgot her own
disappointment in the awful mystery of sudden death. Her share of the
trial was light--a year of waiting, more or less; what did it matter,
since Rupert loved her unchangeably? but, poor Lady Aileen, remembering
how much the dead woman had loved her, and how fondly she had welcomed
her as a daughter, covered her face with her hands, and wept as she
might have wept for her own mother.

"I never knew a mother's love or care," Aileen thought; "and I was
doubly happy in knowing I was to have one at last. And now--and now----"

It was a drearily long morning to the poor bride elect, sitting alone in
her chamber. She heard the roll of carriages up the drive, the pause
that ensued, and then their departure. She wondered how _he_ bore it
best of all, May had said; but, then, he was ever still and strong and
self-restrained. She knew how dear that poor, ailing mother had ever
been to him, and she knew how bitterly he would feel her loss.

"They talk of presentiments," mused Miss Jocyln, walking wearily to and
fro; "and see how happy and hopeful I was this morning, whilst she lay
dead and he mourned. If I only dared go to him--my own Rupert!"

It was late in the afternoon before Col. Jocyln returned. He strode
straight to his daughter's presence, wearing a pale, fagged face.

"Well, papa?" she asked, faintly.

"My pale Aileen!" he said, kissing her fondly; "my poor, patient girl! I
am sorry you must undergo this trial, and," knitting his brows, "such
talk as it will make."

"Don't think of me, papa--my share is surely the lightest. But Rupert--"
wistfully faltering.

"There's something odd about Rupert; he was very fond of his mother, and
he takes this a great deal too quietly. He looks like a man slowly
turning to stone, with a face white and stern; and he never asked for
you. He sat there with folded arms and that petrified face, gazing on
his dead, until it chilled my blood to look at him. There's something
odd and unnatural in this frozen calm. And, oh! by-the-bye! I forgot to
tell you the strangest thing--May Everard it was told me; that painter
fellow--what's his name--"

"Legard, papa?"

"Yes, Legard. He turns out to be the son of Mrs. Weymore; they
discovered it last night. He was there in the room, with the most dazed
and mystified and altogether bewildered expression of countenance I ever
saw a man wear, and May and Mrs. Weymore sat crying incessantly. I
couldn't see what occasion there was for the governess and the painter
there in that room of death, and I said so to Miss Everard. There's
something mysterious in the matter, for her face flushed and she
stammered something about startling family secrets that had come to
light, and the over-excitement of which had hastened Lady Thetford's
end. I don't like the look of things, and I'm altogether in the dark.
That painter resembles the Thetford's a great deal too closely for the
mere work of chance; and yet, if Mrs. Weymore is his mother, I don't see
how there can be anything in _that_. It's odd--confoundedly odd!"

Col. Jocyln rumbled on as he walked the floor, his brows knitted into a
swarthy frown. His daughter sat and eyed him wistfully.

"Did no one ask for me, papa? Am I not to go over?"

"Sir Rupert didn't ask for you! May Everard did, and I promised to fetch
you to-morrow. Aileen, things at Thetford Towers have a suspicious look
to-day; I can't see the light yet, but I suspect something wrong. It may
be the very best thing that could possibly happen, this postponed
marriage; I shall make Sir Rupert clear matters up completely before my
daughter becomes his wife."

Col. Jocyln, according to promise, took his daughter to Thetford Towers
next morning. With bated breath and beating heart and noiseless tread,
Aileen Jocyln entered the house of mourning, which yesterday she had
thought to enter a bride. Dark and still, and desolate it lay, the
morning light shut out, unbroken silence everywhere.

"And this is the end of earth, its glory and its bliss," Aileen thought
as she followed her father slowly up-stairs, "the solemn wonder of the
winding-sheet and the grave."

There were two watchers in the dark room when they entered--May Everard,
pale and quiet, and the young artist, Guy Legard. Even in that moment,
Col. Jocyln could not repress a supercilious stare of wonder to behold
the housekeeper's son in the death-chamber of Lady Thetford. And yet it
seemed strangely his place, for it might have been one of those lusty
old Thetfords, framed and glazed up-stairs, stepped out of the canvas
and dressed in the fashion of the day.

"Very bad tastes all the same," the proud old colonel thought, with a
frown: "very bad taste on the part of Sir Rupert. I shall speak to him
on the subject presently."

He stood in silence beside his daughter, looking down at the marble
face. May, shivering drearily in a large shawl, and looking like a wan
little spirit, was speaking in whispers to Aileen.

"We persuaded Rupert--Mr. Legard and I--to go and lie down; he has
neither eaten nor slept since his mother died. Oh, Aileen! I am so sorry
for you!"

"Hush!" raising one tremulous hand and turning away; "she was as dear to
me as my own mother could have been! Don't think of me."

"Shall we not see Sir Rupert?" the colonel asked. "I should like to,
particularly."

"I think not--unless you remain for some hours. He is completely worn
out, poor fellow!"

"How comes that young man here, Miss Everard?" nodding in the direction
of Mr. Legard, who had withdrawn to a remote corner. "He may be a very
especial friend of Sir Rupert's--but don't you think he presumes on that
friendship?"

Miss Everard's eyes flashed angrily.

"No, sir! I think nothing of the sort! Mr. Legard has a perfect right to
be in this room, or any other room at Thetford Towers. It is by Rupert's
particular request he remains!"

The colonel frowned again, and turned his back upon the speaker.

"Aileen," he said, haughtily, "as Sir Rupert is not visible, nor likely
to be for some time, perhaps you had better not linger. To-morrow, after
the funeral, I shall speak to him very seriously."

Miss Jocyln arose. She would rather have lingered, but she saw her
father's annoyed face and obeyed him immediately. She bent and kissed
the cold, white face, awful with the dread majesty of death.

"For the last time, my friend, my mother," she murmured, "until we meet
in heaven."

She drew her veil over her face to hide her falling tears, and silently
followed the stern and displeased Indian officer down-stairs and out of
the house. She looked back wistfully once at the gray, old ivy-grown
facade; but who was to tell her of the weary, weary months and years
that would pass before she crossed that stately threshold again?

It was a very grand and imposing ceremonial, that burial of Lady
Thetford; and side by side with the heir walked the unknown painter, Guy
Legard. Col. Jocyln was not the only friend of the family shocked on
this occasion. What could Sir Rupert mean? And what did Mr. Legard mean
by looking ten times more like the old Thetford race than Sir Noel's own
son and heir?

It was a miserable day, this day of the funeral. There was a sky of lead
hanging low like a pall, and it was almost dark in the rainy afternoon
gloaming when Col. Jocyln and Sir Rupert Thetford stood alone before the
village church. Lady Thetford slept with the rest of the name in the
stony vaults; the fair-haired artist stood in the porch, and Sir Rupert,
with a face wan and stern, and spectral, in the dying daylight, stood
face to face with the colonel.

"A private interview," the colonel was repeating; "most certainly, Sir
Rupert. Will you come with me to Jocyln Hall? My daughter will wish to
see you."

The young man nodded, went back a moment to speak to Legard, and then
followed the colonel into the carriage. The drive was a very silent
one--a vague, chilling presentiment of impending evil on the Indian
officer as he uneasily watched the young man who had so nearly been his
son.

Aileen Jocyln, roaming like a restless ghost through the lonely, lofty
rooms, saw them alight, and came out to the hall to meet her betrothed.
She held out both hands shyly, looking up, half in fear, in the rigid,
death-white face of her lover.

"Aileen!"

He took the hands and held them fast a moment; then dropped them and
turned to the colonel.

"Now, Col. Jocyln."

The colonel led the way into the library. Sir Rupert paused a moment on
the threshold to answer Aileen's pleading glance.

"Only for a few moments, Aileen," he said, his eyes softening with
infinite love; "in half an hour my fate shall be decided. Let that fate
be what it may, I shall be true to you while life lasts."

With these enigmatical words, he followed the colonel into the library,
and the polished oaken door closed between him and Aileen.




CHAPTER XIV.

PARTED.


Half an hour had passed.

Up and down the long drawing-room Aileen wandered aimlessly, oppressed
with a dread of she knew not what, a prescience of evil, vague as it was
terrible. The dark gloom of the rainy evening was not darker than that
brooding shadow in her deep, dusky eyes.

In the library Col. Jocyln stood facing his son-in-law elect, staring
like a man bereft of his senses. The melancholy, half light coming
through the oriel window by which he stood, fell full upon the face of
Rupert Thetford, white and cold, and set as marble.

"My God!" the Indian officer said, with wild eyes of terror and
affright, "what is this you are telling me?"

"The truth, Col. Jocyln--the simple truth. Would to Heaven I had known
it years ago--this shameful story of wrong-doing and misery!"

"I don't comprehend--I can't comprehend this impossible tale, Sir
Rupert."

"That is a misnomer now, Col. Jocyln. I am no longer _Sir_ Rupert."

"Do you mean to say you credit this wild story of a former marriage of
Sir Noel's? Do you really believe your late governess to have been your
father's wife?"

"I believe it, colonel. I have facts and statements and dying words to
prove it. On my father's death-bed he made my mother swear to tell the
truth; to repair the wrong he had done; to seek out his son, concealed
by his valet, Vyking, and restore him to his rights! My mother never,
kept that promise--the cruel wrong done to herself was too bitter; and
at my birth she resolved never to keep it. I should not atone for the
sin of my father; his elder son should never deprive _her_ child of his
birthright. My poor mother! You know the cause of that mysterious
trouble which fell upon her at my father's death, and which darkened her
life to the last. Shame, remorse, anger--shame for herself--a wife only
in name; remorse for her broken vow to the dead, and anger against that
erring dead man."

"But you told me she had hunted him up and provided for him," said the
mystified colonel.

"Yes; she saw an advertisement in a London paper calling upon Vyking to
take charge of the boy he had left twelve years before. Now, Vyking, the
valet, had been transported for house-breaking long before that, and my
mother answered the advertisement. There could be no doubt the child was
the child Vyking had taken charge of--Sir Noel Thetford's rightful heir.
My mother left him with the painter, Legard, with whom he had grew up,
whose name he took, and he is now at Thetford Towers."

"I thought the likeness meant something," muttered the colonel; "his
paternity is plainly enough written in his face. And so," raising his
voice, "Mrs. Weymore recognized her son. Really, your story runs like a
melodrama, where the hero turns out to be a duke and his mother knows
the strawberry mark on his arm. Well, sir, if Mrs. Weymore is Sir Noel's
rightful widow, and Guy Legard his rightful son and heir--pray what are
you?"

The colorless face of the young man turned dark-red for an instant, then
whiter than before.

"My, mother was as truly and really Sir Noel's wife as women can be the
wife of man in the sight of Heaven. The crime was his; the shame and
suffering hers; the atonement mine. Sir Noel's elder son shall be Sir
Noel's heir--I will play usurper no longer. To-morrow I leave St.
Gosport; the day after, England--never, perhaps, to return."

"You are mad," Col. Jocyln said, turning very pale; "you do not mean
it."

"I am not mad, and I do mean it. I may be unfortunate; but, I pray God,
never a villain! Right is right; my brother Guy is the rightful
heir--not I!"

"And Aileen?" Col. Jocyln's face turned dark and rigid as iron as he
spoke his daughter's name.

Rupert Thetford turned away his changing face, quite ghastly now.

"It shall be as she says. Aileen is too noble and just herself not to
honor me for doing right."

"It shall be as I say," returned Col. Jocyln, with a voice that rang and
an eye that flashed. "My daughter comes of a proud and stainless race,
and never shall she mate with one less stainless. Hear me out, young
man. It won't do to fire up--plain words are best suited to a plain
case. All that has passed betwixt you and Miss Jocyln must be as if it
had never been. The heir of Thetford Towers, honorably born, I consented
she should marry; but, dearly as I love her, I would see her dead at my
feet before she should mate with one who was nameless and impoverished.
You said just now the atonement was yours--you said right; go, and never
return."

He pointed to the door; the young man, stonily still, took his hat.

"Will you not permit your daughter, Col. Jocyln, to speak for herself?"
he said, at the door.

"No, sir. I know my daughter--my proud, high-spirited Aileen--and my
answer is hers. I wish you good-night."

He swung round abruptly, turning his back upon his visitor. Rupert
Thetford, without one word, turned and walked out of the house.

The bewildering rapidity of the shocks he had received had stunned
him--he could not feel the pain now. There was a dull sense of aching
torture over him from head to foot--but the acute edge was dulled; he
walked along through the black night like a man drugged and stupefied.
He was only conscious intensely of one thing--a wish to get away, never
to set foot in St. Gosport again.

Like one walking in his sleep, he reached Thetford Towers, his old home,
every tree and stone of which was dear to him. He entered at once,
passed into the drawing-room, and found Guy, the artist, sitting before
the fire staring blankly into the coals, and May Everard roaming
restlessly up and down, the firelight falling dully on her black robes
and pale, tear-stained face. Both started at his entrance--all wet, and
wild, and haggard; but neither spoke. There was that in his face which
froze the words on their lips.

"I am going away to-morrow," he said, abruptly, leaning against the
mantle, and looking at them with weird, spectral eyes.

May uttered a faint cry; Guy faced him almost fiercely.

"Going away! What do you mean, Sir Rupert? We are going away together,
if you like."

"No; I go alone. You remain here; it is your place now."

"Never!" cried the young artist--"never! I will go out and die like a
dog, in a ditch, before I rob you of your birthright!"

"You reverse matters," said Rupert Thetford; "it is I who have robbed
you, unwittingly, for too many years. I promised my mother on her
death-bed, as she promised my father on his, that you should have your
right, and I will keep that promise. Guy, dear old fellow! don't let us
quarrel, now that we are brothers, after being friends so long. Take
what is your own; the world is all before me, and surely I am man enough
to win my own way. Not one other word; you shall not come with me; you
might as well talk to these stone walls and try to move them as to me.
To-morrow I go, and go alone."

"Alone!" It was May who breathlessly repeated the word.

"Alone! All the ties that bound me here are broken; I go alone and
single-handed to fight the battle of life. Guy, I have spoken to the
rector about you--you will find him your friend and aider; and May is to
make her home at the rectory. And now," turning suddenly and moving to
the door, "as I start early to-morrow, I believe I'll retire early.
Good-night."

And then he was gone, and Guy and May were left staring at each other
with blank faces.

The storm of wind and rain sobbed itself out before midnight, and in the
bluest of skies, heralded by banners of rosy clouds, rose up the sun
next morning. Before that rising sun had gilded the tops of the tallest
oaks in the park he, who had so lately called it all his own, had opened
the heavy oaken door and passed from Thetford Towers, as home, forever.
The house was very still--no one had risen; he had left a note to Guy,
with a few brief, warm words of farewell.

"Better so," he thought--"better so! He and May will be happy together,
for I know he loves her and she him. The memory of my leave-taking shall
never come to cloud their united lives."

One last backward glance at the eastern windows turning to gold; at the
sea blushing back the first glance of the day-king; at the waving trees
and swelling meadows, and then he had passed down the avenue, out
through the massive entrance-gates, and was gone.




CHAPTER XV.

AFTER FIVE YEARS.


Moonlight falling like a silvery veil over Venice--a crystal clear
crescent in a purple sky shimmering on palace and prison, churches,
squares and canals, on the gliding gondolas and the flitting forms
passing like noiseless shadows to and fro.

A young lady leaned from a window of a vast Venetian hotel, gazing
thoughtfully at the silver-lighted landscape, so strange, so unreal, so
dream-like to her unaccustomed eyes. A young lady, stately and tall,
with a pale, proud face, and a statuesque sort of beauty that was
perfect in its way. She was dressed in trailing robes of crape and
bombazine, and the face, turned to the moonlight, was cold and still as
marble.

She turned her eyes from the moonlit canal, down which dark gondolas
floated to the music of the gay gondolier's song; once, as an English
voice in the piazza below sung a stave of a jingling barcarole--

    "Oh! gay we row where full tides flow!
      And bear our bounding pinnace;
    And leap along where song meets song,
      Across the waves of Venice."

The singer, a tall young man, with a florid face and yellow
side-whiskers, an unmistakable son of the "right little, tight little"
island, paused in his song, as another man, stepping through an open
window, struck him an airy, sledge-hammer slap on the back.

"I ought to know that voice," said the last comer.

"Mortimer, my lad, how goes it?"

"Stafford!" cried the singer, seizing the outstretched hand in a genuine
English grip, "happy to meet you, old boy, in the land of romance! La
Fabre told me you were coming, but who would look for you so soon! I
thought you were doing Sorrento?"

"Got tired of Sorrento," said Stafford, taking his arm for a walk
up and down the piazza; "there's a fever there, too--quite an
epidemic--malignant typhus. Discretion is the better part of valor where
Sorrento fevers are concerned. I left."

"When did you reach Venice?" asked Mortimer, lighting a cigar.

"An hour ago; and now who's here? Any one I know!"

"Lots. The Cholmonadeys, the Lythons, the Howards, of Leighwood; and,
by-the-bye, they have with them the Marble Bride."

"The which?" asked Mr. Stafford.

"The Marble Bride, the Princess Frostina; otherwise Miss Aileen Jocyln,
of Jocyln Hall Devonshire. You knew the old colonel, I think; he died
over a year ago, you remember."

"Ah, yes! I remember. Is she here with the Howards, and as handsome as
ever, no doubt?"

"Handsome, to my mind, with an uplifted and unapproachable sort of
beauty. A fellow might as soon love some bright particular star, etc.,
as the fabulously wealthy heiress of all the Jocylns. She has no end of
suitors--all the best men here bow at the shrine of the ice-cold Aileen,
and all in vain."

"You among the rest, my friend?" with a light laugh.

"No, by Jove!" cried Mr. Mortimer; "that sort of thing--the marble
style, you know--never was to my taste. I admire Miss Jocyln
immensely--just as I do the moon up there, with no particular desire
ever to be nearer."

"What was that story I heard once, five years ago, about a
broken engagement? Wasn't Thetford of that ilk the hero of the
tale?--the romantic Thetford, who resigned his title and estate to a
mysteriously-found elder brother, you know. The story ran through the
papers and the clubs at the time like wildfire, and set the whole
country talking, I remember. She was engaged to him, wasn't she, and
broke off?"

"So goes the story--but who knows? I recollect that odd affair perfectly
well; it was like the melodramas on the sunny side of the Thames. I know
the 'mysteriously-found elder brother,' too--very fine fellow, Sir Guy
Thetford, and married to the prettiest little wife the sun shines on. I
must say Rupert Thetford behaved wonderfully well in that unpleasant
business; very few men would do as he did--they would, at least, have
made a fight for the title and estates. By-the-way, I wonder whatever
became of him?"

"I left him at Sorrento," said Stafford, coolly.

"The deuce you did! What was he doing there?"

"Raving in the fever; so the people told me with whom he stopped. I just
discovered he was in the place as I was about to leave it. He had fallen
very low, I fancy; his pictures didn't sell, I suppose; he has been in
the painting line since he ceased to be Sir Rupert, and the world has
gone against him. Rather hard on him to lose fortune, title, home,
bride, and all at one fell swoop. Some women there are who would go with
their plighted husbands to beggary; but I suppose the lovely Aileen is
not one of them."

"And so you left him ill of the fever? Poor fellow!"

"Dangerously ill."

"And the people with whom he is will take very little care of him; he's
as good as dead. Let us go in--I want to have a look at the latest
English papers."

The two men passed in, out of the moonlight, off the piazza, all
unconscious that they had had a listener. The pale watcher in the
trailing black robes, scarcely heeding them at first, had grown more and
more absorbed in the careless conversation. She caught her breath in
quick, short gasps, the dark eyes dilated, the slender hands pressed
themselves tight over the throbbing heart. As they went in off the
balcony she slid from her seat and held up her clasped hands to the
luminous night sky.

"Hear me, oh, God!" the white lips cried--"I, who have aided in wrecking
a noble heart--hear me, and help me to keep my vow! I offer my whole
life in atonement for the cruel and wicked past. If he dies, I shall go
to my grave his unwedded widow. If he lives----"

Her voice faltered and died out, her face drooped forward on the
window-sill, and the flashing moonlight fell like a benediction on the
bowed young head.




CHAPTER XVI.

AT SORRENTO.


The low light in the western sky was dying out; the bay of Naples lay
rosy in the haze of the dying day; and on this scene an invalid, looking
from a window high up on the sea-washed cliff at Sorrento, gazed
languidly.

For he was surely an invalid who sat in that window chair and gazed at
the wondrous Italian sea and that lovely Italian sky; surely an invalid,
with that pallid face, those spectral, hollow eyes, those sunken cheeks,
those bloodless lips; surely an invalid, and one but lately risen from
the very gates of death--a pale shadow, worn and weak as a child.

As he sits there, where he has sat for hours, lonely and alone, the door
opens, and an English face looks in--the face of an Englishman of the
lower classes.

"A visitor for you, sir--just come, and a-foot; a lady, sir. She will
not give her name, but wishes to see you most particular, if you
please."

"A lady! To see me?"

The invalid opens his great, dark eyes in wonder as he speaks.

"Yes, sir; an English lady, sir, dressed in black, and a wearing of a
thick veil. She asked for Mr. Rupert Thetford as soon as she see me, as
plain, as plain, sir----"

The young man in the chair started, half rose, and then sank back--a
wild, eager light lit in the hollow eyes.

"Let her come in; I will see her!"

The man disappeared; there was an instant's pause, then a tall, slender
figure, draped and veiled in black, entered alone.

The visitor stood still. Once more the invalid attempted to rise, once
more his strength failed him. The lady threw back her veil with a sudden
motion.

"My God, Aileen!"

"Rupert!"

She was on her knees before him, lifting her suppliant hands.

"Forgive me! Forgive me! I have seemed the most heartless and cruel of
women! But I, too, have suffered. I am base and unworthy; but, oh!
forgive me, if you can!"

The old love, stronger than death, shone in her eyes, plead in her
passionate, sobbing voice, and went to his very heart.

"I have been so wretched, so wretched all these miserable years! Whilst
my father lived I would not disobey his stern command that I was never
to attempt to see or hear from you, and at his death I could not. You
seemed lost to me and the world. Only by the merest accident I heard in
Venice you were here, and ill--dying. I lost no time, I came hither at
once, hoping against hope to find you alive. Thank God I did come! Oh,
Rupert! Rupert! for the sake of the past forgive me!"

"Forgive you!" and he tried to raise her. "Aileen--darling!"

His weak arms encircled her, and the pale lips pressed passionate kisses
on the tear-wet face.

So, whilst the red glory of the sunset lay on the sea, and till the
silver stars spangled the sky, the reunited lovers sat in the soft haze
as Adam and Eve may have in the loveliness of Eden.

"How long since you left England?" Rupert asked at length.

"Two years ago; poor papa died in the south of France. You mustn't blame
him too much, Rupert."

"My dearest, we will talk of blaming no one. And Guy and May are
married? I knew they would be."

"Did you? I was so surprised when I read it in the _Times_; for you know
May and I never corresponded--she was frantically angry with me. Do they
know you are here?"

"No; I rarely write, and I am constantly moving about; but I know Guy is
very much beloved in St. Gosport. We will go back to England one of
these days, my darling, and give them the greatest surprise they have
received since Sir Guy Thetford learned who he really was."

He smiled as he said it--the old bright smile she remembered so well.
Tears of joy filled the beautiful, upturned eyes.

"And you will go back? Oh, Rupert! it needed but this to complete my
happiness!"

He drew her closer, and then there was a long, delicious silence, whilst
they watched together the late-rising moon climbing the misty hills
above Castlemare.




CHAPTER XVII.

AT HOME.


Another sunset, red and gorgeous, over swelling English meadows, waving
trees, and grassy terrace, lighting up with its crimson radiance the
gray forest of Thetford Towers.

In the pretty, airy summer drawing-room, this red sunset streams through
open western windows, kindling everything into living light. It falls on
the bright-haired, girlish figure, dressed in floating white, seated in
an arm-chair in the center of the room: too childish looking, you might
fancy, at first sight, to be mamma to that fat baby she holds in her
lap; but she is not a bit too childish. And that is papa, tall and
handsome and happy, who leans over the chair and looks as men do look on
what is the apple of their eye and the pride of their heart.

"It is high time baby was christened, Guy," Lady Thetford--for, of
course, Lady Thetford it is--was saying; "and, do you know, I'm really
at a loss for a name. You won't let me call him Guy, and I shan't call
him Noel--and so what is it to be?"

"Rupert, of course," Sir Guy suggests; and little Lady Thetford pouts.

"He doesn't deserve the compliment. Shabby fellow! To keep wandering
about the world as he does, and never to answer one's letter; and I sent
him half a ream last time, if I sent him a sheet, telling all about
baby, and asking him to come and be godfather, and coaxing him with the
eloquence of a female Demos--what-you-may-call-him. And to think it
should be all of no use! To think of not receiving a line in return! It
is using me shamefully, and I don't believe I will call baby Rupert."

"Oh, yes you will, my dear! Well, Smithers, what is it?"

For Mr. Smithers, the butler, stood in the doorway, with a very pale and
startled face.

"It's a gentleman--leastways a lady--leastways a lady and gentleman. Oh!
here they come theirselves!"

Mr. Smithers retired precipitately, still pale and startled of visage,
as a gentleman, with a lady on his arm, stood before Sir Guy and Lady
Thetford.

There was a cry, a half shout, from the young baronet, a wild shriek
from the lady. She sprung to her feet, and, nearly dropped the precious
baby.

"Rupert! Aileen!"

She never got any further--this impetuous little Lady Thetford; for she
was kissing first one, then the other, crying and laughing and talking,
all in one breath.

"Oh, what a surprise this is! Oh, Rupert! I'm so glad, so glad to see
you again! Oh, Aileen! I never, never hoped for this! Oh! good gracious,
Guy, did you ever!"

But Guy was wringing his brother's hand, with bright tears standing in
his eyes, and quite unable to reply.

"And this is the baby, May? The wonderful baby you wrote me so much
about," Mr. Rupert Thetford said. "A noble little fellow, upon my
word--and a Thetford from top to toe. Am I in season to be godfather!"

"Just in time; and we are going to call it Rupert; and I was just
scolding dreadfully because you hadn't answered my letter, never
dreaming that you were coming to answer in person! I would as soon have
expected the man in the moon. And Aileen, too! And to think you should
be married, after all! Oh, gracious me! Do sit down and tell me all
about it!"

It was such a delightful evening, so like old times, and May in the
possession of a baby, that Rupert and Aileen nearly went delirious with
delight.

"And you are going to remain in England?" Sir Guy eagerly asked, when he
had heard a resume of those past five years. "Going to reside at Jocyln
Hall?"

"Yes; and be neighbors, if you will let us."

"Oh, I am so glad!"

"I promised Aileen; and now--now I am willing to be at home in England,"
and he looked fondly at his wife.

"It is just like a fairy-tale," said May.

"We haven't yet been to Jocyln Hall. We came at once here, to see this
prodigy of babies--my wonderful little namesake."

Very late that night, when the reunited friends sought their chambers,
May lifted her golden head off the pillow, and looked at her husband
entering the room.

"It's so very odd, Guy," slowly and drowsily, "to think that, after all,
a _Rupert Thetford_ should be SIR NOEL'S HEIR."



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIR NOEL'S HEIR***


******* This file should be named 35931.txt or 35931.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/5/9/3/35931



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

