The Project Gutenberg EBook of That Unfortunate Marriage, Vol. 2(of 3), by
Frances Eleanor Trollope

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: That Unfortunate Marriage, Vol. 2(of 3)

Author: Frances Eleanor Trollope

Release Date: April 24, 2011 [EBook #35944]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THAT UNFORTUNATE MARRIAGE ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                     THAT UNFORTUNATE MARRIAGE.

                     BY FRANCES ELEANOR TROLLOPE

AUTHOR OF "AUNT MARGARET'S TROUBLE," "A CHARMING FELLOW," "LIKE SHIPS
UPON THE SEA," ETC.


    _IN THREE VOLUMES._
    VOL. II.

    LONDON:
    RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON

    Publishers in Ordinary to Her Majesty the Queen.

    1888.

    (_All rights reserved._)




THAT UNFORTUNATE MARRIAGE.




CHAPTER I.


Four months in their passage leave traces, more or less perceptible, on
us all. On the first evening of May's arrival, her grandmother drew her
to the window, where the rosy light of a fine summer evening shone full
on her face, and scrutinized her long and lovingly. Then she kissed her
grand-daughter's cheek, and tapping her lightly on the forehead, said,
"This is not the big baby I parted from. You're a woman now, my lass.
God bless thee!" May stoutly declared that she was not changed at all;
that she had returned from all the pomps and vanities just the same May
as ever. But on her side she found changes.

On her first view of it in the glow of a rosy sunset, Jessamine Cottage
had been looking its best. The little parlour was fragrant with flowers,
and May's tiny bedroom was a pleasant nest of white dimity, smelling of
lavender and dried rose-leaves. She thought the house delightful. But a
very brief acquaintance showed it to be badly built and
inconvenient--one of those paltry "bandboxes" of which Mrs. Dobbs had
been wont to speak with contempt. Moreover, there was an indefinable air
of greater poverty than she remembered in Friar's Row; and--last and
worst of all--she thought granny herself looking ill. When she hinted
this privately to Uncle Jo, he scouted the idea. Ill? No, no; Sarah was
never ill. There was nothing amiss with Sarah. But the suggestion made
him look at his old friend with new observation, and he was forced to
acknowledge to himself that she was not quite so active as formerly. But
he still would not admit the idea of illness. "She'll be all right now
she's got you back again, Miranda," said Mr. Weatherhead, incautiously.
"It's the sperrit, you see--the sperrit has been preying on the body.
There's where it is."

The idea that granny had been fretting at her absence strengthened May
in her resolution not to return to London. If it were absolutely
insisted upon she must, she supposed, keep the compact and pay her visit
to Glengowrie. But after that she would resume her place by her
grandmother's side--the place to which duty and affection equally bound
her. She wrote to her father announcing this intention. And she
suggested that the money spent on her expenses in London would be far
better employed in paying granny handsomely for her board. "I do not
think she is so well off as she used to be," wrote May in simple good
faith. "And I am sure, my dear father, you will feel with me that we are
bound to do anything in the world we can to help her, after all her
goodness to me."

The subject which mainly occupied Mrs. Dobbs's waking thoughts after
May's arrival was the unknown "gentleman of princely fortune" who might
turn out to be May's fate. But, try as she would, she could find no clue
to May's feeling about this individual, nor could she discover who he
might be. Once she tried a joking question of a general kind about
sweethearts and admirers, but May's response was as far as possible from
the tone of a lovelorn maiden.

"Oh, for goodness' sake, granny, don't talk of such things. It makes me
_sick_!" was her very unexpected exclamation. And then, with a little
judicious cross-questioning, the story of Theodore Bransby's wooing came
out.

"Well, well, well, child, you needn't be so fierce! Poor young man! I
can't help feeling sorry for his disappointment," said Mrs. Dobbs.

"Don't waste your sorrow on him, granny; he ought to have known better."

"Well, as to that, May----" began her grandmother, with a slow smile
spreading over her face.

"Now, granny _dear_, only listen! At any rate he might have known better
_when he was told_, mightn't he? But he would not take 'no' for an
answer; and when Uncle Frederick spoke to him the next day, he was quite
rude, and declared--it makes me so hot when I think of it!--declared he
had been encouraged! The idea of his daring to say such a thing! And,
you know all the time I quite thought he was as good as engaged to Conny
Hadlow. Everybody said so in Oldchester."

"'Everybody' is a person who makes a good many mistakes about his
neighbours' affairs, May. Mrs. Simpson says that young Bransby is not
coming down here this summer."

"So much the better! However, in any case, he would not honour you with
one of his condescending visits _now_. Do you remember that evening when
he called in Friar's Row? How little we thought----"

May chatted with as much apparent candour and frankness as ever. But in
all her descriptions of the people whom she met in London there was not
one who seemed to fit Mrs. Dormer-Smith's unknown.

"Maybe her saying no word is a sign she likes him," reflected Mrs.
Dobbs; "girls will keep a secret of that kind very close. They are shy
of it even in their own thoughts. If I saw him and her together, I could
make a shrewd guess as to how things are."

But there was no chance of her seeing them together, and the gentleman
of princely fortune remained wrapped in mystery.

Meanwhile, May went to see her old friends, and was pronounced by most
of them to be quite unspoiled by her London season. But one critical
spirit, at least, there was in Oldchester, who did not look on Miss
Cheffington with unmixed approbation: Mr. Sebastian Bach Simpson
declared that she gave herself airs.

One of the first visits which May paid was to the old house in College
Quad. The Canon received her with his former paternal benevolence; but,
at first, a slight indefinable chill was perceptible in Mrs. Hadlow's
usually cordial manner. A little maternal jealousy on the subject of
Theodore Bransby rankled in her mind. It was true that Constance did not
seem to care for him; would not probably have accepted him had he asked
her. But, under all the circumstances, Mrs. Hadlow was strongly of
opinion that he ought to have asked her. And then a rumour reached
Oldchester of Theodore's attentions to Miss Cheffington. But there was
no resisting May's warm and single-minded praises of her friend. It
seemed that Conny's prospects had grown unexpectedly brilliant. Mr. Owen
Rivers, who had recently reappeared in Oldchester after his own erratic
fashion, walking in one morning unexpectedly to his aunt's quaint old
sitting-room, pronounced his cousin to have made a great social success.
"You know my opinion of the worth of that game, Aunt Jane," said he.
"But, such as it is, Conny has won it. Old Lord Castlecombe is in love
with her. And--which is far more important--so is Mrs. Griffin. You and
I always knew she was handsome. But there are certain people to whom the
evidence of their senses is as nothing compared with the evidence of
peers, and griffins, and such-like heraldic creatures."

"My Aunt Pauline is in love with Conny, too," declared May. "I ought to
be jealous; for Aunt Pauline is always quoting Constance Hadlow to me as
an example of everything that is delightful in a girl. But I knew it
before. I didn't wait for the heraldic creatures, did I, Mrs. Hadlow?"

And so the old affectionate, familiar intercourse was resumed, and May
was welcomed in the old way. The Canon missed his daughter, and had not
consented easily to her prolonged absence. He liked to see young faces
around him; and May's face was particularly pleasant to him. At first
May had refused to leave her grandmother. But Mrs. Dobbs urged her to
spend some hours every day with the Hadlows. "I have my own occupations
in the daytime," she said; "and when you come home of an evening, and
tell me all your sayings and doings, I can enjoy it comfortably. I don't
want you hanging about this poky little place all day, my lass."

The girl was the more easily persuaded to do as her grandmother wished
in this matter from her own secret resolve to fix herself in Oldchester.
She did not grudge the hours given to her friends. There would be plenty
more time to be spent with granny. So she thought; reckoning on the
morrow with the assurance of youth. Day after day she sat during the hot
afternoon hours under the black shadow of the old yew tree in the
Canon's garden; sometimes volunteering to do some task of needlework for
Mrs. Hadlow, sometimes winding wool for the Canon's grey socks,
sometimes making up posies for the adornment of the sitting-room. And
there was Fox, the terrier, dividing his attentions between her and his
mistress; the peaceful Wend flowing by on the other side of the hedge;
the garden blooming, the birds twittering, the distant schoolboys
shouting, the sweet cathedral bells chiming,--everything as it had been
last summer.

And yet not quite as it had been. There was some subtle difference
between these afternoons and the afternoons of last summer.

It was not merely that Constance was missed, nor that Theodore Bransby
no longer made one of the group beneath the yew tree. Of these changes
one was scarcely to be regretted--for Conny was enjoying herself
extremely, and only desired to prolong her leave of absence--and the
other was undoubtedly satisfactory. But this could not surely suffice to
make it a deep delight to sit silent and wind balls of gray worsted for
half an hour at a stretch! Was it the negative joy of Theodore's absence
which caused May to look forward with her first waking thoughts to those
hours in the garden, and to live them over again in her mind when she
lay down to rest at night? It seemed as if the London season, far from
spoiling her for simple things, had marvellously enhanced the quiet
pleasures of her home life, and given them a new intensity.

They were very quiet pleasures, truly. Mary Rayne and the Burton girls
seldom appeared in College Quad now that Constance was away. Mrs. Hadlow
had no lawn-tennis court, as has already been set forth; and persons who
gave up their garden-ground to the frivolous purpose of growing flowers
could not expect their younger friends to spare them many minutes out of
a summer's day. Visitors of the sterner sex were chiefly represented by
Major Mitton and Dr. Hatch, with a liberal sprinkling of the elder
cathedral clergy.

The eldest Miss Burton said to May once, "I can't imagine how you stand
the dull life down here after your aunt's house in town! But I suppose
you are simply resting on your oars. We hear you are to go to Glengowrie
in the autumn. How delicious! The Duchess is sure to have her house
filled with nice people."

May emphatically denied that she was dull in Oldchester. Dull! She had
never, she thought, been so happy in her life. "I wonder," said she to
Mrs. Hadlow that same afternoon, "whether Violet Burton feels Oldchester
to be dull. And if not, why should she assume that I do?"

"Violet has a serious object in life, you know. She is the best tennis
player in the county. One cannot be dull with an absorbing pursuit of
that sort," answered Mrs. Hadlow, who, with all her genial benevolence,
had an occasional turn of the tongue which proved her kinship with her
nephew Owen.

"The fact is," observed the latter, who was lying under the yew tree
with a pipe in his mouth, and an uncut magazine in his hand, "that each
of us carries his own supply of dulness about with him independently of
external circumstances. Not but what there are conceivable cases where
external circumstances would have a tremendous dulness-producing power;
such as being banished to a desolate shore beyond the reach of 'baccy;'
or having to read the Parliamentary debates right through every day."

"Or being obliged to attend a musical afternoon at Miss Piper's London
lodging three times a week," put in May, laughing. "You don't know what
a hopeless heretic he is, Mrs. Hadlow. Even amiable Mr. Sweeting gave
him up in despair. And Lady Moppett thinks he ought to be
excommunicated."

"Well, I suppose he need not have gone to Miss Piper's unless he had
chosen to do so," said Aunt Jane. "Owen is rather fond of being pitied
for having his own way. He ate his cake in the shape of enjoying Miss
Piper's music, and had it in the shape of declaring himself a victim."

"_Enjoying----?_ Good heavens!" exclaimed Owen, waving his pipe in
protest.

"Why did you go, then?"

To this simple query Owen made no other response than muttering, with
his pipe between his teeth again, that there were "compensations."

"Owen," said his aunt abruptly, after a long silence, "you are a most
unsatisfactory spectacle to behold."

"That's disappointing, Aunt Jane. I flattered myself that I was a thing
of beauty and a joy for ever."

"I shouldn't care about your not being ornamental, if only you were
useful. But it is dreadful to see you wasting your life."

"I assure you I am employing my life in a very agreeable manner just
now," answered Owen, resting on his elbow, and glancing up from under
the shadow of his straw hat.

"Agreeable! That is not the point."

"It's _my_ point."

"Ah! Well, we won't begin a wrangle, Owen; but----"

"My dear Aunt Jane! Do I ever wrangle with you?"

"You do worse. I'm afraid you are incorrigible. But every one else sees
that I am right. Ask May what she thinks."

May started, and coloured violently; but she kept her eyes on the
needlework in her hand, and said nothing.

"No; I shall not ask Miss Cheffington. She is a partisan, and would be
sure to side with you."

"Not at all. May has her own opinions; haven't you, May?"

"One can't help having opinions," returned May shyly.

"Good gracious! Miss Cheffington, what an extraordinarily wild
assertion! 'Can't help having opinions----'? One might suppose you had
been nurtured among sages, and had never heard of Mr. Thomas Carlyle's
celebrated majority."

"I have been nurtured by Granny," rejoined May, lifting her eyes for the
first time with a bright, brief glance.

"Ay," exclaimed Mrs. Hadlow, "I'd advise you to ask Mrs. Dobbs what
_she_ thinks of a young man with your education and talents--oh, you
need not disclaim having brains, it only makes your case so much the
worse!--sitting lazily in his form, and letting all sorts of
dunderheaded tortoises win the race."

"Bravo, Aunt Jane! I like 'dunderheaded tortoises.' 'Mobled Queen is
good.'"

"You wouldn't enjoy hearing Mrs. Dobbs's opinion, I can tell you. I know
very well what she would say," pursued Mrs. Hadlow, more than half
angry.

"I should like to ask her myself," said Owen, rising to his feet. "Do
you think I might, Miss Cheffington?"

"Of course! If you have courage!" answered May, looking up with a smile.

"I'm quite in earnest; I have long wished to know Mrs. Dobbs. Do you
think she would consider it a liberty if I were to call?"

May cast her eyes down again, and became very busy with her needlework.
"No," she answered; "I don't think Granny would consider it a liberty;
she knows about you. I mean she knows you are Mrs. Hadlow's nephew."

Mrs. Hadlow gave no more thought to this conversation, and May, although
she gave many thoughts to it, told herself that Mr. Rivers had only been
jesting, and that nothing was more unlikely than that he should fulfil
his words. She told herself so, with all the more insistence because at
the bottom of her heart she longed that he and "Granny" should know each
other.

Nevertheless, on the very next afternoon, when May was absent, Owen
Rivers did call at Jessamine Cottage.

He was at once received with cordiality for his aunt's sake, but he soon
earned a welcome for his own. Jo Weatherhead took to him amazingly.
"That's what I call a gentleman," said he, "a real gentleman--sterling
metal, and not Brummagem electro-plating. What a difference from that
young Bransby! A stuck-up, impudent--but, Lord! what could one expect
from an old Rabbitt's grandson! There's where it is."

"Mr. Rivers is a good Radical, Jo," Mrs. Dobbs answered slyly. Whereupon
Jo nodded his head with undiminished complacency, and declared that if
it wasn't for such Radicals as _them_, Radicalism might soon shut up
shop altogether; concluding with his favourite apophthegm that many good
things came down from above, but very few mounted up from below.




CHAPTER II.


Owen Rivers was greatly attracted by Mrs. Dobbs. He admired her
uprightness of character, and downrightness of speech; her shrewd common
sense, combined with unpretending simplicity; her indomitable strength
of purpose, tempered by broad good nature. At the very beginning of
their acquaintance, he told her that he had been recommended by his aunt
Jane to take her (Mrs. Dobbs's) opinion as to his mode of life. And when
Mrs. Dobbs tried to put him off by declaring that Mrs. Hadlow must have
been joking, he answered that he, at any rate, was not joking; and
begged her to speak candidly.

"If I speak at all, I shall speak candidly, you may depend," said Mrs.
Dobbs.

And, in truth, Owen soon found that he had no cause to complain of her
lack of plain speaking. Mrs. Dobbs was wholly and heartily on the side
of Aunt Jane, and held many a stout argument with the young man.

"But, pray, how is one to manage?" asked Owen. "My aunt says, 'Go into a
profession.' Easier said than done! Besides, although I might not object
to be Lord Chancellor--or even, perhaps, Admiral of the Fleet--I have no
relish for the intermediate stages, which makes a difficulty."

"That's all stuff and nonsense," said Mrs. Dobbs bluntly. "It's a shame
to see a gentleman with your book-learning, and good gifts, wasting the
advantages God has given him."

"Wasting my advantages! That's Aunt Jane's pet phrase. But those are
mere words, you know."

"Words are words, for certain. And nuts are nuts. Only some of 'em hold
sound kernels, whilst others have got nothing inside but dust."

"Well, come now, let us get at the kernel," said Owen, half earnest,
half amused. "What would you have me do, Mrs. Dobbs?"

"Do! Any honest work that's of use to your fellow creatures."

"Such as stone-breaking, for instance?"

"Better than nothing."

"And my 'advantages' would not then be wasted, I presume?"

"You might be getting a quarter per cent. for 'em--or maybe
less--instead of doubling your capital. But that would be better than
keeping all you've got in a stocking, like some ignorant old woman, and
pulling out a shilling at a time whenever you happen to want it."

Many such passages of arms did they have; and Owen told himself that
Mrs. Dobbs was a very interesting study. Meanwhile, from the superior
vantage ground of her seniority, she had been making one or two studies
of _him_; and the result of them induced her to give him a hint as to
May's prospects. "I shall let him know how the land lies," said she to
herself. "Very likely he's in no danger. So much the better. But I'll
act fair by the young man. He's one of them quiet-looking sort that
feels very deeply; though, for all his humble-mindedness, he's a deal
too proud to show it."

Accordingly Mrs. Dobbs took her opportunity one afternoon when Owen
strolled in somewhat earlier than usual. He and his hostess were
_tete-a-tete_; for May had gone to lunch with Mrs. Martin Bransby, and
to enjoy a romp afterwards with the children, who adored her.

"Do you know this Duchess my grand-daughter is going to visit, Mr.
Rivers?" began Mrs. Dobbs abruptly.

"To the best of my belief I never saw her in my life. My acquaintance
among duchesses is not extensive."

"Nor yet her mother--Mrs. Griffin?"

"Mrs. Griffin I have seen; and I make her a bow when we meet. That's
about all."

"They are very kind to May."

"Small blame to them! And yet I don't know; it is to their credit, when
one comes to think of it."

"May talks of wishing to give up her visit."

"She is unwilling to leave you, I believe."

"Yes; bless her! But I mustn't give in to that." Then with a little air
of hesitation very unusual with her, Mrs. Dobbs proceeded: "I want you
and Mrs. Hadlow and all her friends not to encourage her in that idea.
The fact is, it is very important that May should not miss going to
Glengowrie this autumn. More important than she knows."

Owen Rivers leant forward with a sudden attentive contraction of the
brows. "What is it?" he asked brusquely. Then, remembering himself, he
added, "I beg your pardon. I didn't mean to put a conversational pistol
to your head; nor to demand any secrets from you."

"I don't know that there are any secrets, Mr. Rivers. But you understand
there are certain--certain opportunities which I am bound to give May,
if I can. I'm not one for forcing buckets of water down any horse's
throat, but unless you take him to the water he can't drink if he would.
The truth is, that I am anxious about my grandchild's future. When I am
gone, she will be left very desolate, poor lamb!" She paused suddenly,
and pressed her lips together. Then, after a minute's silence, she went
on more firmly, "God knows I never wished my poor daughter to marry
above her station; her marriage was a sore stroke to me. But now,
whatever you and me may think about distinctions of rank, it's certain
that May has a right to a lady's place in the world, through her
father's birth and family. I sacrificed a good deal in parting from her
at all--sacrificed my feelings, I mean--and I don't want it all to be
wasted. I want the child to get some good out of it, do you see, Mr.
Rivers?"

"I see."

"And don't you think I'm right?"

"Yes; the horse ought to have his choice in that matter of drinking."

"I'm glad you agree with me. My dear old friend Jo Weatherhead is half
inclined to think me wrong. He says I ought to consider the child's
happiness first and foremost, and that, if being with fine folks don't
make her happy, I ought to let her give them up. But May is very young
still--barely eighteen; she hasn't had time to judge. I wouldn't have
her think, later on, that this or that good thing might have befallen
her if she had had her chance and seen more of the world. It's bitter to
look back on opportunities lost or wasted, and that," added Mrs. Dobbs,
changing her tone, and shaking hands with the young man, who had risen
to go away, "is why I take the liberty of scolding _you_ now and then.
But I hope an old granny like me may speak her mind without offence?
That's one of our privileges."

It seemed clear that Owen Rivers, at all events, was not offended. His
visits to Jessamine Cottage grew longer and more frequent. It became an
established custom for him to drop in at tea-time. Very often when May
had been spending the afternoon at the Canon's house, he would escort
her home through the fields. That was a longer way than by the streets;
but so much pleasanter, that their preference for it was surely very
natural.

Oh, those rambles by the Wend, with the pearly evening sky above them,
the dewy, flower-speckled grass under foot, and in their ears the sound
of the sweet chimes, which seemed but to accompany some still sweeter
melody, felt not heard. May gave herself no account of the charm which
encompassed her. She looked not "before and after," but was happy, as
youth alone can be happy, in the intense sweetness of the present. Later
life has happiness of its own; but not that. It may be more or less, but
it is different. Those young delights can no more return than a rose can
furl itself again into a rosebud. And as to Owen, if his day-dream was
sometimes pierced by a sharp ray of common sense from the work-a-day
world, he turned his eyes away, and plunged still deeper into the
rainbow-tinted cloudland of young love.

It could not hurt _her_, he argued. It could hurt no one but himself,
and he was prepared to suffer. She was sweet and kind; but she had
not--she could not have--any special feeling of tenderness for him. If,
indeed, that could be possible----! But what was there in him to attract
so lovely and lovable a creature as May Cheffington? A strongly-marked
trait in Owen's character was what Mrs. Hadlow, being hotly provoked by
some manifestation of it, had once designated as "pig-headed modesty!"
It was obstinate enough, truly, at times; and it had a warp of
inflexible pride in the woof of it. But it was genuine modesty for all
that. Still he would not so resolutely have shut his eyes to the
possibility that this matter of falling in love might be mutual, but for
Mrs. Dobbs's well-meant words of warning. May was going away in a week
or two--away out of his reach, perhaps for ever. Since she was in no
danger, he need, surely, have no scruple in enjoying these few happy
moments in her company. They would probably be the last. No one
suspected his feeling, and he could keep his own counsel.

He honestly believed that no one suspected him. His Aunt Jane, whose
observation might have been the most to be dreaded, was in truth blind
to what was going on under her eyes. In the first place, it was nothing
new or unusual for Owen to spend his afternoons under the yew tree in
her garden; nor for May Cheffington to be there also. And it did not
occur, it scarcely could have occurred, to Conny's mother, that Conny
was being a second time supplanted by this girl so much her inferior in
beauty. And then, too, it must be acknowledged, that neither May nor
Owen thought it necessary to trouble Mrs. Hadlow with any detailed
report of the number of visits which her nephew paid to Jessamine
Cottage; nor with a chronicle of their many evening strolls beside the
Wend. Such strange tricks does love play with all: making the simple
cunning, and the straightforward wily, almost in spite of themselves!
While as for Mrs. Dobbs, her usual keenness with regard to her
grand-daughter was baffled by a vision of "the gentleman of princely
fortune" on whom May had been said to look favourably; and there were
but few opportunities for other eyes to note the behaviour of Owen and
May towards each other.

The custom of the Saturday evening whist-parties, at which Mr. and Mrs.
Simpson and Mr. Weatherhead were the only guests, had been unavoidably
broken through at the time of Mrs. Dobbs's removal from Friar's Row:
and, although efforts had been made to renew it, it had somehow
languished, like a plant whose roots have been disturbed. Sometimes two
or three weeks would elapse without the Simpsons appearing at Jessamine
Cottage on the accustomed Saturday evening. The amiable Amelia tried to
compensate for these gaps in their social intercourse by running in at
odd moments to see Mrs. Dobbs. She would frequently call on her way home
from Mrs. Bransby's, or some other house where she gave lessons, and
chat in her discursive style: smilingly unconscious, for the most part,
whether Mrs. Dobbs vouchsafed her any attention or not; but always too
sweet-tempered to resent it, if she chanced to discover that Mrs. Dobbs
had not heard three sentences of all she had been saying. On one topic
she was, at any rate, sure of being listened to: the words "our dear
Miranda" were certain to arouse Mrs. Dobbs from her deepest fit of
musing; and fits of musing had become more and more frequent with her of
late.

It was not clear whether Mrs. Simpson had taken to call May "Miranda" by
way of ceremoniously acknowledging her place in the world as a young
lady who had been presented at Court; or whether she considered three
syllables to be intrinsically more genteel than one; or whether she had
simply caught the word from the fashionable journals which had
chronicled the appearance of Miss Miranda Cheffington at various
festivities of the season. Mrs. Simpson's reasons for doing or leaving
undone were usually of a tangled kind, and an endeavour to extricate one
of them often resulted in pulling up a number of others by the roots. At
all events, Mrs. Simpson had taken to speak of May as "our dear
Miranda," and the words infallibly insured her an attentive hearing from
Mrs. Dobbs for whatever might follow them. If Mr. Weatherhead chanced to
be present at any of Amelia's erratic visits, he listened willingly to
all the gossip she might pour forth. It was always good-natured gossip.
Sebastian might bear a grudge here and there, and might impute shabby
motives to the conduct of his fellow-creatures; but Amelia never. There
seemed to be an excess of saccharine matter in her disposition which
flavoured every word she said. This species of excess being somewhat
uncommon, many persons pronounced poor Mrs. Simpson to be an arrant
humbug. But, had she been consciously a humbug, she would assuredly have
distributed her sweet speeches with more discretion; for nothing is less
popular than uncritical eulogy--of other people.

There was an unusual air of excitement about her when she appeared one
afternoon in Jessamine Cottage. She found its mistress knitting in her
accustomed arm-chair, with Jo Weatherhead seated opposite to her reading
aloud paragraphs from a local newspaper.

"My _dear_ Mrs. Dobbs," cried Amelia, bursting in breathlessly, "how do
you do? _And_ Mr. Weatherhead! Now this is quite against rules--or, at
least, against custom; for I am sure you would never make such a rule.
You are far too hospitable. But as I _was_ passing--so nice to be
neighbours instead of Friar's Row, though I shall ever look on Friar's
Row with affection for the sake of old times. What is it the poet says
about 'portions and parcels of the dreadful past'? Only there was
nothing dreadful in our little suppers; and Martha's stewed tripe beyond
praise."

"I hope you are going to eat some of our little supper to-night," said
Mrs. Dobbs, composedly. "It's Saturday, you know."

"How odd you should say that! It is exactly the remark I made to Bassy
this morning! Oh yes; certainly. And, as I was saying just now, it's
quite _hors ligne_, as the French express it, to inflict myself on you
twice in one day."

"You know you are very welcome."

"You're always _so_ kind, dear Mrs. Dobbs! I have been busy teaching all
the morning. This very moment I have come from Miss Piper's and----"

"You are not giving _her_ lessons, are you?" asked Mrs. Dobbs, looking
up with a smile.

"Oh dear, no! Not, I'm sure, that she would not be an excellent pupil;
indeed, both of them in their different styles. One the accomplished
musician, and the other so domesticated. No doubt you will hear of it
from our dear Miranda, for of course she will be invited. But I thought
I would mention it."

"Mention what?--eh?" asked Jo Weatherhead, with impatient curiosity.

"The party. They are going to give a musical party. Though really I
might omit the adjective, for who could imagine the Miss Pipers giving a
party that _wasn't_ musical? To be sure some persons find it rather
trying. Bassy, for instance, _cannot_ altogether approve the new school.
But then he was brought up in the strictest classical principles, and he
is so very clever himself, that of course----!"

Some native gift of incoherency which distinguished Mrs. Simpson's mind
enabled her to reconcile the most conflicting claims on her admiration.

"Ho, ho! a party, eh? A musical party?" said Mr. Weatherhead.

"Yes; but of course there is nothing remarkable in _that_," replied Mrs.
Simpson, very unexpectedly.

"Nothing at all remarkable, I should think," assented Mrs. Dobbs.

"Ah! But the _point_ is--oh, pussy! Poor old pussy, _did_ I hurt her?
Dear, dear, dear!"

In the act of throwing herself forward from her place on the sofa, in
order to touch Mrs. Dobbs's arm, and thus emphasize her communication,
Amelia had accidentally set her foot on the tail of the old tabby cat,
who at once protested in the frankest manner.

"I'm so sorry! I am so very nearsighted. Poor old pussums! Come and let
us make it up--won't you, like a dear?"

Poor old pussums, however, declined these advances, and took up her
position on the other side of her mistress's ample skirts; whence for
some time she glared distrustfully at every fresh manifestation of Mrs.
Simpson's playful vivacity.

"Well, for goodness' sake tell us the point, if there is one!" cried Mr.
Weatherhead, who had been irritably rubbing his nose during this
episode.

"Ah! Naughty impatience! That is so like a gentleman! Gentlemen are
dreadfully impatient in general; don't you agree with me, Mrs. Dobbs?
However, it really will be quite a musical treat. Mr. Cleveland Turner
is one of the most rising musicians of the day; I believe nobody can
understand his compositions without severe preliminary training. Mr.
Sweeting, too, is _most_ amiable; he has taken a country house in the
neighbourhood. And Miss Piper has invited a young lady down to stay with
her who sings divinely--quite divinely, Miss Piper says; and, indeed, I
have no doubt she does, for I _saw_ her name mentioned in the _Morning
Post_ at a very aristocratic _soiree_. And Bassy and I are to be
invited!"

"Are you, now? Well, I'm glad of it," said Mrs. Dobbs heartily. She knew
this was a distinction which would give her friends pleasure.

"Yes; Bassy is to accompany the young lady's songs on the piano. Mr.
Cleveland Turner will not accompany;--or, at least, not anything of a
tuneful sort. He doesn't like it. Well, you know, there's no accounting
for tastes, is there? Most people think strawberries delicious. But I
_have_ known a person who couldn't touch them--_invariably_ produced a
rash!"

With which lucid illustration Mrs. Simpson rose, and declared she must
positively be going. After an effusive leavetaking--in the course of
which the old tabby leaped on to the back of Mrs. Dobbs's chair, where
she sat arching her spine and growling--the good lady set forth on her
way down the little garden-path in front of the house. But scarcely had
she reached the gate, when she turned and tripped back again with a
girlish step, which neither increase of years nor flesh had much
sobered. "I never delivered my message," she said; "and really it is an
extraordinary instance of my absence of mind, for that was the chief
reason why I came at all at this hour. I was at Mrs. Bransby's about
four o'clock, and left our dear Miranda there."

Here she paused so long that Mrs. Dobbs replied, "Yes; I knew May was
going to call there."

"Now I dare say you will scarcely credit it," said Amelia, with her head
on one side, her spectacles glistening, and an arch smile illumining her
countenance, "but, for the moment, I had totally forgotten again what I
was going to say!"

"Lord bless the woman!" muttered Jo Weatherhead, in a tone not, perhaps,
quite so inaudible as politeness required.

"But I have it now. This is the message; our dear Miranda begged me to
tell you that she will remain at Mrs. Bransby's for afternoon tea, and
come home in the cool of the evening. Mrs. Bransby--indeed, all the
family--are _most_ kind to her. Of course I don't mean to say that after
the brilliant scenes of London society it can be any particular treat to
her, although anything more truly elegant than Mrs. Bransby's new cream
broche I never beheld in my life. However, they pressed our dear Miranda
to stay. And she remarked to me that 'Granny would not be left alone,
for she knew Mr. Weatherhead was coming.' And now"--looking at her
watch--"I must _fly_, or I shall be too late for tea; and then what
would Bassy say?" She tripped once more down the garden path, stopped at
the gate to wave her hand, and at length finally departed.




CHAPTER III.


Meanwhile, May was playing with Mrs. Martin Bransby's children, in the
delightful old walled garden; and Mrs. Martin Bransby herself was
looking on from the shade of a trellised arbour. These two had become
very good friends. Whether Mrs. Bransby was or was not aware of her
stepson's rejected suit, May had no means of knowing; but she felt
instinctively that Mrs. Bransby was not likely to be super-sensitive on
her stepson's behalf, nor to bear her a grudge for having refused him.
Theodore's absence was not lamented in his own home. His young
half-brothers and sisters openly rejoiced at it; and even his father
felt that life went on more pleasantly without him.

May's popularity with the children was a sure passport to their mother's
heart; while on her side Mrs. Bransby had developed a most endearing
trait of character: she liked Owen Rivers, and was always happy to
welcome him to her house. Although Owen admired her beauty and elegance
extremely, there was no alloy of coquetry in the preference she showed
for his company. Indeed, Owen told his Aunt Jane that Mrs. Bransby's
delight in adorning her graceful person came nearer to being a pure case
of _l'Art pour l'Art_ than any he had ever witnessed. Nevertheless, the
most transcendental of artists enjoys appreciation. So it chanced that
on this special afternoon, Mr. Rivers being announced just when she was
urging May to remain and drink tea with her, Mrs. Bransby at once
suggested that perhaps Mr. Rivers would stay too, and be kind enough to
see Miss Cheffington home. Mr. Rivers handsomely acceded to the
proposal; and these three persons passed a very agreeable afternoon
together.

The romping, happy children, with that disregard for any "plurality of
worlds" theory which belongs to their age, accepted the whole
arrangement as being ordained for their sole and peculiar enjoyment.
Under this impression they declined to allow Owen to remain lounging
beside their mother in the shade, but imperiously required him "not to
be lazy," but to "come and play." He withstood the clamour of the boys
for some time; but when three-year-old Enid toddled up to him, and
gravely seized one of his hands with both hers, evidently under the
conviction that she was quite able to drag him off with her by main
force, it was impossible to resist any longer. A very noisy game--known
to the younger Bransbys under the alliterative appellation of "Tiggy,
Tiggy, touchwood," and which involved a great deal of confused rushing
about, and shrill vociferation--was proceeding in the liveliest manner,
when forth from the long window of the drawing-room stepped a figure at
sight of whom Martin, the eldest boy, stopped short in a headlong
course, and Bobby and Billy were so surprised that they checked a wild
halloo in their very throats.

It was Theodore. He was dressed in travelling garb (Theodore had
appropriate costumes for every department of life; and adhered to them
as punctiliously as a Chinese), and was advancing with his usual erect
gravity towards his step-mother, when, catching sight of May and Owen,
he stopped, surprised in his turn.

"Dear me, Theodore, is that you?" said Mrs. Bransby, rising and coming
forward. "When did you arrive? We did not expect you. You did not write,
did you?"

"No; I took a sudden resolution to run down for a week. I wished to
consult my father about a little matter of business, and I wanted change
of air besides."

In answer to Mrs. Bransby's nervous inquiries whether the servants had
attended to him, and whether she should order his room to be prepared,
he replied--

"Thanks; I have given the necessary orders. My valise has been carried
upstairs. I will go and wash my hands, and then I shall ask you for a
cup of tea, if you please," glancing at the table already spread beneath
the trees. Then he marched up to May, who was standing on the lawn, with
a look of little less dismay than the children ingenuously exhibited. He
raised his hat with one hand, and shook her reluctant hand with the
other, saying in his deliberate accents--

"This is truly an unexpected favour of Fortune. I knew you were in
Oldchester, but I scarcely hoped to find you _here_. How do you do,
Rivers?" (This in an indefinable tone of condescension.) Then again
addressing himself to May, he said, "You have not had any communication
from town this morning?"

"No."

"Nor from Combe Park?"

"Oh no!"

"Ah! I imagined not. May I beg the favour of a word with you presently?
I am only going to get rid of some of the dust of travel. You will still
be here when I return?"

May was tempted to declare that she positively must go home immediately.
But before she could speak Mrs. Bransby answered for her: "Oh, of course
Miss Cheffington will be here still. I do not mean to let her run away
just yet."

Then, with another formal bow, Theodore returned to the house and
disappeared through the drawing-room window.

There was an awkward silence, broken by Martin's exclaiming, in a solemn
tone, "He's just like the vampire."

The laugh which followed came as a relief to the embarrassment of the
elders.

"Martin!" exclaimed his mother reprovingly.

"Well, mother, he _is_," persisted Martin, who was unspeakably disgusted
at the sudden quenching of the festivities. "What does he come stalking
and prowling like that for? He's _exactly_ like the vampire!"

May and Owen avoided each other's eye, feeling a guilty consciousness
that Martin had in a great measure expressed their own sentiments.
Certainly, the whole party appeared to have been suddenly iced. The
three younger children were dismissed to the nursery; and Martin and his
sister Ethel voluntarily withdrew, feeling that all the fun was over. A
large slice of cake apiece was looked upon as very inadequate amends,
and accepted under protest.

"I should think he might have stayed in London when he _was_ there,"
grumbled Martin, as he walked away, viciously digging his heels into the
turf at every step by way of a vent to his injured feelings. "Nobody
wants stalking, prowling vampires _here_. Why couldn't he stop in
London?"

As though "stalking, prowling vampires" were generally admitted to be
popular members of society in the metropolis.

Mr. Rivers and the two ladies beguiled the time until Theodore should
return, by drinking tea and discussing Miss Piper's forthcoming musical
party. Curiously enough no one said a word about young Bransby. They all
seemed to avoid the topic by a tacit understanding. But though out of
sight, he was not out of mind--at any rate, he was not out of May's
mind. She was secretly wondering what he could have to say to her. Could
he possibly intend to renew his offer of marriage? The idea seemed a
wild one; nevertheless, it darted through her mind. One could never
tell, she thought, what his obstinate self-conceit might lead him to do.
However, May resolved, come what might, to cling tightly to Mrs.
Bransby's sheltering presence so long as she remained in that house; and
in going home she would have the protection of Mr. Rivers's escort. Even
Theodore Bransby could scarcely propose to her before these witnesses!

At length Theodore reappeared, brushed and trim, in speckless raiment.
He took his place at the tea-table; and after the exchange of a few
commonplace remarks, silence stole over the company. Theodore seemed to
be waiting for something; and from time to time he looked at Owen as
though expecting him to take his leave. Finally he cleared his throat,
and said gravely, "Miss Cheffington, I see you are not taking any more
tea; may I crave the favour of a few words with you?"

"Oh, please, I think I _will_ have some more tea," said May, hastily
pushing her cup towards Mrs. Bransby. Theodore, who had half risen from
his chair, bowed, resumed his seat, and folded his arms in a waiting
attitude. Then May added, with desperate resolution, "Will you not be
kind enough to say what you have to say, now? I must be going home
immediately; and I'm sure there can be no secrets to tell." She buried
her face in her teacup to hide the colour which flamed into her cheeks
as she said the words.

"If you desire it," returned Theodore stiffly, "of course I shall obey.
I merely thought you might prefer to receive painful tidings in----"

"Painful!" cried May, turning pale, and suddenly interrupting him. "Is
anything the matter with Granny?"

A glance at his raised eyebrows reassured her, for the next moment she
said, "Oh, how stupid I am! Of course you could know nothing, you have
only just arrived. It isn't--it isn't my father, is it?"

"Pray do not alarm yourself, Miss Cheffington. Captain Cheffington is,
so far as I know, perfectly well."

"Wouldn't it be better to speak out?" said Owen. As soon as he had
spoken, he felt that he had no right to put in his word. But he could
not help it; Theodore's self-important slowness was too exasperating.

"Yes; do, please," said May.

"There is no cause for alarm, as I said," returned Theodore, trying to
look as if he had not heard Owen's suggestion. "But a shock--a slight
shock--is apt to be felt at the announcement of sudden death, even in
the case of a total stranger."

"Sudden death!"

"Yes; I regret to inform you that your cousin, George Cheffington, has
been killed by the accidental discharge of a gun, when he was on a
shooting expedition up the country."

All three of his listeners drew a deep sigh of relief.

"Oh!" sighed May, the colour returning to her cheeks and lips, "I felt a
horrible fear for the moment about Aunt Pauline!"

"This is a very important event," said Theodore, looking over his cravat
with his House-of-Commons air, and indicating by his tone that the fate
of Aunt Pauline was a matter of comparative insignificance.

"I am sorry for poor old Lord Castlecombe," said May.

"It will, of course, be a severe blow to your great-uncle; all the more
so that Mr. Lucius Cheffington is in deplorably weak health."

"Lucius is never very strong, is he?"

"He is never robust, but this season he has been extremely delicate. I
have reason to believe that a very high medical authority has expressed
considerable anxiety about him."

"Does Aunt Pauline know?--I mean about George Cheffington's death?"

Theodore drew himself up even more stiffly than usual as he answered, "I
am not aware what means Mrs. Dormer-Smith may have had of hearing the
news; but my impression is that it can scarcely yet have been
communicated to her. The original telegram to Lord Castlecombe only
reached him yesterday."

"Did they--Lucius, or any of them--ask you to tell me?" inquired May. It
now for the first time struck her as being odd that Theodore Bransby
should have been selected for such an office.

"Ahem! No. I was not precisely commissioned to inform you. But I was
anxious to spare you the shock of hearing of this disaster
accidentally."

The fact was that Theodore had seen the telegram in a London newspaper
of that morning.

There ensued a short silence. Then Theodore said to his step-mother,
with an elaborate shivering movement of the shoulders, "Don't you think
it grows very damp and chilly? I cannot consider it prudent to remain
here whilst the dews are falling."

No one was sorry for this excuse to break up the sitting. Mrs. Bransby
made a move towards the house; and May said it was time for her to be
going home.

"With your permission, I will have the pleasure of escorting you, Miss
Cheffington," said Theodore.

"Oh no, please!--thank you. Mr. Rivers said----"

"I have undertaken to see Miss Cheffington safe home," said Rivers. And
Mrs. Bransby suggested that Theodore must be tired with his journey;
and, moreover, that dinner would be ready at eight. But he disregarded
both suggestions. "I shall enjoy a stroll at this cool hour; and I don't
mean to dine. I lunched rather late, and will have something light
cooked for my supper about ten. Do you mean to go, Rivers? Oh! well,
I'll join you as far as Mrs. Dobbs's house."

Of course, under the circumstances it was impossible for May to say a
word to prevent him. And accordingly he walked from his father's door on
one side of her, while Owen strode on the other. As for May, she had
been ready to cry at first with vexation and resentment; but after a
while the sense of something ludicrous in the behaviour of her bodyguard
so overcame her, that she was very near bursting out into a fit of
almost hysterical laughter.

The two young men were full of smouldering animosity towards each other.
But they both manifested this feeling chiefly by a severe, and almost
sullen, demeanour towards May. She felt that she was being marched along
between them more like a detected malefactor than a young lady whom one
of them, at least, had besieged with tender proposals. If she addressed
a word to Owen, he answered her in dry monosyllables; if she spoke to
Theodore, he replied as from a lofty pinnacle of freezing politeness.

"It only needs a pair of handcuffs to make the thing complete," said May
to herself. Then she finally gave up all attempts to be conversational,
and so they arrived at Jessamine Cottage in solemn silence.

As they walked up the little garden-path in the gathering dusk, they
were overtaken by Mr. and Mrs. Simpson. The latter, as soon as she
recognized them, began to pour forth a fluent stream of talk, which did
not cease when Martha opened the door; and then, in some confused way
which neither May nor Owen could afterwards account for, they all found
themselves crowding into the little parlour together. As for Theodore,
he had from the first resolved to go in if Rivers went in, and to remain
as long as Rivers remained.

Mrs. Dobbs looked up astonished at sight of Theodore. She glanced
inquiringly at May, who had a queer look on her face, half-distressed,
half-amused. Jo Weatherhead rose, staring glumly at the new arrivals, of
whom Sebastian brought up the rear, with an expression of countenance
which showed that his temper was bristling like his hair. But Mrs.
Simpson's sprightly eloquence spread itself impartially over all these
shades of feeling, as water makes a smooth and level surface above the
roughest bottom.

"_So_ astonished, dear Mrs. Dobbs, to find Mr. Bransby, junior! Having
not the slightest idea that he was in Oldchester, you know; and what a
singular coincidence our coming upon them all three _just at your very
door_, was it not?"

"Well," observed Sebastian in his rasping voice, "considering that we
were coming to sup with Mrs. Dobbs, and that Miss May was on her way
home, it would have been stranger if we had met at any one else's door."

"Now, Bassy, I will not be overwhelmed by your stern logic. Ladies are
privileged to indulge in some _little_ play of the imagination.
Besides"--with an arch smile of triumph--"it really was the _fact_ in
this case. Oh! thank you, Mr. Weatherhead; any chair will do for me.
Don't let me disturb----! I suppose I may venture to make a shrewd
guess, Mr. Bransby, that you have come down to attend Miss Piper's
musical party? A great compliment, indeed, when one considers your
professional occupations. But the bow cannot always be bent. Even Homer,
I believe, is said _sometimes_----Oh, no; he nods, I fancy: which, of
course, is different. I really believe that Miss Hadlow will be the
_only_ star of our Oldchester firmament absent from the festive scene.
Now acknowledge, dear Mrs. Dobbs, that you were surprised as I was. You
did not expect this addition of 'youth at the prow'--if I may venture on
the expression--to our little circle this evening. At the same time I
must confess that three such sober young persons I never beheld. They
were all as silent as----It put me in mind of those beautiful lines:
'Not a drum was heard; not a funeral note, As his----' Not, of course,
that there was anything of a funereal nature. Far from it."

This last touch overcame May's self-command. She burst into a fit of
uncontrollable laughter; breaking out afresh every time she glanced at
Owen's face, provoked and frowning (though with a twitch at the corner
of the mouth which showed he had to make an effort not to laugh, too);
or at Theodore's, solemnly bewildered. She laughed until the tears
poured down her cheeks; and her grandmother exclaimed, "May, May! Don't
be so silly, child! You'll get hysterical if you go on that way." But
the outburst relieved the nervous tension from which the girl had been
suffering; and as she wiped her eyes she was conscious that the laughter
had saved her from shedding tears of a different sort.

"I beg your pardon, Mrs. Simpson," she said. "I don't know what
possessed me."

"Don't think of apologizing, my dear Miranda. Indeed, why should you?
Nothing is more delightful than the unaffected hilarity of youth. I'm
sure I always enjoy it," returned the good Amelia, with a beaming glance
around her.

"It's lucky Amelia doesn't mind being laughed at," said Sebastian
bitterly.

"Oh fie, Bassy! We must distinguish, love. That all depends on who
laughs, and _how_ they laugh," observed his wife, with unexpected
perspicuity.

"No doubt," said Theodore, "Miss Cheffington's nerves have been agitated
by the sad news which I brought her this evening." He spoke in a low
mysterious tone, addressing himself apparently to Mrs. Dobbs, although
he did not do so by name. At these words Mr. Weatherhead pricked up his
ears; and, although he had previously made up his mind not to say a word
to this "young spark" until the "young spark" should speak to him, his
curiosity so far overcame his dignity that he could not help
ejaculating--

"Sad news, ha! What news? What sad news,--eh?"

Theodore turned to Mrs. Dobbs, and pointedly ignored poor Jo, as he
said, "Miss Cheffington will doubtless take a fitting opportunity of
speaking with you about this event in her family."

"It's nothing that deeply concerns _us_, Uncle Jo!" broke in May,
flushing indignantly, and speaking with impetuosity. "A certain Mr.
George Cheffington has been accidentally killed out in Africa. But since
neither you, nor I, nor Granny ever saw him--nor even heard of him until
quite lately--we cannot pretend to be overwhelmed with grief."

"Nay! George Cheffington killed?" exclaimed Mrs. Dobbs.

Theodore had turned very pale, as he always did when angered. (May had
certainly meant to hit him, but she had no idea that the unkindest cut
of all had been her publicly addressing Mr. Weatherhead as "Uncle Jo.")
He answered slowly, "_I_ should not have chosen this moment when you
are--er--entertaining these--ahem!--your friends, to impart the
intelligence. But Miss Cheffington has taken the matter out of my
hands."

"George Cheffington," repeated Mrs. Dobbs, pondering. "Why, let me see,
now; he'll be Lord Castlecombe's eldest son. Poor old man! Oh, I'm sorry
to hear it: very sorry. It's hard for the old to see their hopes die
before them."

"I'm sorry for him, too, Granny," whispered May, somewhat penitent and
ashamed of her vehemence. She had certainly betrayed a touch of the
Cheffington imperiousness, and had spoken in a manner quite inconsistent
with meek amiability. She had also made Theodore Bransby feel
considerable resentment. Nevertheless, he had never been less inclined
than at that moment to relinquish the hope of making her his wife. Our
passions have various methods of special pleading. But if reason presses
them too hard, they will boldly substitute an "in spite of" for a
"because," and pursue their aim as though, like Beauty, they were "their
own excuse for being."

"Don't let us intrude on a scene of family affliction," said Mr. Simpson
dryly. "Now, Amelia! We had better withdraw, I think."

"Don't you talk nonsense, Sebastian Simpson," returned Mrs. Dobbs,
without ceremony. "Sit down, Amelia. I'm sorry I can't ask you young
gentlemen to stay and share our plain supper, for the truth is I don't
know that there's enough of it. But my friends, Mr. and Mrs. Simpson,
would break an old charter if they didn't remain."

After that the two young men had, of course, nothing to do but to take
their leave. Owen's good humour had quite returned. Wisdom and virtue
should, no doubt, have made him disapprove of Miss May's little outbreak
of hot temper. But the truth is, that this fallible young man had
enjoyed her attack on Bransby. When the latter approached May to say
"Good night," he murmured reproachfully, "You were rather severe on me,
Miss Cheffington. I had no idea of displeasing you by what I said."

She was conscience-stricken in a moment, and answered quite humbly, "I
beg your pardon if I offended you. But I thought you were not civil to
Mr. Weatherhead, and that vexed me. Please forgive me." And she endured
the tender pressure of her hand which immediately followed, as some
expiation of her offence.

Mrs. Dobbs detained Jo Weatherhead that night for a moment, after Mr.
and Mrs. Simpson had gone away, and May was in bed.

"I say, Jo, the death of yon poor man in Africa may bring about strange
changes," said Mrs. Dobbs, looking at him gravely.

"Changes! How? What changes?"

"Well, not changes for me and you, except through other folks. But do
you know that after Lucius Cheffington--who, they say, is but
sickly--Lord Castlecombe's next heir is my precious son-in-law?"

"No!" exclaimed Mr. Weatherhead, making his mouth into a perfect round O
of astonishment.

"Ay; but he is, though."

"Next heir! Viscount Castlecombe, of Combe Park, and all the property!"
gasped Jo.

"I don't know about the property. Only what's entailed, I suppose. But
if Lucius was to die, Augustus would be next heir to the title, as sure
as you stand there, Jo Weatherhead."




CHAPTER IV.


Probably of all the persons in Oldchester who knew or cared anything
about the death of George Cheffington, May was the only one who did not
immediately begin to make some calculations based on that event. The
contingency of her father's succeeding to the family honours had not
occurred to her. And her thoughts and feelings were now occupied with
other things. But Oldchester gossips discussed it with gusto; or, at
least, that small minority of them who interested themselves in the
fortunes of the Castlecombe family. The old lord was little personally
known in Oldchester, and the city had long outgrown any sense of the
overweening importance of a Viscount Castlecombe of Combe Park, which it
might have had a century earlier. To most of the rich manufacturers of
the place (whether they really thought themselves "as good as a lord" or
not) a lord whom they never beheld, and into whose house neither they
nor their children had the remotest chance of being admitted, was, at
any rate, genuinely uninteresting.

In the rural parts of the county it was otherwise. People there could
not be indifferent to the domestic history of a large land-owner who
resided during the greater part of the year on his estate. In many a
country dwelling, from luxurious mansions down to mere labourers'
cottages, George Cheffington's untimely death was canvassed. From a
matrimonial point of view he had been considered the best match in the
county, and dowagers with daughters to marry had looked forward to the
time (often spoken of, but always postponed) when he should give up his
colonial appointment, settle down on his inheritance, and choose a wife.
And there was a large number of persons (tenants and dependents) to whom
the heir's character and conduct were matters of deep importance. To
these, Mr. Lucius Cheffington suddenly became an interesting personage.
Lucius had been very little at Combe Park since his boyhood, and the
report which gradually spread in the neighbourhood that he was a chronic
invalid, was received with many head-shakings and long faces. It seemed
impossible that a Cheffington should be delicate or weakly. "Look at the
old lord," people said; "why, he was sound and tough as a yew-tree!" And
the last time Mr. George was at home he had proved himself a true chip
of the old block by out-riding, out-walking, and out-cricketing all his
contemporaries.

But that was years ago. Now George was stricken down in his strength,
Lucius lay ill of a low fever in London, and Lord Castlecombe sat lonely
and sorrow-laden in the home of his fathers.

The old man was not one to seek for sympathy, nor even to tolerate much
manifestation of it. The only being to whom for many weeks he mentioned
his dead son's name was a superannuated stable-helper, who had set
"Master George" on his first pony, and in whose mind that somewhat
selfish and hardhearted individual had never outgrown the engaging
period of boyhood. "Master George" was the old man's idol, and "Master
George" had, to a great extent, reciprocated the man's liking, partly,
perhaps, from the sort of gratified vanity which makes us all prize the
exclusive attachment of any generally unamiable creature, biped or
quadruped. Old Dick was characterized by his fellow-servants as a crusty
old curmudgeon, and was notorious for a formidable power of swearing,
which he wielded freely, without much respect of persons.

The first day after receiving the news of his son's death, Lord
Castlecombe towards evening walked out in a very unfrequented part of
the grounds, a path between two high holly hedges, leading by a back way
to the stable-yard; and there, with his hat pulled low on his brow, his
head bent, and his hands clasped behind him, he paced slowly, plunged in
bitter meditation. When he came to the corner whence the stables were
visible, he caught sight of old Dick seated on an ancient horse-block,
and busily rubbing at something in his hand. Lord Castlecombe stopped
short, and looked at the man, who evidently saw him, but made no sign,
neither ceased a moment from his occupation. After a minute or so Lord
Castlecombe called to him to ask what he was doing, and received no
answer. He repeated his question. Still no reply. A third time he spoke,
in a harsh, angry tone. And then Dick turned round upon him, and, with a
tremendous volley of oaths, answered furiously, "What am I doing of? I'm
a rubbing up Master George's little silver spurs as you gave him first
time he ever rode to hounds. I've allus kep' 'em bright from that day to
this. And I arn't a-going to leave off now, because some d----d
blundering fool as didn't ought never to have been trusted with a gun--I
wish I'd the rewarding of him, curse him!--has been and put an end to
the boy. That's what I'm a doing of, if ye _must_ know!"

A tear fell on the little burnished spur; and then another, and another.
But old Dick rubbed on. And his master, after a short silence, came and
laid his hand upon his shoulder, and then walked away without a word.

After that Dick was privileged to do what the boldest parson's wife in
the county dared not attempt:--talk to Lord Castlecombe about his son
George.

Most of the letters of condolence which he received Lord Castlecombe
tossed aside contemptuously after glancing at the first line. But one
letter he read through, with a heavy frown on his face, and an
occasional drawing down of the corners of his mouth into a bitter smile,
far more sinister than the frown. It was from his niece Pauline; and its
composition had cost her much thought and anxiety. She flattered herself
that she had avoided saying a word which could jar on her uncle's
irascible temper. And the letter in itself was a good letter enough; but
it was a letter which should not have been written at all, if her object
were to soothe and conciliate Lord Castlecombe. Pauline did not allude
directly to her brother Augustus; but the very fact of her writing
seemed to bring his existence offensively into notice. She refrained
from expressing any special anxiety about the health of her cousin
Lucius. Yet the few words in which she "hoped to hear of his speedy
recovery," made the old man writhe as he read them. Pauline had tried to
combine duty with policy. It was, of course, her duty to condole with
her uncle in his bereavement, and it was clearly desirable not to
irritate the dislike with which, as she more than surmised, he regarded
Augustus. But the whole calculation was based on a misapprehension of
Lord Castlecombe's feeling towards her brother. It was neither more nor
less than hatred. And now jealousy was added to it:--a strange, savage
jealousy, on behalf of his sons. George--his strong, healthy, hardy
eldest-born--was gone. And Lucius--Lucius was not dying! No, no; not so
bad as that. But he was very weakly. And to think for one instant of the
possibility that Augustus Cheffington might some day reign in their
stead--might lord it over the heritage which he had so carefully
garnered for his own sons--was maddening. Any one but Augustus, he said
to himself. Any distant scion, the son of some impoverished far-away
cousin, parson, lawyer, apothecary. Any one, any one, but Augustus!

But of the passionate intensity of this hatred Pauline had no suspicion.
A cleverer and more acute woman than she might not have guessed it. No
one, in fact, ever guessed it; unless it were Lucius, and he only in
part. His own sensitive antipathy to Augustus was an incomparably
feebler sentiment. Lucius had no strain of his father's vigour, whether
for good or ill.

Mrs. Dormer-Smith had also written by the same post to May. This epistle
was more hastily dashed off, and faithfully reflected the wavering mood
of the writer. One of her first preoccupations was whether, under the
circumstances, it would or would not be desirable for May to pay the
promised visit to Glengowrie at this juncture. She did not disguise from
herself that George Cheffington's death opened up the possibility of a
very different future for May from any which could hitherto have been
contemplated. It became a question whether it would be prudent to accept
Mr. Bragg. At all events it would be well to avoid precipitation. Mr.
Bragg was a fine match for a dowerless girl:--even for a (dowerless)
Miss Cheffington. But what if May's father were destined to become a
wealthy Peer of the realm? That might be still but a distant
possibility. Lucius was not thought to be in any present danger, and
certainly might recover. Of course he might recover. And he might marry,
and transmit the title and estates in the direct line. But--Pauline felt
that there was a "but" of vast import.

And then there were minor cares connected with that great duty towards
"society" which she so diligently endeavoured to perform.

     "I am _most_ anxious about your mourning," she wrote to May.
     "It is positively preying on my mind. Of course, nothing could
     be in worse taste than any assumption of woe in this case. You
     never saw poor George, and the kinship is not a very close one.
     In fact, had it been one of the Buckinghamshire Cheffingtons,
     to whom you are related in exactly the same degree, I do not
     know that any mourning at all would have been necessary for
     you. But, of course, the heir to the head of our family
     occupies a different position. At any rate, do not err on the
     side of exaggeration. White, with _noeuds_ of pale
     heliotrope, and jet ornaments; or some black fabric of light
     texture, with a little jet beading, would probably meet the
     case. But it is impossible for me to give you precise
     directions. I am too far away to know what is _bien porte_ at
     this moment. Would that I could be near you! But I cannot break
     my 'cure' at this point. Carlsbad has done me good, on the
     whole; although, of course, the anxiety on your account,
     connected with this painful news, has to some extent thrown me
     back. Mrs. Griffin's taste might be thoroughly trusted; and, if
     she would undertake to order your mourning from Amelie----. But
     now I think of it, Mrs. Griffin will not return to England
     until she leaves the Engadine for Glengowrie. And here, again,
     I am greatly perplexed what to advise in your best interests.
     _All things considered_, it might be well for you to put off
     going to the Duchess. There will be the excuse of this terrible
     news about poor George, you know.

     "I fear that I have written in a sadly _decousu_ fashion; but I
     cannot help it, and my poor head warns me to leave off. As
     usual, I have to pay for intense mental effort. Carlsbad has
     not altered that." And the letter concluded with a postscript:
     "Pearl-gray gloves."

The only clear idea which May gathered from this letter was that her
aunt virtually held her released from her promise to go to Glengowrie,
and left her free to do as she pleased. She carried the letter to her
grandmother, saying, "Granny, I shall not go to Scotland after all. I
shall stay with you, whether you like it or not. Oh, don't ask me to
_explain_. I often feel with regard to Aunt Pauline like a deaf person
watching dancers. There is something which regulates her movements, no
doubt. But it is generally mysterious to me."

Mrs. Dobbs privately thought that in this case she held a clue to the
mystery. "Ay," she said to herself, "Mrs. Dormer-Smith sees, just as I
saw from the first hearing of it, that great changes may come to pass
from this poor man's death. And she don't want May to commit herself too
soon. Lord save us! 'tis a sad, low, worldly way of looking at such a
matter." At this point some scarcely-articulate whisper of conscience
made Mrs. Dobbs's brow redden; and she added mentally, "Well, but if May
likes him? If the man's in earnest, and she likes him, it'll all come
right in the end." Nevertheless, Mrs. Dobbs had begun to entertain
shrewd doubts as to May's caring one straw for the unknown gentleman of
princely fortune.

May, meanwhile, made haste to put her escape beyond the danger of Aunt
Pauline's changing her mind. She wrote to Mrs. Griffin, saying that she
should not be able to accept the Duchess's kind invitation to
Glengowrie. She gave no reason. The excuse which Aunt Pauline had
suggested she could not find it in her conscience to put forward. "If I
had wished very much to go, that would not have stood in my way," she
said to herself. "And it would be base and shocking to play the
hypocrite about such a tragedy."

Neither did she think for a moment of refusing Miss Piper's invitation.
There had not been wanting a hint that she ought to do so. Mrs. Bransby
asked her if she meant to go to the musical party at Garnet Lodge; and,
being answered in the affirmative, said, "Well, it seemed to me that it
would be quite overstrained to refuse. But Theodore persisted that you
would not go; said it would be _inconvenable_. He almost quarrelled with
me about it. You know Theodore's infallible way of laying down the law."

It need scarcely be said that if anything could have strengthened the
young lady's determination to attend Miss Piper's party, it would have
been hearing that Theodore Bransby took upon himself to object to her
doing so.




CHAPTER V.


Like the fairy Pari-Banou's magic tent, which could shelter an army of
ten thousand men, and yet was capable of being folded into the smallness
of a handkerchief, what one calls "the world" shrinks and stretches to
suit the individual case. Into the world of Polly and Patty Piper Lord
Castlecombe and his family sorrows entered not at all. They might
occasionally be viewed afar from the tent door; but even that distant
recognition was not vouchsafed to them now, when the great event of the
musical party absorbed the attention of the two sisters.

In addition to Miss Clara Bertram and Mr. Cleveland Turner, the occasion
was to be graced by the presence of Signor Vincenzo Valli. He was on a
visit to a noble family in Mr. Sweeting's neighbourhood, and had
volunteered to accompany that gentleman and his _protege_ to Miss
Piper's party. This honour, like other honours, was somewhat of a
burthen as well as a distinction. The programme of the evening's
performance, so carefully and anxiously arranged beforehand, must be
modified to suit Signor Valli; who, if he condescended to sing at all,
would do so only in accordance with his own caprice. And this would
probably occasion difficulties; since, although Miss Bertram's
amiability might be reckoned on, Mr. Cleveland Turner took a more
stiff-necked view of his own importance, and would not be disposed to
yield the _pas_ to Valli. Still Miss Piper had no cowardly regrets on
hearing of the distinction which was to befall her. She rose to the
occasion, and was prepared to undergo almost any impertinence from the
popular singing master with a Spartan smile.

"I ought to understand how to manage artists, if anybody does," said
she, remembering the many cups of tea she had poured out for that
_irritable genus_ in old times.

But the crowning interest and glory of the evening to her would be the
performance of an air from "Esther," which Miss Bertram had promised to
sing. The Misses Piper had invited her to visit them at first from
disinterested kindness; the young singer being tired with the work of
the season, and in need of rest and change of air. Under these
circumstances, both the sisters were too thoroughly gentlewomen to hint
at her singing for them. But Clara Bertram, casting about in her mind
for some way to show her gratitude to the kindly old maids, had herself
proposed to sing "something from 'Esther.'" And the offer was too
tempting to be refused.

The composition selected was of the most infantile simplicity, and could
have been learned by heart in ten minutes. But a copy of it had been
sent to town a fortnight ago for Miss Bertram to "study." And Mr.
Simpson had been supposed to be "studying" the accompaniment for an
equal length of time. In fact, the performance of the air from "Esther"
was the original germ out of which the musical party at Garnet Lodge had
been developed.

Clara Bertram arrived in Oldchester the morning before the great day:
partly in order that she might not be over-tired, and partly to give the
opportunity for a rehearsal of the air with Mr. Simpson. "Oh, I'm sure
we need not trouble Mr. Simpson," Clara began thoughtlessly. "It is
certain to go all right." But Miss Polly would not allow such a lax view
of responsibility.

"Excuse me, my dear," she said, "but the music of 'Esther' is
not quite a drawing-room ballad. Not that you will not sing it
charmingly--perfectly! There is no doubt about that. But there is a
certain breadth--a certain style of phrasing, necessary for sacred
music. It is most important that the accompanist should understand your
_reading_ of the air. Indeed, I am anxious to hear it myself. I have my
own idea as to the proper rendering of the opening phrase, 'Hear, O
King, and grant me my petition!' But I shan't say a word until I have
heard you. Your idea may be better than mine; Ha, ha, ha! Who knows?
'Hear, O King, and grant----?' My own notion would be to begin
softly--almost _sotto voce_--in a timid manner: 'Hear, O King;' and then
to rise into a _crescendo_ as the strain proceeds 'and grant me my
PETITION!' But I won't say a word. You must sing it as you _feel_ it."

May was, by special favour, admitted to the rehearsal. She had called to
see Clara Bertram on the afternoon of her arrival, and was ushered into
the long, low, old-fashioned drawing-room, where she found Miss Piper
seated at one end of it, amid a wilderness of rout-seats, and Mr.
Sebastian Bach Simpson at the piano, near to which Miss Bertram was
standing.

"Oh, it's dear May Cheffington!" said Miss Piper, who had turned round
sharply at the opening of the door. "Yes, yes; come in, my dear. Not at
home to anybody else, Rachel! Not to _anybody_, do you hear? Now come
and sit down by me, my dear. She is going to try 'Hear, O King.' Very
glad to see you; you are so sympathetic, and such a favourite with
Clara! There now, don't make her talk! Nothing worse for the voice than
talking. Come and sit down."

May was, indeed, scarcely allowed to exchange greetings with her friend,
who whispered smilingly, "We'll have our chat by-and-by."

Then Mr. Simpson struck up the first chords of the symphony, and there
was breathless silence. He had not played three bars, however, before
Miss Piper jumped up and ran to the piano.

"Oh, I beg pardon, Mr. Simpson, for offering a suggestion to so sound a
musician as yourself, but _don't_ you think a little more stress might
be laid on that chord of the diminished seventh? It prepares the way,
you see, for the pleading tone of the composition. _Le-da_,
_de-da_--like that! Oh, thank you! _Quite_ my meaning. Please go on."

But Mr. Simpson did not proceed far without receiving another
"suggestion."

"A little more force and fulness, don't you think, in that resolution of
the discord? I should like a richer effect."

"I don't know how to make it richer," rasped out Mr. Simpson. "It is the
simple common chord, just four notes--C, E, G, C. I sounded 'em all. I
can play the bass as an octave, if you think _that_'ll be any richer."

"Oh, thank you! Yes, I really think it will. You see 'Esther' was scored
for full orchestra, and the composer's ear hankers after the
instrumental effects. But that octave in the bass is a _great_
improvement. Many thanks!"

And in this fashion the symphony was at length got through.

Then Clara uplifted her pure, clear voice, and sang. May listened in
delight. Surely Miss Polly must be enchanted! Even Mr. Simpson's hard
visage relaxed, as the thrilling notes rose in sweet pathetic pleading.
When they ceased, he wheeled round on the music-stool, and exclaimed
with the most unwonted fervour, "It's the loveliest soprano voice I've
heard since your great namesake, Clara Novello. Some of your notes
remind me of her altogether. Not that I expect to hear anything _quite_
like her 'Let the Bright Seraphim,' on this side of paradise."

May turned to Miss Piper. But, to her astonishment, Miss Piper's face
did not express unmingled delight. There was some slight and indefinable
shade on it.

"Well, I do think that is most beautiful," said May.

"Do you, my dear? Do you really?"

"Why, how is it possible to think otherwise, Miss Piper? No one could,
surely!"

"Well, it is very kind of you to say so, my dear; and, to be frank, it
shows a power of appreciation not quite common at your age. Of course it
would be affectation on my part, at this time of day, and with my
reputation behind me, to say I am surprised. But I am gratified, very
much gratified. And don't you think Miss Bertram did _her_ part
delightfully?"

May looked at her blankly, unable to say a word in reply. Fortunately,
no reply was needed, for Miss Piper bustled up to Clara and thanked her,
and praised her. But still her manner fell decidedly short of its usual
cordial heartiness. At length, with many apologies and flowery speeches,
she begged that the air might be repeated, if Clara were sure it would
not tire her; and, this being at once conceded, she asked, hesitatingly,
"And would you mind if I offered a little suggestion? Just a hint!"

"Certainly not, dear Miss Piper! I will do my best to carry out your
idea."

"Oh, that is so sweet of you! Thank you a thousand times! If Mr. Simpson
will kindly oblige us once more----? Now, you see, it is just here, on
that G in alt, where the voice rises on the words, 'Grant, oh, grant me
my petition!' The sound 'grant,' according to my original conception,
should be given with a sort of wail--not, of course, an unmusical sound,
but just with a tinge of sadness expressive of the then miserable and
depressed condition of the Jewish nation, and at the same time with a
tone--an _underlying_ tone, as it were--conveying the latent hope (which
really was in Queen Esther's mind all along, you know) that by her
efforts brighter days might yet be in store for them. You feel what I
mean?"

"I will try my best," answered Clara gently. And then she sang the air
again--precisely as she had sung it before.

"_Now_," cried Miss Piper, jumping up and clapping her hands in an
ecstasy of triumph, "it is _perfect_--absolutely perfect!"

She poured out unstinted thanks and compliments to both singer and
accompanist, observing to the latter that this recalled the great days
of the public performance of "Esther," and that she considered Miss
Bertram's rendering of "Hear, O King," far superior to that of the
well-known vocalist who had sung it originally. "But then, you see,
_she_ could not, or would not, take a hint. Consequently--although, of
course, she sang the notes perfectly--she never fully mastered my
conception. Now a word has been enough to show Miss Bertram the inner
meaning of my music; and she interprets it in the most _exquisite_
manner."

Before going away May contrived to have a few words with Clara Bertram
in her room.

"It is such a pleasure to hear you sing again," said May. "How I wish
Granny could hear you!"

"Will not your grandmother be here to-morrow evening?"

"Oh no," answered May, colouring. "She does not go out to parties.
Granny does not belong to the class of the ladies and gentlemen who come
here. Her husband was a tradesman in this town. But she is the finest
creature in the world. And she has more real dignity than any one I
know."

"Your grandmother lives here? But then--how is it--your mother is not a
foreigner?"

"A foreigner? Good gracious! No. My mother was Miss Susan Dobbs. She
died years ago, when I was a little child. Why do you ask?"

"Oh, nothing. I fancied--Valli said something about having known Madame
Cheffington abroad."

"That was possible. My parents lived abroad for years. My father is on
the Continent now. I and the two little brothers before me were born in
Belgium."

"Oh! I suppose that must be it," said Clara slowly. "Valli talks at
random sometimes."

"Signor Valli talks very much at random if he ever said my mother was a
foreigner. By the way, do you know he is to be here to-morrow evening?"

"Yes; so I hear."

"You do not hear it with rapture, apparently."

"No; I do not like him very much."

"He likes _you_ very much, if appearances may be trusted," said May
laughingly.

"He is always making love to me after his fashion. That is why I do not
like him."

Clara spoke gravely, but with her habitual serenity. There was something
in her manner which seemed to be akin to her voice; something clear, but
not cold: a crystal with the sun in it.

"Oh, that is hideous, isn't it?" cried May, with eager fellow-feeling.
"When people want to marry you, and you shudder at the bare idea of
marrying _them_."

"I don't think Valli wants to marry me," answered Clara calmly. "Indeed,
I believe he feels a great deal of hostility towards me at times. He is
never satisfied unless his pupils will, more or less, flirt with him--a
kind of philandering which I object to. Besides, it wastes one's time.
But he has been spoiled more than you would believe by fashionable
ladies. I suppose you never read much of George Sands' writings?"

"No," answered May, opening great eyes of wonder.

"Nor I, except 'Consuelo,' and the sequel to it. I read them for the
musical part, which is wonderfully good. Well, in the 'Comtesse de
Rudolstadt' there is a certain Monsieur de Poelnitz, of whom it is said
that _en qualite d'ex-roue il n'aimait pas les filles vertueuses_. It
always seems to me that Valli, in his quality of philanderer, dislikes
women who won't flirt, whether he wants to flirt with them himself or
not."

"How odious! How despicable!"

"And yet he has his good qualities. He is very faithful and generous to
his family, and sends a great part of his earnings to them in their
little Sicilian village."

Then, seeing that May still looked very much shocked and astonished,
Clara added, in a lighter tone, "But let us talk of something more
pleasant. You were speaking of your grandmamma. If you think she would
like it, I should be so glad to go and sing to her at her own home."

"Like it! Of course she would like it! And I scarcely know how to thank
you as you ought to be thanked, for fear of sounding like Miss Piper!"

Clara smiled. "Miss Piper and her sister are both very kind to me," she
said.

"Yes; but I wish Miss Polly wasn't so ridiculous. Of course, her music
is poor and silly. It is only your beautiful singing that makes it sound
well. But then you could make 'Baa, baa, blacksheep,' sound well! And
then to hear the outrageous, conceited nonsense she talks----! I wonder
that you can endure it so meekly. _I_ couldn't!" answered May, with the
trenchant intolerance of her eighteen years.

"Oh yes, you could, under the circumstances. I am only too glad to give
the kind old lady any pleasure. And she is _not_ so outrageously
conceited--for an amateur. But now I fear I must turn you out, much as I
should like you to stay; for Miss Piper sent me upstairs to lie down;
and if she finds I am not doing so, I shall have to drink another cupful
of Miss Patty's excellent beef-tea, which is so strong, it makes me feel
quite tipsy!"




CHAPTER VI.


On the following evening Garnet Lodge wore a brilliantly festive
appearance. Miss Polly was dressed betimes. An unprecedented variety of
geological specimens adorned her wrists and fingers, and hung over the
bosom of her lavender satin gown. She was walking up and down the
drawing-room, surveying the rows of empty rout-seats, fully
three-quarters of an hour before the earliest guest could be expected to
arrive. She was strung up for the great occasion; but, although excited,
she was not apprehensive. Miss Patty, on the other hand, was very
nervous.

"I _am_ a little anxious about the jellies, Polly; and about that new
waiter from Winnick's. But I could face all that, if it wasn't for
'Hear, O King!' To think of hearing it again after all these years! I'm
afraid it will upset me. I'll take a back place near the door for I'm
sure to cry; and then I can slip out if necessary."

"You need not be ashamed of your tears, my dear Patty. Very probably you
will not be the only person powerfully affected."

"Well, I don't know. I don't remember that anybody cried when 'Esther'
was brought out at Mercers' Hall," returned Miss Patty thoughtfully.

The first persons to arrive were Mr. and Mrs. Simpson. Amelia was
resplendent in a new pink silk gown, which seemed to magnify her florid
proportions, and made her a conspicuous object from every part of the
room. She was beaming with delight; and her gratification at finding
herself in Garnet Lodge under the present circumstances was so frankly
and exuberantly expressed, as to cause some mortification to her
husband.

"This is, indeed, a memorable evening, dear Misses Piper," she began;
for Patty had by this time joined her sister in the drawing-room. "I was
telling Bassy that he ought to feel himself honoured by being selected
to officiate--if I may so express it--at the pianoforte on this
extremely interesting and auspicious occasion."

"The honour is to me, Mrs. Simpson," answered Polly Piper politely.

"There!" turning suddenly round with such vehemence as to sweep down a
rout-seat with her pink silk skirts. "What did I tell you, Bassy?
Whatever may be the opinion of certain persons enriched by
manufactures--and yet, after all, what should we do without
manufactures? How many of us would be capable of dealing with the raw
material? Blankets, for instance: take a sheep! But still I always say
to Bassy, 'Believe me, the _real_ gentry acknowledge and revere the
position of the Fine Arts!'"

"Now, Amelia; hadn't you better mind what you're doing?" said Mr.
Simpson, setting the fallen rout-seat on its legs again. She irritated
him occasionally, but he admired her smart gown very much nevertheless,
and thought she looked remarkably well in it, and "quite the lady."

Other guests arriving now claimed the hostess's attention. And presently
Clara Bertram, in her simple black evening dress, came into the room.
Then appeared Mrs. Martin Bransby on the arm of her stepson, and bearing
excuses from her husband, who was not feeling well enough to come out
that evening. Her appearance called forth ejaculations of admiration
from Mrs. Simpson, which, however exaggerated they might sound, were
quite sincere. Mrs. Simpson gave utterance to a kind of prose rhapsody
on the subject of Mrs. Bransby's dress; and then, bowing graciously to
Theodore, said, "And Mr. Bransby Junior, too. When I had the pleasure of
unexpectedly, and, indeed, fortuitously, meeting him the other evening
at the house of a mutual friend, I remarked that he was paying Miss
Piper a high compliment in abandoning Thetis" (the good lady probably
meant Themis) "for the seductions of Apollo. But we are told, on the
poet's authority, that 'music hath charms to soothe the savage----' Not,
of course, that the epithet is applicable in _this_ case. Quite the
contrary." Then, turning her glistening spectacles on the young man, she
playfully added, "But, in addition to the magic of the lyre, we have
what Hamlet--if I mistake not--so eloquently characterizes as 'metal
more attractive:' a collection of youth and beauty which might really,
without hyperbole, be termed a bevy."

"That is an intolerable woman," muttered Theodore between his teeth, as
he conducted his step-mother to a seat.

"Oh, poor Simmy!" remonstrated Mrs. Bransby. "She is a good creature.
But to-night she is in what Bobby and Billy call one of her 'dictionary
moods.'"

Rapidly the room filled up. Besides many other Oldchester notabilities
with whom this chronicle is not concerned, there were present Major
Mitton, Canon and Mrs. Hadlow (the latter bringing May under her wing),
Owen Rivers, who came alone, Dr. Hatch, and Mr. Bragg.

Mr. Bragg, after paying his respects to the ladies of the house, and
standing for a few minutes in his silent, forlorn-looking way, went up
to May, and said, "Will you come and have a cup of tea, Miss
Cheffington? They say hot tea cools you. That seems strange, don't it?
But I believe it's true. Rule of contraries, I suppose."

May did not wish for any tea; but she saw Theodore Bransby hovering in
the distance, and she accepted Mr. Bragg's proffered arm almost eagerly.
She rather liked Mr. Bragg. His slow, quiet, common-sensible manner was
soothing. And she knew enough of his unostentatious good works in
Oldchester to have a considerable esteem for him.

He piloted May into the dining-room, where tea and coffee were being
served, and where the new waiter from Winnick's was, so far, conducting
himself in an exemplary manner.

"Have one of those little cakes, Miss Cheffington? They look very good."

"No, thank you."

Mr. Bragg provided May with a cup of tea, and then took one of the
little cakes himself. "They eat uncommonly short," said he with strong,
though quiet, approbation. "All the eatables seem good."

"Not a doubt of it. Miss Patty is a wonderful housekeeper."

"Now, do you suppose she made those little cakes herself?"

"I cannot tell; but I am sure she could if she chose. She makes
excellent cakes."

"Ah! I remember her giving me some very good ideas about a beefsteak
pudding. I tried to make my cook do one according to her receipt; but it
didn't answer," said Mr. Bragg with a sigh. Presently he remarked, as he
slowly stirred his tea round and round, "This is a bad job about Mr.
George Cheffington."

"Yes; I am very sorry for Lord Castlecombe."

"Ah, your uncle--or great-uncle is he?--I'm not much of a hand at
remembering the ins and outs of families--is hard hit. But he bears up
wonderfully, to outward appearance."

"Have you seen him, Mr. Bragg?"

"Yes; saw him o' Monday about some business. He's a keen hand at a
bargain, is Lord Castlecombe. I don't know that I ever met with a
keener."

"Poor old man!"

"Ay, that's what _I_ say, Miss Cheffington. Keenness and all that is
very well, so long as you've got somebody to be keen for. But it's a
dreary thing to be alone in advancing years. I feel it myself, though
I'm--well, I dare say nigh upon twenty years younger than his Lordship."

There was a little pause, during which Mr. Bragg sipped his tea and ate
another cake. Then he repeated, "It's a dreary thing to be alone."

"Are you alone, Mr. Bragg?" asked May, feeling that she was expected to
say something. "I thought you had sons and daughters."

"Only one son, and he's away in South America--settled in Buenos Ayres
years ago. He's a rich man already, is Joshua. I started him well,
though I hadn't so much money in those days as I have now, not by a
deal, and he's done well. And he married a lady with money--a Spanish
merchant's daughter. No; there's no likelihood of Josh coming home to
England to keep me company, even supposing I wanted him to."

Then ensued another pause. Then Mr. Bragg said, "I'm to have the
pleasure of meeting you at Glengowrie this autumn, I understand."

"No; I have decided not to go. I have written to Mrs. Griffin to say
so."

"Oh! What--on account of this death in your family?"

"No, I cannot say that. It would be mere pretence. I never saw George
Cheffington in my life; and he was not a very close relation." Mr. Bragg
nodded approvingly. "That's a straightforward way of looking at it," he
said. "But I'm disappointed you ain't to be at Glengowrie."

"Thank you. But my absence will not make much difference, I should say."

"I don't know. It might make a deal of difference," returned Mr. Bragg,
speaking even more slowly than was his wont. "But where _shall_ you be
then?"

"Where I like best to be; here, with Granny."

"Granny?"

"My grandmother, Mrs. Dobbs. You must know her by name, at all events,
for you are her tenant."

"What! old Dobbs the ironmonger's widow?--begging your pardon."

May drew herself up with a proud movement of the head, which might have
satisfied even the deceased dowager that there was a strong strain of
the Cheffington nature in her. "There is nothing to beg pardon for, Mr.
Bragg," she said haughtily. "You cannot suppose that I am ashamed of my
grandparents."

"You've no call to be ashamed of them; but people don't always see
things in the right light," answered Mr. Bragg composedly. "Yes; to be
sure, now I come to think of it, Mrs. Dobbs's daughter did marry--Ah! Of
course, Susan Dobbs was your mother! I never knew her to speak to; but I
remember her. Uncommonly pretty she was, too. Why I might ha'
known--But, you see, your aunt, Mrs. Dormer-Smith, never mentioned your
mother's family."

At this moment Owen Rivers approached them. He said he had been sent by
Mrs. Bransby to look for May; and, thereupon, carried her off to the
drawing-room. Mr. Bragg remained behind, pondering for a minute or so.
"To think of this girl being Lord Castlecombe's grand-niece _and_ old
Dobbs's grand-daughter! Well, things do turn out queer in this world!"
Then Mr. Bragg also repaired to the drawing-room.

The musical portion of the evening went off brilliantly. But the great
success was undoubtedly Clara Bertram's performance of "Hear, O King!"
She sang poor Polly Piper's bald and _jejeune_ phrases in a way which
made such of the elder auditors as remembered its first performance ask
themselves, wonderingly, if this were indeed the music they had listened
to long ago. And she concluded with a _cadenza_, so expressive and
beautiful that Mr. Simpson, raptly listening, very nearly omitted to
play the final chords.

When the song was over, there was a burst of applause, and an unusually
loud clapping together of kid-gloved palms. But, from the doorway, where
he had stood to listen, Valli precipitated himself through the crowd
like some swift missile; clearing his way, utterly regardless of
intervening backs and shoulders, male or female, and rushing up to Miss
Bertram, he exclaimed, "_Divinamente!_"

"I am glad you are content," she answered in English.

But Valli went on volubly in his own tongue, "Content? No; 'content' is
not the word. I am enchanted. You sang divinely! Demon of a girl, never
in all your life did you sing a song of _mine_ like that! What possessed
you?"

"Gratitude," answered Clara quietly.

Miss Piper now came up and kissed her effusively. Composer and singer
were soon surrounded by a little crowd, to whose polite exclamations of
"Charming!" "Immense treat!" "Really delicious!" and so forth, Miss
Polly kept replying, with lofty magnanimity, "Oh, but you must not
attribute all the honour to _me_! I assure you that more depends upon
the execution than you are, perhaps, aware of."

This first triumph had a subtle effect on Mr. Cleveland Turner. He was
moved by it to play a dashing _valse de concert_ in place of a
composition of his own, modelled on a great original, which he entitled
"Twilight in the Gardens of Walhalla." It had been much praised in
esoteric circles. But it was somewhat trying to the unregenerate ear; so
much so, that a profane and flippant outsider had rechristened it
"Feeding Time in the Gardens of the Royal Zoological Society." Mr.
Sweeting afterwards mildly reproached his young friend for not having
performed it, and thus doing something towards improving and elevating
the taste of Oldchester.

"It's no answer, my dear boy, to say they wouldn't have liked it," said
Mr. Sweeting. "No answer at all!"

But it is to be feared that Cleveland Turner had some depraved enjoyment
of the applause which resulted from his lapse into heresy.

Signor Valli, determined not to be eclipsed in popularity, and utterly
indifferent to the improvement of Oldchester's musical taste, made
himself unprecedentedly amiable. He sang vivacious Neapolitan street
songs, quaint Tuscan _stornelli_, pathetic Sicilian airs. And these
tuneful productions were greatly relished by that vast majority of the
listeners, who had not progressed so far as to connect ugliness with
righteousness--in music.

When Valli at length rose from the piano, Mrs. Simpson made a sudden
plunge across the room, and presented herself breathlessly before him.
He was in a group of persons, among whom were Mr. Sweeting, Cleveland
Turner, and Miss Piper. Amelia's round, plump face was flushed by heat
and excitement to a rose-pink hue, several shades deeper than that of
her gown; and her spectacles glittered with a blank and baffling
brightness.

"I cannot," she said, "quit this elegant scene of the Muses without
offering my poor tribute to you, Signor" (which she pronounced
"senior"), "for the delightful addition your performances have
contributed to refined enjoyment."

Valli looked up rather bewildered, and, not knowing what else to do,
made her a profound bow.

"I trust," continued the lady, "that I may be allowed to congratulate
you, signor, in the harmonious words of our great poet, upon your
'linked sweetness, long drawn out'--not, I'm sure, that any one present
considered for a moment that you were drawing it out at all _too_ long!"
And with a sweeping curtsey, in the performance of which she overwhelmed
Mr. Sweeting's legs in a flood of pink silk skirt, and backed heavily on
to Mr. Cleveland Turner's toes, Amelia withdrew, beaming.

At supper Valli was in high good humour. He had been presented to Mrs.
Bransby, and was gratified to find himself placed beside her at the
supper-table, she being incontestably the most beautiful woman in the
room. Major Mitton sat near them, and pleased Valli by praises of his
singing--a pleasure not at all diminished by his quick perception that
the good major had no knowledge whatever of the subject.

"It's a real treat, I assure you," said Major Mitton, "to hear a toon. I
don't pretend to be a great connoisseur, but I can enjoy a toon. Ah,
they may say what they please, but there's no music like Italian music,
and nobody can sing it like Italians."

This led to some reminiscences of the major's garrison life in Malta;
and to the mention of the _prima donna_ Bianca Moretti. Mrs. Bransby
recognized this name as that of the heroine of Miss Piper's story, told
at her dinner-party several months ago.

"Oh, you have heard the Moretti?" said Valli. "Yes; she _could_ sing. By
the way, I hear she is a kind of _maratre_--how do you call it?--to that
pretty Miss Cheffington."

"Miss Cheffington? Oh, impossible!"

"Pardon! Not at all impossible! I mean the young lady opposite, at the
other end of the table, sitting between those two young men. I know one
of them--the one with the blonde smooth head. I meet him in society. He
is tremendously annoying--_nojoso_--what you call a bore."

"That is Miss Cheffington, certainly. But you don't mean to say that
Signora Moretti has married her father?"

"Oh, married!" answered Valli, with a shrug. "She has been living with
him for years; that is what I mean. I hear _la Bianca_ has grown steady
now. But she had a _jeunesse pas mal orageuse_."

Major Mitton tried to change the subject, glancing uneasily at Mrs.
Bransby. But Valli was impervious to the hint. Not that he had any
intention of outraging the proprieties, or any suspicion that he was
doing so. Mrs. Bransby was not a _jeune meess_. He had heard of English
cant and hypocrisy long before he came to England. But he had been
agreeably surprised to find them conspicuous by their absence in the
section of London fashionable society which he chiefly frequented. So he
went on narrating anecdotes of _la Bianca_ and her adventures, until
Mrs. Bransby rose, and quietly left the table. Upon this, Major Mitton
and several other men drew closer to Valli. And the consequence was
that, not only the mess-table, but other circles in Oldchester, were
regaled the next day with some choice morsels of scandal, in which the
name of Gus Cheffington figured conspicuously.

But whatever might be the subsequent results of that talk, Miss Piper's
musical party had undoubtedly turned out a great success.

That night, when the sisters were alone together, they sat up for an
hour discussing the events of the evening in a glow of pleasurable
excitement. Every point was remembered and dwelt upon, but of course
their interest centred in the song from "Esther."

"It was a real triumph, Polly," said Miss Patty. "There can't be two
opinions about that. But--there, I thought I wouldn't tell you; but I
can't help it--I overheard Signor Valli and that Cleveland Turner, whom
I never did like, and never shall, speaking of 'Hear, O King,' in a
sneering, slighting manner."

Quoth Miss Polly with a lofty smile, and laying her hand on her sister's
shoulder, "My dear Patty, I am not at all surprised to hear it. I have
experience of artists, if anybody has, and in the best of them I have
always observed one defect in judging my music--professional jealousy!"




CHAPTER VII.


The day after the party at Garnet Lodge Mrs. Dobbs was surprised by the
announcement from her old servant, Martha, that Mr. Bragg was at the
gate, and would be glad to speak with her if she was at liberty.

"Quite at liberty, Martha, and very happy to see Mr. Bragg. Now what can
_he_ want?" said Mrs. Dobbs to the faithful Jo Weatherhead, who was in
his usual place by the hearth.

"Something about the house in Friar's Row?" suggested Jo.

"Ah! I suppose so. Though I don't know what there can be to say.
However, it's no use guessing. It's like staring at the outside of a
letter instead of reading it. He'll speak for himself."

Meanwhile Mr. Bragg had alighted from the plain brougham which had
brought him from his country house; and, walking up the garden path, and
in at the open door, presented himself in the little parlour.

"I hope you'll excuse my calling, Mrs. Dobbs. You and me have met years
ago."

"No excuse needed, Mr. Bragg. I remember you very well. This is my
brother-in-law, Mr. Weatherhead. Please to sit down."

Mr. Bragg sat down; and he and his hostess looked at each other for a
moment attentively.

Mr. Bragg was a large, solidly built man, with an impression on his face
of perplexity and resolution subtly mingled together. It is a look which
may be often seen on the countenance of an intelligent workman, whose
employment brings him into conflict with physical phenomena--at once so
docile and so intractable; so simply and so eternally mysterious. The
expression had long survived the days of Mr. Bragg's personal struggle
with facts of a metallic nature. In his present position, as a man of
large wealth and influence, he had to deal chiefly with the more complex
phenomena of humanity, and very seldom found it so trustworthy in the
manipulation as the iron and lead and tin and steel of his younger days.

Mrs. Dobbs marked the changes wrought by time and circumstances in
Joshua Bragg. She remembered him--he had even been temporarily in her
husband's employment, at one time--in a well-worn suit of working
clothes, and with chronically black finger-nails. She saw him now,
dressed with quiet good taste (for he left that matter to his London
tailor), with irreproachably clean hands--on which, however, toil had
left ineffaceable traces--and a massive watch chain worth half a year's
earnings of his former days.

"You're very little changed in the main, Mr. Bragg. And the years
haven't been hard on you," said Mrs. Dobbs, summing up the result of her
observations.

"No; I believe I don't feel the burthen of years much; not bodily, that
is. In the mind, I think I do. You see, I've come to a time of life when
a man can't keep putting off his own comfort and happiness to the day
after to-morrow. Which," added Mr. Bragg thoughtfully, "is exactly where
young folks have the pull, I think."

"That's queer, too, Mr. Bragg!" remarked Jo Weatherhead. "Putting off
your own comfort and happiness seems a poor way to enjoy yourself, sir."

"Ah, but what you only _mean_ to do, always comes up to your
expectations; and what you _do_ do, doesn't!" rejoined Mr. Bragg, with a
slow, emphatic nod of the head.

"Well, but as to 'feeling the burthen of years,' that's putting it too
strong," said Mrs. Dobbs. "You have no right to feel that burthen yet
awhile. Why, you must be--let me see!--under fifty-three."

"Fifty-three last birthday."

"Ay; I wasn't far out. Lord, that's no age! I might be your mother, Mr.
Bragg."

"I'm glad to hear you say so!--I mean, I'm glad you don't think me too
old--not quite an old fellow, in short."

"No; to be sure not!"

Mr. Bragg was silent for fully a minute. Then he said, "Well, whether
I'm quite an old fellow or not, I'm too old to trust much to the day
after to-morrow. So, if not inconvenient to you, Mrs. Dobbs, I should
like to say a few words to you about a matter that has been on my mind
for some little time."

"Certainly, Mr. Bragg. I'm quite at your service."

Mr. Bragg looked slowly round the little parlour; looked out of the
window at the tiny garden; looked at Mr. Weatherhead; finally looked at
Mrs. Dobbs again, and said, "It's a private matter."

"I had better go, Sarah," said Jo. "I shall look round again at
tea-time;" and he made a show of rising from his chair, very slowly and
reluctantly.

"Oh, perhaps you've no call to go away, Jo. I have no business secrets
from my brother-in-law, Mr. Bragg. He is my oldest and best friend in
the world."

Mr. Bragg rubbed his chin slowly with his hand, and answered with a
certain embarrassment, but quite straightforwardly, "It's a matter
private to _me_."

After this Jo Weatherhead had nothing for it but to take his departure,
and to endeavour to calm the fever of his curiosity with tobacco.

Mrs. Dobbs remained alone with her visitor, wondering more and more what
could be the subject of his proposed communication. Her thoughts, in
connection with Mr. Bragg, persistently hovered about the house in
Friar's Row. But his first words scattered them in widespread confusion.

"Your grand-daughter, Miss Cheffington, tells me that she is not going
to Glengowrie Castle this autumn, Mrs. Dobbs."

"Why--no--I believe not," answered Mrs. Dobbs, looking at him curiously.

"In that case I don't think I shall go there myself. I'm no sportsman. I
always feel lonely in a house full of strangers. And, besides--I was
invited partic'larly to meet Miss Cheffington."

Mrs. Dobbs preserved her outward composure; but something seemed to
whirl and spin in her brain; and, although she kept her eyes fixed on
Mr. Bragg, she saw neither him nor anything else in the room for several
seconds.

"I was asked through Mrs. Griffin. You may have heard speak of her?"

Mrs. Dobbs made an affirmative movement of the head. She could not have
articulated a word at that moment to save her life.

"Mrs. Griffin is a well-meaning lady. But she's a lady who now and then
gets out of her depth, along of not--what you might call minding her own
business. But she always means to be kind. And the best of us make
mistakes."

"Ah, that we do!" assented Mrs. Dobbs huskily.

"Well, Mrs. Griffin is always telling me that my money--'a princely
fortune' she calls it: but it's a good deal more than _that_, by what I
can hear about princes--lays me under an obligation to marry again."

At the words "princely fortune" Mrs. Dobbs winced, and a deep red flush
came into her face; but she answered quietly, "Wealth has its
responsibilities, of course, Mr. Bragg."

"Yes, it has; and its troubles. But when all's said and done, it's
pleasanter to be rich than poor. I've tried both."

"No doubt. Only--one may pay too dear even for being rich."

"Well, I should be sorry for any lady I married to consider that she
paid too dear for being rich."

"Oh, I meant no offence, Mr. Bragg."

"There's nothing you may not pay too dear for, I suppose; except a quiet
conscience. You may pay too dear for a wife. And there's two sides to
every"--he was about to say "bargain," but he substituted the word
"arrangement."

Mrs. Dobbs had taken up her knitting, and was twisting and pulling it
with her fingers in a restless, nervous way. When Mr. Bragg made a
pause, and looked at her, she said, "Of course, that's quite true."

He went on, "I make bold to hope, Mrs. Dobbs, that you'll give me credit
in what I'm going to say, for having some serious reason, and not
talking idly, out of pride and vanity; in short, for not being what you
might call a fool."

"Yes, I will, Mr. Bragg."

"Thank ye. On that understanding I may say, between ourselves, that Mrs.
Griffin has mentioned to me several quarters where I shouldn't meet with
a refusal in case I went to look for a wife. I couldn't have supposed it
myself--at least, not to the extent it really does run to. But the fact
has been brought to my knowledge, so that there's no possibility of
making any mistake about it. More than one young lady--some of 'em
titled, too," said Mr. Bragg, with an odd glimmer of complacency
flitting for a moment like a will-o'-the-wisp above the solid _terra
firma_ of his native good sense. "More than one, and more than two, have
been what you might call trotted out for me."

Mrs. Dobbs's fingers twitched and pulled at the wool on her
knitting-needles, and the muscles round her mouth seemed to tighten. But
she said not a word.

Mr. Bragg continued, "Now, perhaps you think I have no business to take
up your time with all this, when it's no concern of yours?"

Still Mrs. Dobbs did not speak; so he added--

"But it does concern you in a way."

She made a visible effort to say, quietly, "Ah, indeed! How's that?"

But this time she was perfectly sure beforehand of what he was going to
say.

"I'm coming to that in one moment." Here Mr. Bragg paused, took out his
handkerchief, and passed it over his face before proceeding. "I
mentioned that Mrs. Griffin sometimes gets out of her depth (with the
best of intentions) when minding other people's business. She got a
little out of her depth when attending to mine. She somehow took it for
granted that I should be quite content to marry any lady of high family,
who would look handsome in my diamonds and spend my money in the
fashionablest style. She was consequently a good deal taken aback when I
offered some objections to one or two parties of her recommendation. But
I managed to make her understand at last. Said I, 'Mrs. Griffin, I don't
undervalue the honour; but I'm too old to wear a tight shoe for the sake
of appearances.' The fact was, I did not feel myself what you might call
_drawn_ towards any of these young ladies. I couldn't fancy them sitting
opposite to me at my own fireside with a kind look on their faces. Now,
the reason I say all this to you," continued Mr. Bragg, laying his
massive hand on the elbow of Mrs. Dobbs's chair, "is because there is a
young lady that I _do_ feel drawn towards--a young lady I've had
opportunities of observing at home and abroad. And it was talking of
this young lady that I said one day to Mrs. Griffin, 'Now, if you could
find some one like Miss May Cheffington who'd condescend to have me, I
should think myself a very fortunate man.' She quite jumped at the
idea."

"Jumped, indeed!" burst out Mrs. Dobbs, indignantly. "Then she took a
most unwarrantable liberty. She could know nothing about Miss May
Cheffington's feeling in the matter. What business had _she_ to jump?"

"Nay, nay, my good lady! My good lady! You don't understand. She jumped
at the idea on _my_ account. Why, Lord bless me, you couldn't
suppose----! She told me at once that May Cheffington was the
purest-minded and most unworldly girl she ever knew. I remember her very
words; for I couldn't help thinking at the time how queer it was that
Mrs. Griffin should admire unworldliness so much."

There was a long pause. Mrs. Dobbs was greatly moved from her usual
self-possession. She could not trust herself to speak, while Mr. Bragg
was surprised, and somewhat offended, by her reception of what he had to
say.

He had really, all things considered, very little purse pride. But he
had been accustomed for many years to be dumbly conscious of the power
of his wealth, as an elephant is dumbly conscious of the power of his
weight; and for a few moments he felt as the elephant might feel if he
were subjected to the mysterious process which we hear of as
"levitation," and suddenly found himself brushed aside like a fly. Mr.
Bragg did not wish to bear down his fellow-creatures unduly by force of
wealth. But wealth had come to be a large factor in his social specific
gravity.

After a while, Mrs. Dobbs said tremulously, and by no means graciously,
"Well, I don't see what I can do for you in the matter."

"I am not asking you to do anything for me, Mrs. Dobbs. I was not aware
till last night that you were any relation to Miss Cheffington, or,
leastways, I had forgotten it, for I believe I did hear of your
daughter's marriage years ago. When I became aware of it, I thought you
would take it as a mark of respect and goodwill if I came and spoke to
you confidentially. But you don't appear to see it in that light."

Mrs. Dobbs turned round and offered him her hand, saying, "I ask your
pardon if I have said anything to offend you. You don't deserve it; you
are very far from deserving it. But I'm shaken; my nerve isn't what it
was. I haven't been so upset since my poor dear daughter Susy ran away
and got married." She was trembling, and her restless fingers were
making sad work with the knitting.

"Well, well, there's no occasion for you to put yourself about, you
know. I should like you to tell me just this--under the circumstances I
think there's no objection to my putting the question--is there anybody
else in the field before me?"

"N-no; I think not. I can't say."

"If the young lady has no other attachment," said Mr. Bragg, in his
slow, pondering way, "I don't see why I should not be able to make her
happy. What do _you_ think?"

"You're a deal older than the child: there's a great disparity, Joshua!"
answered Mrs. Dobbs, reverting, in her agitation, to the familiar form
in which she had addressed him thirty years back.

"So there is, but that can't be helped; we must just reckon with it as
so much alloy. There wouldn't be much romance--couldn't be; but a vast
number of people get on very well without romance, and are useful and
happy. I have some reason to believe," added Mr. Bragg, looking at her a
little askance--for there was no knowing whether this fiery old woman
might not take offence again--"that certain members of Miss C.'s family
would approve."

Mrs. Dobbs answered with unexpected meekness. "There's no need to tell
me _that_. And you mustn't suppose, Mr. Bragg, that I don't
appreciate--that I don't know how the world in general would look upon
your offer."

"Why, you see, it doesn't amount exactly to an offer. I thought I would
talk matters over with you, and, what you might call, put the case. You
see," said Mr. Bragg, placing the forefinger of his right hand upon the
thumb of his left, "for my part I could undertake that any lady who did
me the honour to marry me should have steady kindness and respect. I
wouldn't marry a woman I didn't respect, not if she was the handsomest
one in the world and a duke's daughter. Then," placing his two
forefingers together, "I ain't a bad temper, nor a jealous temper.
Lastly," here he shifted the forefinger of his right hand to the middle
finger of his left, "though I don't want to lay too much stress upon
money, yet it's a fact that my wife, and, in the course of nature, my
widow, would be a very rich woman."

"I suppose you know," said Mrs. Dobbs, leaning her forehead on her hand,
and letting the knitting slide from her knees to the floor, "that May's
father is alive?"

"Yes; I do know it. And I've got something to say to you on that score.
And I'm sure you will agree with me that it is very desirable for Miss
C. to have protection and guidance. I'm not speaking for myself now, you
understand. Her aunt, Mrs. Dormer-Smith, is a very genteel lady, with
very high connections. But--quite between ourselves, you know--I
wouldn't give much for her headpiece."

Mrs. Dobbs was looking at him eagerly, and scarcely allowed him to
finish his sentence before she said, "But you have something to say
about Captain Cheffington?"

"Well, perhaps you know it. If you don't, you ought to. He has been
travelling about for years with an Italian opera-singer. She is with him
now in Brussels. And people say he has married her."

Mrs. Dobbs clasped her hands together, and ejaculated, almost in a
whisper, "Oh, my poor child!"

Mr. Bragg could not tell whether she were thinking of her daughter, or
her grand-daughter. Perhaps the images of both were in her mind.

"You had not heard of it, then? Ah! It's a bad prospect for Miss C."

"But is it true? So many stories get about. It seems incredible to me
that Augustus, so selfish as he is, should have bound himself in that
way."

"I hear it confirmed on all hands. It's an old story now, and pretty
widely known. But, look at it which way you will, it's an ugly,
disreputable kind of business, Mrs. Dobbs."

She was silent for a while, sitting with her head sunk on her breast,
and her hands clasped before her. Then she said, almost as if speaking
to herself, "God knows! The woman _may_ not be bad or wicked. How are we
to judge?"

Mr. Bragg drew his hand away from the elbow of Mrs. Dobbs's chair, where
it had been resting, and said, in a tone of solemn disapprobation, "I
don't think there can be much doubt as to the character of the--person,
Mrs. Dobbs. I understand she became so notorious in Brussels through
keeping a gaming-house, or something of that kind, as to call for the
interference of the police."

"May I ask how this information reached you?" said Mrs. Dobbs, turning
round and looking full at him.

Mr. Bragg hesitated for a few moments before answering. "It has come to
me from various quarters; but the latest is an Italian singer, who has
been chattering a good deal. He was at Miss Piper's. There's always a
certain amount of risk in having public performers in your house. I
don't encourage 'em myself--never did from a boy; and I think it a pity
that Miss Piper does. Her sister and me are quite agreed on that point."
Mr. Bragg here pushed back his chair and stood up. "I should wish you to
understand," he said, "that I should have thought it my duty to tell you
this, feeling the interest I do in Miss C., quite independent of our
previous conversation."

"I understand. Thank you."

"With regard to that conversation, you can, if you think it advisable,
what you might call _sound_ your grand-daughter. I think that might
avoid disagreeables for both parties. It can't be pleasant for a
sensitive young lady to refuse an offer. And I don't mind saying that it
would be extremely unpleasant to me to _be_ refused. A man of my age
and--well, I may say my position, don't like to look ridic'lous. Of
course you don't care much for _my_ feelings: can't be expected to; but
I think, on reflection, you'll see that by coming to you first in this
way, I've also done the best I could to spare the feelings of Miss C."

With that Mr. Bragg shook hands with his hostess, and, quietly letting
himself out of the house, walked to his brougham, and was driven away to
the office in Friar's Row.




CHAPTER VIII.


To one so habitually resolute, sagacious, and self-reliant as Mrs.
Dobbs, the shock of discovering that she has been living under a
delusion is severe. It is not merely mortifying--it is alarming. After
her conversation with Mr. Bragg, Mrs. Dobbs felt like a person who,
walking along what seems to be like a solid path, suddenly finds his
foot sink into a quagmire. The firmer and bolder the tread, the greater
the danger.

She had not been conscious, until the disenchantment came, how much hope
and pride she had lavished on the image conjured up in her fancy by
Pauline's "gentleman of princely fortune." The image had been vague, it
is true, but brilliant. All that she knew of Mrs. Dormer-Smith's pride
of birth, her contemptuous rejection of young Bransby's suit, the
importance she attached to introducing her niece into the "best set,"
and so forth, served to strengthen Mrs. Dobbs in all kinds of delusions.
She had taken it for granted that the sort of person whom Pauline could
approve of as May's husband must possess certain qualifications. She no
more thought, for instance, of doubting that he would be a gentleman,
than that he would be a white man. The "princely fortune" added
something chivalrous to the idea of him in her mind, since he was ready
to share it with portionless May. And now these airy visions had been
rolled aside like glittering clouds; and the solid, prosaic, ugly fact
presented itself in the form of Joshua Bragg!

Mrs. Dobbs sat for more than an hour after he had left her, with bowed
head and hands clasped, scarcely stirring. For a while she could not
order her thoughts. Her mind was confused. Images came and went without
her will. Under all was a bitter sense of disappointment, and a vague
disquietude for the future. At first she had dismissed the notion of
May's marrying Mr. Bragg, as one too preposterous to be entertained for
a moment; but by degrees she began to ask herself whether she might not
be as mistaken here as she had been in other undoubting judgments. Mr.
Bragg was a man of probity, and--or so she had hitherto thought him--of
excellent sense. Oldchester held many substantial proofs of his
benevolence. Could it be possible that girlish May was willing to think
of this man for a husband? Mrs. Dobbs tried to look at the matter
judicially.

There were many instances of happy marriages where the disparity in
years was as great as in this case. Who could be happier than Martin
Bransby and his beautiful young wife? But this example had not the
effect of reconciling Mrs. Dobbs to the possibility of May's accepting
the great tin-tack maker. Martin Bransby was a man whom any woman might
love--well educated, clever, genial, of a handsome presence, and with
manners of fine old-fashioned courtesy. There could be no comparison
between Martin Bransby and Joshua Bragg.

No, no, no! Such a match would be a mere coarse bargain. The very
thought of it was an outrage to May. And yet--the pendulum of her
thoughts swinging suddenly in the opposite direction--she remembered
that neither Mrs. Dormer-Smith nor Mrs. Griffin had so considered it.
And was it not true what Mr. Bragg had said--that many people did very
well without romance, and were useful and happy? Self-distrust, once
aroused, became wild and uncontrollable. She fought against her better
instincts; telling herself that she was a fool, and that the world was
no place for story-book sentimentality. If May married this man she
would be safe from the gusts of fortune; she would be honoured and
caressed (for it was clear that society accepted Mr. Bragg without qualm
or question), and she would have boundless possibilities of doing good.
_This_, surely, at all events, was a worthy aim!

At this point--just as after a conflict between winds and waves there
sometimes comes a sudden calm and the serenity of sunshine--the turmoil
of her mind was stilled all at once, and she saw clearly. She lifted up
her head and said aloud--

"'What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul?' Lord, forgive me! I was arguing on the devil's side every
bit as much as that poor creature, Mrs. Dormer-Smith. And without her
excuse of knowing no better! The whole thing is plain enough. If May
could bring herself to care for the man--and such unlikely things happen
in _that_ line that one daren't say it's downright impossible!--she'd do
right to marry him; if not, she'd do wrong. And that's all about it."

Here, at least, was a firm foothold. And having struggled out of the
quagmire, Mrs. Dobbs was able to consider the other subject of Mr.
Bragg's talk with her--the rumour that Captain Cheffington had married
again. If it were true, and, above all, if his new wife were such a one
as Mr. Bragg had described, there was a new source of anxiety as to
May's future.

As she was meditating on this point, Jo Weatherhead returned, eager to
hear all about her interview with Bragg, and to impart to her something
he had just heard himself. Mrs. Dobbs was glad to be able to feed Jo's
hungry curiosity by telling him the reports about her son-in-law, since
she could not betray Mr. Bragg's confidence respecting May. She found
that he had been hearing a version of them from Mr. Simpson, whom he had
met in the road. Valli's utterances at Miss Piper's supper-table had
already revived all kinds of obsolete gossip about Captain Cheffington.

"It'll be terrible for my poor lamb if half the bad things they say are
true," said Mrs. Dobbs, shaking her head.

Jo's private opinion was that Captain Cheffington's conduct under any
given circumstances was pretty sure to be the worst possible; but he
tried to comfort his old friend, as he had succeeded in comforting
himself, by setting forth that her father's behaviour, be it what it
might, could scarcely affect May's happiness very deeply, seeing that
she had been entirely separated from him for so long.

"And as to her position in the world, that you think so much of"--Mrs.
Dobbs winced at this, and turned her head away--"why, I shrewdly
suspect, Sarah, that a deal worse things than ever reached you and me
have been known about Captain Cheffington in aristocratic circles this
long time back. And yet Miranda has been received among the tip-toppest
people as if she belonged to 'em. And there's her own great-uncle, the
Lord Viscount Castlecombe of Combe Park, a nobleman notorious for his
heighth" (Jo did not mean his stature), "has quite taken to her, by all
accounts."

After some consultation, they agreed together that it would be well for
Mrs. Dobbs to tell her grand-daughter something of the reports which
were flying about, lest they might reach her accidentally, or, in a
still more painful way, through malice, and find her unprepared.
Moreover, Jo urged his old friend to write boldly to Augustus demanding
an answer as to the truth of the statement that he had married a second
wife. Mrs. Dobbs at length consented to do so, although she had little
hope of eliciting the truth by those means. But Jo was strongly of
opinion that if Captain Cheffington were not married he would be
desirous, for many reasons, of repudiating the statement; and if he were
married he might not be displeased at this opportunity of saying so,
although pride, or indolence, or a hundred other motives, might prevent
him from making the opportunity for himself.

The communication was made to May when she came home from College Quad
that afternoon. And, although greatly surprised at first, it did not
produce so much effect as her grandmother had anticipated.

May had enough of the healthy, unquestioning veneration of a child for
its parent to take her father on trust; and Mrs. Dobbs had always been
careful not to lower Captain Cheffington in his daughter's esteem. But
May did not--naturally could not--feel for him any of that strong
personal attachment which is apt to look jealously on interlopers. She
regarded him with a somewhat hazy affection, largely compounded of
imagination and dim childish traditions. Some added tenderness sprang,
perhaps, from the notion that "poor papa" had been unfortunate, and that
the world had treated him below his deserts.

After the first surprise was over, she said, "But why should he keep it
secret? Wouldn't he have told you, granny?"

"Perhaps not, May; I hear from him very seldom, as you know."

"Very seldom! Yes; but in such a case as this! Perhaps, though, papa
thought it might hurt your feelings, on account of mamma."

"Perhaps," returned Mrs. Dobbs drily.

"People are unreasonably sensitive sometimes, are they not? As for me,
it never entered into my head to think of my father's marrying again;
but now I do think of it, it seems to me that it would be a very good
thing."

"Its goodness or badness would depend, of course, on--circumstances."

"I do really think more and more that it would be a good thing, granny.
Papa must have many lonely hours, you know. He likes Continental life
best, to be sure; but still he is far away from his own country and his
own people. It seems almost selfish in us not to have thought of it
_for_ him. Oh, I hope she is a nice, kind woman, who will be good to him
and take care of him. I think I ought to write at once and assure him
that I have no grudge in my heart about it. And I'm sure you have none
either; have you, granny dear?"

Mrs. Dobbs found it at once more painful and more difficult than she had
foreseen to breathe degrading suspicions into this frank, pure mind. But
it was necessary not to allow May to cherish what might prove to be
disastrous illusions.

"It isn't all such plain sailing, May," she answered slowly. "I will
write to your father, and you had better wait for his reply. We don't
know that he is married at all. And if he is, we don't know that there's
much to be glad about. They do say that the lady is not a fit match for
your father."

"_He_ is the best judge of that, I should think," returned May. Then she
added, her young face flushing with a generous impulse, "I dare say
people may have said the same of my own dear mother."

"No, May. No one ever said of your own dear mother what is said of this
woman."

There was a sternness in her grandmother's voice and face which startled
the girl.

"What do they say, granny?" she asked quickly.

Mrs. Dobbs checked herself. "Oh, I cannot tell you exactly. There are
lots of stories about. Some will have it that--her character is not
quite blameless."

"_Who_ dares to say so of my father's wife?"

"Hush! May. There's no need to call her your father's wife yet. Signor
Valli says the person in question----"

"Signor Valli? Then I don't believe a word of it. Not one word. I know
he talks wildly, and jumps at things. Why, he told Clara Bertram that my
mother was a foreigner, and that he had met her. So you see how accurate
and trustworthy Signor Valli is." Then, after a moment, as if struck by
a sudden thought, she asked, "Is--_she_ a foreigner?"

"I believe so."

"Then that is what he meant, I suppose."

"It's right to tell you, May, that Signor Valli is not the only one who
has heard disagreeable things."

"Oh, of course, they all baa' one after the other! You have no idea,
granny, what foolish back-biting talk goes on among the people whom Aunt
Pauline calls 'society.' I've seen them roll a morsel of gossip over and
over, while it kept growing all the time like a snow-ball--or a
mud-ball. And no doubt many people whom Aunt Pauline doesn't call
'society' are as bad. A sheep is a sheep, whichever side of the hedge it
is on," said this young censor with fine scorn.

Mrs. Dobbs in her heart did not put implicit faith in the stories which
reached her. The young and the old--when they are sound-hearted--are
both prone to disbelieve slander--the young from innocence, the old from
experience; for there is no lesson more surely taught by life than the
evil lightness with which evil is attributed.

But with regard to these particular stories, unwelcome corroboration was
given to Mrs. Dobbs by Clara Bertram. Clara carried out her proposal of
going to sing at Jessamine Cottage. She went there one afternoon when
May was absent at the Hadlows', and introduced herself. There were only
Mrs. Dobbs and Mr. Weatherhead to listen to her; but she sat down at the
old square piano--feebly tinkling now, but tinkling always in tune, like
the conscientious ghost of a defunct instrument--and sang her best. Her
audience, though limited, was highly appreciative; and she soon found
that their applause was not given ignorantly.

Apart from the charm of her singing, Clara won their sympathies by her
kindly, unaffected simplicity. She inspired trustfulness. One must have
been blindly false one's self to doubt her truth. Mrs. Dobbs was moved
to question her a little about Valli.

"Of course, you have heard this gossip about May's father?" she said.

"Yes. To say the truth, I almost hoped you might speak on this subject;
and so I purposely came when I thought May would not be here. I hinted
to her something that Valli had said to me; but I saw she knew nothing."

"I have told her. At least I have told her enough to prevent her being
taken by surprise."

"I am glad of that. I think you have done very wisely."

"This Signor Valli, now," said Mrs. Dobbs musingly. "I suppose he tells
lies sometimes, eh?"

Clara reflected for a moment before she answered. "In one way--yes. That
is to say, if he hated you, and saw you give a penny to a beggar, he
would impute some nefarious motive for the action, and say so without
scruple; but I don't believe he would be likely to invent
circumstances."

Then she went on to tell how Miss Polly Piper remembered a dreadful
story about some gambling transactions; and how Major Mitton had
furbished up his Maltese reminiscences; and how everybody found
something to say, and not one good thing among them all.

Jo Weatherhead listened with a kind of dread enjoyment. So much curious
gossip _could_ not but be interesting; yet he wished with all his heart,
for May's sake, that it were not true.

"I speak openly to you," said Clara; "but I am reticent about all this
with other people. Pray believe that."

Mrs. Dobbs did believe it. Clara seemed to have become intimate with
them all at once.

"May I come again?" asked the young singer as she took her leave.

"May you come! _Will_ you come? I didn't ask you, because, when a person
generously gives me one pearl of price, it is not my way to snatch at
the whole string. Your time is precious; your voice is precious."

"Dear Mrs. Dobbs, your kindness is precious. Not that I am ungrateful
for the kindness bestowed on me by--other people; but there is such a
delightful feeling of homeliness here. And then, although you have
praised me too much, I must say that you and Mr. Weatherhead are good
judges of music."

"Well, I won't go so far as to deny that you _might_ strew your pearls
before certain animals who would value them less," replied Mrs. Dobbs.

As for Jo Weatherhead, he became so enthusiastic in Miss Bertram's
praises behind her back, that Mrs. Dobbs laughingly declared he was in
love with her. And perhaps he was, a little. Many more such humble
innocent "loves" spring up and die around us every day than we reck of.
They do not ripen into fruit, but simply blossom like the wayside
flowers; and the world is all the sweeter for them.

When May came home that evening, she was delighted to hear of the
favourable impression her friend had made; although she declared it was
shabby of Clara to have come in her absence. May brought the news from
College Quad that Constance had written home for a prolonged leave of
absence, having been invited by the duchess to accompany Mrs. Griffin to
Glengowrie.

"Canon Hadlow grumbles a little," said May; "but he will let her go. And
I am so glad; I hated the idea of going; but Conny will enjoy it, and
everybody else will soon find out that she is the right girl in the
right place--which, I am sure, I should not have been."

"Mr. Bragg is not going to Glengowrie either, I understand," said Mrs.
Dobbs, growing very red, and coughing to hide her embarrassment.

"No; Mr. Bragg and I are quite agreed in not liking that sort of thing.
He says he feels lonely in a strange house; and so do I. If the duke and
duchess were my _friends_, it would be different."

"Mr. Bragg has a good deal of sense, I think."

"Plenty of common sense."

"And--ahem!--and good feeling--don't you think?"

"What's the matter with your throat, granny? Shall I get you a glass of
water?--Oh yes; he does a great deal of good with his wealth. Canon
Hadlow was saying only this afternoon that Mr. Bragg gives away very
large sums in private, besides the public subscriptions, where every one
sees his name."

"Mr. Bragg was here the other day to speak to me--on business--No, no; I
don't want any water! Sit still, child. And I think you are a great
favourite of his."

"It's quite mutual, granny. Often and often, in London, I used to prefer
a quiet talk with Mr. Bragg to the foolish chatter of smart people."

"Ay, ay! But 'smart people' need not be foolish, May."

"N--no; they _need_ not. Only so many of them--especially the young
men--seem to think it part of their smartness to put on a kind of
foolishness."

Mrs. Dobbs looked wistfully at her grand-daughter. In that process of
"sounding" May, which Mr. Bragg had recommended, and which Mrs. Dobbs
was endeavouring to carry out, there arose this difficulty: the chords
gave forth a full response to every touch; but who should interpret the
meaning of the notes? Mrs. Dobbs had been accustomed to read May's
feelings by swift intuition. She was now afraid to trust to that. Her
interview with Mr. Bragg had upset so many of her preconceived ideas as
to what could be considered probable, or even possible, in the matter of
her grandchild's marriage, that her judgment seemed paralyzed. And then
to risk a mistake which should involve May's life-long unhappiness,
would be too tremendous a responsibility!

Measured by Mrs. Dobbs's unquiet thoughts it seemed a long time, but in
reality less than a minute elapsed between May's last words and her
saying--

"Talking of smart people, granny, don't you think Aunt Pauline is sure
to know the truth about papa?"

"I cannot tell. There might be reasons why she should not have heard it,
May."

"Well, at all events, I have been thinking that I will write to her and
ask. If she does know, and is keeping her knowledge back from me for any
reason--some of Aunt Pauline's mysterious dancing before deaf people,
you know--that will make her speak out."

"I don't see why you should not write to her, if you choose, May."

Mrs. Dobbs had little doubt that Mrs. Dormer-Smith would be annoyed and
perturbed by May's writing to her on the subject, whether the story of
the marriage were true or false, and whether she herself had or had not
heard of it. But Mrs. Dobbs was in no mood to shield Pauline from
annoyance or perturbation.

"She and her 'gentleman of princely fortune,' indeed!" said Mrs. Dobbs
to herself. "Why couldn't she say old Joshua Bragg? and then one would
have known where one was."

So it was settled that May should write to her aunt.




CHAPTER IX.


Theodore Bransby at first indignantly repudiated Valli's scandals about
Captain Cheffington. He was quite unprepared for them, having, it may be
remembered, heard nothing of Miss Piper's story, told at the
dinner-party in his father's house; and having, moreover, loftily
snubbed every one in Oldchester who ventured to hint anything to the
disparagement of his distinguished friend. What could Oldchester know
about such persons as the Cheffingtons?

But general testimony and public opinion were too strong for him, and he
was forced to give up his distinguished friend. He fell back on
mysterious hints of sympathy and intimacy with "the family," and
allusions to what "poor dear Lucius" had said to him on the last
occasion of their dining together at Mrs. Dormer-Smith's.

In his heart, Theodore was deeply annoyed. He considered that Captain
Cheffington (supposing report to speak truly) had not only derogated
from his proper place in the world, but had, in some sense, personally
injured him (Theodore) by forming a connection so far beneath him.
Nevertheless, it was very possible that Captain Cheffington might some
day come to be Viscount Castlecombe, and much would be forgiven to a
wealthy peer of the realm. Theodore was conscious that he himself could
forgive much to such a one. He was not prone to indulge in idle fancies,
yet he caught himself once or twice writing on a corner of his
blotting-pad the words "Hon. Mrs. Theodore Bransby," with pensive
sentiment. But let her father's fate and fortunes be what they might,
Theodore felt that he must still desire to marry May Cheffington. The
recognition of this feeling in himself gave him an agreeable sense of
his own elevation of soul. That fellow Rivers talked a vast deal of
flashy nonsense, which dazzled people; but it was possible to take a
serious and sensible view of life without being commonplace. Theodore
did not by any means wish to be, or to be thought, commonplace.

He had just been called to the Bar, and ought by this time to have begun
his professional career on the Midland Circuit. But he lingered in
Oldchester on the plea of delicate health. It was not so much the
presence of May Cheffington as that of Owen Rivers which chained him
there. If Rivers would but have left Oldchester, Theodore would have
turned his back on it also with small reluctance. The dull, vague
jealousy of Rivers, which he began to feel long ago, had become acute.
Rivers would have been a distasteful personage to him under any
circumstances; but viewed as a rival, he inspired something like
loathing. And yet the desire to watch him--not to lose sight of him so
long as May should be in Oldchester--was irresistible. Theodore had
never come so near quarrelling with his step-mother as on the subject of
Owen Rivers; but he had failed in causing the latter to be excluded, or
even coldly received, by Mrs. Bransby.

There was a painful scene one day at luncheon, when Martin, Mrs.
Bransby's eldest boy, vehemently took up the cudgels in defence of his
absent friend, Owen, of whom Theodore had been speaking with sneering
contempt. Martin was ordered away from the table for being impertinent
to his half-brother. But general sympathy was with the culprit; and Mr.
Bransby said when the boy had left the room--

"Of course, it would not do to allow Martin to be saucy; but you are too
hard upon Rivers, Theodore. He may have his faults; but, if he be idle,
he is not self-indulgent. Rivers has a Spartan disdain of personal
luxuries; and although he doesn't work, no one suffers by that but
himself. He is incapable of a mean thought, has a most noble
truthfulness of nature, and is a gentleman to the core."

Theodore turned deadly white, and answered, "I am sorry not to be able
to agree with you, sir. To be a lounging hanger-on, as Rivers is at the
Hadlows', is not compatible with my conception of a gentleman."

He rose as he spoke, and left the room, so as to cut off any possibility
of a reply.

Mrs. Bransby had sat by with downcast eyes, parted lips, and beating
heart. She was divided between delight at hearing her husband assert his
own opinion against Theodore and her constitutional timidity and dread
of a quarrel. When Theodore was gone, she put her hand on her husband's
shoulder, and said--

"It is like you, dear Martin, to stand up for the absent. We are
all--the children and I--so fond of young Rivers."

"I hate priggishness, and I hate spitefulness," rejoined Martin Bransby,
with a sparkle in his fine dark eyes.

The old man's face had flushed when he uttered his protest. It was an
unusual outburst; for of late--whether from failing health, or from
whatever cause--Mr. Bransby had more and more shrunk from opposing or
contradicting Theodore. He seemed almost timidly anxious to conciliate
him; and was evidently distressed by any symptom of ill-will between his
eldest son and the rest of the family. After a while the flush died from
his cheek, and the fire from his eye. He sat with bowed head, softly
caressing the white jewelled hand which had slidden down from his
shoulder. Presently he said--

"Don't let us cherish feuds, or blow up resentment, Loui. If there are
subjects on which Theodore thinks differently from you--and me; and me,
too, my dear--let us avoid them. He has his good points, though he has
weak ones--as we all have. Let us spare them. Theodore may be very
helpful to the boys when I am gone. And I have it very much at heart
that there should be peace and goodwill between them."

In Theodore's mind, however, the little incident rankled. He was silent
about it. But that was no indication that he had either forgiven or
forgotten it.

He was also annoyed and disappointed at seeing May Cheffington so seldom
during this sojourn at home. He had formerly met her constantly at
College Quad; but he could not now frequent Canon Hadlow's house as he
had done in old days, even had he wished it. And although it appeared
that Mrs. Bransby had struck up a great friendship with May during his
absence, May's visits to her were very brief and rare. Theodore half
suspected that his step-mother perversely stinted her invitations to the
girl, for the express purpose of vexing him, and at length he plainly
asked her how it was that Miss Cheffington came to their house so
seldom. Mrs. Bransby was tempted to give him her real opinion as to the
reason, but she refrained. She would not vex Martin by saying sharp
things to his son. So she answered vaguely that Miss Cheffington now
passed a good deal of her time at Garnet Lodge with her friend, Clara
Bertram.

"Excuse me," said Theodore, tilting his chair, and looking down as from
the summit of Mont Blanc upon his step-mother. "The Dormer-Smiths were
very kind to that little Bertram girl in town, and Mrs. Dormer-Smith
launched her in some of the best houses; but--pardon me for setting you
right--she is not quite on such a footing as to be a _friend_ of Miss
Cheffington's."

However, he acted on the hint accidentally given, and began to honour
the Miss Pipers with frequent visits.

The good-natured old maids received him very kindly; but it may be
doubted whether he were particularly welcome to any of the persons who
had taken the habit of dropping in nearly every evening at Garnet Lodge.

Major Mitton and Dr. Hatch were old _habitues_; but the circle now
included some new ones. Mr. Bragg was often there. (Theodore considered
it a striking proof of the incurable commonness of Mr. Bragg's
tastes--already illustrated, to Theodore's apprehension, by a memorable
instance--that he, to whom some of the best county society was
accessible, and who had even been invited to Glengowrie, should prefer
the middle-class sitting-room, and the middle-class gossip of Polly and
Patty Piper.) There was, too, the inevitable Owen Rivers, and
occasionally Mr. Sweeting and Cleveland Turner would drive over from the
country-house which the former had hired in the neighbourhood. Miss
Bertram's visit was prolonged; in Theodore's opinion very unduly. It
might be all very well to invite her for professional purposes; but,
once the musical party was over, it was absurd to keep the girl as a
visitor in the house. Altogether, there was much that Theodore
disapproved of at Garnet Lodge; but, as he told himself, he went there
for a purpose totally disconnected with its owners. And if he did some
violence to his social principles by condescending to frequent such an
undistinguished and _bourgeois_ set of people, he was resolved to make
amends by totally dropping their acquaintance in the, not distant,
future.

As to May, although he genuinely believed that the Dormer-Smiths had
influenced her against him, he was not so foolish as to think that she
had been coerced, or that she was at all in love with him. Nevertheless,
a vast deal might depend on the influence of those around her, in the
case of a girl so young, so fresh-hearted, and so inexperienced. He had
faith in his own perseverance and constancy. The main point--the only
vital point--was to prevent any rival from succeeding. So long as May
were free he had good hope. It was quite certain that the Cheffington
family would never sanction her marrying Owen Rivers. _That_ must be
taken as absolutely sure. And, indeed, Miss Cheffington herself would
probably scout the idea. But with regard to what Rivers hoped and
intended Theodore could not be mistaken. There, at least, he was
clear-sighted. It was disgraceful on the part of a fellow like Rivers,
subsisting in idleness on a beggarly pittance, and without prospects for
the future, or advantages in the present, to aspire to such a girl as
May Cheffington. Of course, Rivers knew very well that it would prove a
good speculation. May might prove to be the sole heiress of a rich
nobleman. At any rate, she would certainly inherit her grandmother's
money. Mrs. Dobbs's savings, however paltry, would be a sufficient bait
for Rivers, who had none of that ambition for fine tailoring,
upholstery, and the paraphernalia of fashionable life which becomes a
gentleman. Jealousy apart, perhaps that which made Owen peculiarly
offensive to him was to see a man at once so poor, so contented, and so
free from any misgivings as to his right to be generally respected.

On his side, it must be owned that Owen wasted no cordiality on
Theodore. To see May speaking civilly to that correctly dressed and
dignified young man caused Mr. Rivers a certain irritation which
occasionally manifested itself in the most unreasonable ill-humour
towards her.

"I really believe you _like_ his empty arrogance," he said to her once.
"Why else you should sit and listen to him with that complacent air, I
cannot conceive."

"Oh, I enjoy it of all things," answered May mischievously; "otherwise I
should, of course, cut him short by remarking, in a loud voice, and with
a ferocious glare, 'Mr. Bransby, I look upon you as a tedious prig.' How
delightful social intercourse would become if we had all reached that
fine point of sincerity!"

But there were other causes of dislike between the young men unconnected
with May Cheffington. Owen felt not only admiration, but regard, for
Mrs. Bransby, and resented her stepson's demeanour towards her, while
Theodore was embittered by hearing Owen's praises in his own family.

The perception of this lurking enmity between them made May anxious to
smoothe asperities and prevent a rupture. In her heart, although she
admitted he had done nothing to startle or offend her of late, she
intensely disliked Theodore Bransby; yet she found herself in a position
of taking his part against Owen. Owen was too absolute, too inflexible,
too implacable, she said. After all, Theodore had always conducted
himself irreproachably. He might not be agreeable to _them_ (May had
innocently come to join herself with Owen in this kind of partnership in
sentiment), but probably _they_ were not always agreeable to other
people; they ought to be tolerant if they wished to be tolerated--and
the like sage reflections. All which pretty lectures, though they made
Owen no whit less obdurate towards Theodore, melted his heart into ever
softer tenderness for May.

She had not gone to Glengowrie. The reprieve he had allowed himself,
after which she was to depart, and he must steel himself to endure her
absence for, probably, the remainder of his life, had expired. But May
was still there. And there, too, was he. He was free to go away at any
moment. But he lingered. He began to suffer sharp pangs of regret when
he thought of the lost opportunities which lay behind him; for now
sometimes it seemed to him as if this sweet, pure girl might come to
love him. And what had he to offer her? How could he ask her to share
such a life as his? Owen had held certain uncompromising theories: such
as that a woman who hesitated to partake poverty with the man she
professed to love was not worth winning; and that a man must be but a
poor creature who should weigh a woman's fortune against himself, and
fear to woo a well-dowered girl lest he might be thought to love her
money bags and not her. And he had long ago decided that with _his_
marriage, at least (supposing that unlikely event ever took place),
considerations of money should have nothing to do on either side. But
theories--even true theories--are apt to find themselves a little out of
breath when suddenly confronted with the fact.

The advice so vigorously given by Mrs. Dobbs to do some honest work, if
it were but breaking stones upon the road, took a new significance when
he thought of May. That on this point May agreed with her grandmother's
view he had ascertained, although a shy consciousness restrained her
from urging him to change his course of life. He began to cast about in
his mind for some possible employment; but he found, as so many others
had found before him, how difficult it is to turn "general acquirements"
into a definite channel.

A chance word of Mr. Bragg's at length suddenly suggested a hope to him.

Mr. Bragg mentioned one evening at Garnet Lodge that he purposed making
a journey into Spain, partly on matters connected with his son's
business; and said that he should like to find some trustworthy person
to accompany him as secretary and interpreter.

"I don't speak any foreign language myself," said Mr. Bragg. "Of course,
there's always somebody that knows English; and pounds sterling are a
pretty universal language, I find, and make themselves understood
everywhere. But still, you're at a disadvantage with people who can talk
your tongue while you can't talk theirs."

"But you could send somebody, couldn't you?" suggested Miss Patty.
"Spain, I've heard, is such a horrid country."

"Horrid!" cried Major Mitton indignantly. (He was strong in
recollections of sundry youthful escapades and excursions from "Gib.")
"Most delightful country! Most picturesque, poetical, and----"

"Oh yes; but I meant the cooking," explained Miss Patty.

Mr. Bragg, however, valorously declared himself ready to face the perils
of Spanish cookery. His son was not satisfied with his correspondent at
Barcelona. Mr. Bragg wanted change of air; and since he had given up the
idea of visiting the Highlands this autumn, he would take this
opportunity of seeing foreign parts, and at the same time looking into
matters at Barcelona for his son.

Owen's heart beat fast as the thought occurred to him of offering
himself to Mr. Bragg as secretary for this journey. He hurried after Mr.
Bragg when the latter's carriage was announced, and stopped him in the
hall to ask when and where he could have a private interview with him.
Mr. Bragg answered in his slow, ruminating way, as he took his coat from
the servant--

"An interview with me? Oh, well, why not come over to lunch? My house
ain't beyond a pleasant walk for your young legs."

"No, thank you; I won't come to luncheon. But I want an appointment--I
shall not take up much of your time--on business."

"Oh, on business, is it?" said Mr. Bragg. It was curious to note how
evidently the sound of the word made him bring his mind to bear on what
was said to him, with a new and keener attention. "On business! It's
nothing you could write, I suppose."

"Yes; I could write it. Shall I?"

"I think it would be the best plan, if you don't mind. You see I find,
in a general way, that talk--what you might call, branches out so. Now a
letter limits a man. I don't mean this for your partic'lar case, you
know, but speaking in a general way. Perhaps, if we find afterwards that
there is anything to talk over, you might look me up at my office in
Friar's Row. It'll be easier to settle all that when I know what the
business is. Good night. My respects to your aunt."

Owen hastened to his lodgings, and set himself at once to compose a
letter to Mr. Bragg. Seeing that it was then past eleven o'clock at
night, and that Mr. Bragg had set out for his country-house, it was
scarcely probable that he should have found a secretary between that
hour and the following morning. But Owen felt as if every moment's delay
might be fatal. Oldchester persons, who had seen him lounging on Canon
Hadlow's lawn, and merely knew him as a young man fond of smoking, and
reading, and such unprofitable employments, would have been amazed at
the impetuous energy he threw into the writing of this letter. But the
same weight of character which gives massiveness to repose adds a
formidable momentum to action.

The main difficulty, he soon found, was to make his letter short. This,
after several failures, and the tearing up of three copies, he
accomplished to a fair extent, if not wholly to his own satisfaction.
When he had finished the letter, he put it into a cover, stamped and
addressed it, and went out to post it with his own hand. By that time it
was considerably past midnight. The letter could have been delivered by
hand in Friar's Row next morning, and would probably have reached Mr.
Bragg equally soon. But it was a relief to Owen in his restless,
impetuous mood to have done something irrevocable. And there are few
actions in life so obviously irrevocable as posting a letter. This is
what he had written--

     "DEAR SIR,

     "I venture to offer myself for the post of your secretary
     during the journey you propose making to Spain.

     "My qualifications are--Honesty; a fair knowledge of the
     Spanish language; and considerable experience of travelling in
     Spain, where I have made two long tours on foot. Perhaps I
     ought to add to these good health, and willingness to be
     useful. My disadvantages are--Ignorance of the forms of
     mercantile correspondence, and inexperience of the duties of a
     secretary. I believe I could learn both very quickly.

     "I have hitherto been a man without occupation. I am now
     anxious to have one by which I can earn money. Should you, on
     inquiry and consideration, think I could honestly earn some as
     your secretary, I should be grateful if you would give me a
     trial.

     "I am ready to wait on you at your office, or elsewhere, in
     case you wish for an interview, and remain,

     "Dear Sir,
         "Yours truly,
             "OWEN RIVERS."

The following afternoon Owen was summoned to see Mr. Bragg at his
office. The old house in Friar's Row had been painted and varnished
inside and out. Plate glass glittered in the window panes, and elaborate
brass handles shone on the doors. Owen had never been in the house
during the days of Mrs. Dobbs's occupation. But he knew that May had
spent much of her childhood there; and he looked round the private room
into which he was shown with a tender glance such as probably never
before rested on those mahogany office fittings, morocco-covered chairs,
and neatly ranged account-books.

Mr. Bragg was sitting at a writing-table, and held out his hand without
rising, when Owen entered.

"Sit down, Mr. Rivers," he said, pointing to a chair opposite to his
own, on the other side of the table.

Owen sat down, and remained waiting in silence.

"Well, so you think you'd like to go to Spain with me?" said Mr. Bragg,
slowly rubbing his chin, and looking thoughtfully at the young man.

"I should like to get work to do, Mr. Bragg. I don't care much where it
is. But it struck me that I might be useful to you in Spain."

"Ah! Well, I was surprised at your letter."

"Nothing in it that you object to, I hope?"

"Oh no. Oh dear, no. Only I didn't know you was in want of employment.
And I should have thought----"

"Yes?"

"I should have thought you'd ha' liked some more--what you might call
professional employment."

"A man can't step into a profession from one day to another. And
besides, the professions are overstocked. There's no elbow-room in any
of them--especially for a poor man."

"Ah! Yes; I hear that sort of thing is said a great deal; but it seems
to me that might be a reason for giving up living altogether. There's a
good many of us in all classes, one way and another; but a man has got
to _make_ room for himself."

"You have a right to say so, Mr. Bragg, and I have no right to dispute
it: for you have tried and succeeded, and I have not even tried."

"Ah! That seems a pity--with your education, and all. However, I didn't
intend to branch out, as I said to you last night. With regard to the
point in hand, I would just say at once that this situation would be
strictly tempor'y, you understand. It couldn't be looked on in the light
of what you might call an opening."

"I understand."

"At the same time it might--I don't say it would--lead _to_ an opening,"
continued Mr. Bragg, indenting the paper before him by drawing his
thumb-nail along it with a strong, steady movement, as though he
mentally saw the opening in question, and were mapping out the way to
it.

"I quite understand that if you engaged me as secretary for this
journey, you would not bind yourself to anything beyond. Whether
anything further came of it, or not, would depend, first, on my
suitableness; and next, on circumstances."

"That's it," said Mr. Bragg, leaning back in his chair, and nodding
slowly.

"Well, Mr. Bragg, I can only say I would do my best. As to my knowledge
of Spanish, I'm not afraid. I began to learn the language first for the
sake of reading Cervantes, as so many people have done before me; but
since then I have acquired a colloquial knowledge of it by talking with
all sorts of Spaniards when I was tramping about their country."

"I _have_ heard," said Mr. Bragg, not displeased to show himself
acquainted with the literary aspect of the matter, "of a man that
learned Spanish in order to read a book called 'Don Quixote.'"

"Just as I did."

"Oh! _Did_ you? I thought you mentioned a different name. And can you
write it?"

"Fairly well; but I should have to learn the commercial style."

"There'd be more need, perhaps, for you to understand it than to write
it yourself. All communications with my son in Buenos Ayres could, of
course, be written in English."

Mr. Bragg here made a long, thoughtful pause. It was so long a pause
that Owen at length broke it by saying with a smile, though the colour
rose to his brow--

"As to my character, I can't give you one from my last place, because I
never had a place; but my uncle, Canon Hadlow, will, I believe,
guarantee my trustworthiness."

He felt a queer little shock when Mr. Bragg, instead of protesting
himself fully satisfied on that score, answered in a matter-of-fact
tone--

"Ah! yes, I dare say he will. I make no doubt but what that'll be all
right." Then, after a second, shorter pause, he continued, "There's one
point, Mr. Rivers, that I must put quite plain. I expect everybody in my
employment to obey orders. Now, you see, you, having been what you might
call brought up a gentleman, might not----"

"Oh, I hope you don't think that insubordination is part of a
gentleman's bringing up?"

"It hadn't ought to be; but it's best to be clear."

"Clearly, then, I can undertake to obey your orders; and I would only
warn you to give them carefully, because I shall carry them out to the
letter. If you ordered me to make a bonfire of your bank-notes, I should
burn 'em all without mercy."

Mr. Bragg laughed his quiet, inward laugh. There was something in the
conception of himself ordering bank-notes to be burned, which keenly
touched his not very lively sense of the ludicrous.

"All right," said he. "I'll take _that_ risk."

"Then am I to conclude--may I hope that you will engage me?" asked Owen,
with nervous eagerness.

"Why, I shall ask leave to turn it over in my mind a little longer. But
I'll undertake not to keep you waiting beyond to-morrow morning. You
see, if I do make an offer, it's best you should have it in writing. And
sim'larly, if you accept it, I ought to have that in writing."

"Thank you. Then I need not intrude longer on your time."

"No intrusion at all, Mr. Rivers. Good morning to you."

Owen turned round at the door, and coming back to the writing-table,
said, "May I ask you to keep my application to yourself for the
present?"

"Certainly," answered Mr. Bragg. But he looked slightly surprised.

"Of course, I don't mean the thing to be secret so far as I am
concerned."

"Why, no; we couldn't hardly keep it secret," said Mr. Bragg gravely.

"Of course not. But if your answer should be favourable, I should like
to be the first to tell--a--a person--the one or two persons who take
any interest in me."

"But I shall have to say a word to your uncle; and that's pretty well
the same thing as saying it to your aunt, I take it."

"Oh yes; to be sure. I didn't mean you not to mention it to _them_."

"All right. I certainly shall not mention it to anybody else," returned
Mr. Bragg.

And when the young man was gone, he said to himself, "I wonder who else
there is I _could_ mention it to that would care two straws one way or
the other. I like his way. He don't jaw like that young Bransby. And he
didn't try to soap me."

The next day Owen Rivers was formally engaged as travelling secretary to
Mr. Bragg for three months, beginning from October, which was now near
at hand.




CHAPTER X.


Mrs. Dobbs had judged rightly as to the effect of May's letter on her
Aunt Pauline. That sorely tried lady was overwhelmed at this time by
various troubles. She did not write to May, but addressed a very long
and somewhat rambling letter to Mrs. Dobbs. After the strongest
expressions of dismay and horror at the rumour of her brother's
marriage, Pauline proceeded--

     "I really cannot answer May's letter--at all events, not at
     present. I am deeply distressed that she should have addressed
     me on the subject at all. It is such terribly bad form in a
     girl of her age to appear cognisant of _anything_ not brought
     to her knowledge by the proper channels. I had heard a vague
     report of the connection--which was bad enough. But who could
     have supposed that Augustus would have degraded himself to the
     point of _marrying_ such a person! But I ought not to trouble
     you with my feelings on this matter, for I am very sure you
     cannot imagine one tithe of the various distressing results to
     the family which will flow from it. It is much to be regretted
     that May so precipitately decided not to go to Glengowrie;
     particularly under recent untoward circumstances. I learn from
     a friend in town that my cousin, Mr. Lucius Cheffington, is
     much better. I do not mean, of course, that this is an untoward
     circumstance; but it alters the position of affairs. I scarcely
     know what I write. You may not be aware--few persons are
     aware--of the delicate state of my nervous system. I suffer
     keenly from any mental pressure. And of late I seem to have had
     nothing else! My cure at this place has been sadly interfered
     with by anxiety for others. But, really whether poor dear
     Lucius recover or not, if this story from Belgium is true, my
     niece's position will be a most painful one. From the tone of
     her letter to me, I can see that she does not at all take in
     the situation. You can tell her one thing from me: If my
     brother were to succeed to the title to-morrow, he would have
     nothing but what the entail gives him. So if she imagines
     otherwise it would be well to undeceive her. You won't mind my
     saying that in this respect the circumstances of my brother's
     first marriage were peculiarly unfortunate, since they
     prevented any settlement being made for the children."

"Ay," said Mrs. Dobbs, interrupting her reading at this point, "not to
mention that by that time Augustus had nothing left to settle!"

Then she resumed the letter--

     "You and I, my dear Mrs. Dobbs, must join our forces in face of
     these new and trying circumstances. The more I think of it the
     more I regret that my niece has missed the opportunity of going
     to Glengowrie, especially since I have learned that Mrs.
     Griffin is going to chaperon another young lady in her stead.
     In society it is fatal to drop out of sight--you are forgotten
     immediately--and I cannot expect Mrs. Griffin to do more than
     she has done. Indeed, both she and the dear duchess have been
     extraordinarily kind--I fear May scarcely appreciates _how_
     kind; but the truth is that she is singularly--I scarcely know
     what word to use--not dull, but indifferent on certain points.
     There is an apathy about her sometimes which has caused her
     uncle and myself a great deal of distress. But really she
     _must_ rouse herself from it now. It is a great comfort to us
     to know that you, my dear Mrs. Dobbs, take a sound view of my
     niece's position, and have her best interests at heart.

     "Believe me,

     "Very truly yours,

     "P. DORMER-SMITH.

     "P.S.--I have _this moment_ received a letter from Miss Hadlow,
     in which she mentions, amongst other items of news, that the
     gentleman whom I wrote of as being interested in May has
     declined his invitation to Glengowrie, and is now in
     Oldchester! There appears to be something absolutely
     providential in this. I know you have great influence over May.
     Pray exert it to make her see what is right. I have never been
     able to get her to look on her social position as involving
     certain _duties_. But, indeed, in her case, the duty
     immediately before her of obtaining a splendid settlement and a
     fine position is an easy one. I have seen cases of real
     _sacrifice_ to this social obligation endured without murmur.
     Since they are both in Oldchester, it must surely be easy to
     give the gentleman every opportunity of presenting his suit.
     Indeed, there may be better opportunities than at Glengowrie.
     The longer we live the more we realize how everything is
     overruled for good.

     "P. D. S."

     "I reopen this to write an essential word:--The name of the
     gentleman I have alluded to! You may form some conception of
     the pressure on my brain from my having omitted to do so
     before. He is a Mr. Bragg--a man of very large wealth, and
     received everywhere. I know that my uncle has more than once
     received him at Combe Park. And he would, I dare say, have got
     some chaperon there, and had May down for a time; but, of
     course, under the bereavement we have all just suffered in the
     death of my cousin George, this cannot be at present. But there
     surely must be, among the better families in Oldchester, some
     whom Mr. Bragg visits? Possibly the bishop, if he is there; or,
     perhaps the dean? I know Lady Mary slightly. Pray lose no time,
     my dear Mrs. Dobbs, in ascertaining this."

Mrs. Dobbs pondered long after reading this epistle. In May's absence
she often turned over in her mind the advantages of an alliance with Mr.
Bragg; remembered favourable precedents; and taught herself to think
that it might be. The sight of the girl's face, and the sound of her
voice, were apt to scatter these fancies as sunrise scatters the mists.
But they returned when May disappeared again, and haunted all the old
woman's lonely hours.

One morning, after an evening spent at Garnet Lodge, when Mrs. Dobbs was
alone with her grandchild, and was meditating how she should approach
the subject chiefly in her thoughts, May unexpectedly began--

"Granny, do you know I have something to say that will surprise you."

"Have you, May? Nothing ought to surprise me at seventy odd. But,
somehow, things do surprise me still."

"Of course they do, granny! I think it is only blockheads who are never
astonished, because one thing is much the same to them as another."

"Well, I'm glad I can prove myself no blockhead at such an easy rate.
What is your surprise about, May?"

"It's about--Mr. Bragg."

The colour came into May's cheeks as she looked up with a bright, shy
glance from her favourite low seat beside granny's knee. But it was
nothing to the deep, sudden flush which dyed Mrs. Dobbs's face. She
looked at her grandchild almost vacantly for a moment, and then grew
paler than before. But May did not observe all this. She sat smiling to
herself, with the colour varying in her face, as it so easily did on the
very slightest emotion, her hands clasped round her knees, and her
bright head bent down, as she continued--

"I have had my suspicions for some time past; but I said nothing until
last night. Then, when I went into Clara's room to put my hat on, I just
gave her a tiny hint; and she said very likely I was right, and did not
laugh at me a bit. But I dare say you will laugh at me, granny."

"Let us hear, my lass," said Mrs. Dobbs, moistening her lips, which felt
parched.

"Well--_I_ think that Mr. Bragg has a motive in coming so often to
Garnet Lodge."

"I suppose he has."

"Ah, but a very special motive--a _matrimonial_ motive. There, granny!"

Mrs. Dobbs looked down with a singular expression at the shining brown
hair so near to her hand which rested on the elbow of her easy-chair.
But she did not caress it as she habitually did when within reach. She
sat quite still, and merely said--

"So you think it surprising that Mr. Bragg should have matrimonial
intentions, do you?"

"Oh no. It isn't _that_. Mr. Bragg is a very kind-hearted man, and would
be sure to make a good husband. And, do you know, he is very far from
stupid, granny."

"I dare say. Joshua Bragg always had his head screwed on the right way."

"His manner is against him. Of course, he is uneducated; and rather
slow. But, after all, that doesn't matter so very much."

"And he's rich," added Mrs. Dobbs in a dry tone.

"Ever so rich! I am sure he must have heaps and heaps of money, or else
Aunt Pauline would not approve of him so highly."

"And not quite decrepit."

"Decrepit! What a word to use, granny! No; I should think not, indeed!"

"H'm! Neither a brute, nor in his dotage; and immensely rich--I don't
know what a woman can wish for more!" said Mrs. Dobbs, with increasing
bitterness.

"Why, granny!" exclaimed May, looking up. "I thought you rather liked
Mr. Bragg! I have always heard you speak well of him."

The hand on the chair-arm clenched and unclenched itself nervously, as
Mrs. Dobbs answered in short, jerky sentences, and as though she were
forcing herself with an effort to utter them, "Oh, so I do. Joshua Bragg
is an honest kind of man. I've nothing against him. Don't think that, my
lass."

"Well, granny, but now for the surprise. I wonder you have not guessed
it by this time. Who do you think is the lady?"

"I can't guess. Tell it out, May, and have done with it."

"To be sure there is not much choice. If it were not one, it _must_ be
the other! But I have made up my mind that Mr. Bragg and Miss Patty will
make a match of it! What do you say to _that_, granny?"

Mrs. Dobbs said nothing; but gasped, and laid her head back on the
cushion of her chair.

"I thought you would be surprised! But when one comes to think of it, it
seems very suitable, doesn't it? Mr. Bragg admires Miss Patty's cookery
above everything. And she is such a kind, charitable soul, she would do
worlds of good with riches. And they agree on so many points--even their
crotchets. And, do you know, Miss Patty would look ten years younger if
she would leave off that yellow wig. She has such nice soft grey hair
that she brushes back! I have settled that she is to leave off the wig
when she marries Mr. Bragg, and take to picturesque mob caps. I have
been arranging all sorts of things in my own mind. I'm quite coming out
in the character of a matchmaker, granny!"

In the midst of her chatter the girl looked up, and uttered an
exclamation of dismay. Her grandmother's head still lay back against the
cushion of the chair; her eyes were closed, and she seemed to be
laughing to herself. But the tears were pouring down her cheeks. At
May's exclamation she opened her arms wide, and then pressed the girl's
bright brown head against her breast, saying brokenly--

"Don't be feared, child! I'm all right. I couldn't help laughing a bit.
It's so--so funny to think of old Joshua and--and Miss Patty!"

"But you are crying, too, granny! Is anything the matter? Do tell me."

"Nothing, child; I'm all right. Poor Joshua! He was a good lad when he
worked for your grandfather. And--and--I remember _her_ a little miss in
a white frock and blue sash. It brings up old times, that's all, May.
Lord, what fools we are when we try to be cunning!" and Mrs. Dobbs went
off again into a fit of laughter, interspersed with sobs.

"I didn't try to be cunning!" said May indignantly.

"_You_, my lamb! Whoever thought you did?" returned her grandmother,
wiping her eyes and kissing May's forehead.

By and by she resumed her usual solid self-possession. She told May that
she did not agree in her view of the state of the case, and advised her
not to hint her matchmaking project to any one. "You have said a word to
Miss Bertram, and that can't be taken back; but she is wise beyond her
years, and will not chatter."

"But there's nothing wrong in the idea, granny," protested May, who was
considerably puzzled by her grandmother's unusual demeanour.

"No, no, nothing wrong; only Mr. Bragg might not like it--he might be
looking after a young wife, who knows? Anyway, we will keep our ideas to
ourselves."

As she spoke, the latch of the garden-gate clicked, and, following May's
glance, Mrs. Dobbs saw from the open window Owen Rivers advancing up the
path towards the house.

The "gentleman of princely fortune," whose image had interposed between
her shrewd apprehension and the facts before her, having melted away
like a phantom, she perceived that here was a new influence to be
reckoned with--a new force which, whether for good or ill, might help to
shape her grandchild's future.

"May I come in?" asked Owen.

"Come in, Mr. Rivers."

Mrs. Dobbs felt as though she had invited embodied Destiny to cross her
threshold--Destiny, in the prosaic guise of a blue-eyed, square-built
young man, in a shooting-jacket and a wide-awake hat. But that Power
does not often appear to mortals with much outward pomp and
circumstance. We are like children who think a king must needs go about
in royal robes, crowned and sceptred. But the decree which changes our
lives is mostly signed by some plain figure in everyday clothes, whom we
should not turn our heads to look upon.

Owen entered the little parlour, and came and stood opposite to Mrs.
Dobbs's chair, without any of the customary salutations. "Well," said he
eagerly; "I have some news for you."

"Lord, ha' mercy! This is a day of news," muttered Mrs. Dobbs under her
breath. Then she said aloud, "I hope it's good news?"

"I have found some work to do. Is that good?"

Mrs. Dobbs clapped her hands softly. "Very good," she said. Half an hour
ago her approbation would have been more heartily expressed; but she was
looking at him now with different eyes, and considering his prospects
with a new and serious interest.

"You haven't asked me what the work is," said Owen, just a little
disappointed by her quietude.

"I suppose it is _not_ stone-breaking? But if it is, I stick to my
colours. Better that than nothing."

"You will say, Mrs. Dobbs, that I am luckier than I deserve to be. I am
engaged as secretary to a man who is about to travel in Spain. I happen
to know Spanish. Luck again; for I learnt it merely to amuse myself."

"Yes; I do think that isn't bad for a beginning, and I hope it will lead
to something more. Who is the gentleman, if I may ask?"

Before Owen could answer, May, who had perched herself on the elbow of
Jo Weatherhead's vacant chair, said, "I think I can guess. It's Mr.
Bragg."

"Mr. Bragg!" echoed her grandmother, as if doubtful of having heard
aright.

"I remember hearing him talk of a journey into Spain, and of wanting to
find a gentleman to go with him. Am I not right?"

"Quite right," answered Owen.

"Mr. Bragg! Well, that _is_ strange!" whispered Mrs. Dobbs to herself.

Owen had taken a chair, and sat bending forward, with his elbows on his
knees, pleating and puckering in his fingers the brim of his soft felt
hat. He had not hitherto so much as looked towards May; now he
straightened himself in his chair, and, fixing his eyes on her
earnestly, asked--

"And what do _you_ say to my news, Miss Cheffington?"

"I say, as granny says, that I am very glad," she answered, smiling, but
speaking in a subdued tone.

"It's more to the purpose to ask what Canon and Mrs. Hadlow say to it,"
put in Mrs. Dobbs. "I hope they are pleased?"

"I dare say--I have no doubt--I--I have not seen Aunt Jane yet. The fact
is, I am on my way to College Quad; but I thought I would look in here
as I passed, and tell you that I have followed your advice, Mrs. Dobbs."

The direct road from Owen's lodgings to College Quad was a short, and
nearly straight, line. To visit Jessamine Cottage "on the way" from one
to the other was analogous to going round by Edinburgh on a journey from
London to Leeds.

"I wanted a little patting on the back and cheering up, you see,"
continued Owen.

"Cheering up!" cried May. "Oh! but I remember that Mrs. Hadlow said you
always liked to be pitied for having your own way. You must require a
great deal of consolation, truly, for the prospect of travelling in that
delightful country!"

Owen nodded, and carefully fitted one pleat of his hat-brim into
another, as he answered, "I dare say my appetite for consolation is
bigger than you imagine."

"I think it is Mr. Bragg who needs cheering up. Poor man, he little
knows what a peremptory, protestant, and positive secretary he will
have!" retorted May, with a half shy, half saucy, wholly mischievous,
glance.

"Not at all! Now, that is just the kind of mistake which Aunt Jane so
often makes. But if I serve, I mean to serve honestly, and to be
thoroughly obedient; I have told Mr. Bragg so." And Owen proceeded to
justify himself, and to develop his views as to the duties of a
secretary, with superfluous energy and earnestness.

The old woman sat watching them, and, as she looked, she was amazed at
her own previous blindness. How could she--how could any one--have seen
them together without perceiving that they were falling over head and
ears in love with each other? These two young creatures seemed, in her
old eyes, like a couple of children playing in a pleasure-boat. But she
knew that the river was running towards the sea--widening and deepening
with an irrevocable current. There was room for anxiety about the
future, no doubt. Yet a sense of relief in her mind--as if she had
escaped out of some oppressive atmosphere--revealed more and more
distinctly how repugnant the idea of May's marrying Mr. Bragg had really
been to her.

"Sarah Dobbs," said she to herself severely, "you're a worldly, false
old woman! You're a nice one to find fault with that poor creature
Pauline! What were _you_ doing, pray, but sacrificing your conscience to
the mammon of unrighteousness? The Lord be praised, the dear child is
better, and purer, and honester than either of us old harridans!"

Then she broke into the conversation between May and Owen, which by this
time had sunk into a low murmur, and asked abruptly whether the
engagement with Mr. Bragg was to lead to any further employment.

Owen repeated what Mr. Bragg had said to him, as nearly as he could
remember it; and Mrs. Dobbs thought it hopeful.

"Joshua Bragg is an honest man--a man to be relied on: one of the few
who generally means what he says, all that he says, and nothing but what
he says," said she, nodding thoughtfully.

May was glad to find granny doing justice to Mr. Bragg; and remarked to
herself that, if it were possible to conceive granny's ever being
capricious, she would have called her capricious to-day in her varying
tone about that worthy man.

"I shouldn't wonder," pursued Mrs. Dobbs, "if he put you in the way of
getting permanent employment--supposing you please him. He might get you
a place out in South America with his son. Young Joshua is in a great
way of business there, I'm told. Would you go if you had the chance?"
she asked suddenly, looking at Owen with a searching gaze.

"Undoubtedly," he replied at once.

"And you wouldn't mind being--being banished like from England?"

"Mind? Oh, well, of course I should prefer a thousand a year and a villa
on the Thames; but a fellow who has been an idler up to four and twenty
must take any chance of earning something, and be thankful for it."

"_That's_ right." Mrs. Dobbs drew a long breath of relief.

"It would only be for a year or two; I should come back," added Owen
wistfully.

Then he shook hands and went away, and Mrs. Dobbs and her grand-daughter
were left to discuss the news he had told them. May chatted away
cheerfully, even gaily. When Mr. Weatherhead arrived the subject was
talked over again. Jo's pleasure in the prospect opening before Mr.
Rivers was somewhat tempered by his sense of the incongruity involved in
"a gentleman like that, brimful of learning, and belonging to the old
landed gentry," being under the orders of Joshua Bragg!

"There's no contradiction at all, Jo, if you look at it fairly," said
Mrs. Dobbs. "Mr. Bragg will command where he has a right to--that is, in
matters that he knows better than Mr. Rivers, for all his book-learning.
It isn't as if Joshua wanted to teach the young man how to be a
gentleman. I don't say it's not a good thing to be a gentleman, but it
ain't exactly a paying business nowadays, if ever it was, which I
doubt."

"Ah, more's the pity!" said Jo, shaking his head.

"Why, if I was a gentleman--or a lady--I shouldn't agree with you there,
Jo. If gentlehood don't mean something above and beyond what can be paid
for, 'tis a poor business. It seems to me just as pitiful for gentry to
expect money's worth for their old family, high breeding, and fine
manners, as it is for the grand workers of the world to grumble because
they can't have power over the past, as well as the present and the
future. Mr. Bragg ain't one of that sort. You'll never catch _him_
inventing a family crest, or painting wild beasts on his carriage."

Jo took his pipe out of his mouth, and looked with solemn approbation at
his old friend. "Sarah," said he, "you're right; and I believe you're a
better Conservative than me, when all's said and done."

May had been silent during this discussion. She held some needlework in
her hands; but they were lying idly on her lap, and she was gazing out
of the window as intently as though the small suburban garden offered a
prospect of inexhaustible interest. The cessation of the voices roused
her. She looked round, and said softly--

"It's a good climate, isn't it, granny? Where Mr. Bragg's son lives, I
mean."




CHAPTER XI.


Before going to bed that night Mrs. Dobbs sat down and wrote a letter,
marked "private and confidential," to Mr. Bragg.

     "DEAR MR. BRAGG" (she wrote),

     "I think it my duty to let you know at once that the idea
     mentioned in your conversation with me must be given up. I have
     made quite sure in my own mind that there is no chance of its
     coming to anything. I feel very much how right you were to
     speak to me first. You have spared other people's feelings as
     well as your own. When you asked me the question, I answered
     you truly, to the best of my belief, that there was nobody else
     in the field. But since our talk together I have found out that
     I was wrong there. There _is_ another attachment. It may come
     to something, or it may not. And you will understand that I am
     putting a great confidence in you. But I know I can trust to
     your honour as you trusted to mine. Not a word has passed my
     lips of what you said to me, and never will. Of course, you may
     think me mistaken, and choose to find out the state of the case
     for yourself at first-hand. If you do so I shall not have a
     word to say against it. Anyway, I know you will act upright
     according to your conscience, as I have tried to act according
     to mine. I want to tell you that I appreciate how generous your
     intentions were, though I'm afraid I did not show it at the
     time, being surprised and upset.

     "Believe me,
       "With sincere respect,
         "Yours truly,
           "SARAH DOBBS."

Shortly after that, Mr. Bragg came and called upon her. He thanked her
for her letter, and spoke in a friendly tone. But he seemed indisposed
to consider the matter as finished.

"Young people sometimes don't know their own minds," he said. He further
declared that he had no present intention of speaking to May; but that,
as he was going abroad, he might--if nothing were settled
meanwhile--resume the subject on his return to England.

"I'm quite sure in my own mind that it's no use," said Mrs. Dobbs
firmly. "And it's only fair to tell you so as strong as possible.
However, of course, you must act according to your own judgment."

"There is one question I should like to ask if I might," said Mr. Bragg,
lingering at the door on his way out. "You and me can trust each other.
And, if you feel at liberty to tell me, I should like to know whether
the--the party you alluded to in your letter is Mr. Theodore Bransby."

"Certainly not!"

"Well, I'm glad of it. There was a talk of his paying Miss C. a great
deal of attention in town. In fact, I did hear she had refused him.
Understand, I'm not fishing as to that. It's no matter to me one way or
the other, so long as he is _not_ the party. I can't say that I know any
harm of the young man; but he's what you might call a poor sort of
metal: not pleasant to handle, and, I should fear, brittle in the
working. I really am relieved in my mind to know that he is not the
party. Thank ye."

The news of Owen's engagement to Mr. Bragg was variously received by his
various acquaintances in Oldchester. Some laughed good-naturedly, some
ill-naturedly; some said it was a good thing the young man had at last
seen the necessity for exerting himself; some wondered why on earth he
had accepted such a position; and some--a good many those--wondered why
Mr. Bragg had accepted _him_. Mrs. Hadlow did not feel unmixed
satisfaction by any means.

"It's just like Owen," she said to her husband. "There is such a
singular perversity about him! He has thrown away one straight stick
after the other, and now all of a sudden he clutches at this crooked
one, as eagerly as though his life depended on getting hold of it."

Canon Hadlow, for his part, was well pleased enough. The sentiment at
the bottom of his wife's heart was that to employ a Rivers in any such
base mechanic business as writing commercial letters was like harnessing
a thoroughbred Arab to the dust-cart. But the canon could not, in the
nature of things, fully share that feeling. Nevertheless, he had a
strong regard for Owen, and spoke of him in high terms to Mr. Bragg.

But the testimony in Owen's favour which chiefly impressed Mr. Bragg was
the testimony which Owen gave himself--by deeds, not words.

Being moved by a certain energetic simplicity which belonged to him, to
perform the duties he had undertaken with the most complete thoroughness
he could command, he got a clerk who conducted the foreign
correspondence of a great Oldchester manufacturer to give him lessons
after business hours. He worked away evening after evening at the
composition of mercantile letters in Spanish until he succeeded in
producing epistles so surprisingly technical that his instructor
declared he went far beyond what was necessary in that line, and would
do well to mitigate his business style with a little good Spanish! He
studied, also, to improve his handwriting. It was a legible hand
already, since he wrote with the single-minded aim of being read. But he
strove to make it distinctly commercial in character, and succeeded.

All this became known to Mr. Bragg, who said nothing. But, when it got
wind among the little circle of persons who frequented Garnet Lodge, it
was the subject of some raillery from Owen's friends. So long as the
raillery proceeded from such persons as Dr. Hatch or Major Mitten, there
was no offence in it; but with Theodore Bransby the case was different.

Theodore was, in truth, delighted: first of all, because Rivers had, as
he phrased it, "entered Mr. Bragg's service" (a step which must for ever
disqualify him for aspiring to ally himself with the Cheffingtons,
supposing he were not disqualified already); and, secondly, because his
engagement would take him out of England for three months. So delighted
was Theodore, that his spirits rose to the unwonted pitch of attempting
some pleasantries. Now, there is nothing which more surely reveals the
quality, if not the quantity, of a man's mind than his notion of a joke.
Laughter, like wine, is a great betrayer of secrets; and for incurable
coarseness of feeling a stout cloak of gravity is "your only wear."

Theodore would tilt his head, and say with a sneering smile, "Burton's
clerk declares that Rivers is as thorough-going as the man who blacked
himself all over to play Othello! _Do_ you write a page of round-hand
copies every morning before breakfast, Rivers?" or, "I hear that Rivers
has taken to frequent the commercial 'gents'' ordinary at the Bull in
order to pick up the correct phraseology."

Owen paid very little attention to these sparkling sallies; but Mr.
Bragg, after listening for some time, broke silence one evening by
saying, in his quiet, ponderous way--

"You're rather hard on me, I think, Mr. Bransby."

Theodore looked at him with sudden gravity and unfeigned surprise. "Hard
on _you_?" he exclaimed.

"Oh, when a young gentleman is what you might call satirical, he's apt
to be harder than he means. You needn't look so serious. I'm not
offended."

The moment Mr. Bragg declared he was not offended, Theodore began to
fear that he _was_; and, whatever might be his private opinion of the
millionaire, he had no intention of affronting him. So he protested that
Mr. Bragg must be under some misapprehension, and that he (Theodore)
could not even guess what he meant.

"Oh, come, Mr. Bransby! It's pretty clear. I am but a plain business
man, but it isn't necessary to copy the company at the Bull in order to
come down to my level."

"Good heavens, my dear sir! You can't suppose----! I
was--ahem!--merely----" Theodore paused an instant, and then went on
with a little disconcerted laugh. "Ha, ha, ha! I was merely paying my
humble tribute of admiration to Rivers's energy!"

"Oh yes; I quite understand _that_. You appreciate seeing how a
honourable gentleman sets to work to keep his part of a bargain; whereas
a half-and-half chap, like that little clerk of Burton's, don't see the
highmindedness of it."

Theodore was so entirely taken by surprise, and so uncertain how far Mr.
Bragg was in earnest, that he could but stammer out renewed assurances
that he had been misunderstood. And after that, he subsided into a glum
and dignified silence for the rest of the evening.

He would probably have cut short his visit and gone away early but for
his persistent resolution never to leave Owen in possession of the field
when May was present. There was no question of seeing her home now; for
either old Martha was sent to fetch her, or one of Miss Piper's servants
walked with her to Jessamine Cottage. But, nevertheless, Theodore made a
point of outstaying Owen; or, at the very least, going away
simultaneously with him. On this particular evening, however, Dr. Hatch
interfered with this practice by requesting Theodore to accompany him
when his carriage was announced.

"I want to have a word with you quietly," whispered the doctor, "and it
is almost impossible to do so in your father's house without alarming
Mrs. Bransby. Come along with me, and I'll give you a lift home."

There was no refusing this invitation. But Theodore withdrew, comforted
by the conviction that his rival would have no chance of profiting by
his absence.

Here, however, he reckoned without his hostess; for, Martha failing to
appear at her accustomed hour, and the maid who usually supplied her
place being ill, Miss Piper bustled into the drawing-room, after a brief
absence, demanding which of the gentlemen present would volunteer to
escort Miss Cheffington home.

Mr. Bragg, who kept early hours, had already departed; and only Mr.
Sweeting, Major Mitton, and Owen remained. Mr. Sweeting begged to be
allowed the honour of lending Miss Cheffington his carriage. But May
declined the offer, saying that Mr. Sweeting's horses had a long enough
journey before them, and that, moreover, it being a lovely moonlight
night, she would prefer to walk. Upon this, Owen offered his services,
and Miss Piper at once accepted them.

"It is a good deal out of your way," she said; "but I am sure you will
not mind for once, Mr. Rivers. I am responsible to Mrs. Dobbs for
sending her grand-daughter safely home."

Owen assured Miss Piper that he should not mind at all.

While May was putting on her wraps, Miss Polly and Miss Patty jocosely
reproached Major Mitton for not having displayed his usual gallantry in
offering to escort the young lady.

"Major, Major, you are growing terribly lazy!" said Miss Polly.

"You will lose your reputation for being the most devoted Squire of
Dames in Oldchester," added Miss Patty.

"I'm getting to be an old fellow," returned the Major quietly. Then, as
they all three stood for a moment in the porch, watching the two young
figures pass down the garden in a glory of moonlight, the good Major
whispered to Miss Patty, "Do you think I was going to spoil _that_? Lord
bless me, one has been young one's self!"

As soon as May and her companion had got clear of Garnet Lodge, the girl
said, "I find that I had never thoroughly done justice to Mr. Bragg. The
more I know of him, the more highly I think of him."

"Lucky Mr. Bragg!"

"But, now, did he not administer an admirable rebuke to Theodore
Bransby?"

"Never mind Theodore. Let us talk about more interesting things."

"What _can_ be more interesting?" asked May, laughing.

"Ourselves." As she remained silent, he went on, "Do you know that we
have not had one opportunity for a quiet talk together since I got this
engagement?"

"Haven't we?"

"Ah! you don't remember so accurately as I do. But that was not to be
expected. Take my arm."

She obeyed as simply as a child. She had been drawing on her gloves when
they left Garnet Lodge, but the operation had not been completed, and it
chanced that the hand next to Owen was ungloved. She laid her fingers,
which gleamed snow-white in the moonlight, on his sleeve.

"You think I have done right in taking this employment?" he said.

"Quite right." She turned her young face, and looked at him with a sweet
fervour of sympathy and approval.

Owen raised the white, slender fingers to his lips, and then, replacing
them on his arm, laid his own warm, strong hand over them with a gentle
pressure. "You know why I did so, don't you, darling?" he said.

"Yes, Owen," was the answer, given in a shy whisper, but with innocent
frankness.

"My own dear love!" he exclaimed, pressing her arm strongly and suddenly
to his side. "There is no one like you in the world. Look at me, May.
Let me see your sweet, honest eyes."

He caught her two hands in both his, and they stood for a moment at
arm's length, facing each other, and holding hands like two children.
The moonlight shone full on the young girl's fair face, and glittered on
the bright tear-drops in her eyes, as she raised them to Owen's.

"What can I do to deserve you?" he said. "But why do I talk of desert?
You are God's gift, May, and no more to be earned than the blessed
sunshine."

He put her arm under his once more, and they paced on again without
speaking. But to them the silence was full of voices. It was the silence
of a dream. They might have wandered Heaven knows whither had not their
feet instinctively carried them along the right path, and they found
themselves, almost with a start, arrived at the white palings in front
of Jessamine Cottage.

"We must tell granny, mustn't we?" said May, looking up at Owen, with a
delicious sense of implicit reliance on him.

"Yes; but I am terribly afraid. I hope she will not be angry."

"Angry! How can you think so? Granny is fond of you."

"But she is fonder of _you_, and she knows your value, although, thank
God, you don't! If you did, what chance should I have had? You know how
poor I am--not quite penniless, but very poor."

"Not so poor as I, since I am really and truly quite penniless; but I
don't mind that, if you don't."

Owen felt a desperate temptation to fold her in his arms and beseech her
to marry him to-morrow, throwing prudence and pounds sterling to the
winds. But the ardour of a genuine passion purifies the nobler soul, as
fire purifies the nobler metal, and burns away the dross of self. He
answered gravely--

"Our positions are very different, darling. I hope I have not done wrong
to tell you how dear you are to me?"

"I think it would have been unkind and cruel to go away without telling
me," she answered bravely, though the sound of the words as she said
them brought the hot colour into her cheeks.

"Thank you, dearest; that is the best comfort I could have, if I may
dare to believe it. But it does seem so wonderful that you should care
for me!"

The contemplation of this wonder might have occupied them both for an
indefinite time but that they saw a light begin to shine through the
fanlight of the little entrance-hall of Jessamine Cottage. In the
stillness of the night the sound of their voices, subdued though they
were, had reached the ears of Mrs. Dobbs. She presently opened the door,
and stood looking at them as they hurried up the garden path.

"Oh, granny dear, I'm afraid I'm late!" said May. "I did not guess that
you were sitting up for me."

"Martha had a touch of her rheumatism, so I sent her to bed. I did not
mind waiting. I suppose Miss Piper's maid couldn't come with you? Was
that it?" asked Mrs. Dobbs.

She lingered at the open door, expecting Owen to say "Good-night." But
May took her grandmother's hand and pulled her into the house, while he
followed them. When they reached the lamp-lighted parlour, May, still
holding her grandmother's hand with her left hand, stretched out her
right to Owen, and gently drew him forward. Then she flung her left arm
round the old woman's neck, and kissed her. There was no need for words.
Mrs. Dobbs sank down, white and tremulous, in her great chair, while May
nestled beside her on her knees, and tried to place Owen's hand, which
she still clasped, in that of her grandmother. But the old woman
brusquely drew her hand away.

"You have done wrong," she said, turning to Owen, and scarcely able to
control the trembling of her lips. "I didn't think it of you. But men
are all alike; selfish, selfish, selfish!"

"Why, granny!" exclaimed the girl, breathless with dismay. Then she
started up with a flash of impetuous indignation, and stood beside her
lover. "He is _not_ selfish!" she said vehemently.

"Hush, May! Granny is right," said Owen in a low voice. "I told you that
I feared I had done wrong."

Mrs. Dobbs still trembled, but she was struggling to regain her
self-command. "You might have waited yet awhile," she said brokenly.
"The child is young! You ought not to have bound her until you see your
way more clear."

"Oh, believe me, I will not hold her bound," answered Owen. "I never
meant that. I ought not to have spoken yet. I feared so before, and now
that you say so, I know it. But I am not wholly selfish."

May had stood listening silently, looking, with wide eyes and parted
lips, from one to the other. She now fell on her knees again beside her
grandmother, and, clasping the old woman's hands in both her own, cried
eagerly--

"But listen! If there was any fault, it was mine. I love him so much!
And he's going away. Think of that, granny! Come here and kneel down
beside me, Owen, and let her look you in the face. Think, if he had gone
away and never told me! And I so fond of him! You didn't guess how I
cried that night when I heard he was to leave England. He has made me so
happy--so happy! And we can wait. We don't mind being poor. You said you
were fond of him. And he is so good--and I love him so--and you to speak
to him so cruelly! Oh, granny, granny!" The tears were pouring down her
face, and dropping warm upon the wrinkled hands she held.

Suddenly Mrs. Dobbs opened her arms, and folding May in one of them,
laid the other round Owen's shoulder as he knelt before her, and drew
them both into her embrace.

"Come along, you two!" she said, sobbing and smiling. "I've got a
precious pair of babies to look after in my old age. No more common
sense between you than would lie on the point of a needle! No prudence,
no worldly wisdom, no regard for society--nothing but love and truth;
and what do you suppose _they'll_ fetch in the market?"

After a few minutes she ordered Owen away. "I'm tired," she said. "And
we have all had our feelings worked up enough for one while. Go home
now, Mr. Rivers--well, well, Owen, then, if it must be!--go home, Owen,
and sleep, and dream. And to-morrow, when you're quite awake--broad,
staring, work-a-day-world awake, which you're not now, either of
you,--come here, and we will talk rationally."

Owen obeyed heroically, and marched off without a word of remonstrance.
But May kept her grandmother listening and talking, long after he had
gone. She made Mrs. Dobbs go to bed, and sat by her bedside, pouring out
her young heart, joyfully secure of granny's understanding and sympathy,
until at length Mrs. Dobbs inexorably commanded her to go to rest.

"Good night, dear, dearest, good, goodest granny!" said May, leaning
down to kiss her grandmother's broad, furrowed brow. "Only this one
last--very last--word! Do you know, I am very hopeful about Owen's
future, because I am sure that Mr. Bragg has taken a great fancy to him,
and appreciates him. And Mr. Bragg can make Owen's fortune if he likes."

"Mr. Bragg," murmured Mrs. Dobbs, turning her head on her pillow. "Ah,
_there's_ a nice kettle of fish! I'm as big a baby as the children, for
up to this very instant I'd clean forgotten all about Mr. Bragg!"




CHAPTER XII.


Before they parted Mrs. Dobbs had arranged with Owen that he should come
and have an interview with her at ten o'clock the following morning. But
as she desired to speak with him privately, she resolved to go to his
lodgings early enough to catch him before he should leave home.

She found Owen already at his writing-desk, and, as he turned a startled
face on her, briefly assured him that all was well with May.

"But I must have a private talk with you," she said. "And I can't get
that in my own house, without fussing and making mysteries."

Owen was already acquainted with the main incidents in May's young life;
but Mrs. Dobbs proceeded to give him the history of her own daughter's
marriage, and a sketch of her son-in-law Augustus.

"I'm not speaking in malice," she said; "but the real truth about
Captain Cheffington must always sound severe. As a general rule, I never
mention his name. But it is right and necessary that you should know
what manner of man May's father really is; because only by knowing that
can you understand how it is that the responsibility of guiding her
rests wholly and solely on my shoulders."

"It could not rest on worthier ones," said Owen.

"Ah! There we differ. It's a shame that the darling girl--such a lady as
she is in all her ways and words and innermost thoughts--should have no
better guidance than that of an ignorant old body like me. However, 'tis
as vain to cry for the moon to play ball with, as to get honour or duty,
or even honesty, out of Augustus. There's the naked truth."

"Mrs. Dobbs, I can say from the bottom of my heart, that if ever good
came out of evil it has come to May. She has been thrown out of the
hands of a worthless father into those of the best of grandmothers. But
I suppose I ought to write to Captain Cheffington under the present
circumstances?"

Mrs. Dobbs shook her head. "I wouldn't if I was you," she said.

"I only thought that, since with all his faults he is fond of his
daughter----"

"_Is he_?" interrupted Mrs. Dobbs, opening her eyes very wide. "Oh!
Well, that's news to me."

"Of course, his fondness is not judicious. But still, as he has not much
money, he must make some sacrifice to pay a handsome sum to Mrs.
Dormer-Smith for having May with her in London."

"He pay! Lord bless your innocent heart!"

"Does he not? May told me he did."

"Ah! May thinks so. You see I have thought it right to keep some respect
for her father in her mind--for her sake."

"Then if Captain Cheffington did not furnish the money, who did?" asked
Owen.

Had May been present, one glimpse of "granny's" face, blushing like a
girl's to the roots of her hair, would have betrayed the truth to her.
But Owen did not guess it so quickly. After a minute or so, however, as
Mrs. Dobbs remained silent, he added rather awkwardly--

"Did you pay the money?"

"Look here, young man," answered Mrs. Dobbs. "You must give me your word
of honour that you'll never let out a syllable of this to May, without I
give you leave;--else you and me will quarrel."

Owen took her broad, wrinkled hand in his, and kissed it as respectfully
as if he had been saluting a queen. "I promise to obey you," he said.
"But you make us all look very small and selfish beside you!"

"We old folks, that have but a slack hold on life, must lay up our
stores of selfishness in other people's happiness. It's a paying
investment, my lad. I'm Oldchester born and bred, and you don't catch me
making many bad speculations." The old woman laughed as she spoke, but a
tear was trembling in her eye. "Come," said she. "We needn't go into all
that. There isn't much time to spare. I want to be back to breakfast
before May misses me."

Then she proceeded to impress on Owen that she could not at present
sanction an engagement between him and her grand-daughter. Each must be
held to be free, at least until Owen should return from Spain, and be
able to see his future course a little more distinctly. This he promised
without difficulty. Next, Mrs. Dobbs insisted that May should go back to
her aunt's house, when the Dormer-Smiths returned to London for the
winter. May had shown great reluctance to do this; but Mrs. Dobbs
believed she would yield, if Owen backed up the proposal. With regard to
Captain Cheffington, Mrs. Dobbs recommended that secrecy should, for the
present, be preserved towards him, as well as towards the rest of the
world.

"He cares not a straw for his daughter. Of that I can assure you.
Indeed, lately, since the dear child has taken her proper place in the
world, he has shown a strange kind of jealousy of her. He wrote me a
regular blowing-up letter, demanding money, and saying that since I was
so _rich_--Lord help me!--as to keep May in London in luxury, I ought at
least to assist May's father in his unmerited distress. And he made a
kind of a half-threat that he would come to England, and drag her away,
if he was not paid off."

"The scoundrel! But you didn't--"

"Didn't send him any money? No, my lad, I did _not_. First, because I
wouldn't; next, because I couldn't. But 'wouldn't' came first. There's
no use trying to put a wasp on a reasonable allowance of honey; you must
either let him gorge himself, or else keep him out of the hive
altogether. So now you know my conditions:--Firstly, no binding
engagement for three months at least; secondly, we three to keep our own
counsel for that time, and say no word of our secret to man, woman, or
child; thirdly, you to urge May to go back to London, and see a little
more of the world from under her aunt's wing. I make a great point of
that," added Mrs. Dobbs, looking at him searchingly; "but I see you're
rather glum over it. Are you afraid of May's being tempted to change her
mind?"

"It isn't that," answered Owen, with unmistakable sincerity. "If she is
capable of changing her mind, I should be the first to leave her free to
do so. I don't say that it wouldn't go near to break my heart, but I
need not be ashamed as well as wretched; whereas, if I took advantage of
her innocence, and generosity, and inexperience to bind her to me, and
found out afterwards that she repented when it was too late----! But
that won't bear thinking of! No, I see nothing to object to in your
conditions; only I was thinking that it will be hard on you to part from
her again this winter."

Mrs. Dobbs suddenly stretched out her hand towards him, with the palm
outward. "Stop!" she said. "I can go on all right enough if you don't
pity me." She set her lips tight, and stood for a few seconds breathing
hard through her nostrils, like a tired swimmer. Then the tension of her
face relaxed; she patted Owen's head, as if he had been six years old,
saying, "You're a good lad, and a gentleman; I know one when I see him."

Before Mrs. Dobbs went away, Owen said a word to her on two points--the
probability that Augustus Cheffington might eventually be his uncle's
heir, and the rumour of his second marriage. As to the first point,
although she allowed it seemed likely that Augustus might inherit the
title, yet Mrs. Dobbs assured Owen (speaking on Mrs. Dormer-Smith's
authority) that he would certainly get no penny which it was in Lord
Castlecombe's power to bequeath.

"If you're afraid of May being too rich," said Mrs. Dobbs, with a shrewd
smile, "I think I can reassure you."

"Thank you," said Owen simply. He was struck by her delicacy of feeling,
and thought within himself, "That well-bred woman, Mrs. Dormer-Smith,
would have suspected me, not of _fearing_, but of hoping, that May would
be rich; and she would have hinted her suspicions in terms full of tact,
and a voice of exquisite refinement."

With regard to the question of Captain Cheffington's second marriage,
Mrs. Dobbs declared herself utterly in the dark.

"But," said she, "if I was obliged to make a bet, I should bet on no
marriage. Augustus is too selfish."

When, later, Owen went to Jessamine Cottage, he found May very unwilling
to return to London for the winter. But she yielded at length. The other
conditions she acceded to willingly. But she made one stipulation;
namely, that "Uncle Jo" should be admitted to share their secret.

"You know you can trust him implicitly, granny," said May. "He likes
news and gossip, but he will be true as steel when he once has given his
word to be silent."

So it was agreed that Mr. Weatherhead should be taken into their
confidence.

When May and Owen were alone together afterwards, he asked why she had
so specially insisted on this point.

"Don't you see, Owen," she answered, "that it will be an immense comfort
to granny, when she is left alone, to have some one whom she can talk
with about--_us_?"

Meanwhile no answer arrived from Captain Cheffington to the letter which
Mrs. Dobbs had written about the report of his marriage. May might have
been uneasy at his silence but for the new and absorbing interest in her
life, which confused chronology, and made time fly so rapidly that she
did not realize how long it was since her grandmother had written to
Belgium.

The gossip set afloat by Valli at Miss Piper's party gradually died
away, being superseded in public attention by fresher topics. One of
these was the disquieting condition of Mr. Martin Bransby's health. The
old man had seemed to recover from the serious illness of last year. But
it must have shaken him more profoundly than was generally supposed at
the time; for after the first brief rally he seemed to be failing more
and more day by day. Dr. Hatch kept his own counsel. He was not a man to
interpret the code of professional etiquette too loosely on such a
point; but besides professional etiquette old friendship moved him to be
cautious and reticent in this case. He had some reasons for uneasiness
about Martin Bransby's circumstances, as well as his bodily health. This
uneasiness was vague truly; but it sufficed to make the good physician
keep a watch over his words. So all those who listened curiously to Dr.
Hatch's voluble, and apparently unguarded, talk about the Bransbys went
away no wiser than they came as to old Martin's real condition.

To Martin Bransby's eldest son, however, Dr. Hatch did not think it
right to practise any concealment. On the evening when he invited
Theodore to drive home with him from Garnet Lodge, the doctor plainly
told the young man that he had grave fears for his father's life.

Theodore seemed more moved than the doctor had expected. He was not
demonstrative indeed; but his voice betrayed considerable emotion as he
said, "But you do not give him up, Dr. Hatch? There surely is still
hope?"

"There is hope. Yes; I cannot say there is no hope. But, my dear
fellow"--and the good doctor laid his hand kindly on Theodore's
shoulder--"we must be prepared for the worst."

"You have not, I gather, mentioned your fears to Mrs. Bransby," said
Theodore, after a pause, during which he had been leaning back in the
corner of the carriage.

"No, no, poor dear! No need to alarm her yet."

"She must know, however, sooner or later," observed Theodore coldly.

"I'm afraid she must. But why protract her misery? She is very
sensitive, devotedly attached to your father, and not too strong."

"Mrs. Bransby always appears to me to enjoy good health enough to take
any exertion she feels inclined for."

"I was not alluding to muscles, but nerves," returned the doctor drily.
"There is a little hysterical tendency. And her health is too valuable
to her children to be trifled with."

They drove on in silence to Mr. Bransby's garden gates. Theodore
alighted, and stood at the carriage door.

"Does my father know?" he asked in a low voice.

"There, I confess, I am puzzled," said Dr. Hatch. "I have never told him
his danger in plain words; but he is too clever a man to be hoodwinked.
My own impression is, that your father suspects his state to be
critical, but shrinks from admitting it even to himself. I think there
must be some private reason for this," added the doctor, leaning forward
and peering into Theodore's face as he stood in the moonlight: the
moonlight which at that same moment was shining in May's eyes, looking
at her young lover. "It certainly does not arise from cowardice. Your
father is one of the manliest men I have ever known."

If Theodore knew, or guessed, that his father had any secret reason for
anxiety, he did not betray it.

"I have observed increasing weakness of character in him lately," he
said.

The words might have been uttered so as to convey perfect filial
tenderness. But there was a subtle something in the tone suggestive of
contempt; or at least of remoteness from sympathy, which jarred
painfully on Dr. Hatch. He said "Good night" abruptly, and gave his
coachman the order to drive on.

After this conversation, it somewhat surprised the doctor to learn that
Theodore meant to leave home at the beginning of October, although he
was not to enter on his practical career as a barrister until the
winter. He had accepted one or two invitations to country houses during
the pheasant shooting; and gave, as his reason for going at that time,
that his health required change of air.

"_His_ health!" growled Dr. Hatch, when Mrs. Bransby gave him this piece
of news. "I should have thought he might stay and be of some use to his
father in business."

"Oh, we are rather glad he is going," exclaimed Mrs. Bransby
impulsively. Then she said apologetically, "Martin does not want him at
home. Theodore has never taken any interest in office matters; and
Tuckey manages capitally. Tuckey is Martin's right hand."

Mr. Tuckey was the confidential head clerk in the office which still
retained the name of the firm, "Cadell and Bransby," although Cadell had
departed this life twenty years ago, and the business had been, ever
since that time, wholly in the hands of Martin Bransby.

Mrs. Bransby did not hint at one motive for Theodore's departure which
her woman's wit had revealed to her; namely, that Miss Cheffington would
be leaving Oldchester about the same time. It was true that Theodore had
calculated on this; and also on the fact that Owen Rivers would be
safely out of the way across the Pyrenees. But there was another motive
which lay deeper; and, indeed, formed a part of the very texture of
Theodore's temperament:--he shrank from the idea of being present during
his father's last illness.

It has already been stated that he was subject to the dread of having
inherited his mother's consumptive tendency, and he shunned all
suggestions of sickness and death with the sort of instinct which makes
an animal select its food. The very mention of death produced the effect
of a physical chill on his nervous system. He was not without affection
for his father; although it had been much weakened by Mr. Bransby's
second marriage. Many persons who knew Theodore's tastes for gentility,
assumed that Miss Louisa Lutyer's descent from a good old family would
be gratifying to him, and help to make him accept the marriage
good-humouredly. But the fact was quite otherwise. Theodore constantly
suspected his step-mother of vaunting the superiority of her birth over
that of her predecessor. He had never seen either of his maternal
grandparents, and did not know all the details which Mrs. Dobbs could
have given him about the history of "Old Rabbitt." But he knew enough to
be aware that his mother had been a person of humble extraction. And he
could more easily have forgiven his father had the latter chosen a
person still humbler for his second wife. It was chiefly his
ever-present consciousness that Louisa was a gentlewoman by birth and
breeding, which made him jealously resent the luxuries with which his
father surrounded her, and even the fastidious elegance of her dress.
And, apart from all other considerations, it would have given him
sincere satisfaction to marry a wife who should have the undoubted right
to walk out of a drawing-room before Mrs. Martin Bransby.

One of the many points of antagonism between Owen and Theodore was the
opposite feeling with which each regarded Mrs. Bransby. Owen had a
chivalrous devotion for her; Theodore was nothing less than chivalrous.
Owen's admiration was made tender and protecting by a large infusion of
pity; Theodore held that in marrying his father Miss Louisa Lutyer had
met with good fortune beyond her merits. As to his step-brothers and
sisters, Theodore's feeling towards them was one of cool repulsion, with
the single exception of little Enid, the youngest, whom he would have
petted, could he have separated her in all things from the rest.

As soon as Owen's engagement with Mr. Bragg was assured, Owen called at
the Bransbys' to tell his news in person. On inquiring for Mrs. Bransby,
he was told that she was with her husband in the garden, and, being a
familiar visitor, the servant left him to find his way to them
unannounced.

It was a warm September afternoon; everything in the old garden--the
lichen-tinted brick walls, the autumnal flowers, the deep velvet of the
turf, the foliage slightly touched with red and gold--looked mellow and
peaceful. Under the shadow of a tall elm-tree, whose topmost boughs were
swaying with the movement, and resounding with the caw of rooks, Martin
Bransby reclined on a long chair, and his wife sat on a garden bench a
yard or two away. When she saw Owen approaching, Mrs. Bransby laid her
finger on her lips, and then Owen saw that Mr. Bransby was asleep.

The old man lay with his head supported on a crimson cushion, against
which his abundant silver hair was strongly relieved. The brows above
the closed eyelids were still dark. The placidity of repose enhanced the
beauty of his finely moulded features; but he was very pale, and his
cheeks and temples looked worn and thin. Mrs. Bransby welcomed Owen with
a smile and an outstretched hand. At the first glance he had thought
that she, too, looked pale and suffering, but the little glow of
animation in her face when she spoke effaced this impression.

"Am I disturbing you?" asked Owen in a whisper.

"No, no; sit down. You need not whisper, it is enough to speak low; he
sleeps heavily. I am so glad to see him sleep, for his nights have been
restless lately." As Mrs. Bransby spoke, she pushed aside a heap of
gay-coloured silks with which she was embroidering a rich velvet
cushion, and made room for Owen on the garden-seat beside her. "I know
your news already," she continued, "and I must congratulate you,
although you will be sadly missed. My boys will be in despair; we shall
all miss you."

"I am glad, at all events, that you seem to approve of the step I have
taken."

"Of course. All your friends must approve it.

"Well, they are not so numerous as to make their unanimity absolutely
impossible."

Then, after a short silence, during which Mrs. Bransby resumed her
embroidery, and Owen thoughtfully raked together some fallen leaves with
his stick, he said--

"But you don't know the extent of my good fortune. There is a
chance--rather a remote one, but still a chance--that this employment
may lead to more, and that I may get some work to do in South America."

She started, and the gay embroidery fell from her hands on to the grass,
as she exclaimed with plaintive, down-drawn lips, like those of a child,
"Oh, not to South America! Don't go so far away!"

He merely shook his head.

"Oh, that is terrible!" she said. "I never thought of that! But,
perhaps, you will not go."

"Very much, 'perhaps.' It would be better luck than I could expect."

"And you really could have the heart to leave us all, and go off to the
other side of the globe? Oh, I can't bear to think of it!"

"Don't speak so kindly! You will take away all my courage," he said,
looking for a moment at the beautiful eyes fixed on his face.

"Ah, I am very selfish. Of course you ought to go, if going will lead to
a career for you. Although one can't help feeling that you will be,
somehow wasted in mere commercial pursuits. Yes, yes, of course, I am
wrong!" she added, hastily anticipating his rejoinder. "It is all very
proper and Spartan, no doubt. But I am not in the least Spartan, you
know."

"People usually find it easy to be Spartan for their friends. Very few
keep their stoicism for themselves, and their soft-heartedness for
others--as you do!"

He glanced involuntarily at Martin Bransby, as he spoke; and she
followed his glance with instant quickness of understanding.

"How do you think he is looking? You do not think he seems worse, do
you?" she said.

"No, indeed, no!"

"I was afraid, when you talked about stoicism----"

"No, I only meant that you always show great courage when Mr. Bransby is
ill."

"I don't think I am naturally courageous. But love gives courage."

"Yes,--the genuine sort of love."

"Although it makes one frightened, too, in one way. I am sometimes very
uneasy about him." She turned a gaze of profound tenderness on her
husband's sleeping face.

"I trust your uneasiness is needless," said Owen. "Mr. Bransby seems to
be going on well, does he not?"

"Oh yes, I hope so. But he does not gain strength. His rest is very
troubled, and he talks in his sleep. And I think his spirits are much
less cheerful than they were. He has a great regard for you. He will
approve of what you are doing, I know. But he will be as sorry as the
rest of us to think of your going so far away."

She said all this in her usual sweet voice, and with her usual soft
grace of manner. Then all at once she broke down in a sudden passion of
tears, and burying her face in her handkerchief, she sobbed out, "If you
go to South America he will never see you again;--never, never! I know
his days are numbered. They think they keep me in ignorance; but I know
it, I know it!"

Owen was melted by her grief. In the eyes of sound-hearted manhood,
beauty, while it attracts, adds a sort of sacredness to a pure woman. To
see that lovely face convulsed with weeping made an impression on his
senses, such as he might have felt at seeing an exquisite work of art
defaced or mutilated. And beyond that, there was the warm human
sympathy, and the feeling of compassionate protection due to her sex.

"Dearest Mrs. Bransby," he said, looking at her piteously, "pray, pray
take comfort. Oh, how I wish that I could give you any help or comfort!"

She continued to weep softly and silently for a little while longer.
Then she wiped away her tears, and spoke with calmness. "Forgive me! It
was selfish to distress you," she said. "But it has relieved my heart to
cry a little. And you have always been so friendly. I have as great
reliance on you as if I had known you all my life."

"As far as the will goes, you cannot over-rate my friendship. But the
power, alas! is small; or rather none."

"No; don't say that. Whenever I have forced myself to look forward to
the great sorrow which may soon come upon me, I have said to myself, 'I
know Mr. Rivers would be good to me and the children, and would help us
with honest advice.' I have no one belonging to me--of my own
family--left to rely on. The boys and I would be very desolate and
forlorn, if we were left to guide ourselves by our own wisdom."

"There is Theodore," said Owen. But he said it with dry awkwardness, as
though there were something in the words to be ashamed of.

"Theodore does not love us," returned Mrs. Bransby quickly. "You were
praising me just now for caring about my friends. But you see how
selfish my thoughts were all the time! It does seem so dreary to imagine
you far away out of our reach!"

She wore on her wrist a bracelet consisting of a broad gold band, in
which was set the portrait of her youngest child. Now, little Enid had a
special affection for Owen. She caressed him and tyrannized over him.
And whenever Bobby and Billy desired to coax Mr. Rivers into playing
with them, they conspired to make Enid prefer the request, secretly
agreeing that Mr. Rivers spoiled Enid, and would never resist her. In
short, Mr. Rivers was Enid's sworn knight, and did her suit and service.
The sweet, baby face looked out of its gold frame, with large, grave
eyes, and faintly smiling mouth, and soft yellow hair like the down on a
nestling bird. Owen took Mrs. Bransby's hand, and bent over it until his
lips touched little Enid's portrait. "Near or far," he said, "you and
your children may always count on my faithful affection."

When he raised his head again, Theodore was standing in front of them.

He had come noiselessly along the grass, and halted a little behind his
father's chair. Mrs. Bransby's head was turned in the opposite
direction, and she did not see him immediately. But Owen saw him, and
caught a singular expression on young Bransby's face which made his own
blood run swiftly with a confused sense of furious anger. It was an
expression of mingled surprise, suspicion, and an indescribable touch of
exultation. But even as Owen fixed his eyes on him sternly, the look was
gone; and Theodore's smooth face was as coolly supercilious as usual.

"Your father has been having a good sleep, Theodore," said his
step-mother, when she saw him.

"So I see," he answered. And, again, something singular in his tone made
Owen long to seize him and hurl him away out of Mrs. Bransby's presence.

"Mr. Rivers has been telling me his news," said Mrs. Bransby. "We ought
to rejoice, I suppose. But I can't help feeling selfishly sorry."

"We must hope that our loss will be his gain," replied Theodore. He felt
instinctively that Owen's eyes were still fastened on him. And Owen's
eyes, like many light-blue eyes, had the power of expressing an
intensity of fierceness when he was thoroughly incensed which few
persons would have found it easy to support. But Theodore had averted
his own gaze, and was looking down on his father with ostentatious
solicitude.

The old man slightly moved his head, and Mrs. Bransby was by his side
instantly. "Are you refreshed by your sleep, dear Martin?" she asked as
he opened his eyes.

"Yes, Loui, yes. Oh, there's Rivers! How are you, Rivers?" He rose from
his chair and shook hands with Owen, asking him to come to the house and
have tea. Mrs. Bransby offered her husband her arm, but he took her hand
and laid it tenderly upon his sleeve. "Not yet, Loui; not yet!" he said,
smiling down upon her. "I needn't lean upon you yet." Then the two
walked slowly side by side towards the house, leaving the young men to
follow.

As they did so, crossing the wide lawn side by side, it suddenly
occurred to Theodore, with a shock of surprise, that he and Owen had not
exchanged any sort of greeting or salutation whatever.




CHAPTER XIII.


The Dormer-Smiths arrived in London early in November, and May joined
them almost immediately. Her aunt was delighted to find May looking
remarkably well.

"Some good has come of her vegetating in Oldchester," said Pauline to
her husband. "Her complexion is radiant. Also I think her figure has
improved. If she _would_ but consent to have her stays taken in!
Smithson could manage it half an inch at a time; and might easily get
her waist down to eighteen inches. But there is that lamentable touch of
self-indulgent apathy about May! However, she has really a great deal of
charm; and, in spite of all the drawbacks connected with poor Augustus's
unfortunate marriage, she _looks_ thoroughbred."

The two little boys, Harold and Wilfred, had returned from their sojourn
in a farm-house so much strengthened that their father seriously talked
of sending them into the country altogether for a couple of years. Even
Mrs. Dormer-Smith, although unwilling to relinquish her character of
chronic invalid, confessed that Carlsbad had done her good. In fact, the
whole family returned to London in improved health and spirits. A great
many "nice people" were to be in town for the winter; and the excuse of
May's presence, and the assistance of May's allowance, would enable
Pauline to enjoy society, and at the same time to satisfy that singular
worldly conscience of hers with the sense of duty fulfilled.

There was a little disappointment at Mr. Bragg's absence from England.
But even here Mrs. Dormer-Smith had the not inconsiderable consolation
of knowing that if he were far from May's attractions, he was also far
from those of Constance Hadlow. And she more than ever rejoiced at that
providential interposition in the interests of the Cheffington family
which had kept Mr. Bragg away from Glengowrie. Another symptom which
filled Aunt Pauline with complacent hopes, was May's newly developed
interest in Mr. Bragg, and her eager willingness to talk about his
Spanish tour. Pauline was inclined to attribute something of this
improved state of mind to Mrs. Dobbs's influence; and confessed to
herself that the old woman was doing all she could to compensate the
House of Cheffington for the injury done to it by the disastrous
_mesalliance_.

Mrs. Dormer-Smith's cheerfulness at this time would have been absolutely
unclouded but for the dread hanging over her about her brother. She had
given May to understand that the rumours spread by Valli and others were
based on error. And she even conveyed the idea to her niece (although
scrupulously abstaining from explicit falsehood) that Captain
Cheffington himself had denied those rumours in private communications
to her and Frederick. But the fact was that Augustus had remained
inflexibly silent. The Dormer-Smiths knew nothing of him. And so
completely had he dropped out of the society of all with whom they were
likely to consort, that a doubt sometimes crossed Pauline's mind as to
whether her brother were still living or not.

Meanwhile, every week May received a letter from Owen, forwarded by Mrs.
Dobbs. The latter had restricted the correspondence to one letter a week
on each side. Owen wrote very joyously. His work was easy--too easy, he
said; and he was constantly seeking opportunities to be useful to his
employer. Mr. Bragg he pronounced to be an excellent master: clearheaded
in his commands, and reasonable in his exactions. He seemed to approve
of his secretary so far; and although he was rather taciturn, and not
prone to encourage sanguine expectations, yet Owen began to have good
hope that Mr. Bragg would not turn him adrift when the three months'
engagement should be at an end.

May now became decidedly more popular in society than she had been
during the height of the season. Happiness, like sunshine, beautifies
common things; and the new brightness of her outlook on it was reflected
by the world around her. That feeling which she had expressed in writing
to her grandmother--the forlorn feeling of a child who, in the midst of
some gay spectacle, wearily cries to go home--had disappeared. She knew
that when the curtain should fall on the puppet-show in Vanity Fair, her
own true love was waiting to welcome her.

Sometimes she speculated on how Aunt Pauline would take the revelation
of her attachment to Owen Rivers. That she should have had any doubt on
the subject proved her ignorance of Aunt Pauline's views. Mrs.
Dormer-Smith would not for the world have expressed to May any gross or
sordid sentiments about marriage. She had not the slightest idea that
she entertained any such herself! But, as she had long ago said, there
are many things--never put into words--which "girls brought up in a
certain _monde_ learn by instinct." Now in that kind of instinct May was
greatly deficient.

May reflected that her aunt had spurned Theodore Bransby's proposal on
the avowed ground of his being "nobody." And she understood--or thought
she understood--that Aunt Pauline accorded a tangible existence only to
such persons as could be proved by genealogical records to have had a
certain number of great-grandfathers. Now, thus considered, Owen was
very undeniably and solidly "somebody." He was poor, certainly; but how
often had Aunt Pauline mingled her plaintive regrets with Mrs. Griffin's
about the increasing worship of Mammon which vulgarized London society!
And although Aunt Pauline sometimes showed a deference for wealth which
was rather puzzling in the face of these utterances, yet May observed
that her personal liking and admiration were given on very different
grounds. Witness her regard for Constance Hadlow!

Mrs. Dormer-Smith even kept up an intermittent correspondence with that
young lady. Constance's letters were precisely of the kind which Mrs.
Dormer-Smith delighted in--budgets of social gossip selected with
unerring tact. Constance had returned to Oldchester, but she did not
spend many consecutive weeks in her parents' house, being invited to
visit among "the _elite_ of the county aristocracy," as Mrs. Simpson
phrased it. Miss Hadlow had, in fact, achieved what might be called, all
things considered, a brilliant social position. Her visit to Glengowrie
had been a great success. She had made a conquest of the duchess; and
also--though that was comparatively of small consequence--of the duke.
Mrs. Griffin was charmed that her _protegee_ had done her so much
honour; and promised to take her into society the following season, if
Canon and Mrs. Hadlow would give her leave to come to town. Indeed, Mrs.
Griffin began seriously to revolve in her mind whether she could not
contrive to marry Charley Rivers's grand-daughter, and secure her a fine
establishment. Mrs. Griffin was proud of her achievements in that line,
which, though few, were brilliant. Like a certain famous Italian
singing-master, who was wont in his old age to decline unpromising
pupils on the ground that it was not worth his while to make _seconde
donne_, Mrs. Griffin practised only the higher branches of matchmaking;
and refused to fly her falcons at anything under twenty thousand a
year--or a peerage.

What made Miss Hadlow's letters particularly interesting to Mrs.
Dormer-Smith at this time, was that the former was frequently staying in
the neighbourhood of Combe Park, and occasionally met Lord Castlecombe
and Lucius, whom she reported to be constantly ailing--as, indeed, he
had been since before his brother's death. But his state did not seem to
inspire any immediate apprehension. And Constance even said a word now
and then about "creaking wheels," and intimated her belief that Mr.
Lucius Cheffington would probably outlive many more robust-looking
persons.

But it was not only these polite chronicles which kept the Dormer-Smith
household informed as to the doings of Oldchester people. Mrs. Dobbs, of
course, wrote frequently to her grandchild. The saddest news which she
had to give May was the continuous and rapid decline of Mr. Bransby's
health. Theodore was still away from home, Mrs. Dobbs wrote, and she
commented severely on his heartless neglect of his father. She had
learned through Mrs. Simpson that old Martin Bransby showed great
anxiety for his son's return; and it was reported that he had caused a
letter to be written, telling Theodore that he desired to speak with
him, and urging him to come home without delay.

In the first days of December the end came. Martin Bransby died--rather
suddenly at the last--and his eldest son was not with him. On being
telegraphed to he arrived in Oldchester with the utmost possible
despatch--but too late to see his father alive.

"People are very sorry for the widow and her children," wrote Mrs.
Dobbs; "for it's beginning to be said now that they're left rather badly
off, and that the bulk of everything will go to Theodore. I don't know
any facts, one way or the other; but I do know that foolish folk cackle
louder over a grave than almost anywhere else. So we may hope things are
not so bad with that pretty, gentle woman as Oldchester gossip makes
out."

One of May's first thoughts on reading this letter was, "How grieved
Owen will be!" She grieved herself for the kindly old man who had always
been good to her, and for the grief of those who loved him. And she
incurred a mild rebuke from her aunt by appearing at a dinner party that
evening with pale cheeks and red eyelids.

Contrary to Mrs. Dobbs's hope, it turned out that the gossip had for
once been correct. Martin Bransby's affairs were left in a strange
entanglement. There were many debts, and, as it seemed, very little
money to meet them. People inquired how he had got rid of the handsome
property left him by his father. He had not got rid of it in the
ordinary sense of the words; but the bulk of it was as far beyond his
control as though he had thrown it into the sea.

At the time of Martin Bransby's first marriage, old Rabbitt had made
most stringent arrangements in his daughter's interest. Not only her own
dowry (which was a handsome one), but nearly the whole of Martin's
property was strictly settled on her and her children. Mr. Rabbitt was
enabled to drive a hard bargain by his command of ready money. He
advanced a large sum to his son-in-law for the purchase of Cadell's
share in the firm. Mr. Cadell was old, and wished to retire; the
opportunity was favourable, and promised brilliant results. Nor were
these promises belied by experience. The old-established solicitor's
business was a very flourishing and lucrative one. Martin Bransby was
soon able to pay back the loan to his father-in-law with interest. Old
Rabbitt observed that this was only taking from one hand to give to the
other, for it would all come back to him and his in the end. As a matter
of fact, old Rabbitt left every penny he had in the world to his
daughter and her children after her; but the money was strictly tied up
out of her husband's reach.

This seemed a trifling matter in those days to Martin Bransby. Whom
should he desire to enrich but his own children? and things were going
so well in the office that it seemed probable he might amass another
fortune. But when, after his second marriage, a young family began to
gather round him, he could not help regretting the terms of his original
marriage settlement. As soon as Theodore came of age Mr. Bransby made an
attempt to induce him to relinquish some part of the property in favour
of his younger brothers and sisters; but the attempt failed, and was
never repeated. Mr. Bransby was deeply wounded by Theodore's attitude,
and, on his side, Theodore considered his father's request unreasonable
and unfair.

"If I might venture on a suggestion, I would advise your retrenching a
little, sir," he had said with icy politeness; "in that way you would
soon save enough to provide for Mrs. Bransby and her children in a style
fully equal to what they have any right to expect from you."

The remembrance of that interview was a thorn in the flesh of Martin
Bransby, and it left in Theodore's mind increased resentment against his
father's second marriage.

But Theodore's advice, however unfilially proffered, was sound enough.
Retrenchment in the daily expenses of that easy-going and lavish
household would have been judicious; but then to retrench would have
been to deprive Louisa of the luxuries and elegancies which so became
her, and which gave her so much pleasure. Instead of taking this
disagreeable method, Mr. Bransby tried speculation. He made one or two
lucky strokes, but at the first loss became panic-stricken, and threw
good money after bad in a kind of desperation.

After his death something of all this leaked out in a confused way, to
the public astonishment. "To think of Martin Bransby's money matters
being in a bad way!" people said. "There must be more in this than meets
the eye, for he was acknowledged to be a first-rate man of business."

In brief, as much amazement was expressed as though "men of business"
were commonly infallible, and the world had never heard of a man of
business whose conduct was not ruled by self-restraining prudence. At
the same time many persons declared they had long ago prophesied
disaster, and had even warned Martin to put some check on his wife's
extravagance. But such little inconsistencies as these are but pebbles
in the stream of general gossip; diversifying it with an agreeable
ripple, but never checking its flow.

May wrote an affectionate letter of condolence to Mrs. Bransby. She
received no answer to it; and presently she learned that Mrs. Bransby
and her children had left Oldchester, and gone to London. Constance
Hadlow did not mention the family at all in writing to Mrs.
Dormer-Smith. They had fallen out of the sphere of her observation;
and no one can be expected to turn away his telescope from
contemplating the fixed stars in order to stare at common terrestrial
phenomena--especially phenomena of a non-metallic and unproductive
nature.

About Christmas time Theodore Bransby called unexpectedly at Mrs.
Dormer-Smith's house in London. He came early in the forenoon--so early,
indeed, that Mrs. Dormer-Smith was not yet visible. On asking to see
Miss Cheffington, he was shown into a room where May was sitting with
the children. (Harold and Wilfred were now permitted to spend part of
the morning with their cousin, at her particular request. And it was
found that this arrangement answered the double purpose of delighting
the boys, and leaving Cecile more leisure for needlework.)

May started and flushed on hearing Mr. Theodore Bransby's name
announced. But the first glimpse of Theodore disarmed her wrath. He was
paler than ever--or seemed to be so, in his deep mourning, and there was
unmistakable sorrow in his face. May rose quickly, and gave him her hand
in silence. There were tears in her eyes, and the unexpected sight of
tears in his, made her forgive him for pressing her hand harder, and
holding it longer than mere politeness warranted.

"I have been so sorry!" said May.

"Thank you," he answered. "You are always kind and good."

"So sorry for you all--the widow--the poor children--!" added May, as a
bright drop brimmed over, and rolled down her cheek.

Theodore relinquished her hand, and rapidly passing his handkerchief
across his eyes, gave a dry, husky, little cough in his throat. It was a
sound which curiously repelled sympathy.

"You were not in Oldchester when your dear father died," said May. She
did not intend any covert reproach. Her words were prompted by a pitying
thought of the undying regret which must haunt Theodore on this score.

"No; I was not there. I know I have been blamed for that."

"Oh, indeed I had no such meaning!"

"I well believe it. But I _have_ been blamed--most unjustly. I went away
with my father's full consent; indeed, he thought I needed the change.
He wrote to me when he found himself growing worse, to ask me to come
back. Of course I meant to comply with that request. You cannot doubt
it?"

"I have no right to doubt it," answered May gently.

"No, but pray listen! I wish to justify myself in your eyes. The truth
is, I was in the act of packing my valise to return to Oldchester when a
telegram reached me, saying that my father's danger was imminent. I was
in Yorkshire, in a country house, where there was but one postal
delivery a day. Letters were often delayed, and, in fact, my father's
letter had preceded the telegram only by a few hours."

"Oh, how sad! I am so sorry for you!" cried May, clasping her hands. She
felt some generous compunction for having done him injustice.

"Yes; I have lost a good father," said Theodore.

"You have, indeed. And what a loss is Mrs. Bransby's!"

A subtle change came over his face, although he did not seem to move a
muscle, and he made no answer.

"How is she?" asked May, leaning forward eagerly.

Theodore's eyebrows took their old supercilious curve, as he replied,
"Mrs. Bransby? Oh, she's quite well, I believe."

"Believe! Have you not seen her lately?"

"Oh yes; I have seen her. She appeared perfectly well. I did not at
first quite take in the sense of your question; but I see now what you
meant. Every one has not such keen sensibilities as you, May."

Even this familiar use of her name she let pass, although it jarred upon
her.

"I am sure Mrs. Bransby is not insensible," she answered. "And she loved
your father dearly."

"I am not disputing it. But she was, and is, a doating mother, and her
feelings are greatly engrossed by her children. In one way this is happy
for her. She does not feel the void, the loneliness, which oppresses
me."

It seemed to May that there might be some truth in this. Theodore was
not generally beloved. Cold as he seemed, he doubtless missed his
father's affection. He would feel isolated and forlorn. This might be in
great part his own fault; but May pitied him. She softened towards him
still more when he went on to speak of his plans for assisting his young
step-brothers. He had already offered to send Martin to school at his
own expense. He was endeavouring to be of use to Mrs. Bransby. She was,
unfortunately, very unpractical, and rather impracticable; but he hoped
that, when her grief calmed down, she would listen to reason and take
advice.

"Is she not well off?" asked May, moved by genuine interest in the widow
and her family.

Theodore shook his head. "I may tell _you_," he said, "that she is in
very straitened circumstances. I do not proclaim this generally, because
people who know how indefatigably my poor father worked, and what a
large income he earned, are apt to blame her, and accuse her of
extravagance."

While he was still speaking, a message came from Mrs. Dormer-Smith
asking Mr. Bransby to go to her in the drawing-room. She, too, was
touched by his mourning garb and pale face, and received him with
sympathetic gentleness. May's report of his behaviour in Oldchester had
been favourable, in so far that he had not attempted to renew his suit.
But what most of all conciliated Mrs. Dormer-Smith was the thought of
Mr. Bragg. Now that her niece was so near making a splendid marriage, it
was easier to forgive Theodore's presumption. Doubtless the young man
had already seen his error; and really, putting aside that one
aberration, he was very nice!

Her good opinion was increased in the course of their private
conversation, which turned on matters very interesting to Pauline.
Theodore had seen her uncle lately; he had, moreover, had a good deal of
talk with him about matters political. A vacancy was likely to occur
shortly in the representation of that division of the county where Lord
Castlecombe's landed property was situated. The Castlecombes were
anxious to oppose a threatened Radical candidate, and Theodore had
offered to stand.

On his elder brother's death, Lucius Cheffington had resigned his post
in the Civil Service, and, under normal circumstances, his father would
have desired that he should return to the House of Commons; but his
health was at present too feeble to warrant his attempting any exertion.
Then old Lord Castlecombe thought it would be well to put some one into
the vacant seat who might be willing to resign it whenever Lucius should
be able and willing to come forward again as a candidate. This was not
expressed, but understood; and Lord Castlecombe had approved of
Theodore's ready comprehension of the state of the case, and his clear
view of the advantages such an arrangement would afford to himself.
Election expenses, even in these days of purity and the ballot, retain
as mysterious a rapidity of growth as Jack's beanstalk, and the
assistance of Lord Castlecombe would be very solidly valuable. On the
other hand, Theodore considered that, ambition apart, it would be useful
to him in his career as a barrister to write M.P. after his name, and
was willing to assume some share of the cost of the canvass. The old
lord discovered in this sententious young gentleman two merits--the
possession of money, and the knowledge how to spend it advantageously.

Lucius acquiesced passively in all his father's arrangements; but he
could not be induced to thaw half a degree in his personal relations
with Theodore.

"The fellow is an intolerable prig," he said to his father; "and his
vulgarity is of a particularly objectionable kind--the fine pretentious
kind."

"Oh, of course, he's a d--d snob," answered my lord, with cheerful
candour. "But what the deuce does that matter? We are not going to take
him to our arms; only to throw him into the arms of the voters! And I
can tell you, it will be a vast deal better to have him for our member
than Mr. Butter, the Radical button-maker. At any rate, this young
Bransby won't go in for abolishing the Peers, or starting a Separatist
crusade in the Scilly Islands."

In the course of his talk with Mrs. Dormer-Smith, Theodore hinted to her
as much of his political outlook as seemed good to him. The account of
his relations with Lord Castlecombe greatly impressed her; for she was
very sure her uncle would not waste any of his time and attention on an
entirely insignificant person. And Theodore's tone in speaking of the
political position of the Castlecombe family was such as to win her
complete approval and sympathy.

When Pauline talked over his visit with her husband, after narrating
that part of it which concerned Lord Castlecombe, she added, "And the
young man has a great deal of proper feeling. I really begin to think
that mistake he made must have been in some way May's fault:--oh, not
intentionally, Frederick; but she is so--so unformed in her ideas!
However, we need not discuss all that; for I am convinced Mr. Bransby is
quite _safe_ now. I was going to say that he told me confidentially that
he would not advise us to encourage any intimacy between May and his
step-mother. She is in London, I believe; letting lodgings, or some
dreadful thing of that sort. It is just the kind of thing May would
delight in, if I would let her--visiting and championing people who are
in impossible positions, and talking all kinds of Quixotic nonsense
about them! However, this Mrs. Bransby is not the kind of person who
_can_ be encouraged. She is very handsome, I understand, and _tant soit
peu, coquette_. There was some not too creditable flirtation with young
Rivers before her husband's death; and Mr. Bransby evidently thinks she
is the kind of woman always to have some one dangling after her. He
spoke really very nicely, and said he hoped she might soon marry again,
as she is scarcely fit to be trusted with the responsibility of bringing
up a young family. You are so apt to indulge May in her whims, that I
thought it necessary to repeat all this with distinctness. You must see,
as I do, that it would be quite disastrous for May to keep up any
intimacy with such a person as this Mrs. Bransby--a handsome, flirting,
needy widow! If she were even in society----!"




CHAPTER XIV.


The sale of Martin Bransby's handsome furniture, books, plate, carriage,
and horses realized a considerable sum; but only a small portion of that
sum remained when all debts were paid. Theodore made all the
arrangements, and Mrs. Bransby passively acquiesced in them. She was
crushed by grief, and timidly acknowledged herself to be sadly helpless
and ignorant of business matters.

It was Theodore who had decided that the family should leave Oldchester.
It was Theodore who had taken a house for them in a northern suburb of
London. It was Theodore who suggested that Mrs. Bransby might eke out
her income by receiving one or two lodgers. For Martin's schooling he
promised to be responsible; and he would also guarantee the rent of the
London house for one twelvemonth. But he could promise no further
assistance, giving as a sufficient reason for not doing more the heavy
claims on his purse which would result from his forthcoming political
candidature.

A tiny annual sum was secured to the widow--a sum smaller than that
which she had been in the habit of spending on her dress; and this was
all she had to rely on to keep herself and her five children. It was
clear that an effort must be made to earn some money.

Some articles of furniture remaining from the Oldchester sale nearly
sufficed to furnish the small London dwelling. The house, fortunately,
was clean, freshly painted, and in good repair; but the vulgar
wall-papers were an affliction to Mrs. Bransby's eyes, and the
dimensions of the rooms seemed to her painfully cramped. When she
ventured to hint as much to her stepson he gave her a severe lecture,
and begged her to understand that the days when her whims could be
lavishly indulged were over.

"But it can scarcely be called a whim to want air for my children to
breathe!" returned Mrs. Bransby, with a flash of indignation which she
repented the next moment. And when Theodore pointed out that the house
was a remarkably airy one for the rent; and that he, in his kind
consideration, had taken a great deal of trouble to find a dwelling for
them in a healthy locality, she meekly apologized for having been
betrayed into any expression of impatience, and promised to make the
best of her new circumstances.

They were such as might have depressed a stronger and less sensitive
person. When Theodore had gone away, and the children were in bed, and
the widow sat alone in the mean little room which, small as it was, was
but dimly illuminated by one candle, the sense of her forlorn position
weighed her down, and seemed to make the atmosphere thick with misery.
It was not the loss of material luxuries which afflicted her. A month
ago she would have felt that keenly; but now her great sorrow had
absorbed all minor troubles. Poverty! What was poverty, compared with
desolation of spirit? How willingly would she have faced severer bodily
hardships than any which threatened her if her lost husband could be
restored to her!

She dropped her head on her folded arms resting on the table. The
widow's cap slipped aside, and a veil of bright, brown, waving hair fell
over her bowed face. She had been forced to restrain her tears all day.
There were the children to be thought of. There were Theodore's cold,
clear questions and suggestions to be answered. But now, in solitude,
her tears gushed out. She wept with long, deep-drawn sobs. The words of
the Litany seemed to be repeated over and over again, as by a voice
whispering in her ear, "The fatherless children, and widows, and all who
are desolate and oppressed." She rocked herself from side to side, and
moaned out, "Oh, come back to us! Come back, Martin--Martin!"

A hand was gently laid on her shoulder. With a great start she raised
her head, and saw her eldest boy standing by her side.

He was a handsome boy, very like his father. But now his naturally ruddy
face was pale, and his eyes had a depth of yearning tenderness in them
which went to his mother's heart.

"Don't cry so, mother dear!" he said. "Father couldn't bear to see it,
if he knew."

She clasped the boy in her arms; and, although she still wept, her sobs
were less convulsive, and she gradually grew calmer. Martin stood beside
her very quietly, occasionally stroking back the pretty soft hair which
strayed over her face, and was damp with tears.

Presently Mrs. Bransby said, "I thought you were in bed, Martin. How
silently you came downstairs!"

"I took off my shoes, mother," he answered, showing his feet. "I didn't
want to disturb the others. The children are asleep, and Phoebe is
snoring away."

Phoebe was their one servant, a housemaid from their Oldchester
home--who had volunteered to remain with them and follow their fortunes.

"Poor Phoebe! I dare say she is tired," said Mrs. Bransby.

"I should think she _was_ rather. She has been working like a brick all
day," returned Martin.

There was a little silence, during which Mrs. Bransby dried her eyes,
put up her dishevelled hair, and replaced her cap.

"Ought you not to go to bed, my boy?" she said, looking wistfully at
him.

"I want to stay and talk to you quietly a little, mother."

Mrs. Bransby hesitated. "I should dearly like you to stay awhile,
Martin," she answered; "but I'm afraid it would not be right. You look
pale and worn out. You and I must help each other now to do what is
right;--and what--what _he_ would have wished," she added with quivering
lips.

"Yes, mother," answered the boy eagerly. "That's just what I want; and I
know he would have wished me to spare you all the bother I can. So now
just listen, mother; indeed, indeed I couldn't sleep if I went to bed
now--and it's far wearier work to lie awake than to sit up and talk.
Look here, mother; Theodore has offered to send me to school, hasn't
he?"

"Yes, Martin. I am very thankful for that. I don't see how I could have
afforded it."

"Well, but now, I've been thinking that it would be better if Theodore
would give you that money, instead of paying for my schooling, and for
me to get a situation and earn something."

"Earn! My darling boy, how could you earn anything?"

"Why, mother, I could do all that the office boy did at Oldchester. Old
Tuckey told me once that he earned fifteen shillings a-week. Just fancy,
mother! That's a good lot, isn't it?"

It looked a very childish face that he turned towards his mother: a face
with frank, sparkling eyes and rounded cheeks, to which the excitement
of making this proposition had brought back the roses.

"Oh, Martin, my dearest boy, it is sweet of you to think of this! But
you are too young, darling."

"I'm going on for thirteen, mother!" interrupted Martin.

"Yes, dear; but still even that is very, very young," answered his
mother gravely, although the phantom of a smile flitted across her pale
face.

Martin looked disappointed, and, for a moment, almost angry. He had a
naturally hot temper. But he battled down the temptation, and merely
said, "Well, mother, you need not decide anything to-night. You can
think it over. I believe I could earn something; and I'm sure that if I
can, I ought."

"But your education, Martin!"

"I might, perhaps, go on learning a little at home--in the evenings," he
rejoined, but more slowly, and less confidently than he had spoken
before.

"You know, Martin, _he_ wished you to study. He was so proud of your
abilities--so fond of you----" Her voice broke, and she turned away her
head.

"Yes, mother; but he was fonder of you," answered Martin simply. "I know
quite well that if father could speak to me now, this minute, he would
say, 'Martin, take care of your mother.' That's what he _did_ say one
day when I was alone with him, only a week before----" The boy paused,
made a violent struggle to master his emotion, and then went on bravely,
though his young face grew white to the lips, "And I'm going to do it,
please God!"

The tears that poured down his mother's cheeks as she embraced him and
kissed his forehead were not all bitter. "Not desolate--not wholly
desolate," she murmered, "while I have you, my precious, precious son!"

They sat awhile, talking of their means, and their plans, and their
prospects. Mrs. Bransby felt that although many of Martin's notions
were, of course, crude and childish, yet there was a strain of firm
manliness in him on which she could rely; and the boy had a quick
intelligence. Before parting from his mother for the night, he proposed
that she should write to Owen Rivers and ask his advice. "You'll believe
what Mr. Rivers says, mother, if you don't believe me. And I think
you'll find that _he_ will consider it my duty to earn something if I
can; anyway, he's such a good fellow, and has such a thundering lot of
sense, he's sure to give us good advice."

The widow caught at the suggestion; she had almost as implicit faith in
Owen as her children had. She promised that Martin should enclose a
letter of his own in hers to Mr. Rivers; and when she bade the boy "good
night" at the door of his poor little chamber, she was surprised to find
her heart somewhat lightened of its load.

"I say, look here, mother!" whispered Martin, beckoning her in from the
open door. "Don't those young shavers sleep like one o'clock?" He
pointed to Bobby and Billy, who occupied one large bed--a relic from the
Oldchester nursery--while Martin's little camp-bedstead was squeezed
into a corner of the same room. The two little fellows were sleeping the
profound sleep of healthy childhood. Bobby had a smile on his parted
lips, and Billy lay with one fat hand doubled up under his cheek, and
the other buried in the thick masses of his brother's curly hair.

"This isn't half a bad room when the window's wide open," went on Martin
cheerfully. "I can see a tree--quite a good-sized elm--from my bed. Good
night, mother dear; I hope you'll sleep. I think this'll turn out an
awfully nice little house, when we get used to it."

The two letters to Owen Rivers--Martin's and his mother's--were written
the next morning. Mrs. Bransby sent them under cover to Mr. Bragg,
addressed to Oldchester, to be forwarded, and with a line from herself
to Mr. Bragg, begging that he would let Mr. Rivers have them without
delay. She had written very fully and frankly to Owen, telling him,
without reserve, what her means were. Only on one point had she been
reticent--Theodore's conduct. In her heart she thought Theodore cruelly
cold and hard towards her and the children. But she would not complain
of him; he was her dear husband's son, and she felt as if it would be
disloyal to that honoured husband's memory to paint Theodore to others
as she saw him.

Theodore's recommendation to his step-mother, to "take good, steady,
paying lodgers," was in the nature of those vague counsels we are all
apt to proffer freely to our neighbours; such as, to "cheer up;" not to
"yield to weakness;" to "look on the bright side;" to "dismiss
disagreeable thoughts;" to "set to work briskly and earn money," and the
like. That is to say, it was easier said than done. When, after the
family had been somewhat over a week in town, Theodore came again to see
them, and found that no steps had been taken to carry out this
suggestion, he showed considerable displeasure, and said a sharp word or
two about the difficulty of helping unpractical people.

This word, "unpractical," was, in fact, a favourite reproach to apply to
poor Mrs. Bransby on the part of a great many persons. Mrs. Dormer-Smith
caught it up from Theodore. Constance Hadlow echoed the same phrase
when, at length, in answer to some private inquiries of Mrs.
Dormer-Smith's, she wrote about the Bransby family.

May's first eager proposal to go and see Mrs. Bransby was met by her
aunt with an absolute refusal; but she was so urgent, and appealed so
strongly to her uncle, that Mrs. Dormer-Smith, making a virtue of
necessity (for she feared that if leave were refused May might go
without it), graciously consented that her niece should pay one visit to
Mrs. Bransby.

"One visit will be enough, May," said Aunt Pauline. "Quite enough to
show that you feel kindly towards her, and that sort of thing. It is
really stretching a point. However, if it must be, it must be. I only
implore you not to talk about these people in society. Pray, _pray_ do
not _poser_ as a district visitor, or whatever it is called."

May shrugged her shoulders, and was silent. She knew how vain it was to
reason with Aunt Pauline on a point of this kind; but she comforted
herself by looking forward to the time--very near now--when Owen would
return, and when, in some mysterious way, not explicable to her head,
but quite sufficing to her heart, all her difficulties would vanish
before his presence. And that same afternoon she set off to Collingwood
Place, Barnsbury Road, in a cab, attended by Smithson.

Mrs. Bransby received her affectionately, and thanked her for her visit;
but she did not ask her to repeat it. She perceived, far more quickly
than May had perceived it, that Mrs. Dormer-Smith would not like her
niece to keep up any intimacy with a family who lived in Barnsbury, and
were served by one maid-of-all-work. When the children clung round May,
and clamoured to know when she was coming to see them again, Mrs.
Bransby interposed. She told them that May could not be running in and
out of their house in London as she had done in Oldchester; and they
must understand she could not take up the time of her aunt's maid in
making long journeys to Barnsbury. And she said privately to May--

"Don't get into trouble with your aunt by coming here, my dear. I know
you would help us if you could; but you cannot. But I ought not to say
that! It is helpful to know you are unchanged, and warm-hearted as ever.
Some day, please God, we may be able to see each freely."

"Yes; some day!" cried May joyfully, thinking of him who would help to
make that and all the other good things possible. And then she coloured
vividly, as though she had betrayed a secret.

Mrs. Bransby, however, did not notice this. She went on pensively, "And
yet I am almost afraid to look forward to any pleasant thing lest it
should be snatched away from me. Misfortune makes one a sad coward. I
have had a disappointment just lately--about Mr. Rivers. He is not
coming back so soon as was expected."

"He is coming back at the end of this month," said May in a quick,
almost breathless way.

"No. He _was_ to have returned to England at the end of December, but
that is altered. His present engagement is prolonged for some weeks. I
had a letter from him last evening from Barcelona, and he does not
expect to be in England before the latter part of January at the
soonest."

May drove homeward much depressed and out of spirits. It was not only
that Owen's return was postponed, but that she had not been the first to
hear of it! To be sure, his weekly letter was not yet due, and he was
rigidly scrupulous in keeping his promise to Mrs. Dobbs about
corresponding with May. But need he have volunteered to give this news
to Mrs. Bransby before writing it to her? A dull feeling of discontent
seemed to oppress her; but on reaching home she tried to shake it off,
and to forget it in fighting her friend's battle against Aunt Pauline.

Aunt Pauline had constructed for herself an image of Mrs. Bransby
founded on Theodore's hints. She had decided in her own mind that Mrs.
Bransby was a weak-minded, lounging, lazy woman, who, no longer able to
adorn herself with fine clothes, would sink into slattern-hood, and
throw herself and her family as a dead weight on to any shoulders who
would carry them.

"A woman belonging to the provincial middle-class, who thinks of nothing
but dress," said Mrs. Dormer-Smith, shaking her head mournfully. "One
knows what _that_ must come to!"

"But Mrs. Bransby thought of a great many things besides dress!" cried
May. "She thought of her household, and her children, and, above all, of
her husband."

Mrs. Dormer-Smith merely shook her head again, with an air of mild
martyrdom, as though some one were unjustly accusing _her_.

"And I assure you, Aunt Pauline," May continued, "that the little house
she is living in--poor and humble, of course, in comparison with her old
home--is a pattern of neatness."

"You say 'poor and humble,' May; but do you not think that a house at
forty-five pounds a year is quite as good as she has any right to
expect, under the circumstances? _I_ do. And that poor young Bransby has
to be responsible for the rent."

"I am sure Mrs. Bransby won't let him be out of pocket, if she can
possibly help it."

"I dare say. But she is a sadly unpractical person."

"It was most touching to see her with all those children about her,
trying to be cheerful and composed; and looking so lovely in her
melancholy mourning dress."

"I presume she wears crape? Ah! There's no more extravagant wear. She
might have one dress trimmed with crape for occasions; but her ordinary
everyday frocks ought to be of plain black stuff. Hemstitched muslin
collars and cuffs, perhaps," added Mrs. Dormer-Smith, relenting at the
image of uncompromising ugliness she had herself conjured up. "But they
can be made at home, and need not cost much. Has she any lodgers?"

"No, not yet. But there has been very little time. And it is difficult,
she says, to find suitable persons."

"Yes, that is precisely the kind of thing one would expect her to say.
That is the speech of a thoroughly unpractical person."

"The fact is," burst out May hotly, "it is unpractical to be poor! It is
unpractical to be left a widow, with five children, and only a miserable
pittance to keep them on!"

It was intolerable to hear Aunt Pauline sitting in judgment on this poor
lady, of whom she really knew nothing whatever save her misfortunes. And
May was greatly astonished at the glib way in which her aunt, usually so
prosaically matter-of-fact, discoursed about Mrs. Bransby, putting in
visionary details with a lavish fancy. The girl had yet to learn that
the most narrow and commonplace minds are capable of wild exaggeration
within their own sphere, and that to be unimaginative is no guarantee
for truthfulness of perception.

Mrs. Dormer-Smith, whatever her defects might be, possessed almost
perfect gentleness of temper. She merely said softly, "May, May, when
will you understand that nothing can be worse form than that habit of
raving about people? You are so dreadfully emphatic!"

"I don't care a straw about what you call 'good form'! I prefer good
substance," answered May, still in a glow of indignation.

"My dear child, what does this woman matter to you?"

"Matter! She is my friend. She has always been kind to me; and even if
she were not my friend, I would defend her against unfair accusations."

Mrs. Dormer-Smith was silent for a few minutes. Then she said, in her
slow, somewhat muffled tones, "May, you compel me to say what I would
rather leave unsaid. Mrs. Bransby is not the kind of person your uncle
and I wish you to associate with. I do not assert that there has been
anything positively wrong in her conduct. Now oblige me by listening
quietly! If you start up in that melodramatic way, you will bring on one
of my nervous headaches. I was merely going to remark that a woman so
handsome as I am told she is, and so very much younger than her husband,
ought, in the most ordinary view of what is _convenable_, to avoid
anything like--like seeking to attract men's admiration, and that sort
of thing. But instead of that, Mrs. Bransby carried on a very flagrant
flirtation during her husband's lifetime with a young man considerably
her junior. It was noticed, of course, and commented on. If she was so
led away by foolish vanity when she had a sensible husband to guide her,
what will it be now that she is left to her own devices?"

May stood staring at her aunt like one suddenly awakened out of sleep.
"This is all false," she said, after a moment; "false, and very cruel.
Who told you such things, Aunt Pauline?"

"I decline to tell you, May. Some one who has had the means of knowing
what went on in this Bransby household, and some one whose judgment I
can trust. It must suffice to assure you that I am quite certain of my
facts." And, strange, as it may seem, Mrs. Dormer-Smith really thought
she was certain of them.

May turned away contemptuously. "Mrs. Bransby is really very much to
blame," she said. "It is bad enough to be poor and unprotected, but to
be the most beautiful woman in all her circle of acquaintance as well,
is not to be forgiven!"

Then May left her aunt's presence, and betook herself to her own room,
where she locked the door and burst out crying. These calumnies were
bewildering. She sat on the side of her bed for more than an hour, in a
drooping posture, depressed and miserable. As she thought over her
aunt's words, the belief flashed into her mind that Mrs. Dormer-Smith's
informant must have been Constance Hadlow. She did not suspect Constance
of having deliberately invented stories to the poor widow's discredit;
but she did think that Constance had repeated them, and that they had
lost none of their venom in her repetition. It chanced that on that very
morning her aunt had spoken of a letter just received from Miss Hadlow;
and May knew very well the sort of gossip which made up the staple of
that correspondence. Not for one moment did her suspicions point to
Theodore. The idea that he could have originated odious insinuations
against his father's wife was inconceivable to her. But Conny----She had
observed latterly a tendency in Conny to bitterness and detraction when
speaking of Mrs. Bransby. Was she jealous? And why? When they talked of
Mrs. Bransby's flirtations with a man younger than herself, whom did
they allude to?

All at once May drew herself sharply into an upright attitude, while a
burning flush covered her face and throat. She dashed away some stray
tears with her handkerchief, and exclaimed, speaking out loud in her
excitement, "I will not _think_ of such mean, malicious, despicable
folly! I will turn my mind away from it. It is shameful even to be
conscious of anything so base-minded!"




CHAPTER XV.


Two days after May's interview with Mrs. Bransby, Owen's weekly letter
arrived. In it he informed her of the unexpected postponement of his
return; and he mentioned having written this news to Mrs. Bransby in
answer to a letter from her appealing to him for help and advice. But he
did not expend many words on the Bransby family. He had to keep May
minutely informed of his own doings, and of his prospects, so far as he
could judge of them. And whatsoever time and space remained at his
disposal when this was accomplished was devoted to a theme which touched
him more nearly than the fortunes of gentle Louisa Bransby--although his
regard for her was very real. Owen was deeply in love, and wrote
love-letters. And that species of composition does not deal with
circumstantial and connected narrative--at any rate, about third
persons.

But although Owen did not return to England at the end of December, Mr.
Bragg did. He appeared one day in Mrs. Dormer-Smith's drawing-room, when
he was received by that lady with marked graciousness, and by May with a
changing colour and shy eagerness which he might have been excused for
misinterpreting.

Mrs. Dormer-Smith was delighted. May's behaviour appeared to her to be
just what it ought to be. Uncle Frederick, too, who happened to be at
home--for Mr. Bragg called at so unfashionably an early hour that the
master of the house had not yet gone out to his club--had reason to be
gratified. He took the opportunity of consulting Mr. Bragg as to a
little investment he purposed making. And Mr. Bragg, while dissuading
him from that particular investment, spontaneously offered to put his
money into "a good thing" for him.

"I make it a rule not to advise people in general about such matters,"
said Mr. Bragg. "The responsibility's too great; not to mention that if
it once, what you might call got wind that I did give such advice, I
should have my time took up altogether with other people's business. And
I don't see the force of that."

"Of course not! Most inconsiderate!" murmured Mr. Dormer-Smith.

"But I reserve the right to make exceptions now and then," continued Mr.
Bragg. "And I shall be happy to be of use to you."

All this while no word had been said about Owen. May's secret
consciousness made her too bashful to introduce his name. But at length
Mr. Bragg mentioned it of his own accord. It was in speaking of Mr.
Bransby's death. Mr. Bragg expressed kindly sympathy with the widow, and
added--

"She has one good friend, poor soul, anyway. My secretary takes the
greatest interest in her. You know him, Miss Cheffington--Mr. Owen
Rivers."

"Yes," answered May, in as constrained a tone as though the subject were
distasteful to her. Yet the poor child was longing with all her heart to
speak of Owen, and to hear him spoken of.

"To be sure you do. We used to meet him at the Miss Pipers' pretty well
every evening, didn't we? Besides, he's a cousin of your great friend,
Miss Hadlow."

"Oh, of course!" exclaimed Mrs. Dormer-Smith, with a sudden remembrance
of that relationship, and a consequent increase of interest in Owen,
whom personally she knew but very slightly. "A cousin of Constance
Hadlow's! Yes, yes; I recall it now. Mrs. Griffin told me that his
grandfather, who married a Lespoony----" She stopped, remembering that
family genealogy was a subject not likely to be specially agreeable to
Mr. Bragg, and asked that gentleman sweetly, "How do you like him? Does
he do well?"

"First rate!" answered Mr. Bragg emphatically.

May coloured with pleasure, and turned aside her face, to hide a broad,
childlike smile which stole over it.

"First rate," repeated Mr. Bragg. "He gives full satisfaction. Not but
what there are little what you may call _twists_ in him here and there.
He's peculiar in some ways. But I never did expect angels from heaven to
come down and do office-work for me. I consider myself lucky if I get
honesty and fair industry. Now, Mr. Rivers is more than honest--he's
honourable."

"Isn't that a distinction without a difference in this case?" asked Mr.
Dormer-Smith lightly.

"Well, no; I don't think so," answered Mr. Bragg in his slow, pondering
way. "You see, honesty makes a capital slow-combustion kind of fire, but
if you want a white heat you must have honour. I can't express myself
quite clear, but I have it in my mind."

"And so Mr. Rivers takes a great interest in this Mrs. Bransby," said
Pauline. Her thoughts had been busy with this point ever since Mr. Bragg
had uttered the words. And she was pleased that May should hear
something like corroboration of the charge against Mrs. Bransby.

"Uncommon. He's quite what you might call devoted to her."

"She's a deuced pretty woman, isn't she?" put in Mr. Dormer-Smith, with
a little knowing laugh.

Mr. Bragg replied, with perfect seriousness, "Mrs. Bransby is a lady of
great personal attractions, and, so far as I know of her, most amiable.
I'm sorry to hear she's left in poor circumstances. Martin Bransby seems
to have made most imprudent speculations. If he'd have come to me, poor
man, I could have given him some useful warnings; and would have done
it, too. I'd have made one of my exceptions in his favour."

Mrs. Dormer-Smith's interest in the deceased Martin Bransby was too
slight to enchain her attention. When the widow was no longer being
spoken of, Pauline's thoughts flew off rapidly to the fashion and
texture of May's wedding-dress (which had already haunted her solitary
musings), and to the question whether Mr. Bragg would be likely to do
anything for her boy Cyril, who was just about to be entered at the
University. But her eyes remained fixed with a politely attentive look
on Mr. Bragg, and, when he ceased speaking, she murmured plaintively, as
being a safe thing to say, "That is so good of you!"

As soon as Mr. Bragg was gone, May sat down to write an account of his
visit to Owen. Her heart swelled with pride as she repeated to him Mr.
Bragg's words about himself. Indeed, she was so enthusiastic about Mr.
Bragg, that Owen jestingly told her in his next letter that he was
growing jealous of his "master"--so he always termed Mr. Bragg.

It was out of the question that May should hint to Owen a word of the
unkind things which were said of Mrs. Bransby. She could not bring her
pen to write them. It seemed to her as if she could never even speak
them to him. But she said all the most sympathetic and affectionate
things she could think of about the poor widow and her children, being
inspired by the malicious gossip only to a more chivalrous warmth on her
friend's behalf. But yet--that gossip was like a barbed seed that clings
where it alights, and could not wholly be shaken out of her memory. If
she could but have spoken with granny! She could not write all the
confused feelings that were in her mind. To have tried to do so would
have seemed almost like hinting something which might be construed into
a doubt of Owen! But if she could speak, with her living voice,
granny--who loved her so much, and would listen with such understanding
ears--would surely find the right words to conjure away the oppression
which weighed on her spirits! She was ashamed of not feeling so happy as
she had felt three weeks ago. And yet it was impossible to deny that a
cloud--light and filmy, but still a cloud--had come between her and the
sun. She was very lonely. Sometimes she was startled by the sudden
recognition of how completely aloof she was in spirit from the beings
around her.

Next to Owen's letters, her little cousins were her chief comfort. She
had them with her as much as possible, helping them with their lessons,
and joining in their play. Their brother Cyril being now at home from
Harrow, the younger children received even less than the scanty share of
her attention which their mother had ever vouchsafed to them. Mr.
Dormer-Smith was a good deal engrossed by his eldest son; and Harold and
Wilfred would have been forlorn indeed, at this time, but for Cousin
May. Yes, the children were a great comfort to her; and, after them, she
liked Mr. Bragg's society better than that of most people! He was so
closely associated with Owen.

Mr. Bragg had become a frequent and familiar guest at the Dormer-Smiths'
house. Uncle Frederick highly valued his advice and assistance in
financial matters, while Aunt Pauline was never tired of repeating his
praises. Only--as she privately complained to her husband--he "hung
fire" a little.

"Why in the world he shouldn't speak out, I cannot conjecture," said
she, with that soft, suffering expression of countenance, which Mr.
Bragg's assiduous visits had recently banished for as much as two or
three days together. "It really is not May's fault this time. Nothing
could be nicer than she is to him. I should be uneasy about the
Hautenvilles, but that they are spending the winter at Rome. And
besides, Mrs. Griffin assured me that he wouldn't _look_ at Felicia. In
fact, he told her in plain terms that Miss Cheffington was the one young
lady he admired. Dear Mrs. Griffin! I shall never forget what a friend
she has been all through the affair. And the dear duchess! But really,
Mr. Bragg does hang fire most unaccountably! I think it is beginning to
tell on May herself a little. She mopes. Now, that is a _very_ serious
matter, for her complexion is of the delicate kind which will not stand
worry."

The new year opened dark and damp in London. But the external gloom did
not quench social gaiety, of which there was a good deal going on at
this time. Mrs. Dormer-Smith entered into it, and insisted on May's
entering into it, as much as possible. She reflected that this would be
the last year during which she would have the assistance of May's
allowance, and that it would be well to profit by it to the utmost while
it lasted. The allowance was never expended in any way by which May
could not benefit. For example, if Mrs. Dormer-Smith were going to a
dinner-party without her niece, she would not spend May's money on the
hire of a carriage to save her own hard-worked brougham horse; but when
May accompanied her she would do so. And on such occasions she would
indulge in some little extra elegance of dress, on the plea (quite
genuinely preferred) that she _must_ be decently dressed in the girl's
interests.

In spite of Theodore Bransby's recent mourning they frequently met in
society.

"It is my duty to keep up my social connections," he would say to Mrs.
Dormer-Smith, with a grave, resigned air. And no one could have more
fully appreciated and approved the sentiment than she did.

Theodore travelled rather frequently backwards and forwards between
London and Oldchester in these days. He was busy in the neighbourhood of
his native city, preparing the ground for his political campaign; while
he was constantly attracted to London by the hope of seeing May. He had
discovered that Mrs. Bransby wrote sometimes to Owen Rivers, and he
frequently volunteered to give her items of news about May, which he
thought and hoped she might transmit to Spain. Miss Cheffington had sat
near him at Lady A.'s dinner-party; he had escorted Miss Cheffington and
her aunt to Mrs. B.'s _soiree musicale_; Mrs. C. had given him a seat in
her box at the theatre--where he met Miss Cheffington; and so forth.

"Miss Cheffington appears to be very gay!" said Mrs. Bransby once, with
a sigh, not envious, but regretful; her own life was so dull and dark.

"Miss Cheffington is very much in the world, of course. Her birth and
her beauty entitle her to a good deal of attention, and she gets it. I
see no objection to that. On the contrary, it delights me that she
should be admired."

His step-mother stared at him in sudden surprise.

"Theodore!" she exclaimed impulsively. "There is nothing between you and
May, is there?"

He drew himself up, and answered in as coldly offended a tone as though
he had not desired, and even angled for, that very question. "Excuse me,
Mrs. Bransby, but I do not think it well to use a young lady's name in
that way. It is too delicate a matter to be handled at all in its
present stage."

"Don't you believe him, mother," said Martin when Theodore had gone
away. "May Cheffington isn't likely to think of _him_."

"I don't know, Martin. It may not seem likely to us, because----"

"Because we know what Theodore is," interposed Martin boldly.

His mother let that suggestion lie, but she said, "You must remember, my
boy, that Theodore has many qualities which--which----He is very well
educated, and clever, and gentlemanlike."

"No; that he is _not_!" put in the irrepressible Martin.

"And he probably has a distinguished career before him. Besides, he is
rich now, you know."

"As if May would care for _that_!" exclaimed Martin, with innocently
lofty disdain.

"Her friends might care for it for her," answered Mrs. Bransby
thoughtfully.

She had fallen into the habit of consulting with Martin on all kinds of
subjects. Sometimes she reproached herself for harassing the boy with
cares and questions beyond his years. But, in truth, it would have been
impossible at that time to keep Martin from sharing her cares; and the
pride of being allowed to share her counsels also, more than made him
amends.

Mrs. Bransby had a lodger now--a lodger who was the incubus of her life.
He was an elderly German, engaged in the City; and, besides occupying
the chamber which Theodore had ordained must be let if possible, he
breakfasted with the family every day, and dined with them on Sundays.
The man was vulgar, greedy, and sullen in his manners. His habits at
table, without being absolutely gross, were revolting to Mrs. Bransby's
refinement. And his exigencies on the score of the Sunday dinner were
such as to keep her in constant anxiety, and to excite boundless
indignation in Phoebe. Phoebe, indeed, so detested Mr. Bucher, that
Mrs. Bransby was occasionally reduced to beg for a cessation of
hostilities; and (very much against the grain) to plead Mr. Bucher's
cause even with tears in her eyes.

Such being the state of things, it can well be imagined with what an
ebullition of joy Mrs. Bransby hailed a letter from Owen Rivers,
announcing his approaching arrival in London, and proposing himself to
her as a lodger. He would like, he said, to board entirely with the
family, and offered terms which Mrs. Bransby feared were almost too
generous. Martin, it is needless to say, enthusiastically welcomed the
idea of having Owen Rivers to live with them. And Phoebe's delight in
the prospect of Mr. Bucher's being speedily superseded, made her
volunteer to prepare his favourite pudding on the very next Sunday,
although hitherto she had obstinately professed the blankest ignorance
of its composition.

Before, however, giving the unpopular Mr. Bucher notice to quit her
house, Mrs. Bransby thought herself bound to consult Theodore. Her mind
misgave her lest Theodore, who, as she knew, detested Owen Rivers,
should strongly set his face against receiving him; and she wrote her
letter to her stepson in considerable trepidation. But, to her surprise,
she speedily received an answer entirely approving the plan. It was not
gracious; Theodore was never gracious to her. But that was a small
matter in comparison with obtaining his consent to the arrangement, and
this consent was unmistakably given.

"I believe," he wrote, "that you will be justified in taking Rivers for
a lodger, if you wish it. I meet his employer, Mr. Bragg, very
frequently at the house of Mrs. Dormer-Smith, and he apparently intends
to retain Rivers in his service--at all events, for the present. You
will, therefore, I should say, be quite sure of regular payments."

So Owen's offer was joyfully and gratefully accepted.

He had, of course, written to tell May as nearly as possible the time of
his arrival in England, but he had not mentioned his scheme of living at
the Bransbys, fearing lest it might not be practicable. He did not, in
fact, receive Mrs. Bransby's reply to his proposal until he was on his
way home. He found it addressed, as he had directed Mrs. Bransby, to the
"Poste Restante" in Paris, where he spent one day on business for Mr.
Bragg. And thus it chanced that the first intimation which May received
of the matter came from Theodore Bransby.

He was dining at the Dormer-Smiths'. Mr. Bragg was there also. It was
what Mrs. Dormer-Smith called "a _very_ quiet little dinner--just one or
two people, quite cosily," and had been given simply and solely for Mr.
Bragg. There was but one other guest, Lady Moppett. Mrs. Dormer-Smith
did not consider Lady Moppett to be worth cultivating. She was rich, but
not "in the best set." Moreover, she had a craze for music. Mrs.
Dormer-Smith's private sentiment about all the Arts was akin to that of
the Turkish potentate who inquired at a ball why they did not make their
slaves dance for them, instead of taking all that trouble themselves!
She considered, in fact, that the Muses ought to be kept in their
places. But she would never have uttered any word approaching to such a
Boeotian phrase. She had an almost perfect taste in phrases. There,
however, sat Lady Moppett at her dinner-table. Mr. Dormer-Smith had
stipulated for "some human being to speak to." Mr. Bragg must, of
course, be left to May, and Mr. Dormer-Smith could not endure young
Bransby. Theodore was not generally popular with his own sex, but
Pauline had quite reinstated him in her good graces. And, indeed, how
was it possible not to feel agreeably towards a young man whom Lord
Castlecombe himself delighted to honour?

Lady Moppett was an old acquaintance of her host's, as has been stated.
And, except on the subject of music, she was a good-humoured woman
enough; making amends for the inflexible rigidity of her dogma as to the
divine art by a rather broad indulgence towards the merely moral
shortcomings of her fellow-creatures. Mr. Dormer-Smith led her out to
dinner. Mr. Bragg, of course, conducted his hostess; and Theodore,
therefore, had to give May his arm to the dining-room. There was no help
for that. But the party was small and the table was round, and Mr. Bragg
would not be far sundered from May. And once in the drawing-room, Aunt
Pauline would take care that he should have abundant opportunities for
private conversation with her niece.

May endured Theodore's proximity far more graciously than would have
been the case three months ago. He was not naturally quick at discerning
the effect he produced on others, nor careful to spare their feelings.
But Love stimulates the perceptions in a wonderful way. Prosaic though
his subjects may be, the Arch-Magician has lost nothing of his cunning;
and under his potent influence Theodore Bransby developed some little
sympathetic insight into May's feelings. He even divined that part of
her new, soft kindliness of manner towards himself was due to pity for
his bereavement. And he had learned in a more unmistakeable way--for she
had told him so--that she approved his care of his step-mother and young
brothers and sisters. Theodore was pretty safe in vaunting his
disinterested efforts on their behalf. Mrs. Bransby and May were
effectually kept apart, and neither of them suspected that this was
chiefly his doing.

He now, as he sat by May's side, had something in his mind which he
greatly desired she should hear. But some feeling, unaccountable to
himself--or, at least, which he did not choose to account for--made him
hesitate to utter it to her directly. At length, in a little pause of
the conversation, he bent slightly forward towards Mr. Bragg, who sat
opposite to him, and said--

"I suppose you do not propose returning to Spain, Mr. Bragg?"

"Me? Oh no. I don't think I've any call to do so. And there's plenty for
me to look after elsewhere."

"Of course! Transactions on such a colossal scale! When I heard that
Rivers was coming back to London, I concluded that you had wound up the
business which took you to Spain."

"Mr. Rivers has been very helpful to me, indeed. I feel myself under an
obligation to him."

To say the truth, Mr. Bragg was impelled to offer this testimony--even
at the cost of dragging it in somewhat inopportunely--by his lively
remembrance of sundry spiteful speeches made by young Bransby in former
times; but rather to his surprise, Theodore did not now seek to divert
the conversation from Owen's praises.

"Yes; Rivers has come out wonderfully well, I understand," said
Theodore. "I hear a good deal about him. He is in constant
correspondence with Mrs. Bransby; as, perhaps, you know?"

"Oh!" said Mr. Bragg quietly. "No; I can't say I know it. By the way, I
do call to mind Mrs. Bransby sending me a letter for him some time ago.
Well, he may be in correspondence with her."

"Oh, he _is_. I have reason to know it, for I think he is the sole topic
of conversation at my step-mother's house just now. The whole family are
in a fever of excitement about his coming to live with them."

Without turning his head, or even glancing at May, he felt that she was
listening with a new and suddenly concentrated attention; and he said to
himself, with a glow of elation, "_She_ did not know it."

"Ah! Really?" said Mr. Bragg, addressing himself to his dinner. The
matter did not seem to him one of any very special interest. If young
Rivers went to lodge at Mrs. Bransby's, it would probably be a good
arrangement for both.

"Who's that? Anybody I know?" asked Lady Moppett from her place at the
host's right hand.

Theodore answered, "I was merely speaking of a man named Rivers,
who----"

"Owen Rivers? Oh, of course I know him. A dreadful heretic! He
enunciates the most intolerable, old-fashioned stuff! And he's so
frightfully obstinate; battles, and argues one down, positively! I
really have no patience. But what about him? Is he going to be married?"

"Not that I know of," replied Theodore, with his correct air, and an odd
effect, as though his white cravat and shirt-front had been suddenly
petrified.

"Oh, I beg your pardon. I thought you said something of the sort."

"By Jove, more unlikely things have happened," put in Mr. Dormer-Smith
jocosely. "He's exposing himself to a tremendous fire. Dangerous work
for a fellow to live under the roof of a lovely and captivating woman
who sets him up as a kind of 'guide, philosopher, and friend,'--eh?"

"Dangerous! I should think the end of _that_ arrangement is a foregone
conclusion!" exclaimed Lady Moppett. "Mr. Rivers is a very agreeable
young fellow--when he isn't talking about music. But who's your 'lovely
and captivating woman?' Does anybody know her?"

There was an instant's pause, during which Pauline cast an expressive
glance of the most poignant reproach at her husband. Then Theodore
answered very gravely, "Mr. Dormer-Smith was merely jesting. The lady is
Mrs. Martin Bransby--my father's widow."

END OF VOL. II.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of That Unfortunate Marriage, Vol. 2(of 3), by
Frances Eleanor Trollope

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THAT UNFORTUNATE MARRIAGE ***

***** This file should be named 35944.txt or 35944.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/9/4/35944/

Produced by Delphine Lettau, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
