Project Gutenberg's Ku Klux Klan Secrets Exposed, by Ezra Asher Cook

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Ku Klux Klan Secrets Exposed
       Attitude toward Jews, Catholics, Foreigners and Masons.
       Fraudulent Methods Used. Atrocities Committed in Name of
       Order.

Author: Ezra Asher Cook

Release Date: April 27, 2011 [EBook #35976]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KU KLUX KLAN SECRETS EXPOSED ***




Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has     |
    | been preserved.                                           |
    |                                                           |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. For     |
    | a complete list, please see the end of this document.     |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




  KU KLUX KLAN

  SECRETS EXPOSED

  Attitude toward Jews, Catholics, Foreigners
  and Masons. Fraudulent
  Methods Used. Atrocities
  Committed in Name
  of Order.

  EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
  (Incorporated)
  26 E. Van Buren St.    CHICAGO




  COPYRIGHT APPLIED
  FOR 1922




CONTENTS


                                                             Page

  The Old Ku Klux Klan                                          5

  The New Ku Klux Klan                                         21

  How the Modern Ku Klux Klan Was Organized                    25

  How the Ku Klux Klan Gets Members                            29

  Oath of the Ku Klux Klan                                     32

  The Old Pledge of Loyalty                                    38

  Modern Kleagles Pledge of Loyalty                            39

  How the Dollars Roll In                                      40

  The Ku Klux Klan and the Jews                                43

  The Ku Klux Klan and the Catholics                           46

  The Ku Klux Klan and the Masons                              55

  The Ku Klux Klan and the Negroes                             58

  The Ku Klux Klan and Women                                   60

  Atrocities Committed in the Name of the Order                62




KU KLUX KLAN SECRETS EXPOSED




CHAPTER I

THE OLD KU KLUX KLAN


To the old Ku-Klux Klan which rode through the south in the days
following the civil war the new Ku-Klux Klan is a relative only in
name.

It is not tied by blood. It holds the same position to its southern
aristocratic forbear as an imposter in social life does to some
illustrious gentleman of the same name of whom he claims to be a
descendant.

The old Ku-Klux Klan was a historical development. The new is a man's
contrivance. The old Ku-Klux Klan movement was an outcome of
conditions that prevailed in the southern states after the war. The
present Klan, apparently, is an outcome of a group of men's desire to
make money.

Widespread, spontaneous, popular, the movement of 1866 grew out of a
disordered society, not as a "movement" at all at first, but as a
scheme for having fun, a source of amusement among a group of young,
full-blooded southern men to puzzle outsiders. Its use as a weapon
against the stranger in the old south came later.

The "stranger" was the northern carpetbagger. To the south he was the
pestilence that follows war. He was the blunderer who entered the land
whose social customs were unknown to him, in a year when the fabric by
those social customs was in need of mending.


NO RELIGIOUS TEST

When southern society seized the Ku-Klux Klan as an instrument with
which to resist there were only two classes, carpet-bagger and unruly
negro, against which it operated. To join the ranks of the white-robed
horsemen, there were no qualifications of religion. The Klan made no
mention of Jew or Catholic. Its purpose was to restore order, not to
fan prejudice, and therein lies the difference between the old Klan
and the present Klan which makes the latter a maverick.

The first unit of the horseback riding knights was founded in the
village of Pulaski, Tenn., with the same motive for its organization
as the old-time college hazing society. Its members were young men who
had come back from the war, poor, exhausted, discouraged, and bored
with the tameness of a country town.


HOW IT STARTED

According to the story which has lived south of the Mason and Dixon
line since those post-bellum days, a group of youths cooling their
heels in a law office one May evening in 1866 organized a society for
a good time. If anyone had suggested to them at that time that five
years later a committee of congress would devote thirteen volumes to a
history of their "movement" and pass a law to suppress it, or that
before the child of their wits was fully grown it would have developed
into a terrorizing "hobgoblin" sheeted for lawlessness, they would
have thought it a jest.

When their mere joke had become a grim joke, neighbors who feared it
found in its name "Ku-Klux" the suggestion of a clicking rifle. But
the name itself was proposed by its charter members in Tennessee as a
derivative of the Greek word "Kuklos," meaning a circle. From "Kuklos"
to "Ku-Klux" was an easy transition. The "Klan" followed because these
youthful students of Greek had an ear for the alliterative.

From the Pulaski law office the society migrated to a haunted house on
the outskirts of the village. Its members found their first source of
amusement in initiation rites. They named their chief officer a Grand
Cyclops and their vice president a Grand Magi. Other officers were the
Grand Turk, or marshal; a Grand Exchequer or treasurer, and two
Lictors.


WORE WHITE MASKS

The only germ in their constitution from which the "Imperial Wizard"
Simmons of the twentieth century Klan could breed his present
organization was the promise of absolute secrecy. For his copying
years later, the first Klan also contrived a disguise. It consisted of
a white mask, a tall cardboard hat, a gown or robe, and for the night
riding excursions, a cover for the horses' bodies and mufflers for
their feet.

Only after the Pulaski organization had entertained itself for many
nights did the phenomenon present itself which was to make the Klan a
weapon in the progress of post-war reconstruction. It was the
discovery that the African negro was twice as fearful of mysticism and
mystery as the white man. It taught the white men of Tennessee and
neighboring states that they had a means of their own of preventing
what they considered political mismanagement and social insolence in
the control by northerners and freedmen of the state government.


BECOMES MILITARY ORGANIZATION

The Pulaski riders made themselves popular. Young men of neighboring
towns organized brother Klans. When southern society found itself a
Humpty Dumpty fallen from the wall, it grasped the Pulaski idea as the
means for pulling itself up again. The Klan became a military
organization, with the purpose of keeping order among the negroes by
intimidating them. Mysticism in the order grew. Humor grew with it,
and by the time the states of the north discovered that the south had
an organization which was in purpose a society of regulators, the
young southern war veterans were donning their white robes and
cardboard hats with a human skull and two thigh bones as the symbols
of allegiance.

The oath which the grand cyclops administered has been preserved in
southern diaries and documents. It was taken in a solemn manner as the
knights were grouped amid the bones. The oath follows.

    "We (or I, as the case might be) do solemnly swear before
    Almighty God and these witnesses, and looking upon these human
    bones, that I will obey and carry into effect every order made
    by any cyclops or assistant cyclops, and if I fail strictly to
    conform and execute every order made, as above required of me,
    unless I am prevented from some cause which shall be no fault of
    mine, or if I shall give any information to any person or
    persons except members of this order, that the doom of all
    traitors shall be meted out to me, and that my bones may become
    as naked and dry as the bones I am looking upon. And I take this
    oath voluntarily, without any mental reservation or evasion
    whatever, for the causes set out in said order, so help me God."

Ku-Klux horsemen who rode white-sheeted through the south in the
nights of 1866 regarded themselves as upholders of sectional
patriotism.

They considered themselves the spiritual descendants of the New
Englanders who threw the English tea overboard into Boston harbor
nearly 100 years before. Their protests, and the acts of intimidation
by which they enforced their protests were against the white
"carpetbagger" from the north, the negro freedman to whom liberty
meant arrogant office-holding, and the "scalawag," by which terms they
designated those deserters from the southern aristocracy who had
joined the ranks of the northern stranger.

The second stage came within a year after the secret body had its
birth, when the band of burlesquers became a band of regulators.

To the south, the reconstruction acts which congress passed in 1867
were pernicious. The one-time white confederate soldier believed that
the congressional legislation made official mismanagement permanent.
He saw negroes organized into the militia. He saw his former slaves
voting twice and thrice at elections where he himself had to pass,
literally, under bayonets to reach the polls. He disliked the
freedman's bureau, which substituted northern alien machinery for the
old patriarchal relation between white employer and black employe. He
heard drunken negroes at his gates in the night. He saw the
"carpetbagger" urging upon the freedman civic rights which he knew the
latter was not educated enough to perform.


FIRST OBJECTS POLITICAL

These were the prejudices against which the original Ku-Klux Klan
threw itself. They were surface indications of an historical
development. They had nothing to do with the racial and religious
biases which the present Klan attempted to propagate. To the present
Klan, the old Klan, in its first stage, was unrelated. In its second
stage it was related only in its methods of terrorism and its removal
of justice from the courts to the masques until its own leaders were
powerless to check it.

The Klan early fell a victim to the abuses inseparable from secrecy.
It happened that Tennessee, the birthplace of the hooded institution,
was also the first southern state to find itself turned upside down in
reconstruction. "Dem Ku-Kluxes," as the negro called the mysterious
union, became a band of regulators. Their first official convention
was held in Nashville early in 1867.

The Klan, which, until then, had been bound together only by the
deference which priority rights gave to the grand cyclops of the
parental Pulaski "den," was organized into the "Invisible Empire of
the South." It was ruled by a grand wizard of the whole empire, a
grand dragon of each realm, or state, a grand titan of each dominion,
or county, a grand cyclops of each den, and staff officers with names
as equally suggestive of Arabian Nights.


LAWS DEFINE OBJECTS

For the first time its laws defined serious objects. First was the
duty of protecting people, presumably white southerners, from
indignities and wrongs; second was the duty of succoring the
suffering, particularly among the families of dead confederate
soldiers; finally was the oath to defend "the constitution of the
United States and all laws passed in conformity thereto," and of the
states also, to aid in executing all constitutional laws, and to
protect the people from unlawful seizures and from trial otherwise
than by jury.

It is these purposes which Imperial Wizard Simmons of the modern clan
pretends to perpetuate, plus persecutions of Jews, Catholics and
negroes, while denying charges of terrorizing outbreaks.

The Nashville convention chose Gen. Nathan B. Forrest, the confederate
cavalry leader, as its supreme ruler. He is known to have increased
the membership of the hooded horsemen in the old south to 550,000.
Among his aides were Generals John B. Gordon, A.H. Colquitt, G.T.
Anderson, A.B. Lawton, W.J. Hardee, John C. Brown, George W. Gordon
and Albert Pike. The latter became one of the foremost authorities of
Masonry.

Terrorism spread, until during the political campaign which preceded
the 1868 presidential election, 2,000 persons were killed and injured
in Louisiana by Ku-Klux Klansmen, who rode at night, disguised as
freebooters, and according to James G. Blaine, defeated candidate for
the presidency at a later date, hesitated at no cruelty.

In the north, in the years immediately after the civil war, the
original Ku-Klux Klan was called a conspiracy.

In the south, where society was being ground in the mills of
reconstruction, the Klan started its midnight rovings as an instrument
of moral force. But within three years its period of usefulness, as
the white southerner saw it useful, was over.

Its founders had played with it as with an exciting bonfire. During
the months, however, when former confederate soldiers used it to
frighten away northern officeholders with oppressive tactics, it had
leaped in size until when the moment came for smothering it out its
leaders discovered it beyond control.

Not until the full fire department of federal and state law had been
called out did the Invisible Empire cease to operate.


TENNESSEE ACTS AGAINST IT

By 1872 the white-robed knights of midnight, whose purpose to enforce
law had in itself yielded to lawlessness, were for the most part
disappeared. But so, in one state after another, had the northern
carpetbagger and the southern scalawag.

Tennessee, where the Klan was founded, was the first to take
legislative action against it. In September, 1868, its legislature
passed a statute making membership in the Klan punishable by a fine of
$500 and imprisonment for not less than five years.

As a result, in February, 1869, Gen. Nathan B. Forrest, former cavalry
officer of the confederate army, who was grand wizard of the order,
officially proclaimed the Ku-Klux Klan and Invisible Empire dissolved
and disbanded forever.

But members of the adventurous law-assuming organization were
reluctant to yield their mysterious power.

The wizard's order went into effect. Klan property was burned.


NEW BANDS SPRING UP

But immediately in southern states, as far west as Arkansas, there
sprang up disguised bands, some of them neighborhood groups only,
some of them bands of ruffians who traveled in the night to win
personal ends, still others new orders founded in imitation of the
Ku-Klux and using similar methods.

Of the last, the Knights of the White Camellia was the largest. In
some private notebooks of the south its membership was said to be even
larger than the parent Klan.

From New Orleans early in 1868, it spread across to Texas and back to
the Carolinas. Racial supremacy was its purpose.

Only white men 18 years or older were invited to the secrets of its
initiation, and in their oath they promised not only to be obedient
and secret, but to "maintain and defend the social and political
superiority of the white race on this continent."

Initiates were enjoined, notwithstanding, to show fairness to the
negroes and to concede to them in the fullest measure "those rights
which we recognize as theirs."


"PALE FACES" AND OTHERS

Other bands of nightriders responded to the names of "Pale Faces,"
"White Leaguers," the "White Brotherhood" and the "Constitutional
Union Guards."

Surviving members are hazy as to their aims and methods, the character
of their membership, their members, and the connection between them.

Federal recognition that the Invisible Empire, whether it was the
original Klan or not, was everywhere a real empire came in the spring
of 1871, when a senate committee presented majority and minority
reports on the result of its investigations of the white man's will to
rule against the freedmen's militia in the south.

The majority report found that the Ku-Klux Klan was a criminal
conspiracy of a distinctly political nature against the laws and
against the colored citizens.

The minority found that Ku-Klux disorder and violence was due to
misgovernment and an exploitation of the states below the Mason and
Dixon line by radicals.


CONGRESS ACTS AGAINST KLAN

The first Ku-Klux bill was passed in April, 1871, "to enforce the
fourteenth amendment." Power of the president to use troops to put
down the white-hooded riders was hinted at.

In the next month the second Ku-Klux bill was passed to enforce "the
right of citizens in the United States to vote."

In 1872 federal troops were sent into the south to back up his
anti-Ku-Klux proclamation. By the end of 1872 the "conspiracy" was
thought to be overthrown.

At various times individuals in the south and elsewhere have tried to
put breath into the Klan's dead body.

It was left for "Grand Wizard" Simmons of Atlanta to accomplish it.
His new organization, he explains, is imbued with the Ku-Klux
"spirit."

"That this spirit may live always to warm the hearts of many men," he
says, "is the paramount ideal of the Knights of the Ku-Klux Klan."

President Grant answered: "Thou shalt not" to the Ku-Klux Klan in
1871. He backed up his word with armed troops.

During the whole of one session of congress senators and
representatives serving in Washington in the years just after the
civil war occupied themselves in stripping the masques off the
southern night-riders.

Into the country south of the Mason and Dixon line they dispatched
congressional investigators, whose duty it was to enter the "portals
of the invisible empire" and discover what was hiding behind them.
When they reported that the Ku-Klux Klan, decked out in the uniform of
ghosts, was waging midnight warfare on the negro and carpet-bagger
congress passed legislation which suppressed the order.


PUTS ROBES OUT OF FASHION

Action was quick. Almost before the government printing presses had
finished turning out ten volumes in which the committee recorded the
results of their investigation the white robes and hoods of the
Ku-Kluxes had gone out of fashion in the old south.

President Grant in 1871 was without precedent. His law enforcers, just
getting acquainted with the amendment which freed the slaves, were
without a statute to deal with the armed clique which proposed to keep
the negro down in the day by frightening him in the night. The
emergency bill which congress passed at that period empowers the
regular army or the navy to put down any unlawful combination which is
doing domestic violence.

When congress met for its forty-second session in 1871, the cross
bones and skull and coffin with which the Ku-Klux were marking their
threats had become the symbols of terrorism in the south. So grave was
the situation that speakers on the floor of the house, when the
session opened, classed the conspiracy of the Klan "less formidable,
but not less dangerous to American liberty" than the just-ended war of
the rebellion. They charged that as well as binding its members to
execute crimes against its opponents in the social-political life of
the south, it protected them against conviction and punishment by
perjury on the witness stand and in the jury box. Representatives
asked why, of all offenders, not one had been convicted.


PRESIDENT URGES ACTION

On March 23, 1871, President Grant sent a message to both houses in
which he recommended that all other business be postponed until the
Klan was made subservient to the flag.

"A condition of affairs now exists in some of the states of the Union
rendering life and property insecure and the carrying of the mails and
the collection of revenue dangerous," his message said. "The proof
that such a condition of affairs exists in some localities is now
before the senate. That the power to correct these evils is beyond the
control of the senate authorities I do not doubt; that the power of
the executive of the United States, acting within the limits of
existing laws is sufficient for present emergencies, is not clear.
Therefore, I urgently recommend such legislation as in the judgment of
congress shall effectually secure, life, liberty and property and the
enforcement of law in all parts of the United States. It may be
expedient to provide that such law as shall be passed in pursuance of
this recommendation shall expire at the end of the next session of
congress. There is no other subject on which I would recommend
legislation during the present session."


"FORCE BILL AT DISPOSAL"

The law which was at the disposal of President Harding was popularly
known as "the Force bill." Under congressional passage it was entitled
"An act to enforce the Fourteenth amendment of the constitution of the
United States and for other purposes." President Grant approved it
April 20, 1871.

It is aimed at two or more persons who conspire to use force and
intimidation "outside the law." It forbids them to go in disguise
along a public highway or upon the premises of another person for the
purpose, either directly or indirectly, of depriving that person of
equal privileges under the law. Punishment for the offense may be
imprisonment from six months to six years, a fine not less than $500,
nor more than $5,000, or both.

The act took particular action against the practice of the Klanists of
protecting each other in court. It provides that every man called for
service on a jury in a Klan case shall take oath in open court that he
is not a member of nor has ever aided or advised any such "unlawful,
combination or conspiracy."


DISGUISE IS BARRED

That individual was declared a violator of the law who shall "go in
disguise upon the public highway or upon the premises of another for
the purpose, either directly or indirectly, of depriving any person or
class of persons of the equal protection of the laws, or of equal
privileges or immunities under the laws, or by force, intimidation or
threat to prevent any citizen lawfully entitled to vote from giving
his support or advocacy in a lawful manner toward the election of any
lawfully qualified person for office."

The act states further: "That in all cases where insurrection,
domestic violence, unlawful combinations or conspiracies in any state
shall so obstruct or hinder the execution of the laws thereof, and of
the United States, as to deprive any portion or class of the people of
any rights, privileges or immunities or protection, and the
constituted authorities of such state shall either be unable to
protect, or shall fail in or refuse protection, it shall be unlawful
for the president, and it shall be his duty, to take such measures by
the employment of the militia or the land and naval forces of the
United States for the suppression of such insurrection."


"KU-KLUX" FILLS RECORDS

Pages of the Congressional Globe, as the present Congressional Record
was then called, were filled during the months before the passage of
this act with the word "Ku-Klux."

The verb "Kukluxed" became in the mouths of senators and
representatives arguing over the bill a synonym for "intimidated."
Friends of the nightriders termed them "modern knights of the Round
Table," and "conservators of law and order." Opponents on the floor of
the house advocated a policy of "amnesty for every rebel, hanging for
every Ku-Klux."

Black and white victims of the gun-toting ghosts were brought from
Tennessee, Georgia, Louisiana, Texas and other states where the Klan
rode to recount before the congressional committee the details of
their persecutions. Their accounts as the government documents
preserve them might well have been a primer, it has been said, for
the acts of later Lenines and Trotzkys.


REPORT OF OFFENSES VARIES

The report of the congressional committee is a recital varying from
mirth to murder. In one county the victim of the hooded Klan might be
an itinerant minister who had offended by teaching a negro mammy to
pray. Next door a Ku-Klux sign, with a coffin painted in blood, might
be hung over the dead body of a "bad" negro whose freedom had made him
officious.

One negro was whipped for stealing a beef. Another was tarred and
feathered because his daughter ran away from the white man who had
employed her.

Colored cooks were beaten for talking saucily to their southern
mistresses. Northern white women were threatened for hiring colored
cooks.


IGNORES NOTE, DIES

When a negro ignored a note carrying the Ku-Klux skull and cross bones
and voted "republican" instead of "conservative," his body, ornamented
with skull and bones in blood, might be found the next morning in the
middle of the road--lifeless.

The congressional minutes report a bold, public display of the Klan's
official orders. They might appear in a whisk of the wind on the post
office window. They might be pinned on a tree or pole or building. On
one occasion, when a member of the Klan was on trial in a county
court, a band of white masquers, riding through the courtyard on
horse, dropped a note addressed to the court, grand jury and sheriff.

"Go slow," it commanded. At the bottom was a drawing of a coffin and
on each side a rope. The signature was "K.K.K."

Ku-Klux rule in the south half a century ago was an attempt to govern
by masque.

Secret covenants arrived at by a sheeted brotherhood, veiled signs,
orders written in blood and posted at midnight on the victim's
door--by such means did the Klan substitute the masque for the ballot.

Congressional investigating committees who stripped the night-riding
organization of secrecy during the administration of President Grant,
were entertained during a session of congress by tales of lares and
lemures howling at night in fields or on crossroads, bad luck omens
for the negroes.


UNDER MARTIAL LAW

In organization the Klan was military, and its town, county and state
rule, as recorded in the Congressional Globe, operated as under
martial law.

As the revolt of the white southerner to colored and northern
domination reared itself into giant-size, towns under Klan domination
came to take their rule and law from the K.K.K. note, flapping in the
wind on a tree or fencepost, with the coffin on its signature, urging
that it be obeyed.


WARN CARPET BAGGERS

In South Carolina, according to the report of the federal committee,
townsfolk journeyed to the postoffice, not to get their mail, but to
read the daily Ku-Klux bulletin. One such, reprinted in the ten-volume
report of the committee which examined southern outrages, was a
warning against further "carpet bagger" administration. It is as
follows:

    Headquarters, Ninth Division, S.C.
      Special Orders, No. 3, K.K.K.

    Ignorance is the curse of God.

    For that reason we are determined that members of the
    legislature, the school committee and the county commissioners
    of Union county shall no longer officiate.

    Fifteen days' notice from this date is given, and if they, and
    all, do not at once and forever resign their present inhuman,
    disgraceful and outrageous rule, then retributive justice will
    as surely be used as night follows day.

                                  By order of the Grand Chief,
                                          A.O., Grand Secretary.


THREATEN NEGROES FOR FIRES

Another "special order," this one warning that the colored race in
general would be punished for all malicious fires in particular, was
made public in the Charleston News, Jan. 31, 1871.

                                             Headquarters, K.K.K.
                                                January 22, 1871.

Resolved: That in all cases of incendiarism, ten of the leading
colored people and two white sympathizers shall be executed.

That if any armed bands of colored people are found hereafter
picketing the roads, the officers of the company to which the pickets
belong shall be executed.

Southern speakers on the floor of the house in the debates which
preceded the passage of the "act to enforce the fourteenth amendment,"
traced the origin of the Ku-Klux to the Union league, an association
in the south composed chiefly of northerners. Charges were also made
by statesmen once in the confederate army that "Tammany Hall" in New
York furnished arms to the Klanists, in order that they might murder
southern republicans.


SUPPRESSED IN 1871

When the act suppressing the Klan was approved by President Grant on
April 20, 1871, it was estimated that the night riders were operating
in eleven states of the south. Six months later, in October, President
Grant issued a proclamation calling on members of illegal
associations in nine counties in South Carolina to disperse and
surrender their arms and disguises in five days.

Five days afterwards, another proclamation was issued suspending the
privileges of the writ of habeas corpus in the counties named. More
than 200 persons were arrested within a few days. It is believed that
the Ku-Klux Klan was practically overthrown by the middle of the
following January.




CHAPTER II

THE NEW KU KLUX KLAN

    _Must Every Citizen be a Slave of Fear Spread by Masked
    Night-Riders, or Will He Live under the Protection of the
    Constitution of the United States?_


Are you a citizen of the United States? If you are it is to your
interest to inform yourself about the Ku-Klux Klan. As a citizen you
are under the protection of the constitution of the United States. The
Ku Klux Klan has set itself above the constitution. It has made laws
of its own. Its members have inaugurated a reign of lawlessness that
may drag you out of your bed at midnight and submit you to a coat of
tar and feathers through the whims of some neighbor who does not like
the country in which you were born, or who objects to your religion,
your color, your opinions, your personal habits or anything else about
you that does not suit his fancy.

The constitution guarantees that your house, your person and your
papers and effects are free from unlawful search and seizure; that you
cannot be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of
law, which law must be publicly enforced in God's sunshine by persons
legally chosen; that when you are accused of any delinquency or crime
you shall have a speedy, public trial before a judge and an impartial
jury; that you may be a member of any religious denomination or sect
with whom you may worship as you please; that you have the right of
free speech; that you cannot be held in involuntary servitude except
as a punishment for crime, for which you have been found guilty in a
legal way; that you cannot be denied the right to vote on account of
your color.


MASKED MEN DEFY CONSTITUTION

Masked riders of the night disagree with these guarantees of freedom.
They break into your house under cover of darkness unlawfully seize
your person and ride away with you, depriving you of liberty without
due process of law. They accuse you of charges that may or may not be
true, without giving you the opportunity of knowing the identity of
your accusers, because they are masked. They try you without giving
you a chance to defend yourself. They make themselves accuser, judge,
jury and executioner. They deny that you have the right to worship God
as you please. They deny your right to free speech, because they
forbid you to criticise what they do.

The Ku Klux Klan clamps involuntary servitude on its own members by
making them take oaths to uphold their leaders, even when they violate
the constitution. It aims to place those whom it opposes under its
heel. It openly defies the article of the constitution that guarantees
race equality, by binding its members to put the black race under the
supremacy of the white.

The American constitution says that if you were born abroad, but have
become a naturalized citizen of the United States, you have as many
rights here as though you were actually born here. The Ku Klux Klan is
against the constitution on that point. The Ku Klux Klan wants to make
the foreigner a serf.

The Ku Klux Klan has set itself up as a regulator of morals. Persons
against whom there has been neighborhood gossip have been tarred and
feathered. Thanks to the _New York World_, court records have been
published showing that some of the highest persons in the Ku Klux have
been involved in proceedings as disgraceful as those for which tar and
feather parties have been organized by the Klan or persons
masquerading as Ku Klux.


MISTREAT WHITES AND BLACKS

Men and women, white and black--have been mistreated by masked men.
The number of these attacks grows as the Klan increases in size. At
present the Klan has branches in all states of the union except
three--New Hampshire, Montana and Utah. In each state the law would be
enforced by legal officials against any persons guilty of crime if
public spirited citizens would make it their business to assist public
officials to round up law breakers. The Klan, however, believes in its
own method of punishment against those whom it opposes. It protects
its own members and there is no case on record where a Klansman has
been outraged. The Klan has one law for itself and another for its
victims. The revelations of scandal among its leaders have not
resulted in any movement on the part of its members to "clean house."
Its motto seems to be "A Klansman can do no wrong." The lesson to be
drawn from the revelations is that those in high places in the Klan
have played on the gullibility of tens of thousands of otherwise
sensible Americans. These leaders have become rich by dealing in the
hocuspocus of mysticism, secret rites and high sounding phrases and by
inflaming the passions of dupes by false stories involving religions
and races.

In the south they have preached and conspired against the negroes.
This hatred also has been carried into certain sections of large
cities of the north where there are large negro populations. In some
states they have played upon the feelings of those who might be drawn
into the Klan by a crusade against Catholics. They have made use of
counterfeit documents in secret bids for membership on this score. In
cities like New York and Chicago, where the populations are largely
Jewish, they have fanned the flames of religious hatred by propaganda
against the Jews. Where foreign-born residents are living in large
numbers the Klan has secretly intrigued against them. On the Pacific
coast this propaganda is made against the Japanese; on the eastern
seaboard it has been against persons born in European and Asiatic
countries.


A GOLD MINE FOR PROMOTERS

Those who have investigated the Klan are convinced that its principal
promoters are not inspired by a zeal for the welfare of the United
States, but on the other hand they are certain that the promoters are
in the Ku Klux Klan business to make money out of it; that they have
profited by millions of dollars and that for this filthy money they
have spread loose seeds of discontent and disorder that must be raked
out of the body politic by the united action of all patriotic
organizations and individuals. As far as its chief protagonists are
concerned the Ku Klux is a huge money-making hoax--a gold mine. The
poor dupes who have been "soaked" for regalia and dues will wake up
some time and discover how they have been deluded and misled. In the
meantime, however, it is the duty of every true American to inform
himself about the Klan so that in whatever way may come to his lot he
may counteract the terrible consequences of its teachings and
practices.




CHAPTER III

HOW THE MODERN KU KLUX KLAN WAS ORGANIZED

    _Something about those who sit in judgment on the affairs of the
    "Invisible Empire"; their troubles in court._


William J. Simmons (who carries a bogus title as "colonel") is the
"Imperial Wizard" of the "Invisible Empire, Knights of the Ku Klux
Klan." He organized the masked men on Thanksgiving night in 1915. Some
of the organizers associated with him had belonged to the original Ku
Klux Klan which rampaged in the southern states after the Civil War,
killing hundreds of negroes and whites, and which was put out of
business by President U.S. Grant after the states had failed to do so.

Simmons and thirty-four others secured a charter from the state of
Georgia on December 4, 1915. It is signed by Philip Cook, who was then
secretary of state of that commonwealth. Later, on July 1, 1916, a
special charter was issued by the Supreme court of Fulton county, Ga.
The granting of the charters followed the organization of the Klan
which occurred with midnight ceremonies on the top of Stone mountain,
near Atlanta, Thanksgiving night.


THAT COLD WINTER NIGHT

In referring to the first ceremonies, Simmons has written as follows
in the official records of the Ku Klux:

"On Thanksgiving night, 1915, men were seen emerging from the shadows
and gathering round the spring at the base of Stone mountain, the
world's greatest rock, near Atlanta, Ga., and from thence repaired to
the mountain top, and there under a blazing fiery cross they took the
oath of allegiance to the Invisible Empire, Knights of the Ku Klux
Klan.

"And thus on the mountain top that night at the midnight hour, while
men braved the surging blasts of wild wintry mountain winds and
endured a temperature far below freezing, bathed in the sacred glow of
the fiery cross, the Invisible Empire was called from its slumber of
half a century to take up a new task and fulfill a new mission for
humanity's good, and to call back to mortal habitation the good angel
of practical fraternity among men."

It will be noticed that Simmons refers to "a temperature far below
freezing." The official weather reports of the region for that night
show that the temperature was thirty degrees above the freezing point.

Simmons had a fraternal order in mind when he organized the Ku Klux.
He had been an itinerant Methodist preacher and organizer for the
Modern Woodmen of the World and had not met with success in either
capacity. He was a good talker but lacked the "punch" to put things
over. The Ku Klux Klan did not prosper under his direction. Then he
met Edward Y. Clarke and Mrs. Elizabeth Tyler. Clarke and Mrs. Tyler
were the owners of the Southern Publicity Association of Atlanta.
During the war they had been publicity agents for various "drives,"
managed for the Y.M.C.A., such Y.W.C.A., the Salvation Army and such
enterprises. Clarke saw the value of the publicity that could be
coined from the old name of the Ku Klux Klan and entered into an
arrangement with Simmons to promote the Klan. He agreed to give
Simmons $100 a week if Simmons would follow his directions. Simmons
was to brush up on delivering speeches and writing articles for _The
Searchlight_, a magazine which Clarke founded as the official organ of
the Ku Klux.

From this joining of forces Simmons, Clarke and Mrs. Tyler have become
rich. The Klan has extended its membership to all except three states
and it claims that 500,000 to 700,000 Klansmen are in its ranks.
Clarke is the "Imperial Kleagle," or boss salesman of memberships.
Mrs. Tyler is Grand Chief of Staff in charge of the woman's division
of the Klan.


WHAT POLICE RECORDS SHOW

Investigation of the police and court records of Atlanta disclosed
that Clarke and Mrs. Tyler were arrested in their night clothes in a
house that Mrs. Tyler owned at No. 185 South Pryor street, Atlanta.
This occurred in October, 1919. Clarke gave the name of "Jim Slaton"
and Mrs. Tyler gave the name of "Mrs. Elizabeth Carroll."

The cases were on the book of the Recorder's court as City of Atlanta
versus E.Y. Clarke and City of Atlanta versus Mrs. Elizabeth Tyler,
page 305 of the docket of 1919, case numbers 17,005 and 17,006. The
police were put on the trail of Clarke and Mrs. Tyler by Clarke's
wife.

In addition to the charge of disorderly conduct, a charge of
possessing whisky illegally was placed against Mrs. Tyler and Clarke.
This was an amazing charge against Clarke because he had been known as
one of the leaders of the anti-saloon movement in Georgia. The whisky
charge was dropped when J.Q. Jett, son-in-law of Mrs. Tyler, claimed
ownership of the whisky and was fined $25.

The Klan is supposed to stand for respect of women and children. The
records of the Atlanta courts still contain charges against Clarke
that he deserted and abandoned his wife and child. He never has denied
the charges. Mrs. Clarke went to work to support herself and her
little son. A suit for divorce was filed in October, 1919, by Mrs.
Clarke, who charged that her husband had deserted her three years
previously. After his arrest with Mrs. Tyler Clarke agreed to pay his
wife $75 a month. Since Clarke has become prosperous in the Ku Klux
Klan he has bought his wife a $10,000 house.


RECORDS ARE STOLEN

When newspaper men began to investigate Mrs. Tyler and Clarke, they
discovered that the official records of the Atlanta police department
and the Recorder's office had been mutilated. Somebody had stolen the
pages from the books containing the records of the cases. Members of
the Ku Klux Klan are numbered among the police and official attaches
of the city and newspaper comment indicates that they helped smother
the case in behalf of their leaders.


SCANDAL OF "CHAPLAIN" RIDLEY

Another leader of the Ku Klux Klan is "Rev." Caleb A. Ridley, who is
the "Imperial Chaplain" of the order. He is a right-hand assistant of
Mrs. Tyler and helps her to edit _The Searchlight_.

Ridley also has had an experience in the recorder's court. He was
arrested on complaint of the husband of Mrs. J.B. Hamilton, who lives
on Cooper street, Atlanta, not a great distance from the Central
Baptist church, where Ridley preaches. Recorder Johnson dismissed the
case against Ridley.

Mrs. Hamilton testified that Ridley used to walk past her house when
she sat on the porch and smile up at her. One day, without being
invited and with no encouragement from her, he walked up on the porch
and sat next to her on a swing. She said he chatted with her about
church questions, although she was not a member of his church. Then he
placed his arm around her, tried to embrace her and said something
that she thought was not proper.

One witness testified that he had seen Ridley go on the porch and sit
on the swing. He had seen Mrs. Hamilton push Ridley away from her.

Ridley was supported by his flock. Several women testified in behalf
of his character. He said he visited Mrs. Hamilton because she looked
lonely.




CHAPTER IV

HOW THE KU KLUX KLAN GETS MEMBERS

    _First Approached by Mysterious Notes, the Candidate is Soaked
    for a "Donation" and Money for His Robes._


The man who is invited to join the Ku Klux Klan is kidded into the
belief that he is one of the chosen of God's beings and that he is
being honored because his presence in the ranks is an honor to himself
as well as to the Klan. A kleagle is a common salesman. He has charge
of a small district. He works under a king kleagle, who has charge of
a state. He is the state salesmanager. A cyclops is in charge of the
king kleagles and the kleagles in several states.

Here is the way one group of kleagles work. They are given the name of
a person who is eligible. One kleagle is assigned to catch him. The
kleagle sends the sucker the following message:

    "Sir (or Brother)--Six thousand men who are preparing for
    eventualities have their eyes on you. You are being weighed in
    the balance!

    "The Call is coming! Are you able and qualified to respond?

    "Discuss this matter with no one."

                                                       "Yu-Bu-Tu"

A few days later this card is sent:

    "Sir--You have heard from us because we believe in you. We are
    for you and Need you!

    "The impenetrable Veil of Mystery is drawing aside. Soon you
    will appear exactly as you are.

    "Are you a Real Man?

    "Lift your eyes to the Fiery Cross and falter not, but go
    forward to the Light.

    "Discuss this matter with no one.

                                                       "Yu-Bu-Tu"

After another short wait this third message is sent:

    "Sir:

    "You have been weighed in the balance and found Not wanting!

    "Strong Men--Brave Men--R-e-a-l Men. We need such Men. We know
    you are one.

    "The Goblins of the Invisible Empire will shortly issue their
    Call. Be discreet, preserve silence and bide its coming.

    "Discuss this matter with no one.

                                                       "Yu-Bu-Tu"

By this time the candidate is supposed to be in a mood to fall, and
the kleagle calls on him personally.


QUESTIONS FOR THE CANDIDATE

The kleagle presents the prospective initiate with the following list
of questions to be answered:

(Note the questions marked with stars. They are used to bar out Jews,
Catholics, negroes and foreign born.)

    1.  Is the motive prompting your inquiry serious?
    2.  What is you age?
    3.  What is your occupation?
    4.  Where where you born?
    5.  How long have you resided in your present locality?
    6.  Are you married, single or widower?
   *7.  Were your parents born in the United States of America?
   *8.  Are you a gentile or Jew?
   *9.  Are you of the white race or of a colored race?
   10.  What educational advantages have you?
   11.  Color of eyes? Hair? Weight? Height?
  *12.  Do you believe in the principles of Pure Americanism?
  *13.  Do you believe in white supremacy?
   14.  What is your politics?
  *15.  What is your religious faith?
  *16.  Of what church are you a member (if any)?
  *17.  Of what religious faith are your parents?
   18.  What secret, fraternal orders are you a member of (if any)?
   19.  Do you honestly believe in the practice of Real fraternity?
  *20.  Do you owe any kind of allegiance to any foreign nation,
        government, institution, sect, people, ruler or person?

    I most solemnly assert and affirm that each question above is
    truthfully answered by me and in my own handwriting and that
    below is my real signature.

                                     Signed .....................
                                                        Inquirer.

  Business Address ......................
  Telephone No. .........................
  Date ............................. 19..
  Residence Address .....................
  Telephone No. .........................

  N.B.--If space above is not sufficient to answer questions, then
  make your answer on the other side of this sheet. Number the answer
  to correspond with the question.

If the candidate answers the question satisfactorily, he must pay his
initiation fees, called "donation" and provide money to pay for his
mask, robe, etc. This will be explained later. With his money affairs
settled, he is ready for the initiation, together with whatever other
candidates there are in the vicinity. The initiation services are held
at midnight, with a flaming cross, an American flag, a sword or
dagger, and a Bible as the chief outward signs of the order. There is
also a bottle of water on the "altar."




CHAPTER V

OATH OF KU KLUX KLAN

    _Those who join the order must pledge blind allegiance to
    Constitution. They do not see._


Blind and unconditional obedience to the "constitution, laws,
regulations usages and requirements" of the Ku Klux Klan, even to the
extent of indorsing the principle of secret mob violence, is accepted
by every person who takes the oath of Grand Wizard Simmons' Invisible
Empire.

That every Klansman, under penalty of death, also agrees to carry out
the mandates, degrees, edicts, rulings and "instructions" of Emperor
Simmons also is shown in a reproduction of the oath as supplied by
Klan organizers and officials.

The first section of this oath that carries veiled hints of violence
to back it binds the members to unconditional obedience to a
constitution he has never seen. Not only that but it binds him to obey
any laws that may be enacted in the future, whether or not he approves
of them. When he takes this obligation he gives a lease on his life to
Simmons.


SWEARS TO ABSOLUTE SECRECY

Absolute secrecy even in the face of death is his second obligation
and he promises that he "will pay promptly all just and legal demands
made upon me to defray the expenses of my Klan when same are due or
called for."

Then, with his left hand over his heart and his right hand raised to
heaven and with the promise that "this oath I will seal with my
blood," the candidate takes oath that he "will most zealously and
valiantly shield and preserve by any and all JUSTIFIABLE means and
methods (not legal means and methods) the sacred constitutional rights
and privileges of free public schools, free speech, free press,
separation of church and state, liberty, white supremacy, just laws
and the pursuit of happiness, against any encroachment of any nature
by any person or persons, political party or parties, religious sect
or people, native, naturalized or foreign, of any race, color, creed,
lineage or tongue whatsoever."


MYSTERY IN AUTHORITY

Who defines the permissible limits of zeal and valor is not stated.
Neither is it stated who decides when schools are free, speech and
press free, nor when church and state are sufficiently separated. It
is not stated whether it is the individual Klansman, the local Klan,
the supreme council or the Imperial Wizard.

It has been revealed, however, that this phase of the Klan movement
has been much fathered by the sales crew selling subscriptions at $10
each under the direction of Wizard Simmons and Imperial Kleagle
Clarke.

The exact text of the oath of allegiance administered to new members
of the Ku Klux Klan is given herewith. The asterisks are printed to
take place of the Ku Klux Klan and also the officers of the order.
These places are left blank in the printed oath because it is carried
by Klan officials and might be lost, revealing their secret.

The oath:

You will place your left hand over your heart and raise your right
hand to heaven.


SEC. I.--OBEDIENCE

(You will say) "I" ---- (Pronounce your full name ---- and repeat
after me) "In the presence of God and Man ---- most solemnly pledge,
promise and swear ---- unconditionally ---- that I will faithfully
obey ---- the constitution and laws ---- and will willingly conform to
---- all regulations, usages and requirements ---- of the * * * * ----
which do now exist ---- or which may be hereafter enacted ---- and
will render at all times ---- loyal respect and steadfast support ----
to the Imperial Authority of same ---- and will heartily heed ---- all
official mandates ---- decrees ---- edicts ---- rulings and
instructions ---- of the I* W* thereof. ---- I will yield prompt
response ---- to all summonses ---- I having knowledge of same ----
Providence alone preventing.


SEC. II.--SECRECY

"I most solemnly swear ---- that I will forever ---- keep sacredly
secret ---- the signs, words and grip ---- and any and all other ----
matters and knowledge ---- of the * * * * ---- regarding which a most
rigid secrecy ---- must be maintained ---- which may at any time ----
be communicated to me ---- and will never divulge same ---- nor even
cause the same to be divulged ---- to any person in the whole world
---- unless I know positively ---- that such person is a member of
this Order ---- in good and regular standing ---- and not even then
---- unless it be ---- for the best interest of this Order.

"I most sacredly vow ---- and most positively swear ---- that I will
not yield to bribe ---- flattery ---- threats ---- passion ----
punishment ---- persecution ---- persuasion ---- nor any enticements
whatever ---- coming from or offered by ---- any person or persons
---- male or female ---- for the purpose of ---- obtaining from me
---- a secret or secret information ---- of the * * * * ---- I will
die rather than divulge same ---- so help me God ----

                                                           AMEN!"

You will drop your hands.

GENTLEMEN (or SIR):

You will wait in patience and peace until you are informed of the
decision of the E* C* and his * in klonklave assembled

       *       *       *       *       *

You will place your left hand over your heart and raise your right
hand to heaven.


SEC. III.--FIDELITY

(You will say) "I" ---- (pronounce your full name ---- and repeat
after me) "Before God ---- and in the presence of ---- these
mysterious *smen ---- on my sacred honor ---- do most solemnly and
sincerely pledge ---- promise and swear ---- that I will diligently
guard and faithfully foster ---- every interest of the * * * * ----
and will maintain ---- its social cast and dignity.

"I swear that I will not recommend ---- any person for membership in
this Order ---- whose mind is unsound ---- or whose reputation I know
to be bad ---- or whose character is doubtful ---- or whose loyalty to
our country ---- is in any way questionable.

"I swear that I will pay promptly ---- all just and legal demands ----
made upon me to defray the expenses ---- of my * and this Order ----
when same are due or called for.

"I swear that I will protect the property ---- of the * * * * ---- of
any nature whatsoever ---- and if any should be intrusted to my
keeping ---- I will properly keep ---- or rightly use same ---- and
will freely and promptly surrender same ---- on official demand ----
or if ever I am banished from ---- or voluntarily discontinue ---- my
membership in this Order.

"I swear that I will most determinedly ---- maintain peace and harmony
---- in all the deliberations ---- of the gatherings or assemblies
---- of the I* E* ---- and of any subordinate jurisdiction ---- or *
thereof.

"I swear that I will most strenuously ---- discourage selfishness ----
and selfish political ambition ---- on the part of myself or any
*sman.

"I swear that I will never allow ---- personal friendship ---- blood
or family relationship ---- nor personal ---- political ---- or
professional prejudice ---- malice nor ill-will ---- to influence me
in casting my vote ---- for the election or rejection ---- of an
applicant ---- for membership in this Order ---- God being my helper
----

                                                           AMEN!"

You will drop your hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

You will place your left hand over your heart and raise your right
hand to heaven.


SEC. IV.--*ISHNESS

(You will say) "I" ---- (Pronounce your full name ---- and repeat
after me) "Most solemnly pledge, promise and swear ---- that I will
never slander ---- defraud ---- receive ---- or in any manner wrong
---- the * * * * ---- a *sman ---- nor a *sman's family ---- nor will
I suffer the same to be done ---- if I can prevent it.

"I swear that I will be faithful ---- in defending and protecting ----
the home ---- reputation ---- and physical and business interest ----
of a *sman ---- and that of a *sman's family.

"I swear that I will at any time ---- without hesitating ---- go to
the assistance or rescue ---- of a *sman in any way ---- at his call I
will answer ---- I will be truly *ish toward *smen ---- in all things
honorable.

"I swear that I will not allow ---- any animosity ---- friction nor
ill-will ---- to arise and remain ---- between myself and a *sman ----
but will be constant in my efforts ---- to promote real *ishness ----
among the members of this Order.

"I swear that I will keep secure to myself ---- a secret of a *sman
---- when same is committed to me ---- in the sacred bond of *smanship
---- the crime of violating THIS solemn oath ---- treason against the
United States of America ---- rape ---- and malicious murder ----
alone excepted.

"I most solemnly assert and affirm ---- that to the Government of the
United States of America ---- and any State thereof ---- of which I
may become a resident ---- I sacredly swear ---- an unqualified
allegiance ---- above any other and every kind of government ---- in
the whole world ---- I here and now ---- pledge my life ---- my
property ---- my vote ---- and my sacred honor ---- to uphold its flag
---- its Constitution ---- and Constitutional laws ---- and will
protect ---- defend ---- and enforce same unto death.

"I swear that I will most zealously ---- and valiantly ---- shield and
preserve ---- by any and all ---- justifiable means and methods ----
the sacred constitutional rights ---- and privileges of ---- free
public schools ---- free speech ---- free press ---- separation of
church and state ---- liberty ---- white supremacy ---- just laws ----
and the pursuit of happiness ---- against any encroachment ---- of any
nature ---- by any person or persons ---- political party or parties
---- religious sect or people ---- native, naturalized or foreign ----
of any race ---- color ---- creed ---- lineage or tongue whatsoever.

"All to which I have sworn by THIS oath ---- I will seal with my blood
---- be Thou my witness ---- Almighty God ---- AMEN!"

You will drop your hands.


OLD PLEDGE OF LOYALTY

    APPELLATION

    This Organization shall be styled and denominated, The Order of
    the (then follows three stars; no other name given).


    CREED

    We, the Order of the * * *, reverentially acknowledge the
    majesty and supremacy of the Divine Being, and recognize the
    goodness and providence of the same. And we recognize our
    relation to the United States Government, the supremacy of the
    Constitution, the Constitutional Laws thereof, and the Union of
    States thereunder.


    OBJECTS OF THE ORDER

    This is an institution of Chivalry, Humanity, Mercy, and
    Patriotism; embodying in its genius and its principles all that
    is chivalric in conduct, noble in sentiment, generous in
    manhood, and patriotic in purpose; its peculiar object being,

    First: To protect the weak, the innocent, and the defenseless,
    from the indignities, wrongs, and outrages, of the lawless, the
    violent, and the brutal; to relieve the injured and oppressed;
    to succor the suffering and unfortunate, and especially the
    widows and orphans of Confederate soldiers.

    Second: To protect and defend the Constitution of the United
    States, and all laws passed in conformity thereto, and to
    protect the States and the people thereof from all invasion from
    any source whatever.

    Third: To aid and assist in the execution of all constitutional
    laws, and to protect the people from unlawful seizure, and from
    trial except by their peers in conformity to the laws of the
    land.

    Note the vast difference between this and the following page.
    One, the pledge to all that is right and uplifting--the other to
    a single autocrat. The above was formed for the protection and
    enforcement of law--the Kleagle's pledge, merely a vow to do
    anything that the Imperial Wizard Simmons might see fit.


MODERN KLEAGLE'S PLEDGE OF LOYALTY

    I, the undersigned, in order to be a regular appointed KlEagle
    of the Invisible Empire, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan
    (Incorporated), do freely and voluntarily promise, pledge and
    fully guarantee a lofty respect, whole-hearted loyalty and an
    unwavering devotion at all times and under any and all
    circumstances and conditions from this day and date forward to
    William Joseph Simmons as Imperial Wizard and Emperor of the
    Invisible Empire, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan (Incorporated). I
    shall work in all respects in perfect harmony with him and under
    his authority and directions, in all his plans for the extension
    and government of the Society, and under his directions, with
    any and all of my officially superior officers duly appointed by
    him.

    I shall at any and all times be faithful and true in all things,
    and most especially in preventing and suppressing any factions,
    cisms or conspiracies against him or his plans and purposes or
    the peace and harmony of the Society which may arise or attempt
    to arise. I shall discourage and strenuously oppose any degree
    of disloyalty or disrespect on the part of myself or any
    klansman, any where and at any time or place, towards him as the
    founder and as the supreme chief governing head of the Society
    above named.

    This pledge, promise and guarantee I make is a condition
    precedent to my appointment stated above, and the continuity of
    my appointment as a KlEagle, and it is fully agreed that any
    deviation by me from this pledge will instantly automatically
    cancel and completely void my appointment together with all its
    prerogatives, my membership in the Society, and I shall forfeit
    all remunerations which may be then due me.

    I make this solemn pledge on my Oath of Allegiance and on my
    integrity and honor as a man and as a klansman, with serious
    purpose to keep same inviolate.

  Done in the city of ...................., State of
  ........................... on this the ..........
  day of .................... A.D. 19...
               Signed ..............................
               Address .............................
  Witness: .........................................
  Address ..........................................

    This is the oath taken by Kleagles in the Ku Klux Klan. It binds
    the Kleagle to "Imperial Wizard" Simmons personally in an almost
    slavish fashion. The oath is taken as a pledge of loyalty to
    Simmons and not to the order.




CHAPTER VI

HOW THE DOLLARS ROLL IN

    _The Klan Claims to Have 500,000 to 700,000 Members. Plan to get
    College Boys._


The Ku Klux Klan claims to have 500,000 to 700,000 members. As a
matter of fact it is generally believed that that number is a hot air
figure. It offers a basis for some interesting figures on the money
that has changed hands, however.

Every person initiated must pay $10 as an initiation fee. Kleagles who
have left the order say that the "initiation" fee is called a
"donation" so that the Klan can escape paying income tax to the
government, because dues in clubs and societies are taxable.

Of the $10, the kleagle who enrolls the member gets $4. The king
kleagle, or state salesmanager, gets $1. The cyclops, or division
manager, gets 50 cents. Clarke, the Imperial Kleagle, gets $3 and the
office of Imperial Wizard Simmons gets $1.50. On this basis of 700,000
members, Clarke has collected more than $2,000,000. So far as known no
public accounting ever has been made.

In addition the person initiated pays $6.50 for a mask, or helmet, and
a robe. This he must purchase from the Gate City Manufacturing Company
of Atlanta, owned by Clarke. Clarke's fortune grows every time a new
member is taken in. If the Klansman rides a horse in ceremonies he
must buy a robe for $14--also from Clarke's company.


WATER AT $10 A QUART

Another source of revenue to Clarke is the water used in initiations.
It comes from the Chattahoochee river (Indian for "muddy water") near
Atlanta. It is sent around the country as special Ku Klux Klan liquid
without which an initiation cannot be held. It costs $10 a quart,
money to be paid to Clarke.

Simmons and Clarke live in costly houses on Peachtree road, outside of
Atlanta. It is explained that their homes were presented to them by
the Klan. It also is explained that some of the money of the Klan goes
to Lanier university, near Atlanta, where young students are to be
trained to spread the Ku Klux Klan to every village of the country.


AFTER THE COLLEGE BOYS

In addition to the general membership, Simmons started a plan to get
college boys into the Ku Klux Klan at $1 a head and with a charge of
$5 for masks and regalia. The watchword for the college boys was to be
"Kuno." Simmons, according to kleagles who deserted him, explained
that he got the college idea from the German militarism system, which
started to train boys for the army when they were in school. Simmons
wrote this inspiration to attract college boys:

"Klannishners is your creed and faith; therefore, let no angel, man or
devil break you from its glorious anchorage. Then when the end of your
initiation shall have been reached in this life and you have been
summoned to take your place as an inhabitant of the Invisible Empire,
as you pass through the veil you can say to the world in tones of
truth triumphant: "I have kept the Faith!" Thus preserving your honor
by a faithful allegiance your life shall not have been lived in vain."


THE BOOK OF "KLORAN"

The ceremony of initiation is contained in a copyrighted book called
the Kloran written by Imperial Wizard Simmons. The Bible is opened at
the 12th Chapter of Romans.

These songs are sung:

    We meet in cordial greetings
      In this our sacred cave
    To pledge anew our compact
      With hearts sincere and brave;
    A band of faithful Klansmen
      Knights of the K.K.K.
    We all will stand together
      Forever and for aye.

    Chorus:
    Home, home, country and home;
      Klansmen, we'll live and die
    For our country and home.

    Her honor, love and justice
      Must actuate us all,
    Before our sturdy phalanx
      All hate and strife shall fall.
    In union we'll labor
      Wherever we may roam,
    To shield a Klansman's welfare,
      His country, name and home.


KLEXOLOGY

(Tune--America)

    "God of Eternity,
      Guide, guard our great country,
    Our homes and store.
      Keep our great state to Thee;
    Its people right and free
      In us Thy glory be
    Forevermore."




CHAPTER VII

KU KLUX KLAN AND THE JEWS

    _"Drive them out of the United States" are the words that are
    used to enlist Jew-haters into the ranks._


In spite of the fact that ever since the beginning of the American
colonies, in the war of the revolution and in other national crises,
great Jews have helped to make the United States what it is today, the
Ku Klux Klan recruits misguided members on the representation that it
has found a scheme to drive the Jews out of the country. Anti-Jewish
propaganda is used particularly in large cities and in smaller
communities where racial and religious flames may be fanned in order
to win members and money for the Ku Klux.

_The Searchlight_, the official paper of the Klan, teems with
anti-Jewish literature. Secret documents and stories are passed around
privately among the organizers and used in gaining recruits.

"Chaplain" Ridley is one of the most rabid of the campaigners against
the Jews. He never lets an opportunity go by to ridicule Jews and stir
up prejudice.

In the first place, Jews are barred from the Ku Klux Klan. In a
questionnaire that must be filled in by those who are initiated these
questions are asked:

"Are you a gentile or a jew? What is your religious faith? Of what
church are you a member (if any)? Of what religious faith are your
parents?"


CHAPLAIN ATTACKS JEWS

"Chaplain" Ridley in _The Searchlight_, writes:

"I cannot help being what I am racially. I am not a Jew, nor a negro
nor a foreigner. I am an Anglo-Saxon white man, so ordained by the
hand and will of God, and so constituted and trained that I cannot
conscientiously take either my politics or my religion from some
secluded ass on the other side of the world.

"Now, if somebody else happens to be a Jew, I can't help it any more
than he can. Or if he happens to be black, I can't help that, either.
If he were born under a foreign flag, I couldn't help it--but there is
one thing I can do. I can object to his un-American propaganda being
preached in my home or practiced in the solemn assembly of real
Americans."

_The Searchlight_ constantly mixes Jews and negroes in ridiculous
"movements." For instance, one writer in the issue of July 30, 1921,
declares that his investigations have demonstrated that Jewish
plotters are stirring up the negroes to make a race war so that the
government will be destroyed.

The writer goes on:

"For the same reason, the Jew is interested in overthrowing Christian
Russia. But remember, he does not intend to stop at Russia. Through
his Third Internationale of Moscow he is working to overthrow all the
Gentile Governments of the world. I am enclosing an editorial clipped
from The New York _World_ of Saturday, July 23. You will keep in mind
that _The World_ is Jew-owned, as is every other newspaper in New York
City except the Tribune. * * * In all my twenty-five years traveling
about over this continent I have never met a disloyal American who
failed to be either foreign-born or a Semite. With the best wishes for
the success of the Ku Klux Klan."


HOW TO THROW JEWS OUT

In the instructions to kleagles, who sell memberships in the Klan, the
anti-Jewish feeling in some communities is appealed to in this manner:

"The Jew patronizes only the Jew unless it is impossible to do so.
Therefore, we klansmen, the only real Americans, must, by the same
methods, protect ourselves, and practice by actual application the
teachings of klannishness. With this policy faithfully adhered to, it
will not be long before the Jew will be forced out of business by our
practice of his own business methods, for when the time comes when
klansmen trade only with klansmen then the days of the Jews' success
in business will be numbered and the Invisible Empire can drive them
from the shores of our own America."

Another favorite way to create interest in the anti-Jewish movement is
to represent that Imperial Kleagle Clarke has in hand the organization
of a nation-wide Jewish society to oppose the Sons of Israel. This
society is to be created by Jews who are in the pay of Kleagle Clarke
and who are really traitors to their own co-religionists. Spies
working in the ranks of the Sons of Israel will keep the Ku Klux Klan
informed of what the Sons of Israel are doing and finally a clash
between the two organizations is to be engineered, to the destruction
of both. Of course this is the wildest sort of propaganda, but it
demonstrates how the agents play with fire in order to get members.


"SEARCHLIGHT" AND THE JEWS

Among the articles in _The Searchlight_ there are those headed, "A
Message from Jerusalem--Esau the Wanderer must Pay for His
Pottage--the Mightiest Weapons for the Jews are Pounds and Pence."

"Doesn't Think Much of the Jews."

"Jewish Rabbi Gets Rabid."

A paragraph from "Doesn't Think Much of the Jews," published Feb. 12,
1921, contains this passage:

"Their religion is to control wealth and thereby control all nations.
And you cannot deny but they are doing so under false names. Jews are
entering into every Government, every nation on earth except China and
Japan, where their heavenly God received little recognition. They
spread their ingenious religion that strangled the ignorant and
credulous by causing dissension to their advantage."




CHAPTER VIII

KU KLUX KLAN AND THE CATHOLICS

    _Misrepresentation of Oath of Knights of Columbus is Used to
    excite Religious Hatred in order to get money._


Just as the organizers of the Ku Klux Klan misrepresent the Jews in
order to get members and money for their order, they go to great
lengths to create prejudice against Catholics. In some communities
anti-Catholic arguments are thought to be those that will bring the
most members into the fold. Fake documents and false statements on
printed cards that can be slyly passed from hand to hand are used for
this purpose. Anti-Catholic lies that can be hurled at Klansmen at
meetings to inspire them to get in more members and increase the
incomes of the "imperial wizard," the kleagles and other officers are
spread around.

One of these documents is a card entitled "Do You Know?" A kleagle of
the Klan asked the King Kleagle of his state for some literature that
he could employ to stir up interest in the Klan. In a short time the
kleagle received the literature from the Gate City Manufacturing
Company of Atlanta, Ga., a company promoted by "Imperial Kleagle"
Clarke. The supply of literature contained 100 copies of a card
bearing the heading "Do You Know?"

Another document that is sent broadcast to foment religious unrest and
hatred is a fake oath ascribed to the Knights of Columbus, which is
composed of Catholics and which has published the oath that its
members take. Before reading the fake oath, it will be well to examine
the real oath.


REAL K. OF C. OATH

The bona fide oath that is taken by men initiated into the Knights of
Columbus, and which, it has been proven, is the correct oath follows:

"I swear to support the Constitution of the United States. I pledge
myself, as a Catholic citizen and Knight of Columbus, to enlighten
myself fully upon my duties as a citizen and to conscientiously
perform such duties entirely in the interest of my country and
regardless of all personal consequences. I pledge myself to do all in
my power to preserve the integrity and purity of the ballot, and to
promote reverence and respect for law and order. I promise to practice
my religion openly and consistently, but without ostentation, and to
so conduct myself in public affairs, and in the exercise of public
virtue as to reflect nothing but credit upon our Holy Church, to the
end that she may flourish and our country prosper to the greater honor
and glory of God."


BOGUS K. OF C. OATH

We can now appreciate the animus behind the bogus oath that is
ascribed to the Knights of Columbus by the Ku Klux Klan. This
fraudulent oath, as used by the recruiting organization of kleagles of
Ku Klux follows:

"I, ---- ----, now in the presence of Almighty God, the blessed Virgin
Mary, the blessed St. John the Baptist, the Holy Apostles, St. Peter
and St. Paul, and all the saints, sacred host of Heaven, and to you,
my Ghostly Father, the Superior General of the Society of Jesus,
founded by St. Ignatius Loyola, in the pontification of Paul the III,
and continued to the present, do by the womb of the Virgin, the matrix
of God, and the rod of Jesus Christ, declare and swear that His
Holiness the Pope is Christ's vicegerent and is the true and only head
of the Catholic or Universal Church throughout the earth; and that by
virtue of the keys of binding and loosing given His Holiness by my
Saviour, Jesus Christ, he hath power to depose heretical Kings,
Princes, states, Commonwealths and Governments and they may be safely
destroyed. Therefore to the utmost of my power I will defend this
doctrine and His Holiness's right and custom against all usurpers of
the heretical or Protestant authority whatever, especially the
Lutheran Church of Germany, Holland, Denmark, Sweden and Norway, and
the now pretended authority and Churches of England and Scotland, and
the branches of same now established in Ireland and on the Continent
of America and elsewhere, and all adherents in regard that they may be
usurped and heretical opposing the sacred Mother Church of Rome.

"I do now denounce and disown any allegiance as due to any heretical
King, Prince, or state, named Protestant or liberals, or obedience to
any of their laws, Magistrates, or officers.

"I do further declare that the doctrine of the Churches of England and
Scotland, of the Calvinists, Huguenots and others of the name of
Protestants or Masons to be damnable, and they themselves to be damned
who will not forsake the same.

"I do further declare that I will help, assist and advise all or any
of His Holiness' agents, in any place where I should be, in
Switzerland, Holland, Ireland or America, or in any other kingdom or
territory I shall come to, and do my utmost to extirpate the heretical
Protestant or Masonic doctrines and to destroy all their pretended
powers, legal or otherwise.


MORE OF IT

"I do further promise and declare that, notwithstanding that I am
dispensed with to assume any religion heretical for the propaganda of
the Mother Church's interest, to keep secret and private all her
agents' counsels from time to time, as they instruct me, and not
divulge, directly or indirectly, by word, writing or circumstances
whatever, but to execute all that should be proposed, given in charge
or discovered unto me by you, my Ghostly Father, or any of this sacred
order.

"I do further promise and declare that I will have no opinion or will
of my own or any mental reservation whatsoever, even as a corpse or
cadaver (perinde ac cadaver), but will unhesitatingly obey each and
every command that I may receive from my superiors in the militia of
the Pope and of Jesus Christ.

"That I will go to any part of the world whithersoever I may be sent,
to the frozen regions north, jungles of India, to the centers of
civilization of Europe or to the wild haunts of the barbarous savages
of America without murmuring or repining, and will be submissive in
all things whatsoever is communicated to me.


AND STILL MORE

"I do further promise and declare that I will, when opportunity
presents, make and wage relentless war, secretly and openly, against
all heretics, Protestants and Masons, as I am directed to do, to
extirpate them from the face of the whole earth; and that I will spare
neither age, sex or condition, and that I will hang, burn, waste,
boil, flay, strangle, and bury alive these infamous heretics; rip up
the stomachs and wombs of their women and crash their infants' heads
against the walls in order to annihilate their execrable race. That
when the same cannot be done openly, I will secretly use the poisonous
cup, strangulation cord, the steel of the poniard or the leaden
bullet, regardless of the honor, rank, dignity or authority of the
persons, whatever may be their condition in life, either public or
private, as I at any time may be directed so to do by any agents of
the Pope or superior of the Brotherhood of the Holy Father of the
Society of Jesus.

"In confirmation of which I hereby dedicate my life, soul and all
corporate powers, and with the dagger which I now receive I will
subscribe my name written in my blood in testimony thereof; and
should I prove false or weaken in my determination, may my brethren
and fellow soldiers of the militia of the Pope cut off my hands and
feet and my throat from ear to ear, my belly opened and sulphur burned
therein with all the punishment that can be inflicted upon me on earth
and my soul shall be tortured by demons in eternal hell forever.


NEARING THE END NOW

"That I will in voting always vote for a K. of C. in preference to a
Protestant, especially a Mason, and that I will leave my party so to
do; that if two Catholics are on the ticket I will satisfy myself
which is the better supporter of Mother Church and vote accordingly.

"That I will not deal with or employ a Protestant if in my power to
deal with or employ a Catholic. That I will place Catholic girls in
Protestant families, that a weekly report may be made of the inner
movements of the heretics.

"That I will provide myself with arms and ammunition that I may be in
readiness when the word is passed or I am commanded to defend the
church, either as an individual or with the militia of the Pope.

"All of which I, ---- ----, do swear by the blessed Trinity and
blessed sacrament which I am now to receive to perform and on my part
to keep this, my oath.

"In testimony whereof, I take this most holy and blessed sacrament of
the Eucharist and witness the same further with my name written with
the point of this dagger dipped in my own blood and seal it in the
face of this holy sacrament." (Excerpts from "Contested election case
of Eugene C. Bonniwell against Thomas S. Butler," as appears in the
Congressional Record ---- House, Feb. 15, 1913, at pages 3215, &c.,
and ordered printed therein "by unanimous consent." Attached thereto
and printed (on page 3216) as a part of said report as above.)

The above spurious oath, and others like it, have been found to be
fraudulent, both by the courts and by an investigation made by
Masonic bodies. The above oath made its appearance according to a book
published by Maurice Francis Egan, for eleven years United States
Minister to Denmark, and John B. Kennedy, in 1912. Messrs. Egan and
Kennedy explain it as follows:

"It was filed by Mr. Eugene C. Bonniwell of Pennsylvania in his charge
against Thomas S. Butler before the Committee of Elections No. 1, in
Congress, when Mr. Bonniwell stated that it had been used against him
as a Fourth Degree Knight of Columbus in an election contest. Mr.
Butler, in his defense, stated that he had refrained from condemning
the 'oath,' until election day, although he did not believe it to be
genuine, because he feared to give it notoriety.

"Far from being disconcerted by the airing of this delectable document
in Congress, those profiting by its circulation seized upon its
inclusion in the Congressional Record to give it an air of authority
by printing on future copies the annotation 'Copied from the
Congressional Record, &c.,' not pausing, however, to explain the
circumstances under which it was allowed to appear in that official
journal."


EDITORS ARE CONVICTED

A.M. Morrison and Garfield E. Morrison, editors of the _Morning
Journal_ of Mankato, Minn., charged E.M. Lawless, editor of the
Waterville, Minn., _Sentinel_ with having taken the bogus oath.
Lawless took the case to court and the two Morrisons were convicted.
The foreman of the jury was a Methodist minister.

In 1914 the bogus oath came to light in California. The Knights of
Columbus asked a committee of two, 32nd and 33rd degree, Masons, Past
or Past Grand Masters of Masonry of that state, to make an
investigation of all the rituals, pledges and oaths used by the
Knights of Columbus. The Masonic committee gave out a report saying
that they had made such an investigation. They found that the
ceremonies of the Knights of Columbus were embodied in four degrees
"intended to teach and inculcate principles that lie at the
foundations of every great religion and every great state."


WHAT MASONS REPORTED

Their report continued:

"Our examination was made primarily to ascertain whether or not a
certain alleged oath * * * which has been printed and widely
circulated was in fact used by the Order and whether * * * any oath,
obligation or pledge was used which was or would be offensive to
Protestants or Masons. * * * We find that neither the alleged oath nor
any such oath or pledge bearing the remotest resemblance thereto in
matter, manner, spirit or purpose is used or forms a part of the
ceremonies of any degree of the Knights of Columbus. The alleged oath
is scurrilous, wicked and libelous and must be the invention of an
impious and venomous mind. * * * There is no propaganda proposed or
taught against Protestants or Masons or persons not of Catholic faith.
* * * We can find nothing in the entire ceremonials of the Order that
to our minds could be objected to by any person."

_The Searchlight_, official organ of the Ku Klux, contains many
articles that misrepresent the Catholics. For instance, of Feb. 26,
1921, _The Searchlight_ had an article which was captioned: "Facts
Gathered by the Knights of Luther from the Washington Bureau of
Statistics":


CHARGES OF "KNIGHTS OF LUTHER"

Without one word to support them, the following were printed as
"facts":

"The National Democratic Committee is by majority a Roman Catholic
body. It usually has a Roman Catholic President and secretary.

"Catholics influenced the national campaign which elected Wilson.

"The President's private secretary is a Roman Catholic.

"Over 70 per cent. of all appointments made by President Wilson are
Catholics. Their influence is so powerful it compels the homage of
those in authority.

"Five States now have Catholic Administrations.

"Thirty-one States have Roman Catholic Democratic Central Committees.

"Twenty thousand public schools have one-half Catholic teachers.

"Over 100,000 public schools now contribute a part or all of the
school tax to Catholic Churches and schools.

"Six hundred public schools use Catholic readers and teach from them
the Roman Catholic catechism.

"Sixty-two per cent. of all offices of the United States, both
elective and appointive, are now held by Roman Catholics.

"New York, Chicago, Baltimore, Philadelphia, Buffalo, Cleveland,
Toledo, St. Louis, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Boston now have 75
per cent. Catholic teachers in their public schools.

"In all the cities and towns of the United States of 10,000 or more
inhabitants an average of over 90 per cent. of the police force are
Roman Catholics.

"Roman Catholics are in the majority of the City Council of 10,000
cities and towns of the United States."


MORE OF THE SAME STUFF

_The Searchlight_ continues:

"We will now look at the results of Catholic teaching on vice and
virtue. The history of assassins of heads of Governments in the past
is a history of murderous Roman Catholics. In 90 per cent. of the
cases where criminals are executed for crimes committed, the victims
of the execution have a priest at their elbow to administer the last
sacrament.

"The man who shot Roosevelt was a Roman Catholic.

"The man who shot President Garfield was a Roman Catholic.

"The man who shot President Lincoln was a Roman Catholic.

"The plot that took the life of Lincoln emanated from Roman Catholic
influence in the house of a Roman Catholic.

"Abraham Lincoln said, 'I do not pretend to be a prophet but, though
not a prophet, I see a very dark cloud on our horizon, and that cloud
is coming from Rome. It is filled with tears and blood. The true
motive power is secreted behind the walls of the Vatican, the colleges
and schools of the Jesuits, the convents of the nuns, and the
confessional boxes of Rome,' and such opinions cost the Nation his
life.

"Over 65 per cent. of prison convicts of all grades and of all kinds
of prisoners are Roman Catholics, while less than 5 per cent. are
graduates of our public schools.

"These statements are astounding when we remember that only about 12-1/2
per cent. of the entire population of the United States are Roman
Catholics, while the other 87-1/2 per cent. are not."




CHAPTER IX

KU KLUX KLAN AND THE MASONS

    _Iowa and Missouri Jurisdiction Grand Masters Issue Public
    Denunciations Against the Klan_.


Promoters of the Ku Klux Klan brag that most of its members are
Masons. Whether this is true no one on the outside can tell. It is
known, however, that the kleagles or salesmen, who solicit members in
a community try to play upon the Masonic spirit to help along their
game. That this is done with the disapproval of the leading Masonic
bodies of the country is shown by the action of the grand commanders
of the Iowa and Missouri jurisdictions. They have issued public
denunciations of the operations and purposes of the Klan, especially
that feature that resorts to the masking of members when they are
taking part in Klan rites. The examples of Iowa and Missouri are being
followed by Masons in other states.


IOWA GRAND MASTER'S STATEMENT

Amos N. Alberson of Washington, Iowa, grand master of that state, has
directed a communication to all Masonic lodges under his jurisdiction
as follows:

"Whereas, It has become known to your grand master that a certain 'Ku
Klux Klan' has been and is now organizing within this jurisdiction an
alleged 'secret and invisible empire'; and,

"Whereas, It is reported that its organizers and agents have stated
and intimated to members of our craft that the said 'Ku Klux Klan' is
in effect an adjunct of Freemasonry and in accord with its principles
and purposes; and,

"Whereas, Any such statement or intimation is absolutely false and
untrue, in that Masonry can not and does not approve of or ally itself
with any organization or movement, secret or public, that proposes to
subvert or supersede the processes of orderly representative
government 'of the people, for the people, and by the people'; nor one
that appeals to bigotry and endeavors to foster hatred of any
nationality, class, religious faith or sect, as such.


THE SOLEMN CHARGE

"Therefore, I, Amos N. Alberson, grand master of Masons in Iowa, do
solemnly charge each and all of the regular Masons in Iowa, now as
heretofore when you were made a Mason, that 'in the state you are to
be a quiet and peaceable subject, true to your government and just to
your country; you are not to countenance disloyalty or rebellion, but
patiently submit to legal authority, and conform with cheerfulness to
the government of the country in which you live.'


CITES MASONIC OBLIGATION

"Furthermore, I charge each and all, that as our fathers have framed
the truly Masonic principles of liberty and conscience, equality
before the law, and fraternity among men into the constitutions of
this nation and state, we as Free Masons and citizens of this republic
are obligated to perform our full moral and civic duty, to promote and
enforce an orderly administration of justice and equity, acting openly
that it may be known of all men."

Grand Master Alberson further orders and directs "that this letter to
the craft be read aloud at the next meeting, whether regular or
special, of each lodge throughout this jurisdiction; that it shall be
made of record, and due notice of the same circulated among the
brethrens, that it may come to the knowledge of all Masons in Iowa."


MISSOURI'S ACTION ON KLAN

William F. Johnson, grand master of the Carterlin Grand Lodge of
Missouri Ancient-Free and Accepted Masons made this statement at the
annual meeting of the grand lodge, which indorsed it:

"As the impression seems to prevail in some sections, that the Masonic
fraternity is directly or indirectly associated with or furthering
this secret organization (Ku Klux Klan), and as I have been asked on
numerous occasions what relations, if any, our fraternity bears to
such secret society or order, it is well that the seal of disapproval
be positively placed by this grand lodge upon this secret
organization, which assumes to itself the right and authority to
administer law and punish crimes.

"Nothing is more destructive of free government than secret control.
The arraying of race against race, color against color, sect against
sect is destructive of peace and harmony, which is the great end we,
as Free Masons, have in view. We profess and boast that we are true to
our government and just to our country.


IS SUBVERSIVE OF THE REPUBLIC

"We can not, as Free Masons and good citizens, recognize the right of
any secret society or combination of men to assume unto themselves the
right to administer law and to inflict punishment upon their fellow
men. Such an assumption is subversive of our republican institutions,
contrary to the great principles of Free Masonry.

"An organization that practices censorship of private conduct behind
the midnight anonymity of mask and robe, and enforces its secret
decrees with the weapons of whips and tar and feathers must ultimately
merit and receive the condemnation of those who believe in courts,
open justice and good citizenship."




CHAPTER X

KU KLUX KLAN AND THE NEGRO

    _Members of the Klan take an oath to Bring about White
    Supremacy, notwithstanding the Constitution, which guarantees
    the Negro Equal Rights._


Under the constitution of the United States, the negro is guaranteed
equal rights with all other citizens. When the President of the United
States is sworn into office he takes an oath to uphold the
constitution and the laws passed under it. Every senator, congressman,
governor and other important officer in the United States and in each
of the states is sworn to uphold the constitution.

But the members of the Ku Klux Klan take an oath that puts the
constitution at naught. They swear to bring about "white supremacy."
Taken in conjunction with the speeches and writings of their leaders,
this oath shows that the Klansmen intend to work together to create
strife against the negro, to belittle him and his family, his
churches, his business, his social societies and other things that are
dear to him. The Klan is determined to put the negro out of business
in the United States and to drive him back to Africa.

As is all other main objects--the warfare on Jews, Catholics and
foreign born--the Klan intends to follow its own laws in dealing with
the negro. The writings of its leaders are very plain on that point.

In his oath the Klansman swears:

"I swear that I will most zealously and valiantly shield and preserve
by any and all justifiable means and methods White Supremacy----

"All to which I have sworn by this oath. I will seal with my blood by
Thou my witness, Almighty God. Amen."

Prominent lawyers who have examined this oath declare that it really
is an oath upholding mob rule and that any time the Klansman is given
orders he will follow his leaders in a crusade outside the
constitution of the United States that might lead to serious trouble
and bloodshed.

Chaplain Ridley of the Ku Klux Klan has written in _The Searchlight_
on white supremacy as follows:

"Back in the days of the reconstruction the fathers gathered at the
call of the low, shrill whistle and rode into immortal fame, rescuing
a threatened civilization and making real once more the White Man's
Supremacy. Klansmen of to-day, whether they assemble in the mountains
of Maine, or 'neath the shadows of the great Rockies, or on the plains
of the Wonderful West, or amid the trailing vines and wild flowers of
Dixie, meet to keep alive the memory of these men and preserve the
traditions of those days when the souls of men were tried as if by
fire."

In Texas a white man who testified in behalf of an accused negro--he
merely told the truth under oath as he knew it--was tarred and
feathered by masked men.

_The Searchlight_ has printed column after column of anti-negro stuff,
mostly under anonymous names or under the titles of organizations
whose addresses are not given. One such resolution adopted by the
"Patriotic Societies of Atlanta" condemns Rev. Ashby Jones, a
minister, for inviting an honorable negro to an interracial meeting
and for addressing the negro as "mister."

Here are some of the titles of articles in _The Searchlight_, showing
its evident purpose of stirring up racial feelings:

"Social Equality Put Under Ban."

"Negroes Must Serve on Chain Gangs Now."

"Separate Cars for Negroes."

"White Woman Marries a Negro."

_The Searchlight_ condemned President Harding for appointing Henry
Lincoln Johnson, a negro, as register of deeds.




CHAPTER XI

THE KU KLUX KLAN AND WOMEN


Here is the proclamation issued by Imperial Wizard Simmons, making
Mrs. Elizabeth Tyler his "grand chief of staff" to have charge of the
women's organization to be affiliated with the Ku Klux Klan:

"To all Genii, Grand Dragons and Hydras of Realms, Grand Goblins and
Kleagles of Domains, Grand Titans and Furies of Provinces, Giants,
Exalted Cyclops and Terrors of Cantons, and to all citizens of the
Invisible Empire, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, in the name of our
valiant and venerated dead, I affectionately greet you:

"In view of our Nation's need and as an additional force in helping on
the great work of conserving, protecting and making effective the
great principles of our Anglo-Saxon civilization and American ideals
and institutions, the Imperial Kloncilium, in regular session
assembled, after deliberate care and earnest prayer, decided that
there shall be established within the bounds and under the supreme
authority and government of the Invisible Empire an organization that
will admit the splendid women of our great national commonwealth, who
are now citizens with us in directing the affairs of the Nation. Which
decision of the Imperial Kloncilium I have officially ratified after
serious, careful and devoted consideration of all matters and things
involved by this move.

"In view of the foregoing, I hereby officially declare and proclaim
that such organization does now exist in prospect. Plans, methods,
ritualism and regulations of same are now in process of formation and
will be perfected at an early date and officially announced.

"I do farther proclaim that in order to have the proper assistance in
the formation and perfecting of this organization, I have this day
and date selected and officially appointed Mary Elizabeth Tyler of
Atlanta, Fulton county, Ga., to be my grand chief of staff, to have
immediate charge of work pertaining to said woman's organization under
my authority and direction.

"Further information will be duly and officially communicated from
time to time.

"Done in the Aulic of His Majesty, Imperial Wizard, Emperor of the
Invisible Empire, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, in the Imperial City of
Atlanta, Commonwealth of Georgia, United States of America, on this,
the ninth day of the ninth month of the year of our Lord, 1921.

"Duly signed and sealed by His Majesty,

                                          William Joseph Simmons,
                                               "Imperial Wizard."




CHAPTER XII

ATROCITIES COMMITTED IN THE NAME OF KU KLUX KLAN

    _Ku Klux Klan Knights of Beaumont, Texas, issue a justification
    for taking the law into Their own hands._


Confession that the Ku Klux Klan uses tar and feathers and the lash to
punish persons whose actions it condemns is made by the Klansmen of
Beaumont, Tex. The Beaumont Ku Klux Klan organization tarred and
feathered Dr. J.S. Paul and R.F. Scott and later acknowledged, under
its official seal, that its members did the job.

"Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, No. 7, Beaumont, Texas," admitted taking
the law into their own hands in a statement dated July 21, 1921. This
statement was made to the editors of two newspapers of Beaumont. It
sought to justify the "tar and feather party" and gave warning that
the "heavy hand of the Ku Klux Klan" was waiting to yank other persons
from their beds in case they came into its displeasure.


SHOW SIMMONS MISREPRESENTS

Grand Wizard William J. Simmons has declared publicly that the Ku Klux
did not indulge in midnight raids on defenseless victims whom it
tarred and feathered. He has defended the Ku Klux Klan by ascribing
these unlawful actions to imposters who use the regalia of the Ku
Klux. The Beaumont incident proves that the Ku Klux not only was
responsible for assaults on Dr. Paul and Scott, but that it boasted of
its exploits with them.


LETTER ADMITS USE OF TAR

The Paul-Scott "party" occurred on May 8. Its details were telegraphed
all over the country. The letter to the two Beaumont newspapers the
following July read:

"Your publication since the organization of the Ku Klux Klan in the
city of Beaumont has on various occasions published information
concerning and pertaining to the affairs of this organization. We
believe, as you do, that a newspaper should serve the best interests
of its constituency and that all legitimate news should be given the
public through its columns. During the past two months items have
appeared in your paper relative to the case of the Ku Klux Klan and
its connection with Dr. J.S. Paul.

"Now, that you and the public may be fully informed of the true facts
in the case, the Klan has assembled and herewith hands you an
intelligent, true and correct history of the entire matter. The Klan
suggests that this summary of facts be published in the columns of
your paper not later than Sunday, July 24, 1921, and that it be
published verbatim, according to the enclosed copy, typographical
errors excepted.

                                    Knights of the Ku Klux Klan."


PHYSICIAN IS ACCUSED

The "intelligent, true and correct history of the entire matter" was a
lengthy statement. It accused Dr. Paul of being a physician who for
years had sold whisky and narcotic drugs and had performed illegal
operations on women. Because he had political and financial backing
grand jury proceedings against him had been squelched.

About the middle of December, 1920, R.F. Scott, who lived in
Deweyville, Texas (Scott was a former member of the United States
Marine corps), consulted Dr. Paul and arranged for an illegal
operation. The statement declares the girl became seriously ill as a
result of malpractice on Dr. Paul's part and was taken from her
residence to a hospital, where a serious operation was performed.

After this occurrence the girl demanded that Dr. Paul assist her in
defraying the extra expense due to his negligence, and he offered her
$500 to leave Beaumont. This bargain he broke and is accused of having
threatened to cause her arrest for attempted blackmail, or with death
if she exposed him.


MORAL LAW ABOVE WRITTEN

Her predicament was reported to the Klan and the statement says her
cry was heard by men who respect the "great moral law more than the
technicalities of the legal code."

The statement goes on:

"The eyes of the unknown had seen and had observed the wrong to be
redressed. Dr. Paul was wealthy. His victim was a poor girl. Between
the two stood the majesty of the law, draped in technicalities of
changes of venue, mistrials, appeals, postponements, eminent counsel
skilled in the esoteric art of protecting crime and interpreting laws
involved in a mass of legal verbiage, the winding and unwinding of red
tape, instead of the sinewy arm of justice, wielding the unerring
sword. The law of the Klan is JUSTICE.

"Dr. Paul was approached in his office by three men on the night of
May 7 and instructed to go with them. He was placed in a waiting
automobile and escorted a few miles out of town. The judgment of the
Klan was read to him and charges were related to him, none of which he
would deny.


"LASHED, TARRED AND FEATHERED"

"In a cowardly, whimpering plea, he pleaded that others were as guilty
as he. The lash was laid on his back and the tar and feathers applied
to his body. He was then informed of the will of the Klan that he
should leave the city within forty-eight hours. Upon the return of the
party to Beaumont, Dr. Paul was discharged from an automobile at the
intersection of two of the main streets of the city, that he might be
a warning to all of his ilk that decent men and women no longer wanted
him in the community.

"Dr. Paul complied with the instructions of the Klan that he leave the
city and returned for a few days to his former home at Lufkin. During
this time he was constantly under the surveillance of the Klan. Within
a few days he had surrounded himself with relatives and hired
hench-men of his own tribe and character and returned to Beaumont.


SCOTT ALSO TARRED AND FEATHERED

"Scott, who had been constantly watched by the Klan, whose number is
legion and whose eye is all-seeing and whose methods of gathering
information are not known to the alien world, was apprehended and
punished in the same manner Dr. Paul had been dealt with. He was taken
to the woods and guarded until nightfall. His captors during this time
treated him with kindness and consideration. They provided him with
food and fruit to eat and ice water to drink. During the day he was
questioned and admitted all the charges the Klan had accused him of.
The judgment of the Klan was that he was to be given ten lashes across
the bare back and that he was to be tarred and feathered.


EYES OF "UNKNOWN" ON HIM

"Scott left Beaumont on Monday, July 18, and spent the major portion
of the day in Orange parading the streets and proclaimed the
diabolical lie that he had been subjected to the tortures of the
inquisition. He posed to the gullible public and sensational
newspapers as a patriot and a hero. All these things the eyes of the
unknown have seen and their ears have heard. We can not be deceived
and JUSTICE will no longer be mocked."

The seal of the Beaumont Klan was attached to the end of the
statement.

Rev. Caleb Ridley, known as the imperial chaplain of the order,
acknowledged that the Klan's purpose was to set itself up as
prosecutor, jury, judge and sheriff.


PASTOR GIVES WARNING

On Aug. 26, 1921, he issued to the citizens of Dallas county, Texas,
the following warning:

"To the Citizens of Dallas County, Greetings: This organization has
caused to be posted the following proclamation:

"Be it known and hereby proclaimed

"That this organization is composed of native-born Americans and none
other.

"That its purpose is to uphold the dignity and the authority of the
law. * * *

"That this organization * * * recognizes * * * that situations
frequently arise where no existing law offers a remedy.

"That this organization does * * * not countenance and will not stand
for social parasites remaining in this city. It is equally opposed to
the gambler, the trickster, the moral degenerate and the man who lives
by his wits and is without visible means of support.

"The eye of the unknown hath seen and doth constantly observe all,
white or black, who disregard this warning. 'Whatsoever thou sowest
that shall you also reap.' Regardless of official, social or financial
position, this warning applies to all living within the jurisdiction
of this Klan.

"This warning will not be repeated.

"'Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin.'

"Hereafter all communications from us will bear the official seal of
the Klan.

                                   "KNIGHTS OF THE KU KLUX KLAN."


KU KLUX KLAN SHOOTS SHERIFF

The attitude of members of the Ku Klux Klan toward officers of the law
was demonstrated on October 1, 1921, in Lorena, Tex., when the Ku Klux
Klan shot Sheriff Bob Buchanan of McLennan county, when he attempted
to stop a parade of Masked Knights.

Without getting an official permit to hold the parade, the Ku Klux
Klan announced that it would be held at 8:30 p.m. The sheriff notified
the community that the parade was against the law and that he would
not allow it. The word was carried to the Ku Klux Klan leaders.
Messages were sent back and forth, and the Ku Kluxers tried to scare
the sheriff into a retreat. He refused to back down, however, and
ended the negotiations by telling the Klansmen that they had to obey
the law as well as other citizens.

The sheriff said there was a law against uncertain masked men who
refused to divulge their identity. He would agree to the parade if the
names of the masked men were furnished to him. This the Klan leaders
refused to do.

The Klansmen held a council of war at which the sheriff was denounced
for daring to give them orders. They decided to show the people of
Lorena that they were bigger than the sheriff or the law that he
represented. The chief of the Klansmen gave the order for the parade
to start.

With a posse of citizens and deputies, Sheriff Buchanan met the parade
at the intersection of the main streets. Thousands of persons were out
to witness the test of strength between the law and the Ku Klux Klan.
The sheriff approached a masked Klansman who carried a fiery cross. He
attempted to seize the cross. There was a shot. A bullet hit the
sheriff in the right arm. A general gun fight followed and ten persons
were injured. The Masked Knights hurriedly departed, carrying one of
their number who was wounded.

Sheriff Buchanan is hailed as a hero in Texas by the law-abiding
element. The United States needs more public officials like him--men
with the courage to stand by their oaths of office.


OTHER OUTRAGES

Since the Ku Klux Klan was organized night outrages in which masked
men are involved have increased to a frequency not known in the United
States since the years just following the Civil War, when the original
Ku Klux Klan was active in the southern states against "carpet
baggers" and Negroes.

A murder was committed on June 9, 1921, at Sea Breeze, Fla., by masked
men who said they were Ku Klux Klan. They took Thomas L. Reynolds from
his bed and punched and kicked him. Then one of the masked men shot
him. He died later. Official investigation failed to involve the Ku
Klux Klan.


WIZARD SIMMONS DENIES

In the case of Paul and Scott in Beaumont, Tex., an organization
claiming to be the Ku Klux Klan admitted under a seal that it was
responsible. In many other instances the masked riders have openly
boasted that they were Ku Kluxers. In other cases they have worn
regalia like that of the Ku Klux. Imperial Wizard Simmons has denied
that the Ku Klux is responsible for any outrages. Whether he knows
what he is talking about probably will be determined only by a
Congressional investigation.

Meanwhile the people of the country have the big fact on which to form
their judgment--namely, that since the Ku Klux has extended its
membership and influence by influencing hundreds of thousands to get
down on their knees and take the oath of "white supremacy," bands of
night riders who take the law into their own hands have been carrying
on these disgraceful marauding "parties" with a boldness that
challenges public attention.

In Daytona, Fla., H.C. Sparkman, an editor, carried on a campaign
against the Ku Klux Klan. On June 12, 1921, Sparkman received by mail
a threat warning him that if he did not let the Ku Klux alone the Klan
would take up his case and that he might be killed. In Pensacola,
Fla., on July 8, 1921, a band of men wearing white robes like those of
the Ku Klux Klan in their initiation ceremonies appeared at the store
of Chris Lochas, a restaurant keeper, and while the chief of police
was looking on gave him a written order to leave town because of
certain charges. The warning was signed "K.K.K."


KU KLUX KLANSMAN KILLED

In the city of Atlanta, Ga., where the Ku Klux Klan is strongest a
killing resulted from a raid by masked men on J.C. Thomas, who had a
lunch room at 280-1/2 Decatur street. Thomas had received letters
threatening him with violence unless he "let alone" a certain woman in
his employ. On March 12, 1920, four men got Thomas to enter an
automobile and drove him to a spot in a lonely neighborhood. There
they took him from the car and told him that he was to be punished
because he had not observed their warnings. When they started to
strike Thomas, he took a knife from his pocket and killed Fred
Thompson who was later identified as a member of the Ku Klux Klan.

The case of killing against Thomas was put before a grand jury but the
jury refused to indict him. At the inquest into the death of Thompson,
Homer Pitts was identified as the driver of the car in which Thomas
had been kidnapped. Pitts was represented in the proceedings by
Attorney W.S. Coburn. In the official list of Ku Kluxers there is a
H.R. Pitts who is a kleagle at Fresno, Cal., and a W.S. Coburn who is
a grand goblin with headquarters at Los Angeles, Cal.


100 OUTRAGES IN TEXAS

Texas, where the Ku Klux Klan is strong, has been the scene of nearly
100 unlawful punishments by masked men. In one case the initials
"K.K.K." were branded on the forehead of a negro who was horsewhipped
on the charge of having been found in a white woman's room.

Something the same treatment that was given Dr. Paul was handed out to
J.S. Allen, an attorney of Houston, Tex., who on April 10, 1921, was
whisked from a downtown street, driven to the country and tarred and
feathered. The masked men then took him back to the city and threw him
out of the automobile into a crowd. He was nude except for his coat of
tar and feathers.




SECRET SOCIETY RITUALS


REVISED FREEMASONRY ILLUSTRATED.

    The complete and accurate ritual of the First Seven Masonic
    Degrees of the Blue Lodge and Chapter, by Jacob O. Doesburg,
    Past Master of Unity Lodge, Holland, Michigan, a Royal Arch
    Mason, with full Monitorial and Scripture Readings and the
    Secret Work profusely illustrated. The exact Michigan "Work,"
    with a Historical Sketch of the Order and a critical analysis of
    each degree by President J. Blanchard. Also the legal
    attestation of the accuracy of the ritual by the author and
    others.

    Paper cover                     $1.50
    Cloth                            2.00
    First Three Degrees, paper       1.00
    Cloth                            1.50


THE MASTER'S CARPET;

    By Edmond Ronayne, Past Master of Keystone Lodge, No. 639,
    Chicago. The work contains 406 pages, illustrated with 50
    engravings, and is substantially bound in cloth.

    Price                           $1.25

    Explains the true source and meaning of every ceremony and
    symbol of the Blue Lodge, showing the basis on which the ritual
    is founded. By a careful perusal of this work, a more thorough
    knowledge of the principles of the order can be obtained than by
    attending the Lodge for years. Every Mason, every person
    contemplating becoming a member, and even those who are
    indifferent on the subject, should procure and carefully read
    this work.


MAH-HAH-BONE;

    By Edmond Ronayne. Bound in fine cloth, 690 pages, 135
    illustrations.

    Price                          $2.25

    Comprises the "Hand Book of Free Masonry" and "Master's Carpet"
    in one volume. The value and convenience of this combined book
    will be seen at once. As the Master's Carpet frequently refers
    by foot notes to the Hand Book, and the Hand Book as frequently
    refers to the "Carpet," by having both books under one cover,
    reference can be made in an instant. It is cheaper; as the
    Carpet at $1.25 and the Hand Book at $1.50 would make $2.75,
    while the combined book sells in fine cloth binding at

                                   $2.25


    EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
    (Incorporated)
    26 E. Van Buren St.       Chicago


HAND BOOK OF FREE MASONRY;

    By Edmond Ronayne, Past Master of Keystone Lodge, No. 639,
    Chicago. Latest Revised Edition, with portraits enlarged to 284
    pages, 85 illustrations

    This work gives the correct or "Standard" work and ritual of
    Masonry; the proper position of each officer in the Lodge room,
    order of opening and closing the Lodge, dress of candidate,
    ceremony of initiation, the correct method of conferring the
    three degrees of "Ancient Craft Masonry," Entered Apprentice,
    Fellow Craft and Master Mason, the proper manner of conducting
    the business of the Lodge, and giving the signs, grips,
    pass-words, etc., all of which are accurately illustrated with
    85 engravings.

    Paper cover, pocket size       $1.00
    Flexible Cloth, pocket size     1.50


BLUE LODGE AND CHAPTER.

    By Edmond Ronayne. Bound in fine Cloth, 604 pages.

    Price                          $2.00

    This book comprises the Hand Book of Free Masonry, which gives
    the written and the "unwritten" work of the three degrees of
    Blue Lodge Masonry, and the complete work of the four degrees of
    Chapter Masonry, including the Royal Arch degree. This makes a
    compact, handy and economical volume.


REVISED ILLINOIS FREEMASONRY, ILL'D.

    The complete and accurate ritual of the First Seven Masonic
    Degrees of the Blue Lodge and Chapter, by a Past High Priest,
    with all Monitorial and Scripture Readings and the Secret Work
    fully illustrated. The exact Illinois "Work." Nearly 400
    foot-notes from the highest Masonic authorities. Complete work
    of 640 pages, the First Seven Degrees comprising the Blue Lodge
    and the Chapter Degrees.

    Cloth                          $2.00
    First 3 degrees, cloth. Price   1.50


POCKET LEXICON OF FREEMASONRY.

    By J.W. Morris. A reliable companion to the young Mason on the
    ritual and customs of the Order, as well as a memory-aid to the
    older brethren. 53 pages, cloth bound.

    Price                          $1.00
    Paper covers                     .50


    EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
    (Incorporated)
    26 E. Van Buren St.       Chicago


       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                   |
    |                                                           |
    | Page 10: aids replaced with aides                         |
    | Page 32: agres replaced with agrees                       |
    | Page 40: "If the Klansmen rides a horse" replaced with    |
    |          "If the Klansman rides a horse"                  |
    | Page 51: Bulter replaced with Butler                      |
    | Page 63: orgaization replaced with organization           |
    | Page 67: law-aboding replaced with law-abiding            |
    | Page 68: maurading replaced with marauding                |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *





End of Project Gutenberg's Ku Klux Klan Secrets Exposed, by Ezra Asher Cook

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KU KLUX KLAN SECRETS EXPOSED ***

***** This file should be named 35976.txt or 35976.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/9/7/35976/

Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
