The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Blue Rose Fairy Book, by Maurice Baring

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Blue Rose Fairy Book

Author: Maurice Baring

Release Date: May 1, 2011 [EBook #36008]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLUE ROSE FAIRY BOOK ***




Produced by David Edwards, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







  [Illustration]


  The Blue Rose Fairy Book
  Maurice Baring


  [Illustration: THE HOOFS OF HIS STEED LEFT BEHIND THEM A TRAIL OF
  TWINKLING ANEMONES]


  THE BLUE ROSE
  FAIRY BOOK

  BY
  MAURICE BARING

  [Decoration]

  NEW YORK
  DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY
  1911



  DEDICATED
  TO
  _MARY and AUBREY_



  NOTE

  One of these stories, "The Glass Mender," appeared first in _The
  English Review_, and six of the shorter stories in _The Morning
  Post_. I wish to thank the editors and proprietors concerned for
  their kindness in letting me republish them. The rest of the
  stories are new.
                                                           M. B.



  CONTENTS

                                                       PAGE
  THE GLASS MENDER                                        1
  THE BLUE ROSE                                          31
  THE STORY OF VOX ANGELICA AND LIEBLICH GEDACHT         45
  THE VAGABOND                                           97
  THE MINSTREL                                          137
  THE HUNCHBACK, THE POOL, AND THE MAGIC RING           151
  THE SILVER MOUNTAIN                                   165
  THE RING                                              179
  THE MERCHANT'S DAUGHTER                               193
  THE CUNNING APPRENTICE                                219
  ORESTES AND THE DRAGON                                233
  THE WISE PRINCESS                                     247



  LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

  And as he galloped through the wood, the hoofs
  of his steed left behind them a trail of
  twinkling anemones                                   _Frontispiece_

  One evening he was playing his one-stringed
  instrument outside a dark wall                     _To face p._  41

  As he said this he climbed on to the manuals
  and disappeared into the heart of the organ              "       95

  And there stood before the throng a wonderful
  shining figure with wings                                "      133

  And turning round she saw an old woman, bent
  and worn, who was muttering a supplication               "      139

  The sun was shining on the sea and a fresh
  breeze was blowing                                       "      160

  And towards the evening he emerged from the
  forest and saw the hill before him shining
  in the sunset                                            "      176

  Her mother, when she was walking in the
  garden of the palace, found a silver horseshoe
  lying on one of the paths                                "      181

  A garment on which the month of May, and all
  its flowers, was painted                                 "      210

  He changed himself into a hawk                           "      223

  The dragon appeared, and seizing the little
  Princess with its tail, flew away                        "      235

  She went out on to the step and called out in a
  loud voice, "Oh, you boisterous winds, bring
  hither that same carpet on which I used to
  sit in the house of my father"                           "      252




THE GLASS MENDER


Once upon a time there lived a King and a Queen who had one daughter
called Rainbow. When she was christened, the people of the city were
gathered together outside the cathedral, and amongst them was an old
gipsy woman. The gipsy wanted to go inside the cathedral, but the Beadle
would not let her, because he said there was no room. When the ceremony
was over, and the King and Queen walked out, followed by the Head Nurse
who carried the baby, the gipsy called out to them:

"Your daughter will be very beautiful, and as happy as the day is long,
until she sees the Spring!" And then she disappeared in the crowd.

The King and the Queen took counsel together and the King said: "That
gipsy was evidently a fairy, and what she said bodes no good."

"Yes," said the Queen, "there is only one thing to be done: Rainbow must
never see the Spring, nor even hear that there is such a thing."

So an order was issued to the whole city, that if any one should say the
word "Spring" in the presence of Princess Rainbow he would have his head
cut off. Moreover, it was settled that the Princess should never be
allowed to go outside the palace, and during the springtime she should
be kept entirely indoors.

The King and the Queen lived in a city which was on the top of a hill,
and had a wall round it, and the King's palace was in the middle of it.
In the springtime Rainbow was taken to a high tower which looked on to
the little round city, and from her window you could see the spires of
the churches, the ramparts, and the broad green plain beyond. But a
curtain made of canvas was fastened outside Rainbow's window, so that
she could see nothing, and she was not allowed to go outside her tower
until the springtime was over.

Rainbow grew up into a most beautiful Princess, with grey eyes and fair
hair, and until she was sixteen all went well, and nothing happened to
interfere with her happiness.

It was on her sixteenth birthday, which was in April, and she was
sitting alone in her room, looking at her birthday presents, when she
began to wonder for the first time why she was shut up in her tower
during three months of the year, and why a curtain was placed outside
her window, so that she could see nothing outside. Her mother and her
nurse had told her that this was done so that she might not fall ill,
and she had always believed it; but on that day, for the first time, she
began to wonder whether there might be any other reason as well. It was
a lovely Spring day, and the sun shone through the canvas curtain which
was stretched outside Rainbow's open window; a breeze came into her room
from the outside world, and Rainbow felt a great longing to tear aside
the curtain and to see what was happening out of doors.

At that very moment, a sound came into her room from the city: it was
the sound of two or three notes played on some small reed or pipe,
unlike those of any of the musical instruments she had heard in the
palace, more tuneful and more artless and more gay. As she heard the few
reedy notes of this little tune, she felt something which she had never
known before. The whole room seemed to be full of a new sunshine, and
she smelt the fragrance of the grass; she heard the blackbird whistling,
and the lark singing; she saw the apple orchards in blossom, the violets
peeping from under the leaves, the hedges covered with primroses, the
daffodils fluttering in the wind, the fern uncrumpling her new leaves,
the green slopes starred with crocuses; fields of buttercups and
marigolds; forests paved with bluebells; lilac bushes; the trailing gold
of the laburnums; and the sharp green of the awakening beech-trees; and
she heard the cuckoo's note, and a thousand other unknown sounds of
meadow, wood, and stream; and before her passed the whole pageant of the
Spring, with its joyous music and its thousand and one sights.

The vision disappeared and she cried out: "Let me go into the world and
let me taste and see this wonderful new thing!"

Rainbow said nothing about her vision, either to her parents or to her
nurses, but she resolved to steal out of the palace as soon as she
could, and to see in the world what her vision had shown her; but that
very evening she fell ill, and she was obliged to go to bed. The next
day she was no better, and a week passed and she was just as ill as
ever. All the wisest physicians of the land examined her, but not one of
them could say what was the matter with her; some of them prescribed
medicines, and others strange things to eat and drink; but none of them
did her the least good. The months went by, and Rainbow was still lying
in bed, suffering from a strange malady which nobody could even find a
name for. When the Spring was past, Rainbow was borne on a couch into
the garden of the palace; but she got no better.

At last the Queen sent for a Wise Woman who lived in a wood near the
city, and asked her advice. The Wise Woman was told Rainbow's history
and what the gipsy had said, and after she had looked at Rainbow and
spoken to her, she said to the Queen:

"I understand quite well what has happened. Your daughter has seen the
Spring."

"But that's impossible," said the Queen, "for during the whole of the
Spring months she has never left her room."

"Somehow or other the Spring has reached her," said the old woman, and
then she asked Rainbow some more questions, and the end of this was that
Rainbow told her about the tune she had heard on her birthday, and the
vision she had seen.

"I knew it," said the old woman, "she heard somebody playing the
Spring's own tune, and she won't get well until she hears it again, and
even then her troubles will be far from ended." So saying the old woman
went away.

The King at once sent for the court musicians and told them to play the
Spring's Song. They fiddled, and they blew upon every kind of pipe and
flute; they beat the cymbals and struck the harp; but none of these
tunes kindled the slightest interest in Rainbow or roused her from her
listlessness. The King then issued a proclamation saying that whoever
should play the song that cured Rainbow would receive any reward he
should ask for, and even, if he wished it, his daughter's hand.

The news was spread far and wide, and people came from the four corners
of the world to play to the Princess.

First of all a lad came from the northern country, where he had slain a
huge dragon in single combat, and he said that if any one knew the Song
of Spring he did, for the birds themselves had taught it him; and when
he was shown into the Princess's room he blew a blast on his horn, so
strong that the rafters trembled, and so sweet that the palace seemed to
be full of the scent of the northern forests. But Rainbow paid no heed,
and the lad went his way.

Then an uncouth minstrel came from Greece; he had furry ears and a
pointed beard, and he played on a double pipe and he said: "I know the
Song of Spring if any one knows it, for the bees taught it me." He
breathed on his pipe and the whole room seemed to be full of the smell
of thyme, the murmur of reeds, and the drone of bees. But Rainbow paid
no heed to him, and the uncouth minstrel went his way.

Then there came a man who carried a lyre. His face was beautiful and
sad, and he said: "I know the Song of Spring if any one knows it, for I
heard it played in the happy fields." And he struck his lyre and sang a
song which was so lovely and so plaintive that the horses neighed in
their stalls, the dogs came to listen, and the trees of the garden bent
over the palace windows, and the King and the Queen and all the
courtiers wept: but Rainbow paid no heed, and the man with the lyre went
his way.

Then came a knight from over the sea, from the West Country; and he was
the most splendid knight ever seen, and he carried neither harp nor
pipe, and he said: "I know the Song of Spring if any one knows it, for
I learnt it in the forests of Tintagel:" and he sang the song that only
those who dwell in the forests of the West know, and it was a song of
love. But Rainbow paid no heed, and the knight went his way.

Then Prince Charming came from the Golden Isles and said: "I know the
Song of Spring if any one knows it, for my fairy-godmother gave me a
flute, and when I play on it the elves dance round me in a ring": and he
played a tune on his flute, and the lights and rainbows of the golden
islands seemed to twinkle in the room. But Rainbow paid no heed, so
Prince Charming went his way.

Then there came a Prince who was a changeling and who had been brought
up in Fairyland itself, and he said: "I know the Song of Spring if any
one knows it, for Proserpine, the Queen of the Fairies, herself taught
me the song she heard in the Vales of Enna, when she was picking flowers
in the Spring." And he sang of the Sicilian fields, a song of the
swallow and the corn; and the song was like a vision, and the room
seemed to be full of the sound of the southern seas; but Rainbow paid no
heed, and the changeling went his way.

Then Prince Apollo himself came from Italy with his fiddle, and he said:
"If I do not know the Song of Spring, who can know it? For my music
excels that of all mortal men."

Prince Apollo struck up a tune on his fiddle and the room was filled
with a glory; but Rainbow paid no heed, and Prince Apollo went away in a
rage, saying that the Princess had no ear.

After this people gave up the quest, for they said: "If all these great
people fail, how should we succeed?" Now it happened one day, when the
springtime came round again, that two tumblers were playing at ball in
the Princess's room to try and amuse her, and one of them in throwing,
threw the ball and broke the pane of her casement; so a glass mender was
sent for to mend the window, and there happened to be one that day just
outside the palace.

The glass mender was a youth, and his eyes were blue and his cheeks
fresh, and as he strode up the staircase to the Princess's room, he
whistled on a small glass pipe the tune that glass menders have always
whistled ever since the beginning of the world. Directly Rainbow heard
this sound, she leaped from her bed and cried out:

"That is it! I hear it, the Song of Spring!" And as the glass mender
came into the room with his basket and his tools, she said: "At last
you've come! You've cured me, and I am now quite well again."

There was no doubt about it. Rainbow from that moment was cured, and the
glass mender went to the King and claimed his reward.

At first the King was vexed that his daughter should have to wed a
humble glass mender, but he did not dare play any tricks with his
daughter's life after what had happened, for fear she should fall ill
again; and besides, Rainbow was determined to marry him, and as he was
so young, so handsome, and so well-spoken, the King told the Queen that
he was very likely a Prince in disguise.

But the glass mender made two conditions about his marriage: the first
was that he was to continue to be a wandering glass mender who earned
his living by going from city to city, and from village to village,
mending glass, and the second was that Rainbow was never to ask him
where he came from nor who were his parents, and that she should call
him Blue Eyes, nor ever ask him whether he had another name.

This convinced the King that Blue Eyes was a Prince in disguise, and the
conditions were readily agreed to, and Rainbow and Blue Eyes were
married without further delay. The King gave them each a white pony for
a wedding present and they started off on their travels.

They rode through the fields and the woods, from village to village,
sleeping now in a house and now out of doors, and for the first time in
her life Rainbow tasted and saw the Spring; and no words can tell how
happy they were: all day long Blue Eyes played a tune on his glass
pipe, and he showed Rainbow the haunts of the birds and the beasts; and
whenever they came to a village it was as though they brought the
sunshine of the morning with them, for as soon as any one looked at Blue
Eyes, they could not help being happy, and when he played on his pipe
people danced for joy. They wandered over the wide world, and they saw
every kind of country and city, and wherever they went smiling faces met
them and they made sad people happy, and happy people happier still.

When they were in the woods or meadows the birds and beasts seemed to
know Blue Eyes, and he talked with them just as if they were real
people; and the most savage beasts--wolves and bears and wild
boars--were as tame as lap-dogs when he spoke to them; and the
nightingales used to perch on Blue Eyes' shoulder in the evening, and
sing, as he rode with Rainbow through the forest; the bees and
butterflies used to fly in front of them and show them the way.

The years went by and they had a little son who was called Blue Boy,
who grew up just like his father, and talked with the birds and beasts
directly he could speak, and they were all three of them together as
happy as the day is long.

One Spring evening they arrived rather late in a wood, and after they
had made a fire and cooked their supper, Rainbow and Blue Boy went to
sleep, and Blue Eyes sat by the fire for he said he wasn't sleepy.

After Rainbow had been sleeping for a few hours she woke up with a
start. The moon had risen and the camp-fire had not yet gone out, but
the ashes were smouldering and there by the fire sat Blue Eyes. Rainbow
could see him distinctly, but he seemed to her to look different from
usual; strange, beautiful, and more like a fairy Prince than a glass
mender. Sitting with him by the fire was a lovely maiden with roses in
her hair and some ears of wheat in her hand, and a silver sickle hanging
from her girdle. They were talking together. Rainbow was so surprised
that she uttered a cry, and immediately the beautiful maiden vanished
into the wood. Blue Eyes at once went to Rainbow, but she turned over
on her side and pretended to be asleep.

The next day Blue Eyes said nothing about the strange maiden, and
Rainbow began to be jealous and sad. She tried not to think of it, but
she could not get rid of the thought that perhaps Blue Eyes loved
somebody else. The next evening they again camped out in the wood, and
Rainbow said she was tired and lay down to sleep early; but she only
pretended to go to sleep, and she was really wide awake.

As soon as Blue Eyes thought that Rainbow was asleep, he blew a note on
his glass pipe, and once more the strange maiden came out of the wood,
and she and Blue Eyes talked together in a whisper, and once more Blue
Eyes seemed to look quite different, and not at all like a glass mender,
only, as it was dark that night, Rainbow could not see him distinctly.

The next morning Blue Eyes again said nothing about the strange maiden,
and Rainbow was sadder than ever. If Blue Eyes would only explain, she
said to herself, everything would be all right. So as they were riding
through the wood, Rainbow said to him:

"I saw you in the wood last night talking to a strange maiden; and, Blue
Eyes, you looked different. I am sure now that you are not a glass
mender; and now that I have seen you talking to that strange maiden, I
shall have no peace until you tell me who you are and who she is."

"Alas, alas, alas!" said Blue Eyes. "Oh; Rainbow, why could you not
trust me? I must tell you now, whether I wish it or no, but you have
destroyed our happiness, and I shall have to leave you. My name is
Spring, and I was talking to my sister Summer; and now I shall have to
leave you, for I can only take a mortal shape as long as nobody knows
who I am."

Then Rainbow wept bitterly, and said:

"Do you mean you must leave me for ever, and that I shall never see you
again?"

"There is one hope left," said Blue Eyes. "We shall meet again if you
are able to find me. You will have to search all over the world, and you
will not find me until you recognise my look and my voice in the speech
or the look of a human being; and if you fail to recognise it, when it
is there, you will never find me at all."

"And when I recognise you either in the speech or the look of a human
being," said Rainbow, "what must I do then?"

"Then," said Blue Eyes, "you must say this:

    'Blue Eyes, Blue Eyes, come back to me,
    Over the hills and over the sea;
    Brother of Summer, husband and friend,
    Come and stay till the world shall end.'"

"But what will happen," asked Rainbow, "if I make a mistake and say the
rhyme to some one who seems to have your look and your speech, when
really they are not there?"

"If you make a mistake," said Blue Eyes, "you will never see me again."

Rainbow again began to weep bitterly. She implored Blue Eyes to forgive
her, but she no longer begged him to stay, for she knew it was useless;
and Blue Eyes kissed her and Blue Boy, and when he had said good-bye, he
leapt on to his pony and galloped off into the wood. As he galloped away
his appearance changed; his glass mender's clothes fell away from him;
instead of his blue cap, there was a crown of dew on his head, and he
was clothed with the petals of snowdrops and cowslips; he wore a rainbow
for a scarf, which fluttered in the wind; his pony changed into a white
horse with silver wings; in his hand he carried a large wand of almond
blossom, and a starling perched on his wrist. And as he galloped through
the wood, the hoofs of his steed left behind them a trail of twinkling
anemones. Thus he galloped on until he disappeared into the heart of the
forest, and Rainbow was left alone with Blue Boy.

After she had had a long cry she dried her eyes and began at once to
look for Blue Eyes. She wandered on through the wood with Blue Boy until
they came to a hermit's cave. The hermit lived there all the year round,
and his only companions were the birds and the beasts of the forest,
and Rainbow thought if she talked to him she would perhaps hear the
voice or see the look of Blue Eyes. But when she spoke to him she saw
that he had forgotten what human beings were like, and he gave Rainbow
and Blue Boy some bread and milk just as though they were birds. Then he
opened his big book and began reading in it, and no longer noticed their
presence.

The months went by, and Rainbow searched everywhere. She searched all
through the summer, and although she met many kind faces, and saw many a
happy smile, and heard many a young voice, nowhere did she meet any one
who in the least reminded her of Blue Eyes.

When the winter came, they went to a city, and Blue Boy, who was growing
up into a big boy, was apprenticed to a glass mender, and Rainbow and he
lived together in a little room in the glass mender's house. The glass
mender had a pretty daughter called Joan, and she had a tame blackbird
which she kept in a wicker cage. All through the winter the city had
been muffled in snow, and it had been bitterly cold; at last the snow
melted; and March came with his boisterous wind and his cold showers of
sleet and rain.

But one day the rain stopped; the sun shone in the blue sky, and Joan
cried out:

"This is the first Spring day!" She ran out of doors with her bird cage
and hung it up on the wall outside the house, and although there were as
yet no green leaves anywhere, the blackbird knew that the spring had
come, and he began to sing. While Joan was looking at the blackbird,
Rainbow was watching her from her window, and was thinking to herself.
"Surely now I shall hear the voice of Blue Eyes or see his look!" She
was on the point of calling out:

    "Blue Eyes, Blue Eyes, come back to me,"

when Joan looked up at her and met her gaze; and laughed, and blushed,
and ran away. Rainbow knew that it was neither the voice nor the look of
Blue Eyes; and she cried from disappointment.

By the time the spring was over, Blue Boy had learned his trade, and he
was able to work on his own account and to support his mother, so they
left the city together when the summer came, and they went from village
to village and from city to city, mending broken window panes.

The years went by. Blue Boy was almost a man, and still Rainbow had not
come across any one who had reminded her of Blue Eyes. She was sad,
because she knew that in a year's time Blue Boy would be a man, and that
it would be time for him to marry, and that she would then be left all
alone. She knew that this was the last year that she and Blue Boy would
be together.

One day they were walking through a grassy wood which was yellow with
cowslips. It was a lovely April morning, and in the wood a lot of
children were playing, and making chains and wreaths with the cowslips.

"Now, at last," thought Rainbow, "I shall hear the voice of Blue Eyes."
She ran up to the children, but when the children saw her running
towards them, they were frightened, and they ran away into the wood,
and although she called and called they would not come back.

A little further on they came to a lovely village on a hill, overlooking
a river which was a small arm of the sea. The hill was covered with
orchards which were in full blossom, and in front of the little white
straw-thatched cottages the neat flower-beds were full of sweet-smelling
violets.

Rainbow and Blue Boy stayed in this village, and found plenty of work.
One evening Rainbow was strolling in a lane on the top of the hill; the
steep lane had on each side of it two grassy banks, on the top of which
bushes and brambles and nut-trees grew so thickly that the ends of their
boughs almost met across the lane, and the banks were covered with
primroses. Walking along this lane, with their faces towards the sunset,
Rainbow met a youth and a maiden; they were whispering to each other
little broken words, with many sighs and smiles, and their talk was like
the talk of two birds.

Rainbow's heart leapt as she heard them, and she was just going to cry
out:

    "Blue Eyes, Blue Eyes, come back to me,"

when they caught sight of her and stopped talking, and Rainbow knew that
Blue Eyes was not there.

Then came the month of May, and the woods grew green and the lilac
blossomed, and Rainbow grew sadder and sadder. One night she could not
sleep, and she got up and walked through the moonlit village, right down
to the quay by the river-side where the fishermen kept their boats and
their nets. Many of the fishermen were out fishing on the sea, and one
of them, a young lad, was setting the brown sail of his boat on the
river, and as he did so, he sang a song which was like this:

    "I have a cottage I love well,
      In the sweet west countree:
    And there my love and I shall dwell,
      When I come back from sea.

    We'll stow the sail and stow the oar,
      And oh, how glad she'll be
    To mend the nets upon the shore,
      When I come back from sea.

    I have a cottage on the hill,
      Just right for her and me,
    And she will say 'I love you still,'
      When I come back from sea."

The fisherman's voice was so glad and joyous as he sang this song, that
Rainbow thought Blue Eyes must be there, and she ran to the shore. At
that moment the moonlight fell full upon the fisherman, so that Rainbow
could see his face, and she stopped herself calling out just in time,
for she saw he was not at all like Blue Eyes.

During that same month Blue Boy fell in love with a Dairy Maid called
Cherry-Ripe, and it was arranged that they should be married at
Michaelmas. But as Michaelmas drew near, Rainbow grew sadder and sadder,
because she could not bear to think what she would do without Blue Boy.

September came, and the corn was carried, and the leaves began to turn
gold. On Michaelmas Eve, Rainbow was sitting in her garden watching the
autumn sunset. Not far from her garden, which was on the side of a steep
hill, there was a quarry in which there was an old seat, and this was a
favourite spot for lovers, for from this place you could see the little
river, all the village and the sea beyond, and the view was beautiful.
Rainbow thought she would walk to the quarry, so as to get a better view
of the sunset.

When she got there, she saw an old couple sitting on the seat. The man
was a fisherman; his face was bronzed and wrinkled by the wind and the
waves, and the woman's hair was grey and silvery. They did not notice
Rainbow coming, and the old woman said to the man:

"Do you remember how we used to meet here in the days when you were
courting me?"

And the old man said: "It was in the spring, and the apple-trees were
out."

And the old woman said: "Ah! I was a comely lass then. There was no one
like me in the village. Folks wouldn't believe it now, what with my
white hair and my wrinkles."

And the old man said: "I see no difference in you, lassie. You've the
same lovely blue eyes as you always had, and if your hair has turned
silver, it's none the less fair for that."

And the old woman said: "And I see no difference in you, Sweetheart;
you're just as strong and as brave as ever."

And the old man said: "Why, it's forty years ago, but it makes nought to
us, for as long as I've got you, and you've got me, we shan't see any
change in each other, for with us it has always been springtide and
courting time, and it always will be."

And the old man looked at the old woman, and smiled and took her hand,
and her eyes filled with tears. And when Rainbow saw this, before she
knew what happened, she had called out:

    "Blue Eyes, Blue Eyes, come back to me,
    Over the hills and over the sea.
    Brother of Summer, husband and friend,
    Come and stay till the world shall end."

As soon as she had said this, Blue Eyes stood before her just as he had
been when he rode away, clothed in snowdrops and cowslips, wearing the
rainbow for a scarf, and carrying a branch of blossom in his hand.

Rainbow was so glad to see Blue Eyes that she almost fainted. She led
him to her cottage, and there she wept a long time for joy. Then Blue
Eyes told her that he would never leave her again, but that he could not
live on the earth a second time in the guise of a glass mender. During
the spring they would ride through the world, scattering sunshine,
laughter, and hope; mortals would see them, but they would not know who
they were. During the summer and the autumn they would be invisible to
mortals, and during the winter they would slumber in the Diamond Palace
of his mother, the Snow Queen.

They waited to see Blue Boy and Cherry-Ripe married, and Blue Eyes gave
them as a wedding present a little glass pipe, which, whenever he played
it, brought the spring into the hearts of all who heard it. And Blue
Eyes promised that whenever Blue Boy whistled on the pipe, he and
Rainbow would immediately answer his call and come to him.

When the wedding was over, Blue Eyes gave Rainbow his scarf, and they
mounted on two winged steeds and galloped off through the lanes. Now if
you ever meet in a wood or by a river a man with blue eyes, on a winged
horse, with a crown of dew, and a tunic of snowdrops and cowslips, and
by his side, on a white pony, a beautiful woman wearing the rainbow for
a scarf, and holding a branch of blossom in her hand, you will know it
is Blue Eyes and Rainbow.

And if ever you hear on a spring morning, in a city or a village, three
little notes played on a pipe which make your heart dance for joy, you
will know that Blue Boy is calling for his father and his mother; for he
does this very often.




THE BLUE ROSE


Once upon a time there lived in China a wise Emperor, whose daughter was
remarkable for her perfect beauty. Her feet were the smallest in the
world; her eyes were long and slanting, and as bright as brown onyxes,
and when you heard her laugh it was like listening to a tinkling stream,
or to the chimes of a silver bell. Moreover, the Emperor's daughter was
as wise as she was beautiful, and she chanted the verse of the great
poets better than any one in the land. The Emperor was old in years; his
son was married and had begotten a son; he was, therefore, quite happy
about the succession to the throne, but he wished before he died to see
his daughter wedded to some one who should be worthy of her.

Many suitors presented themselves at the palace, as soon as it became
known that the Emperor desired a son-in-law, but when they reached the
palace, they were met by the Lord Chamberlain, who told them the Emperor
had decided that only the man who found and brought back the Blue Rose
should marry his daughter. The suitors were much puzzled by this order.
What was the Blue Rose, and where was it to be found? In all a hundred
and fifty suitors had presented themselves, and out of these, fifty at
once put away from them all thought of winning the hand of the Emperor's
daughter, since they considered the condition imposed to be absurd.

The other hundred set about trying to find the Blue Rose. One of
them--his name was Ti-Fun-Ti, he was a merchant and immensely rich--went
at once to the largest shop in the town and said to the shopkeeper: "I
want a blue rose, the best you have."

The shopkeeper, with many apologies, explained that he did not stock
blue roses. He had red roses in profusion, white, pink, and yellow
roses, but no blue rose. There had hitherto been no demand for the
article.

"Well," said Ti-Fun-Ti, "you must get one for me. I do not mind how much
money it costs, but I must have a blue rose."

The shopkeeper said he would do his best, but he feared it would be an
expensive article and difficult to procure.

Another of the suitors, whose name I have forgotten, was a warrior and
extremely brave; he mounted his horse, and taking with him a hundred
archers and a thousand horsemen he marched into the territory of the
King of Five Rivers, whom he knew to be the richest king in the world
and the possessor of the rarest treasures, and demanded of him the Blue
Rose, threatening him with a terrible doom should he be reluctant to
give it up.

The King of the Five Rivers, who disliked soldiers, and had a horror of
noise, violence, and every kind of fuss (his bodyguard was armed solely
with fans and sunshades), rose from the cushions on which he was lying
when the demand was made, and, tinkling a small bell, said to the
servant who straightway appeared, "Fetch me the Blue Rose."

The servant retired and returned presently bearing on a silken cushion a
large sapphire which was carved so as to imitate a full-blown rose with
all its petals.

"This," said the King of the Five Rivers, "is the Blue Rose. You are
welcome to it."

The warrior took it, and after making brief, soldier-like thanks, he
went straight back to the Emperor's palace, saying that he had lost no
time in finding the Blue Rose. He was ushered into the presence of the
Emperor, who as soon as he heard the warrior's story and saw the Blue
Rose which had been brought, sent for his daughter and said to her:
"This intrepid warrior has brought you what he claims to be the Blue
Rose. Has he accomplished the quest?"

The Princess took the precious object in her hands, and after examining
it for a moment, said: "This is not a rose at all. It is a sapphire; I
have no need of precious stones." And she returned the stone to the
warrior, with many elegantly-expressed thanks. And the warrior went
away in discomfiture.

When Ti-Fun-Ti, the merchant, heard of the warrior's failure, he was all
the more anxious to win the prize. He sought the shopkeeper and said to
him: "Have you got me the Blue Rose? I trust you have; because if not, I
shall most assuredly be the means of your death. My brother-in-law is
chief magistrate, and I am allied by marriage to all the chief officials
in the kingdom."

The shopkeeper turned pale and said: "Sir, give me three days, and I
will procure you the Blue Rose without fail." The merchant granted him
the three days and went away. Now the shopkeeper was at his wit's end as
to what to do, for he knew well there was no such thing as a blue rose.
For two days he did nothing but moan and wring his hands, and on the
third day he went to his wife and said: "Wife, we are ruined!"

But his wife, who was a sensible woman, said: "Nonsense! If there is no
such thing as a blue rose we must make one. Go to the apothecary and
ask him for a strong dye which will change a white rose into a blue
one."

So the shopkeeper went to the apothecary and asked him for a dye, and
the chemist gave him a bottle of red liquid, telling him to pick a white
rose and to dip its stalk into the liquid and the rose would turn blue.
The shopkeeper did as he was told; the rose turned into a beautiful blue
and the shopkeeper took it to the merchant, who at once went with it to
the palace, saying that he had found the Blue Rose.

He was ushered into the presence of the Emperor, who as soon as he saw
the blue rose sent for his daughter and said to her: "This wealthy
merchant has brought you what he claims to be the Blue Rose. Has he
accomplished the quest?"

The Princess took the flower in her hands, and after examining it for a
moment said: "This is a white rose; its stalk has been dipped in a
poisonous dye and it has turned blue. Were a butterfly to settle upon
it, it would die of the potent fume. Take it back. I have no need of a
dyed rose." And she returned it to the merchant with many
elegantly-expressed thanks.

The other ninety-eight suitors all sought in various ways for the Blue
Rose. Some of them travelled all over the world seeking it; some of them
sought the aid of wizards and astrologers, and one did not hesitate to
invoke the help of the dwarfs that live underground. But all of them,
whether they travelled in far countries, or took counsel with wizards
and demons, or sat pondering in lonely places, failed to find the Blue
Rose.

At last they all abandoned the quest except the Lord Chief Justice, who
was the most skilful lawyer and statesman in the country. After thinking
over the matter for several months, he sent for the most skilful artist
in the country and said to him: "Make me a china cup. Let it be
milk-white in colour and perfect in shape, and paint on it a rose, a
blue rose."

The artist made obeisance and withdrew, and worked for two months at the
Lord Chief Justice's cup. In two months' time it was finished, and the
world has never seen such a beautiful cup, so perfect in symmetry, so
delicate in texture, and the rose on it, the blue rose, was a living
flower, picked in fairyland and floating on the rare milky surface of
the porcelain. When the Lord Chief Justice saw it he gasped with
surprise and pleasure, for he was a great lover of porcelain, and never
in his life had he seen such a piece. He said to himself: "Without doubt
the Blue Rose is here on this cup, and nowhere else."

So, after handsomely rewarding the artist, he went to the Emperor's
palace and said that he had brought the Blue Rose. He was ushered into
the Emperor's presence, who as he saw the cup sent for his daughter and
said to her: "This eminent lawyer has brought you what he claims to be
the Blue Rose. Has he accomplished the quest?"

The Princess took the bowl in her hands, and after examining it for a
moment, said: "This bowl is the most beautiful piece of china I have
ever seen. If you are kind enough to let me keep it I will put it aside
until I receive the blue rose. For so beautiful is it that no other
flower is worthy to be put in it except the Blue Rose."

[Illustration: ONE EVENING HE WAS PLAYING HIS ONE-STRINGED INSTRUMENT
OUTSIDE A DARK WALL]

The Lord Chief Justice thanked the Princess for accepting the bowl with
many elegantly-turned phrases, and he went away in discomfiture.

After this there was no one in the whole country who ventured on the
quest of the Blue Rose. It happened that not long after the Lord Chief
Justice's attempt, a strolling minstrel visited the kingdom of the
Emperor. One evening he was playing his one-stringed instrument outside
a dark wall. It was a summer's evening, and the sun had sunk in a glory
of dusty gold, and in the violet twilight one or two stars were
twinkling like spear-heads. There was an incessant noise made by the
croaking of frogs and the chatter of grasshoppers. The minstrel was
singing a short song over and over again to a monotonous tune. The sense
of it was something like this:--

    "I watched beside the willow trees
      The river, as the evening fell;
    The twilight came and brought no breeze,
      No dew, no water for the well,

    "When from the tangled banks of grass,
      A bird across the water flew,
    And in the river's hard grey glass
      I saw a flash of azure blue."

As he sang he heard a rustle on the wall, and looking up he saw a slight
figure, white against the twilight, beckoning to him. He walked along
under the wall until he came to a gate, and there some one was waiting
for him, and he was gently led into the shadow of a dark cedar tree. In
the twilight he saw two bright eyes looking at him, and he understood
their message. In the twilight a thousand meaningless nothings were
whispered in the light of the stars, and the hours fled swiftly. When
the East began to grow light, the Princess (for it was she) said it was
time to go.

"But," said the minstrel, "to-morrow I shall come to the palace and ask
for your hand."

"Alas!" said the Princess, "I would that were possible, but my father
has made a foolish condition that only he may wed me who finds the Blue
Rose."

"That is simple," said the minstrel, "I will find it!" And they said
good-night to each other.

The next morning the minstrel went to the palace, and on his way he
picked a common white rose from a wayside garden. He was ushered into
the Emperor's presence, who sent for his daughter and said to her: "This
penniless minstrel has brought you what he claims to be the Blue Rose.
Has he accomplished the quest?"

The Princess took the rose in her hands and said: "Yes, this is without
doubt the Blue Rose."

But the Lord Chief Justice and all who were present respectfully pointed
out that the rose was a common white rose and not a blue one, and the
objection was with many forms and phrases conveyed to the Princess.

"I think the rose is blue," said the Princess. "It is, in fact, the Blue
Rose. Perhaps you are all colour blind."

The Emperor, with whom the decision rested, decided that if the Princess
thought the rose was blue, it was blue, for it was well known that her
perception was more acute than that of any one else in the kingdom.

So the minstrel married the Princess, and they settled on the sea-coast
in a little green house with a garden full of white roses, and they
lived happily for ever afterwards. And the Emperor, knowing that his
daughter had made a good match, died in peace.




THE STORY OF VOX ANGELICA AND LIEBLICH GEDACHT


Once upon a time there was a poor tanner called Hans who lived with his
wife Martha in a town in which there were two hundred churches, a
hundred chapels, and a huge cathedral.

Hans lived in a wooden house opposite the gates of the cathedral. They
had only one son and he was so delicate that they did not know what
trade he could learn when he grew bigger. In the meantime they taught
him how to read and write. The boy was christened Johan; for he was born
on St. John's Day. When Johan was quite a tiny little boy he liked
listening to the sound of the organ in the big cathedral, and in the
evenings he would sit for hours in the darkness, listening to the
organist at his practice.

The organist was an old man called Doctor Sebastian, and he wore a
powdered wig and large tortoise-shell spectacles. When he played the
organ, which was an immense instrument and had five keyboards, the
windows trembled in all the houses which nestled round the cathedral.

Doctor Sebastian soon noticed the little Johan and allowed him to come
up into the organ-loft while he was playing, and Johan used to sit as
still as a mouse, and watch him pull out the stops, and play with his
feet as skilfully as he did with his hands. Doctor Sebastian had a pupil
called Frantz, a lad with curly brown hair and large brown eyes. Frantz
used to practise on the organ every day; but Doctor Sebastian was severe
with him, and Frantz was not allowed to play the organ at High Mass on
Sundays. One day Johan asked Doctor Sebastian whether this was because
Frantz played badly, and Doctor Sebastian said:

"Frantz has much to learn and he must be trained, but one day, when he
has learnt all that I can teach him, he will be able to teach me what I
shall not be able to learn."

Johan did not understand what this meant, but he guessed that Doctor
Sebastian thought well of Frantz, in spite of his being so severe with
him. Johan thought that Frantz was the most wonderful player in the
world, and whereas Doctor Sebastian only made the organ speak in deep
single tones, and only used the open stops and the booming pedal
bass-notes, Frantz--when Doctor Sebastian was not there to listen--used
to make the organ sigh and speak like a castle full of spirits, and
Johan thought this was wonderful.

One day, it was in winter just before Christmas, and Johan was eight
years old, Doctor Sebastian was laid up in bed with a bad cold, and he
sent for Frantz and said to him:

"I shall never rise from my bed again. I am going thither where I shall
hear the music which we only guess at here on earth. You must play the
organ on Christmas Day. I have taught you all I know. I have been severe
and gruff with you; but being a musician, you know that if I had not
thought you worthy of it, I should not have taken any trouble with you
at all. I have been spared until you were ready to take my place, and
now I can go in peace, for I know that I leave behind me a worthy
successor. I have scolded you and pulled your ears, rapped your fingers
and blamed your playing, but you have got that which I should never
learn if I lived for two hundred years. You have the divine gift, and as
a musician I am not worthy to unlatch the shoes of what you will be; for
you will play on earth the music that I am now going to hear in Heaven!"

After that Doctor Sebastian squeezed Frantz's hand and said no more. The
next day he died.

Frantz was very sad, and he spent the whole day that the Doctor died in
the cathedral composing a requiem in memory of his dead master. Little
Johan, in a corner of the aisle, listened to the music: he had never
heard anything so beautiful; some new power seemed to have come to
Frantz, and when he touched the keys the pipes spoke in a way they had
never spoken before.

Frantz went on playing until late into the night, and Johan had been
carried so far away into dreamland by the music that he did not notice
when Frantz stopped, but all at once he became aware that he was alone
in the cathedral and that the organ-loft was dark and no sound came from
it.

Johan ran up the winding stair into the organ-loft, but Frantz had gone,
and Johan knew that he was locked in the cathedral for the night. He
made up his mind to sleep there where he was, and he was just taking one
of Frantz's missals to use as a pillow when he became aware that he was
no longer alone. Sitting on the bench in front of the keys was a strange
figure. It was an old man with a grey beard, twinkling eyes, and a deep
voice like the buzzing of a hornet. He wore a brown coat and grey
stockings, and a black three-cornered hat.

"Who are you?" asked Johan.

"My name is Quint," said the little old man, "and I live in one of the
big wooden pipes of the organ."

"Do you always live there?" asked Johan.

"No, not always," said Quint. "We don't live here as a rule, but some of
them oblige us to come here and sing----"

"I don't understand," said Johan.

"Well, I will explain it to you," answered Quint. "It's like this: Every
one of the stops of the organ has some one who belongs to it and to whom
it belongs--but these people do not live in the stops; they live in
their own country, which is called Musicland, and they only come to the
organs when they are obliged to."

"But who obliges them?" asked Johan.

Quint thought for a moment, and then he said: "Those who have the gift."

"But what is the gift?" asked Johan.

"That I can't tell you," said Quint. "All I know is that some have it
and others haven't."

"Did Doctor Sebastian have the gift?" asked Johan.

"No," said Quint, "he was a learned man and a very good man; but he
hadn't got the gift. But young Frantz: he's got it. That's why I am here
to-day."

"Are the people of the other stops here too?" asked Johan, who was
deeply interested in what Quint told him.

"They've all gone home," said Quint. "You see, as long as the player
plays, we can stay here and not come out except just when we're wanted;
but if we don't get back into the pipes before the player has finished,
we can't go home. Now just before Frantz finished I crept out of my pipe
because I wasn't wanted, and I wished to look at the cathedral, and then
suddenly he stopped playing, before I could get back into my pipe again,
and if we are not in our pipes when the organist stops playing we can't
get home."

"What will you do then?" asked Johan.

"I shall have to wait till he plays again to-morrow. I can get into a
pipe of course, but I can't go home."

"To Musicland?" asked Johan.

"Yes," said Quint, "and it's annoying, because I shall miss the end of
the wedding festivities."

"Whose wedding?" asked Johan.

"Vox Angelica's, of course," said Quint. "She was married yesterday."

"Vox Angelica is that lovely soft stop in the swell," said Johan. "I
suppose she's going to marry 'Lieblich Gedacht'?"

"Of course she is," said Quint, "but it's a long business. If you like I
will tell you all about it."

"Oh, please do!" said Johan.

"Well," began Quint, "Vox Angelica is the most beautiful person you have
ever seen. Her eyes are just like blue waters, grave and still, and her
hair is long and as bright as the gold on a harp. And as for her voice,
well, you can hear that whenever Frantz plays the organ. She is as kind
and gentle as she is beautiful, and everybody in our country loves her.
She lives in that part of Musicland where the hills and white mountains
are. In the winter it is covered with snow which gleams in the sunshine,
whiter and brighter than any snow you have ever seen, but when the
spring comes the snow disappears and the slopes of the mountains are
covered with millions and millions of flowers which are soft and white
and glisten like stars.

"Lieblich Gedacht was the son of a forester, and he lives in the Woods
of Melody, right in the heart of our country where the old oak forests
grow, which are carpeted with bluebells in the spring so that the
enormous stems look as if they rose out of a blue sea, and in the spring
and in the summer the woods are full of birds; but no bird there has so
sweet a note as Lieblich Gedacht when he sings in the wood. The birds
stop singing to listen to him. He sings all the year round: when the
woods are green, and in the autumn too, when they are gold and crimson
like the tattered banners of our King, and in the winter, when the oak
trees spread their bare arms across the clear cold sky.

"One day Lieblich Gedacht put on a green jerkin, a green cap, and taking
with him a sword and a pipe he set out on his travels. He wandered
through Musicland until he came to a castle which was on the top of a
mountain. This castle had a tower with one window in it, and from the
window came the sound of a whisper which sounded so soft and wonderful
that Lieblich Gedacht thought it must be the voice of a flower speaking
to itself: the jessamine perhaps, or the briar rose. Then he looked up
and he saw leaning out of the window a maid with gold hair which fell
from the window far down the tower, and she was as frail and as lovely
as a gentian on the mountains.

"Then Lieblich Gedacht sang a song. He sang of all the beautiful things
he had ever dreamed of; he sang of the sun and the moon and the stars,
of the spring, the grass, the great woods and their secret; he sang the
song the leaves sing when they wake in the dawn, and the song the boughs
sing in the evening when they lull the birds and the flowers to sleep.
He sang of the love he felt for all the beautiful things in the world,
and about how glad he was to be alive in a beautiful country like
Musicland.

"Vox Angelica heard him, and answered his song, and they sang a duet
together, and Lieblich Gedacht's part said, 'I love you,' and Vox
Angelica's part said, 'I love you too.'

"Then Lieblich Gedacht asked Vox Angelica to marry him, and she said she
would, and they settled they would start at once for the City of
Pleasant Sounds and be married. They started at once. Lieblich Gedacht
rode on a grey horse, and Vox Angelica rode on the saddle in front of
him. Now their way lay through a perilous wood called the Forest of
Discord, which was infested by imps called Chromatics, and by hundreds
of gnomes who made a hideous noise, and in the middle of this wood lived
Bourdon, who is a wizard.

"When they reached the wood it was already dark, and from every bush and
tree came sharp sounds, ugly cries, moans, groans, squeaks, wheezes, and
in the distance they could hear a deep buzzing boom.

"Vox Angelica and Lieblich Gedacht were rather frightened, since it was
dark and neither of them knew the way, for neither of them had ever been
near the Forest of Discord before, and they knew none of the people who
belonged to it. So they made up their minds not to go any farther but to
sleep under the shade of an oak-tree. It was summer, so it was warm.
They made themselves a bed of leaves and lay down; but the Chromatics
made such a noise that they could not go to sleep. At last they put moss
into their ears so that they could not hear the ugly sounds, and they
both fell asleep.

"In the middle of the night Lieblich Gedacht had a bad dream. He dreamed
that the trees had come to life and had stretched out their arms and
taken Vox Angelica away from him, and that when he tried to keep her
they bound him down to the ground.

"When Lieblich Gedacht awoke, it was daylight and the sun was shining
through the dark trees. But what was his grief and despair when he saw
that Vox Angelica was no longer there! She had gone, disappeared, and
left no trace. He looked for her everywhere; he called out her name in a
thousand ways till the ugly wood re-echoed with the sweetness of his
song, but no Vox Angelica answered. She was nowhere to be found.
Lieblich Gedacht was in despair. He did not know what to do nor where to
look. 'But,' he thought to himself, 'one thing is certain: it is no use
wasting time in this forest, I must go and find some one who will be
likely to help me.'

"So he rode out of the Forest of Discord as quickly as he could, and
crossed the plains which lie beyond it, and he rode on until he reached
the Wood of Dreams, which is on the other side of the plains.

"In this wood there lives a hermit called Sackbut, who is well known for
his goodness and his wisdom, and Lieblich Gedacht made up his mind to go
and ask him for his help and advice. Sackbut lives in a cave
underground. He is very old, and has a long white beard six times as
long as mine. Lieblich Gedacht, after searching for some time in the
wood, found a clear space in the thickets, and in the middle of it a
circle of built bricks which looked like the top of a well. But when he
looked down into what he thought was the well he saw there were steps
in it which went down underground. He went boldly down the steps and
into the dark, and when he had counted thirty-two of them they stopped
and he came to the door. He knocked at this door, and he heard a hoarse
voice saying: 'Who is there?'

"'It is I, Lieblich Gedacht,' he answered. 'I have come for advice.'

"The door was opened at once, and Lieblich Gedacht found himself in a
cell lit by a lantern, and in front of him, sitting at a table and
reading a large book, which had nothing but notes in it, was Sackbut the
Hermit.

"'Well, what do you want?' asked the hermit in a gruff voice. 'Be quick
and tell me, because I am busy and I have got no time to waste. I am
learning a fugue by one of those new-fangled German musicians, and I
must know it by next Sunday, for there's a man in one of their cities
who has the gift, and I shall have to go.'

"'I have plighted my troth to Vox Angelica,' said Lieblich Gedacht. 'We
were travelling together to the City of Pleasant Sounds to be married,
and we stopped on the way in the Forest of Discord.'

"'That was a silly thing to do,' said Sackbut.

"'We slept the night there, and when I woke up in the morning Vox
Angelica had disappeared.'

"'Did you hear anything in the night?' asked Sackbut.

"'No,' said Lieblich Gedacht, 'but I had a bad nightmare. I dreamed the
trees were taking her away and strangling me.'

"'I see,' said Sackbut, 'it's Bourdon the wizard; he's at his old tricks
again. Vox Angelica has been carried away by Bourdon, and he has
probably hidden her somewhere. He would not dare keep her in his castle,
because the Chromatics are such gossips that the whole kingdom would
know it at once. She is a prisoner somewhere; of that you can be sure.
But where I cannot tell you. All I can advise you is to go and ask Echo:
she hears everything.'

"'And where does Echo live?' asked Lieblich Gedacht.

"'Echo,' said Sackbut, 'lives in the Castle of the Winds, which is not
very far away. You must go right through the Wood of Dreams, and across
the plains, and then you will come to a valley; you must descend into
this valley, which is steep, and climb up the other side of it; and
there on a high rock you will see the Castle of the Winds. Good-bye.'

"And the Hermit bent over his music-book once more and hummed to himself
in his deep bass voice. But just as Lieblich Gedacht was going away,
Sackbut called him back and gave him a walnut, and said: 'Whenever you
are in danger and want my help, crack this. Now go.'

"Lieblich Gedacht thanked Sackbut, and did as he had been told. He rode
through the Wood of Dreams, which is a quiet wood, shady and dim. There
are very few birds in it; but the nightingale sings there all day and
the nightjar sings there all night. And on his way he passed a cottage
where Waldhorn the hunter lives, and farther on he passed a castle
which belongs to Waldfloete the Lord of the Forest. But neither of them
were at home; for Waldhorn was out hunting, and Waldfloete was on a visit
to his cousin Cor de Nuit, who lives in the Orchards of Twilight.

"Lieblich Gedacht soon reached the valley, which is deep and made of
great rocks and quarries. It is so steep that he had to lead his horse
down the whole way. But the other side was easier to climb because it
was grassy, and he was able to ride up it. When he reached the top, he
saw a castle with transparent walls which reflected the sunlight and
which had hundreds of windows, all of them wide open so as to let in the
winds from all the corners of the world. When he reached the door he
sang a soft note, and he immediately heard it repeated hundreds and
hundreds of times so that the whole world seemed to be full of calling
sounds. The door opened of itself, and Lieblich walked into a hall, at
the end of which was a winding staircase. He walked up this staircase
and he went on and on until he thought it would never end. At last he
came to the top, and there, in a little room which had eight sides,
sitting on a crystal throne, was Echo.

"She was dressed in moonbeams and dewdrops and the fleece of a cloud,
and she had wings made of gossamer like those of a dragon-fly, and on
her head there trembled a star.

"'I have come,' said Lieblich Gedacht, 'to ask you to help me.' And he
told his story.

"'Two nights ago,' said Echo when he had finished, 'I heard Bourdon
start from his castle in his large rumbling coach. His horses were
galloping. He left his castle and drove for some time through the Forest
of Discord, and then he stopped. At that moment I heard a sigh which I
am sure was Vox Angelica speaking. But the sigh was soon stifled, and
Bourdon drove off again in his coach. He drove right through the Forest
of Dreams, over the plains, till he came to the sea, and there he got
out and disappeared under the sea. After that I do not know what
happened, because the winds cannot bring me any news of what happens
underneath the sea; but he probably crossed the sea and went to
Muteland, which is beyond it. But I advise you to go and ask Unda Maris,
who lives under the sea. She will tell you.'

"'But how shall I find Unda Maris?' asked Lieblich Gedacht.

"'All you have got to do is to go to the seashore,' said Echo; 'you must
take this ring, and when you get there'--and here she gave Lieblich
Gedacht a silver ring with a strange blue stone in it--'you must throw
it into the sea and sing--

    "Ring, ring, go home,
    To the fishes and the foam;
    Say the word and open the sea,
    Come and show the way to me."

But remember this: if any one asks you to do them a service, however
small, which might delay your journey, you must refuse, or evil will
come of it. And you had better take this with you, and whenever you are
in danger and want my help, open it.' And she gave Lieblich Gedacht a
little green egg.

"Lieblich Gedacht thanked Echo and said good-bye, and then he rode as
quickly as he could to the seashore. There he threw the ring into the
sea and said--

    'Ring, ring, go home,
    To the fishes and the foam;
    Say the word and open the sea,
    Come and show the way to me.'

No sooner had he said this than the sea opened wide, and he saw before
him a stone staircase with a rope made of pearls for him to walk down
by; and a silver fish with webbed feet and hands went in front of him
and showed him the way.

"The fish led him a long walk right to the bottom of the sea, and when
he got there, he found a place built of rocks and seaweeds. Inside it
was green and dim like a summer night, and sounds echoed through its
green corridors. The fish led Lieblich Gedacht through many halls to the
central grotto, which was built of sapphires, where Unda Maris lived.
She was lying on a bed of purple seaweed when he entered the grotto,
and she was touching the strings of a golden harp. She was almost hidden
by a veil, and her face shone behind it, pale like the moon behind a
cloud. She asked Lieblich Gedacht what he wanted, and he told his story.

"'It is true,' she said when he had finished. 'Bourdon has carried away
Vox Angelica out of Musicland. He passed through the sea three days
ago--passed through and took her to Muteland beyond the sea, to the
Castle of Silence that stands in the middle of the Lake of Sighs. You
must go there if you wish to find her. You must cross the sea to get
there in a boat, and you must be sure on no account to stop anywhere on
the way, or else evil will come of it. Take this with you, and whenever
you are in danger, and want my help, open it.' So saying, she gave
Lieblich Gedacht a pearly shell.

"So Lieblich Gedacht thanked Unda Maris and said good-bye, and walked
back by the staircase to the seashore again. When he got there the first
thing he did was to go to a fisherman's hut and ask him to lend him a
boat to cross the sea in. While he was talking to the fisherman he saw
three figures coming towards him. One was dressed in bright armour, and
wore a gold cloak on his left shoulder, and a crimson cap with a crimson
feather in it, and a sword. This was Prince Hautboy, and with him was
his page, Piccolo, a mischievous little boy with beady brown eyes,
clothed entirely in silver; and the second, who wore a scarlet tunic and
who carried a broadsword and a bugle, was Cornet the soldier; and the
third was a tall figure with a handsome, melancholy face, dressed in
black velvet and wearing a large black cap from which a proud white
plume waved. This was Viol d'Amore, the brave nobleman who was a
swordsman and who made beautiful verses and sang them.

"Lieblich Gedacht walked up to them, and taking off his green cap made
obeisance to them.

"Hautboy and Viol d'Amore asked him who he was.

"'I am Lieblich Gedacht,' he said, 'the son of the forester. I live in
the Woods of Melody, and I am betrothed to Vox Angelica. But Bourdon has
taken her away and locked her up in the Castle of Silence on the Lake of
Sighs, and I am going to rescue her.'

"'Then you can come with us,' said Hautboy, 'for we are bound upon a
like errand. I am betrothed to Clarabella, and Bourdon has taken her
away; and Viol d'Amore is looking for Dolce his betrothed, and Cornet
for Muzette, who is pledged to him, and Bourdon has taken them too.'

"So Viol d'Amore, Hautboy, Cornet, and Lieblich Gedacht, and Piccolo the
page, got into the boat, hoisted the sail and set out to sea. They had a
fair breeze, and for three days their voyage continued smoothly without
any adventures; but on the fourth day they met a huge brass ship with a
serpent at the prow which challenged them.

"'This is Bourdon's doing,' said Hautboy; 'he has had wind of our
adventure and sent his allies against us.'

"In the brass ship there were two very fearsome warriors--Tromba, who
was a giant mailed in brazen armour, like the vessel, and Bassoon, who
was as large as a barrel and who had a voice like thunder; and with them
were fifty tin soldiers. As soon as the vessel approached, Tromba cried
out in a ringing voice--

"'Surrender, you are my prisoners!'

"'In whose name?' cried out Hautboy.

"'In the name of Bourdon, our King,' answered Tromba.

"'We recognise no king save King Diapason, our lawful sovereign,' said
Hautboy unabashed.

"'Then if you won't surrender we shall make you,' said Tromba; and he
told his soldiers to ram the little boat.

"Hautboy thought that all was lost; and Lieblich Gedacht said, 'If only
Unda Maris were here she could help us.' Then he remembered the shell
which she had given to him, and he opened it. There was nothing inside
it except a tiny seed-pearl, and as he opened the shell the vessel gave
a lurch and the seed-pearl fell into the sea. Lieblich Gedacht cried out
in despair, but as he did so, a wave rose between them and the brazen
vessel, and from out this wave came a gigantic sea-serpent, which at
once attacked the brazen vessel. Tromba and Bassoon were frightened out
of their wits, and setting all sail they fled as fast as they could, and
their ship was soon out of sight. Then the sea-serpent disappeared, and
the sea at once became quite calm again. They journeyed on for two more
days, and the weather grew warmer and finer every hour, and the sky
turned to a softer azure, and the sea to a deeper blue; they were borne
along by the lightest of breezes, and sometimes their sail flapped idly
in the still air.

"On the third day, they descried a speck of land on the horizon, and
towards the evening they could see that it was an island with misty
hills and lights on it. All round it on the sea, which the sunset had
turned fiery, little white sails seemed to be scudding towards it, and
when the sun set and the stars came out there came to them from the
island a faint thread of wonderful sound.

"Hautboy and Cornet said they thought it would be a good thing to land
at this island for the night, and Lieblich Gedacht was so curious to
hear more of the lovely music that he forgot all about the warning Unda
Maris had given him not to stop anywhere on the way, and he consented.

"So they ran their boat into a sandy cove, hauled her up on to the
beach, and landed. The island was overgrown with tall ferns; and shapes
of trees, such as none of them had ever seen before, nodded to them from
the hills. There appeared to be no birds, beasts, or any living creature
on the island, but the thread of sound they had heard in the distance,
was fuller now and more silvery, and they walked up along a grassy path
towards the place where it seemed to come from. After they had climbed
up the ground in front of them for some time, they reached a spot where
the ground ceased to rise. Lieblich Gedacht turned round to have one
last look at the sea before walking down into the valley which was
before them. The stars twinkled in the sky and the sea mirrored them
like quiet glass, and strange to say, all the little white sails which
they had seen at sunset scudding round the island had disappeared.

"They went down into the valley, and the ferns became more dusky and
taller, the path darker and darker, and the sound of music sweeter and
more insistent; they crossed the valley, and the pathway led them uphill
once more to a clear space, and before them rose pinnacles and domes all
grey and shimmering like a mist which hides the sun, and in this frail
dwelling-place a hundred little lights glistened like glowworms, and the
whole place trembled with the magical silvery sound which they had
followed.

"They walked on, and they came to a grey portal with colours in it like
those of a fading rainbow, and a voice bade them enter. They did so, and
found themselves beneath a cloudy dome, so high that they could not see
the top of it, and although there were myriads of small lights
twinkling everywhere, the air remained dim and mysterious: but the sound
was louder and clearer. They could not but follow it, and it led them
beyond the dome up a flight of steps to a terrace which was open to the
sky. The terrace was long and broad, and as unreal and unsubstantial as
though it were built of moonshine. They walked on, straight in front of
them, until they came to a transparent wall. They looked over this, and
beneath them was a steep slope covered with grasses and ferns, trees and
plants; down this slope, which was interrupted at intervals by the
outline of smaller terraces and ledges, in which were sheets of light,
like pools of water, they seemed to hear a hundred waterfalls rushing
whispering down the slope; and far away in the darkness they saw the
ghosts of white fountains rising and sobbing. On their left, the terrace
overlooked the sea, and went sheer down to the beach; and on their
right, tall shadows hid from their view the fern-forests of the island.
In the air there was scent of flowers, and the whole terrace was
overgrown with some sweet jessamine-like flower which they could not
see, for both the terrace and the sloping garden beneath them were
shrouded in a mist in which millions and millions of fireflies swarmed
and glistened. And all this time the sound grew softer, clearer, and
stronger. Just as they were wondering where it could be coming from,
there came to them from out and through the filmy walls of the dwelling,
a beautiful lady. Her face was like a pale flower, and her hair, which
fell to her feet, was dark as the night, and she was dressed in clinging
folds of dewy silver, and she stretched out her white arms to them and
said in a voice which seemed like that of the summer darkness--

"'Welcome!' Then she led them into the house, up into a high room, built
in the clouds and from which they could see the circle of the island and
the sea beyond.

"They at once fell into a deep sleep, and in their dreams winged shapes
fanned them and soft voices whispered to them. The next morning when
they awoke, although the sun was shining the mists did not rise from the
island; everything remained filmy, grey, and dim, shimmering like a bell
of foam; lights twinkled and fountains and waterfalls plashed, and the
island echoed with hidden voices and the same magical sound.

"'I suppose,' said Lieblich Gedacht, 'we ought to go on with our
journey?'

"'Yes,' said Hautboy, 'but where are we going to?'

"'Yes, where _are_ we going to?' repeated Cornet.

"And Lieblich Gedacht thought and thought, and puzzled and puzzled; but
neither he nor any of them could remember where they were going.
Presently Hautboy said--

"'Why should we go anywhere? What place could be better than this
island?'

"'This is better than fighting,' said Cornet.

"'And then making verses and singing them,' said Viol d'Amore.

"'And then piping all day,' said Piccolo.

"'Nobody asked your opinion,' said Hautboy.

"And so they wandered about in this magical island, listening to the
delicious sound and smelling flowers which they could not see; they were
steeped in the mist of the place, and they could not remember what it
was they had set out to do. They were captives to the dream and the
spell of the place, and however much they tried they could not drive the
mist from their minds and remember what they had set out to do. At
sunset the beautiful lady appeared again and gave them fruits to eat and
water in a crystal cup, and she sang to them a song, and never had they
heard anything so lovely. When she had done singing, Lieblich Gedacht
asked her who she was and what the island was called.

"She said: 'I am the daughter of the moon, and this island is called the
Island of Moon Dew. I am very lonely, but you shall keep me company
now.'

"'But,' said Lieblich Gedacht, 'we must not stay here long. We are bound
on a quest, only we can't remember just now exactly what it is.'

"'We will talk of that later,' said the lady, 'in the meantime I will
sing you a song.' And she sang them to sleep with her wonderful voice.

"A whole year passed, and every day was spent in the same way, in dream
and song and sleep. Cornet, Hautboy, and Viol d'Amore had quite stopped
worrying about their journey, and about what they should do in the
future. But Lieblich Gedacht was sad because he knew there was something
he ought to do, but he could not remember what it was. One day when he
was wandering by himself in the gardens of the island, he sat down to
rest on the grass beside some misty bushes. He was trying hard to
remember, and he happened to take out of his pocket the little egg which
Echo had given him. He had quite forgotten what it was, and he played
with it, throwing it up and catching it; and then growing tired of this
game, he put the egg on the grass next to the misty bushes so that it
touched one of them. Directly he did this a myrtle bush, which had not
been there before, appeared out of the mist quite distinct, and it at
once began to speak.

"'Who are you,' it said, 'who have made me visible and given me the
power to speak?'

"'I am Lieblich Gedacht,' he answered. 'I have been here a year, and
what I am doing I don't know, because I can't remember things.'

"'You are protected by some powerful spell,' said the myrtle, 'or else
you would have suffered my fate already. Don't you know where you are?'

"'No,' said Lieblich Gedacht, 'we came here in a boat one evening after
sunset; we have seen the Lady of the Island, but we do not know her
name.'

"'Then I will tell you,' said the myrtle. 'You are in the island of
Zauberfloete the enchantress. All who come here lose their memory and
forget their homes, their native country, and the faces that they love.
And when they have been here a year, Zauberfloete puts them to the test.
She bids them listen to the Moon Song, and if they can listen to it
without falling asleep, they are free, but if they fall asleep, then
they are hers for ever, and she changes them into ghostly shapes:
plants, fountains, streams, waterfalls, flowers, trees, ferns, or
whatever she wishes.'

"'And who are you?' asked Lieblich Gedacht.

"'I,' said the myrtle, 'am the youngest son of the Sleeping Beauty in
the wood. I was on my way to Musicland to seek adventure. I stopped at
this island, although my fairy godmother had warned me not to, and after
I had been here a year Zauberfloete sang me the Moon Song and I fell
asleep, and she changed me into a myrtle bush. There are many, many
people on this island who have suffered the same fate. From my country
there are the Marquis of Carrabas, who stayed here for a night to feed
his cat: he is changed into a fuchsia and the cat into a tiger-lily; and
Cinderella is here too: she was changed into a glass slipper; and there
are many knights and maidens from all the corners of the world, sleeping
here in the shape of ghostly ferns and trees and flowers.'

"'What must I do?' he asked, 'to resist the Moon Song?'

"'It is very difficult,' said the myrtle, 'no one has ever resisted it
yet; but you must have some spell about you or else you could not have
made me visible and given me speech. But look, what is that egg lying on
the grass next to my stem?'

"'Oh, Echo gave me that,' said Lieblich Gedacht; 'I had forgotten, but I
remember now; she told me to crush it if I was in danger!'

"'You must not crush it until the Moon Song has begun,' said the myrtle,
'and then the spell will be broken, and we shall all be free, for as
soon as some one is found who can resist the Moon Song, the spell will
cease to bind us; but if you don't break the egg in time, you will
sleep here for ever. Now I must not talk any more or else we shall be
discovered.'

"Lieblich Gedacht thanked the myrtle and went away. That night there was
a full moon, and never had the island looked so beautiful. Zauberfloete
came on to the terrace, and called Hautboy, Cornet, Viol d'Amore,
Lieblich Gedacht and Piccolo, and said she would sing to them.

"She began to sing the Moon Song, and never had her voice been so
silvery and never had they listened to such a song; all the island was
trembling with joy, and the moon and the stars seemed to be leaning out
of the sky to listen. And just as Lieblich Gedacht was yielding to the
spell and sinking into a delicious ocean of dreams he cracked the egg to
pieces between his fingers.

"At that moment the song stopped, and Lieblich Gedacht heard the echo of
Vox Angelica's voice, which came from the egg, sighing: 'Lieblich
Gedacht, my betrothed, have you forgotten me?'

"'Of course I haven't,' said Lieblich Gedacht. 'Come, Hautboy, Viol
d'Amore, and Cornet, we are bound for Bourdon's castle.' At that moment
Viol d'Amore, Hautboy, and Cornet remembered everything they had
forgotten and whither they were bound.

"As Lieblich Gedacht said this, Zauberfloete disappeared at once into her
mysterious palace. The mists lifted and vanished and the garden appeared
in its true shape, just like an ordinary garden, with stone terraces
overgrown with jessamine, and trees and bushes, and flowers and grass
and weeds, just like anywhere else, and the shadows on one side of the
terrace were cypress trees, and Zauberfloete's palace was an ordinary
palace built of marble. From the garden came Prince Myrtle, the Marquis
of Carrabas, Cinderella, and a hundred other knights and maidens who had
been spellbound there for years; and they all thanked Lieblich Gedacht
for setting them free. They started at once in their boats, which they
found in the cove where they had left them. The Marquis of Carrabas,
Prince Myrtle, and Cinderella set out for Musicland, and Lieblich
Gedacht and his comrades started once more on their quest of rescue.

"They sailed for three more days and for three more nights, and they
arrived at Muteland. Muteland is a flat country with no woods in it and
very few trees, and those have no leaves on them. Some people say this
is so that they may not rustle. But they couldn't rustle even if they
had leaves, because there is no wind in Muteland. There are no birds in
Muteland, and the only beasts there are dormice and salamanders. There
are no streams and no rivers, and the people who live there only speak
to each other by signs. In the middle of the country there is a large
lake called the Lake of Sighs, because some people say that the sound of
sighs is sometimes heard coming from it, and that these are the only
sounds which have ever been heard in the country.

"As soon as Hautboy, Viol d'Amore, Cornet, Piccolo, and Lieblich Gedacht
landed on the coast of Muteland, the first thing they did was to sing a
song. This frightened the people there so much that they all ran into
their holes; for the inhabitants of Muteland live underground. They
walked for some hours over the barren plains until they came to an
avenue of leafless willows. Lieblich Gedacht was walking on ahead, and
as he passed one of these trees he stopped, for he thought he heard a
human moan coming from one of the trees. He paused and listened, and
again the sound was repeated. This time he heard it quite plainly. It
was the piteous and musical moan of a human creature in pain. It
trembled through the silence, and shook and quivered and touched
Lieblich Gedacht's kind heart.

"He walked up to the tree which was nearest to him to see if he could
find out where the noise came from. Then from above, coming from the
heart of the tree, he heard the plaintive voice crying to him: 'Release
me. Set me free. I am imprisoned in the trunk of this tree.'

"'Who are you?' asked Lieblich Gedacht.

"'I am Vox Humana,' said the voice, 'I was imprisoned in this tree by a
wizard a hundred years ago, and nobody will set me free.'

"'But how can I set you free?' asked Lieblich Gedacht.

"'All you have got to do is to touch the tree and say--

    "Willow-tree, willow-tree,
      Hark to me, hark!
    Set the poor captive free,
      Open your bark."'

"Lieblich Gedacht in his distress quite forgot what Echo had told him
about not delaying his journey to render any one a service, and he
touched the tree and said the words.

"As soon as he had done this, the tree opened and Vox Humana came out of
it, with tears of gratitude in her soft brown eyes; but the spell which
the wizard had put on the tree was of such a kind that he who set free a
prisoner from it became a prisoner himself, and Vox Humana did not know
this. So directly she was set free, Lieblich Gedacht found himself in
her place, a prisoner in the dark trunk of the willow-tree, and
although Vox Humana, who was very unselfish, at once touched the tree,
and said the magic rhyme, because she preferred to be imprisoned herself
rather than to cause some one else to be a captive, the spell did not
work a second time. Indeed, like most spells, it could only be used
once.

"Presently Hautboy, Viol d'Amore and Cornet came up, and they found Vox
Humana crying bitterly. She told them what had happened, and they did
not know what to do, for they could not even hear Lieblich Gedacht's
voice; because it is only after years and years that a person who is
imprisoned in a tree can be heard by any one else. And that is the
reason why Vox Humana has such a plaintive voice. They were all very
sad, and they settled to go on to the Lake of Sighs and accomplish their
quest, and then perhaps they would find some way of setting Lieblich
Gedacht free again. They soon reached the Lake of Sighs, and in the
middle of it, on a rocky island, stood the Castle of Silence. They found
a boat on the shore of the lake, and it carried them across by itself,
without oars or sail. They found the gates of the castle (which was all
black) wide open. They entered the castle. It was quite empty and
deserted. They went into room after room. They searched every nook and
corner, but they found nothing. When they came to the banqueting-hall
they found a meal ready for them, with fruits and bread and wine, which
were served by invisible hands; so they sat down and ate, for they were
hungry.

"When they had had enough they began to search the castle once more, but
they soon felt sleepy, so they lay down in one of the rooms where they
found beds all ready for them, and fell fast asleep.

"No sooner were they asleep than Bourdon's three cousins, Bass, Violone,
and Ophicleide, who were looking after the castle for him, and who had
been hiding in a secret room in the walls, came out and bound them and
cast them into an oubliette which was at the bottom of the castle, right
under the lake. And there they found Vox Angelica, Dolce, Muzette, and
Clarabella.

"To go back to Lieblich Gedacht: he was of course miserable, and he
spent a whole month in the willow-tree, waiting for Hautboy and the
others to come to set him free. But they never came. At last one day he
remembered the walnut which Sackbut had given him. He had quite
forgotten it up to that moment. He took it out of his pocket and cracked
it, and in it he found a tiny silver key and a hazel nut. He put the
hazel nut in his pocket, and he looked everywhere in the tree for a
keyhole, and at last he found a tiny crack; he put the key in the crack
and it fitted exactly. The door of the tree opened and he was free once
more. He set out for the lake at once, and reached it in a few hours.
Exactly the same things happened to him as to the others. The boat took
him across the lake. He entered the empty castle and explored every nook
and corner of it, but he found nothing. When he came into the
banqueting-hall he saw the table spread by invisible hands; but he said
to himself: 'I will not eat and drink till I have found Vox Angelica.'
So he did not touch the food; but he went on searching. As he was
looking out of one of the windows of the castle he distinctly heard Vox
Angelica's sigh coming from the lake, and he at once understood that she
was imprisoned in some dungeon underneath the lake. He waited until it
was dark, and then he took the boat and rowed round the castle, and low
down by the water he came to a barred window, and from this window came
the sound of many sighs. Lieblich Gedacht now understood why the lake
was called the Lake of Sighs, for the sighs came from prisoners
imprisoned in Bourdon's dungeon.

"'Is that you, Vox Angelica?' he whispered.

"'Yes,' she whispered back, 'we are all here in the dungeon. But you
must be careful, because Bourdon's three brothers are hiding in the
castle.'

"'How can I rescue you?' asked Lieblich Gedacht.

"'I don't know,' said Vox Angelica. 'We are all of us bound in fetters.'

"'I will try and find a file,' said Lieblich Gedacht, 'to file the bars
of the window and set you free.'

"So he went back to the castle to look for a file, but as he entered the
gate Bourdon's three brothers fell upon him, and bound him, and cast him
into the dungeon.

"'Alas!' said Vox Humana, 'we are all lost now.'

"'Not at all!' said Lieblich Gedacht, 'we will soon be free. Piccolo is
so small he ought to be able to wriggle out of his chains, which are
much too big for him.'

"Piccolo needed no further telling, and he soon managed to set himself
free.

"'Now we are no better off than before,' said Vox Humana, who was always
inclined to take a gloomy view of things. But Piccolo was then told to
look in Lieblich Gedacht's pocket for a hazel nut, and when he found it
to crack it. Piccolo found the nut, cracked it, and inside the nut
tightly rolled up was a silk cap.

"'Now,' said Lieblich Gedacht, 'you must put the cap on my head.' As
soon as Piccolo did this, Lieblich Gedacht's chains fell from him and
he was free. For the cap was of that kind which makes a man invisible,
unchainable, and as strong as ten. The next thing he did was to break
the fetters of the eight other prisoners; then he pulled the bars from
the window. They could not get out, but in front of the window were the
waters of the lake, and they had no boat.

"'Perhaps,' said Lieblich Gedacht, 'the hazel nut will help us again
because it is faery,' and he took half the nutshell and threw it into
the lake. It at once turned into a boat just big enough to hold Vox
Humana, Vox Angelica, Clarabella, Dolce, Muzette, Hautboy, Cornet, Viol
d'Amore, Piccolo, and himself. And they all got into it, and it took
them across the lake without sail or oars.

"They reached the seashore without further adventures and sailed back to
Musicland. On the way they passed the island of Zauberfloete, which was
still trembling with lovely sound: but this time they knew better than
to stop there. They went straight back to the City of Pleasant Sounds,
to the palace of King Diapason, and they told him the whole story.

"The King was angry with Bourdon, and he sent his army, under the
command of Tuba Mirabilis, who, helped by Posaune, Clarion, and Cymbal,
captured Bourdon and his three brothers, Bass, Violone, and Ophicleide,
and put them in prison in the Lake of Sighs. They are there to this day.
And they are never allowed to go free in their own country, but they
have to come to your world when some one has the gift; and that is why
their voices are so gruff. Bassoon and Tromba were let off with a severe
reprimand because they were sorry for what they had done. Then King
Diapason ordered a great wedding to be held. And Lieblich Gedacht and
Vox Angelica were married yesterday. It was the most gorgeous wedding
ever seen. We were all of us there, and Unda Maris came from her home in
the sea in a chariot drawn by sea-lions, and Echo came from her high
castle in a chariot drawn by zephyrs. Tuba Mirabilis, Clarion, and the
soldiers all wore their best armour and their brightest helmets.

"Vox Angelica's bridesmaids were the seven daughters of Echo, and her
page was Piccolo. Lieblich Gedacht's best man was Waldhorn. And Voix
Celeste, who is a nun, came from her convent to sing in the choir. Many
of the fairies came to the wedding: Prince Myrtle was there, Cinderella,
and the Marquis of Carrabas and his cat."

"And did Zauberfloete come?" asked Johan.

"No," said Quint, "she was not invited."

"And what happened to Hautboy, Cornet, and Viol d'Amore?" asked Johan.

"Well," said Quint, "they were all to have been married on the same day;
but Muzette is very dainty and her wedding gown was not ready. It is
being woven in Fairyland by the elves, and it is to be made of the
petals of forget-me-nots and pinks, and her veil is to be spun out of
dewdrops caught in the new moon. All this takes such a long time that
the elves could not finish it by yesterday, so the King arranged that
Hautboy and Clarabella, Viol d'Amore and Dolce, and Cornet and
Muzette should be married in a month's time, all on the same day."

[Illustration: HE CLIMBED ON TO THE MANUALS AND DISAPPEARED INTO THE
HEART OF THE ORGAN]

"At any rate," said Johan, "you will not miss that wedding. But where
have Vox Angelica and Lieblich Gedacht gone to for their honeymoon?"

"They have gone to Lieblich Gedacht's cottage in the Woods of Melody,
and they will live there for the rest of their lives; for all their
lives will be one long honeymoon," said Quint. As he said this he
climbed on to the manuals, and disappeared into the heart of the organ.

And Johan noticed that the sun had risen and that the sacristan was
opening the cathedral for early Mass. A few minutes later Frantz walked
up into the organ loft, and Johan asked him to draw the stops of Vox
Angelica and Lieblich Gedacht together and alone. Frantz did this, and
they blent their voices together in unison, and Johan understood that
they were happier than they had ever been before.




THE VAGABOND


There was once upon a time a King and a Queen who had three daughters.
The eldest was called Elsa, the second Elfrida, and the third
Heartsease. All the fairies were invited to the christening of the two
eldest daughters, and not one was left out. They came and showered gifts
on the two babies, and promised them beauty, riches, prosperity,
happiness, and long life. But when Heartsease was born, the King
happened to be very busy drawing up a treaty with a neighbouring State,
about the rights of preserving gold-fish in a certain pond which lay
between the two kingdoms, so that when he invited the fairies to the
christening he left out one of them: the Fairy of the Yellow Mines, who
was wicked and powerful.

The other fairies came, and they said that Heartsease should be the
kindest and the cleverest princess ever seen: her eyes should be as
blue as forget-me-nots, her smile as bright as the morning, her hands as
delicate as snowdrops, and her heart of pure gold. Moreover, she should
sing like a lark, and ride wild horses, and do needlework better than
all other princesses. Towards the end of the feast, the Fairy of the
Yellow Mines arrived in a chariot drawn by two snorting dragons. She was
all yellow, and her face was dry as a piece of parchment, and pinched
and wrinkled with spite and envy.

"So it appears I am not worthy to be invited to this feast," she said.
"I know I am old-fashioned, but in my time kings used to take the
trouble to be civil to fairies. But since I have come unbidden I must
not depart without bestowing a gift. Heartsease, in spite of her eyes
the colour of forget-me-nots, in spite of her smile like the morning and
her hands like snowdrops, shall not be pretty to look at, for her skin
shall be marked with my special signature. And he who woos her will woo
her for herself and for her heart, and not for her face."

So saying, the Fairy of the Yellow Mines chuckled, and flew away in her
yellow chariot.

The King and the Queen were dreadfully vexed when this happened, and
they at once asked Heartsease's godmother, who was none other than the
Fairy of the Azure Lake, whether she could not do anything to help them.

"Alas! I cannot undo the mischief that has been done," she answered,
"but nevertheless Heartsease shall be wooed and won, and her bridegroom
shall be greater than that of her beautiful sisters." And when she had
said this, the Fairy of the Azure Lake drove away in her chariot, which
was made of honeysuckle, and driven by ten obedient bees.

Heartsease was the most beautiful little baby ever seen. Her hair was
curly, her skin as soft as that of a rose-leaf, with many dimples in it,
and her smile made those who looked at her happy the whole day long. Two
years passed, and the King and the Queen began to think that the wicked
fairy's words had only been a bad joke, when one day Heartsease began
to cry, and it became clear that she was not well. She was put to bed,
and the Court doctor was sent for. He looked at her, and said that the
case was a very serious one. During a whole month little Heartsease was
mortally sick, and she was given many nasty medicines which she drank
without complaining. The King and the Queen never left her bedside day
and night.

At last, at the end of the sixth week, the doctor said the turning-point
had come, and that little Heartsease would get well. From that day
onwards she began to recover, and in a month's time she was able to run
about. But alas! her lovely soft skin had disappeared. It was pitted all
over with deep marks, so that it appeared to be all shrivelled, and as
yellow as the face of the Fairy of the Yellow Mines; and nobody could
recognise in this dried-up, wizened face the lovely little child that
had once been Heartsease. And in spite of her eyes, which were still as
blue as forget-me-nots, and in spite of her smile, people could scarcely
bear to look at her, poor little thing, such a fright had she become.
And this, of course, was the doing of the Fairy of the Yellow Mines, who
had cast a spell on Heartsease's face.

The King ordered all the looking-glasses in the house to be broken, lest
Heartsease should catch sight of herself and be sad, and so she
continued to play with her toys and ride on her white pony and be happy.
But the King and the Queen were sad, because they loved Heartsease the
best of all their daughters.

One day, when Heartsease was eight years old, she went out for a walk
with her two sisters, and they met a vagabond in dark, tattered cloak
who was playing a hurdy-gurdy, which is a thing like a big violin, with
strings, and keys, and a handle at the end of it which you turn. The
vagabond looked very poor and miserable, and he took off his cap and
asked for a few pence, for he had not a penny to buy bread with.

Now Elsa and Elfrida, Heartsease's sisters, were very proud. They
scowled at the vagabond, and told him to go about his business quickly,
or else they would send for the soldiers and have him locked up in gaol.
But Heartsease was sorry for him and said: "I cannot give you any money,
because I have not got any, but take this: perhaps it will make you
happy, because I love it very much, and talk to it when I am alone." And
she took her favourite old doll which she always carried about with her,
and gave it to him. It was not a pretty doll, and she had played with it
so much that its clothes were frayed and torn; but it had a beautiful
crown made of gold paper, and a necklace of large blue beads. And
Heartsease loved it above all things, and it was her companion; because
Elsa and Elfrida never let her play with them, for they said she was too
small.

As soon as she had done this Elsa and Elfrida burst out laughing.

"Fancy giving a beggar a doll!" they said. "We should like to know what
he can do with it!"

"Thank you kindly, little Princess," said the vagabond. "I shall never
forget your kindness."

"A lot of good a beggar's kindness will do her," said Elsa.

"Perhaps he will bring her a bridegroom," said Elfrida.

"Perhaps he will wed her himself," said Elsa, and they both laughed.

"Nobody else will, for sure," said Elfrida.

The vagabond then turned to the two sisters and said--

"A day will come when you will envy your sister her bridegroom." And he
hobbled away.

Elsa and Elfrida burst into a fit of laughter.

"Fancy," said Elsa, "our envying Heartsease!"

"Fancy," said Elfrida, "her ever having a bridegroom!"

Now Heartsease could not understand what they meant, for she did not
know she was a fright; but their words made her thoughtful and sad, and
she wondered what they were talking about. When she got home, she asked
her father whether, when she grew up, she would find a bridegroom, and
be married.

"Of course you will, dear little child," he said, and he took her on his
knee, but she noticed that his eyes were filled with tears.

From that moment, Heartsease began to suspect that there was something
wrong about herself, and that she was not quite the same as other
children. One summer night, after she had been put to bed, her nurse and
the nurserymaid were sitting by the nursery window darning some
stockings. They thought Heartsease was asleep.

"Princess Elsa will be fifteen years old come Michaelmas," said the
nurse.

"They'll be looking for a bridegroom for her soon," said the
nurserymaid. "She's as tall as a grown-up lass already."

"I pity her husband," said the nurse; "she's a regular cross-patch she
is, and as proud as a peacock."

"And as different from the little one as cloth from silk," said the
nurserymaid.

"Ah!" sighed the nurse, "poor little lamb! they'll have a hard task to
find her a suitor, although she deserves the best in the land."

Heartsease wondered what this could mean, and the more she pondered over
it, the sadder she became.

The years passed by, and a great feast was held at Court to celebrate
Princess Elsa's seventeenth birthday. All the princes of the land were
invited, for the King and the Queen thought that the time had come for
Elsa to be married. The three principal suitors were Prince Silvergilt,
who possessed immense riches and countless jewels; King Sharpsword, who
was a terrible fighter, and had slain two hundred knights in single
combat; and Prince Simple Simon, who was the youngest son of a powerful
king, and so simple that he was always laughed at by everybody. Besides
these there were a number of less important knights and princes. As soon
as the Prince Silvergilt set eyes on Princess Elsa, he made up his mind
that she would make just the right wife for him, because she was
beautiful and haughty, and he was determined that the queen of his
country should be the proudest woman in the world, and should always be
dressed in gold, and wear a heavy crown.

The King's feast was the most splendid that had ever been known, and it
was followed by a display of fireworks and a ball. Prince Silvergilt
danced with Princess Elsa, and King Sharpsword danced with Elfrida, and
all the other princes and knights chose partners from among the crowd of
beautiful princesses who were there; but nobody chose poor Heartsease,
who sat lonely and very sad in a corner by herself.

At last, when the ball was nearly over, Prince Simple Simon noticed that
Heartsease was all by herself, and he went up to her and asked her why
she did not dance.

"Because," said Heartsease, "nobody has asked me to."

"Will you dance with me?" asked Simple Simon.

"Of course I will," said Heartsease, and he led her out. As he did this,
Heartsease noticed that the courtiers looked at each other and hid a
smile. They danced round the room; but Simple Simon was so awkward that
although Heartsease, who danced like the wind, steered him beautifully,
he kept on catching his sword in the trains of the princesses, and
bumping up against them, so that all the courtiers tittered, although
they tried to hide it, and Heartsease was obliged to ask him to go back
to the quiet corner where she had been sitting.

"They are laughing because I dance so awkwardly," said Simple Simon.
"Everybody laughs at me, except Lizbeth."

"Who is Lizbeth?" asked Heartsease.

"Lizbeth is the goose-girl in our village," he answered. "We are
betrothed, and I am to wed her as soon as I have made my fortune."

"It was at me they were smiling," said Heartsease. "They always smile at
me, and I do not know why. But perhaps you will tell me."

"I do not know," said Simple Simon.

"You see," said Heartsease, "the courtiers here pay me extravagant
compliments. They tell me I am beautiful and clever; but I do not know
whether it is true, because I have never seen my own face."

This was true, because there was no such thing as a looking-glass in the
whole kingdom, and poor Heartsease had never been allowed to go near a
river, a pond, a pool, or any place where she might have seen the
reflection of her own face.

"I think," said Simple Simon, "your face is very beautiful. You have
such nice, kind eyes. But then everybody says I am a bad judge. But
haven't you ever looked at yourself in a mirror?"

"What is a mirror?" asked Heartsease.

"I will show you to-morrow morning," said Simple Simon.

At that moment a herald dressed in gold came into the ballroom, and blew
a blast on his silver trumpet which meant that supper was ready.
Heartsease would have liked to have gone in to supper with Simple Simon,
but the Court etiquette did not allow it, and an old duke who was deaf
came up, and gave her his arm.

The next morning Heartsease was feeding her tame birds in the garden
when Simple Simon appeared before her.

"I have brought you a mirror," he said. And he gave her a piece of
smooth polished steel which he had cut out of his own breastplate.

Heartsease looked at her face, and then two large tears ran down her
cheeks.

"Oh!" she said, "it was unkind of you to mock me. I understand
everything now. I see why nobody will speak to me. I am a hideous
fright; my face is covered with spots and marks."

"But I wasn't mocking you," said Simple Simon. "I don't think those
spots matter a bit. You have got such nice, kind eyes."

"No, no," said Heartsease, "I understand everything. Nobody will ever
marry me."

"I am sure they will," said honest Simon; "why, I would have married you
gladly myself if I had not been betrothed to Lizbeth." And so saying,
Simple Simon said good-bye to Heartsease, for it was time for him to
start once more on his travels.

Heartsease said good-bye to him and thanked him for his kindness, for
she understood now that he had not meant to mock her, but that he spoke
the truth, and she told him that she hoped he would make his fortune
soon, and marry Lizbeth the goose-girl, and be happy ever afterwards.

When Simple Simon rode off on his old grey mare, Heartsease felt sad and
lonely, for the only friend she had ever made was now leaving her for
ever. The festivities went on all day long, because the Prince
Silvergilt asked Elsa to be his wife, and it was settled that they
should be married without any delay. So in the evening there was another
great State ball, but Heartsease felt so sad at heart that she said she
was not feeling well, and she went up to a little room where she kept
her dolls, and all the treasures she had had when she was a child. This
little room was in an attic in a side wing of the palace, and it looked
over a narrow street, for the palace stood in the middle of the city.
Heartsease had made this room a hiding-place for herself as soon as she
was big enough to leave the nursery. Nobody knew it existed except her
nurse, and she could go and play there when she wanted to be alone. She
liked to look out on to the street and see the people coming and going,
the horses and the carts clattering over the cobblestones, instead of on
to the big empty gardens on which all the state-rooms looked out, and
where you saw no one except the sentry walking up and down, and the
courtiers, strutting about like peacocks in their wigs and hoops. The
room had a little bed in it, and sometimes she slept there; but this
evening she was not at all sleepy, and she leant out of her window and
watched the evening star shining in the summer twilight, which was still
tinged with yellow in the west.

Faintly in the distance she heard the sounds of harps, cymbals, and
drums coming from the banqueting-hall, where the King was holding a
feast. The little street beneath her was quite empty and silent, the
curfew had sounded, and the watchman had blown his horn and told all
good people to put out their lights and go to bed, and in the
jutting-out casements of the pointed red-gabled houses opposite her,
which seemed to lean over the street, there was not a light left.

Suddenly she heard the sound of footsteps tramping on the cobblestones,
and round the corner of the street she saw a dark figure coming along,
which seemed to her to be a man. It was dark now, and the sky was a deep
and wonderful blue. The moon had not risen, and only a few stars
twinkled, very large and bright.

The figure walked slowly along, keeping close to the walls of the houses
opposite to her. When he was opposite the palace he stopped. She could
not distinguish clearly who it was, but she saw at once it was a man. He
was carrying something in his hand, and presently she became aware that
it was a lute, or a musical instrument of some kind, for he began to
play, and a thin thread of sound crept from the darkness and found a way
straight into her heart.

Then it all at once came into her mind that she had seen this man before
and heard these sounds already, and she remembered the vagabond who
played a hurdy-gurdy, and to whom she had given her favourite doll,
long ago when she was little. But now his music sounded different.
"Perhaps," she thought, "it is because I am older and can understand
it." However that may be, never in her life had she heard or imagined
anything so melodious and so sweet. For while the vagabond played, he
sang, and although the words of his song were in some tongue which was
unknown to her, she seemed to understand every word of it. Although she
had never heard the vagabond's voice before, it seemed familiar to her
as if she had known it all her life. And there was something warm in it
which gladdened you, and something soft and lovely like the tender
colours of summer dawn. But more than all things Heartsease felt that
the voice was the voice of a friend who would be kind to her and comfort
her; and Heartsease felt she could listen to it for ever.

"Come away," it seemed to say, "from this palace and these unkind
people, and I will give you freedom, and we will roam together over the
wide world, and sleep beneath the stars, and drink of the clear brooks
and bathe in the streams; in the summer the sky shall be our tent, and
the stars shall be our candles, and in the winter we will make ourselves
snug and warm in the heart of the woods; we will wander over hill and
valley, and will float on a raft down the broad river till we come to
the sea; and we will cross the great sea, and I will give you a little
cottage of your own, all overgrown with honeysuckle, where the bees hum
and boom, and there I will lull you to sleep with a song."

Then all at once the music ceased, and Heartsease wanted to call the
minstrel, but he had vanished, and although he had sung quite loud, none
of the people in the houses seemed to have noticed him.

All night long Heartsease dreamed of the vagabond and of his singing,
and the next evening she waited at her window as soon as the sun set.

But the vagabond did not come that evening, nor the next evening either,
and weeks and months went by but he did not come again.

A year after this Princess Elsa was married. The King and the Queen gave
another great feast in honour of their second daughter, Elfrida, and
this time King Sharpsword was betrothed to her, and the wedding was
celebrated with pomp and ceremony. As usual there were feasting and
dances every night, and although all the princes of the land were there,
nobody took any notice of poor Heartsease except the old duke, who was
obliged to lead her in to supper according to the etiquette of the
Court. And this time Heartsease had no friend to talk to, for Simple
Simon was not there, although she had news of him. He had made his
fortune, much to everybody's surprise, by capturing a cruel ogre, and he
had married Lizbeth the goose-girl, and they were as happy as the day is
long. But although Heartsease was lonely and despised, she did not feel
lonely any longer, for somewhere she felt she had a friend who would not
forget her, and she remembered the marvellous song of the vagabond.

The night Elfrida was married, Heartsease again said she did not feel
well, and she went to the little room in the attic, and waited by the
window while the light faded from the twilight sky. And as soon as it
grew dark, she heard the footsteps on the cobblestones, and soon the
piercing notes of the sweet familiar voice echoed in the street,
sighing, soothing, and binding her with a spell, healing her heartache
and taking away her homesickness, and calling her away to the valleys
and the hills. For hours she seemed to listen to the deep, deep tones,
and then, as the year before, the sound suddenly ceased and the vagabond
had vanished.

The next year Heartsease herself was seventeen years old, the age at
which it was the custom for the royal princesses to be married. But
although the King and the Queen made a great feast and invited all the
princes of the land, not one of them asked the King for the hand of his
daughter Heartsease, because they all thought it was impossible to marry
a wife who was such a fright.

The King and the Queen were miserable, and they settled to wait another
year, in case some kind prince might come who would be willing to marry
Heartsease.

As for Heartsease, she begged her father and mother not to worry about
her. She told them she did not want to marry any one, and that she was
quite happy living at home and taking care of them. And they did not
know that she had looked at herself in a mirror and had seen her face.
But although she said this, and pretended to be happy and cheerful, she
was really sad at heart because she was such a fright, and she was sure
nobody could love her, and the only thing which consoled her was the
mysterious vagabond who came once a year and sang beneath her window.

Soon after Heartsease's seventeenth birthday, her mother, the Queen,
went one day for a ride in the forest by herself, and the wicked Fairy
of the Yellow Mines carried her off in her chariot and locked her up in
a castle. The people of the city searched for the Queen everywhere, but
no trace of her was to be found, so that everybody thought she must
have been eaten by wild beasts; but Heartsease knew this was not true,
because she saw her mother in her dreams every night. Another year
passed, and just before Heartsease's birthday came round, the old King
married again. The new Queen was the godchild of the Fairy of the Yellow
Mines. She was wicked, and owing to the spells which her godmother had
taught her, she could make the King do anything she wished, and she made
him believe the Queen had been eaten by wild beasts. No sooner were they
married than her wickedness and her cruelty, which she had hidden up to
that moment, became plain to everybody. She hated Heartsease, because
Heartsease was good and unhappy, and she tormented her in every possible
way; and to crown all, on the day before Heartsease's birthday, she said
she could not have a lazy, good-for-nothing slut about the house, but
that Heartsease must marry at once, and that since nobody would marry
her of their own accord, she would find some one who should do so
whether he liked it or not.

That very day the new Queen sent a message by a rat to her godmother,
and the Fairy of the Yellow Mines arrived in her chariot drawn by two
snorting dragons.

"It's about that child," said the Queen, when her godmother had arrived
and settled herself comfortably in an arm-chair. "She bothers me. I want
you to find her a husband--some one who will keep her in order and not
stand any nonsense; at the same time I should like it to be a suitable
and proper alliance--suitable for me too, that is to say."

"I quite understand," said the Fairy.

"You see," said the Queen, "the King won't live long, and when he dies I
shall be Queen of the country, and I shall not want any of the King's
sons-in-law to come bothering or interfering, disputing my right to the
kingdom, or any nonsense of that kind. I am quite at my ease about
Prince Silvergilt and King Sharpsword; they are so busy beating their
wives that they will not bother me."

Now this was quite true, and Elfrida and Elsa were both of them
unhappy; because their husbands were unkind, and they were obliged to
wear stiff robes all day, and heavy crowns, and they were beaten if they
did not look happy and cheerful.

"I have got the very thing," said the Fairy; "my dear nephew
Crookedshanks is just what you want. He has been looking for a wife for
a long time, but so far nobody has consented to marry him. He's so
beautiful, you know"--and here the Fairy chuckled--"he's a dwarf and a
hunchback, and he's got such a sweet, sweet temper. He'll keep the minx
in order."

"But," said the Queen, "I hope he won't interfere with me."

"Never fear," said the Fairy, "he lives inside the copper mountain, deep
down underground, like a mole among the gnomes, and he would not leave
the treasures he hoards there for all the kingdoms of the earth."

Thus it was settled that Heartsease should marry Crookedshanks, and the
Fairy of the Yellow Mines brought him to the palace the next day, which
was Heartsease's birthday.

Crookedshanks was hideous to look at, and he was as spiteful as he was
ugly. And when Heartsease was brought to him, and told that this was to
be her husband, she could not believe her eyes. She begged her father to
save her; but her father was now so completely spellbound by the wicked
Queen that he could not do anything, and so all preparations were made
for Heartsease's wedding, which was to take place on the morrow.

But in the evening, just before the feast began, Heartsease escaped from
the banqueting-hall when no one was looking, and ran up to the little
room in the attic. Then she opened the windows wide and leaned out into
the street.

It was a lovely evening. There was a smell of sun-dried hay in the air,
and the dust of the town made a golden cloud in the west which faded
presently, and when the evening star lit its lamp the sky was soft and
blue. In the palace everybody was looking for Heartsease. They were
searching the halls and the gardens, but nobody thought of looking for
her in that out-of-the-way attic, except her nurse, but she did not tell
anybody. Presently Heartsease heard the well-known footstep of the
vagabond, and her heart gave a great leap for joy.

He walked right up to the house opposite her window, and began to sing.
And this time his beautiful voice was louder and stronger than it had
ever been. And Heartsease leant out of the window and cried out--

"Come, for I have heard and I am ready!"

The song ceased, but this time the vagabond did not vanish. He crossed
the narrow street, and entered at one of the side doors of the palace
which was just beneath Heartsease's window. Heartsease heard him walking
up the winding wooden stairway, and soon the vagabond entered her room
and stood before her in his rags and tatters, poor, pale, ill-kempt,
limping and miserable. And Heartsease ran to him and cried out--

"At last you have come, my lover, my lord and my bridegroom!"

"Do you really wish to come with me?" he asked. "My kingdom is the open
field, and my palaces are the dark wood and the highway; my brothers and
sisters are the cold winds, the rain, the snow, and the hail; my jewels
are tears, and my wealth is sorrow."

And Heartsease said: "I will come with you to your kingdom and dwell in
your palaces; and your brothers and sisters shall be my brothers and
sisters, and I will wear your jewels and share your wealth as long as I
live!"

The vagabond gave Heartsease a silver penny, which was all his wealth,
and they climbed down the narrow staircase and went out into the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the King's palace on the night of the banquet there was great
commotion because Heartsease could not be found anywhere. The courtiers
searched high and low, in the palace and in the gardens, but all in
vain, until at last they gave it up and the banquet was begun without
her.

The Queen was angry, and the old King was sad, and Crookedshanks gnashed
his teeth and pinched everything he met, out of spite. The next morning
the nurse came to the King and told him Heartsease could not be found
anywhere. So the King issued a proclamation which was sent far and wide
over the whole kingdom, saying that whoever should find his daughter
Heartsease would receive half of his kingdom. But although a great
number of people set out to try and find Heartsease, they none of them
succeeded, and most of them gave up the quest after a time.

Now Heartsease and the vagabond wandered far over hill and dale, north
and south, east and west, earning their bread by songs, until they came
to the grim castle in which Heartsease's mother had been imprisoned by
the wicked fairy.

The vagabond sang a song outside the castle, so that Heartsease's mother
could hear him, and he told her that Heartsease was alive and had not
forgotten her, and that one day the wicked fairy's spell would be
broken. And Heartsease saw her mother's hand waving through the thick
bars of the narrow window of the castle. Then they wandered on till they
came to the kingdom of King Silvergilt, and there, in a castle, were
Prince Silvergilt and his wife Elsa; and King Sharpsword and his wife
Elfrida were staying with him. Elsa and Elfrida were both of them
unhappy because their husbands were so unkind.

The vagabond and Heartsease went under Elfrida's window, and the
vagabond sang a song, but no sooner had he begun than Prince Silvergilt
sent out his soldiers, and told them to drive the vagabonds away. Now
Elsa and Elfrida were sad and sorry because the vagabond's song had made
them feel happier, but they dared not say a word. Only when it grew dark
they crept out of the castle, into the wood, which was next to it, to
see if they could find the two vagabonds and give them alms. They
wandered about in the forest, and they soon came to a little hut where
the vagabond and Heartsease were lying fast asleep on a heap of leaves.

"Here they are, poor, poor people!" said Elsa; "they have got nothing to
eat."

"They must be very cold," said Elfrida, and she took off her cloak and
laid it over them.

"Do you remember a vagabond telling us we should one day envy Heartsease
her husband?" said Elsa.

"Poor Heartsease, she'll never have a husband; but I'm sure we envy her
now, wherever she is," said Elfrida.

"I would give worlds to see her again," said Elsa. "Poor, poor
Heartsease, to think how unkind we were to her!" And Elsa and Elfrida
began to cry bitterly, and their tears fell upon Heartease's face.

Then leaving behind them some bread and wine which they had brought with
them, and a purse full of gold, and their cloaks, they went back to the
castle; neither of them had recognised Heartsease.

The next morning when the vagabond and Heartsease rose, they found the
gifts that the sisters had brought, and the vagabond told Heartsease to
go and look at herself in a pool which was hard by. When Heartsease
looked into the pool she gave a cry of surprise, because the ugly marks
had gone from her face, and she looked like what she had been when she
was a little girl--lovely, and fresh as a rose in the morning dew, and
the loveliest princess in the world.

"Now," said the vagabond, "we will go to your father's castle."

So they started for the King's castle, but it was far off, and they had
to pass through many cities and villages; and when the people in the
cities and the villages heard the vagabond singing in the street, and
saw Heartsease, they wondered at her great beauty, and when the vagabond
sang they were afraid, and they thought he must be a wizard and that
Heartsease was a witch, and they often drove them away from their doors;
so that Heartsease and the vagabond with difficulty earned enough bread
to keep them alive.

At last they reached the city of the King, and there they read the
King's proclamation, which said that whoever should find Heartsease
would receive half the kingdom. The vagabond went straight to the King's
palace, and asked to see the King; but the soldiers stopped him at the
gate and said that beggars were not allowed to go into the palace. But
when the vagabond said he had found Princess Heartsease they durst not
forbid him to enter. So the vagabond was led to the King, and he told
him that he had found his daughter.

The King was overjoyed, but Heartsease's stepmother said it was not
true, and the King told the vagabond to bring Heartsease to the palace.
He went to fetch her, and when he brought her to the palace everybody
was dazzled by her beauty, but nobody recognised her, not even the King,
for he could not understand how the Heartsease whom he remembered could
have turned into such a vision of beauty. But there were two people in
the castle who said that they recognised her: one was her old nurse, and
the other was Simple Simon, who happened to be there. Simple Simon said
he saw no difference in her at all: that she was now just as she had
always been, with the same kind eyes and lovely smile. And when he said
this, the whole Court laughed, and they said that Simple Simon would
never cease to be a ninny. And as for the nurse, the Queen said she must
be locked up in the dungeon at once for telling lies. Then the wicked
Queen said that the vagabond was a wizard, and that Heartsease was a
witch, and that they had killed the real Heartsease, and that they must
both be burnt alive in the public square. And owing to her magic
everybody believed this, and the vagabond and Heartsease were thrown
into prison.

But the King, who did not want them to be burnt, sent for his daughters
Elsa and Elfrida, to see if they recognised Heartsease. Elfrida and Elsa
arrived with their husbands, and Heartsease was brought before them, but
she was not allowed to speak; and owing to the wicked Queen's spells,
neither Elfrida nor Elsa recognised their sister. After this it was
settled that the vagabond and Heartsease should be burnt in the public
square.

On the day this was to happen the whole town gathered together to see
the wizard; and the vagabond and Heartsease were driven from the prison
to the square, where a large pile of fagots had been prepared, in a
cart. And when the people saw Heartsease, a wave of pity went through
the crowd, so lovely and so innocent was her face. The King and the
Queen, his daughters, and all the Court were there, and when the
vagabond got out of the cart he asked the King to grant him one last
favour: and this was to allow him to sing a song before he died. And the
King granted it him.

The vagabond began to sing, and he sang the sweetest and most wonderful
song that had ever been heard; he sang of the love that never dies, and
the love which is stronger than death; and as he sang, the evil spells
of the wicked Queen died in the King's heart, and he remembered his true
wife, and the great love he bore her; and Elsa and Elfrida recognised
the voice, and they cried out--

"It is the vagabond we heard when we were children, and it _is_
Heartsease after all!"

[Illustration: THERE STOOD BEFORE THE THRONG A WONDERFUL SHINING FIGURE
WITH WINGS]

And the King cried out: "Yes, it is Heartsease after all!" And he ran to
her, and took her in his arms, and covered her with kisses. Then he said
to the vagabond: "You have brought me back my daughter. You shall be my
son and you shall have half my kingdom."

But the wicked Queen said: "That is impossible! How can you give half
your kingdom to a vagabond in rags and tatters?"

But the King said: "I do not care if he is a vagabond or not. He shall
wed my daughter and have half my kingdom."

And as he said this the vagabond threw off his dark, tattered cloak, and
there stood before the throng a wonderful shining figure with wings, and
golden hair, and across his shoulder there was slung a silver bow with a
quiver full of silver arrows, and he held a lyre in his hand, and all
round him was a cloud of golden light like the fire of sunrise. And his
face shone, and his eyes were like stars. But when the wicked Queen saw
this, she was so angry that she burst with rage, and all her spells
were undone.

At the very same moment the Fairy of the Azure Lake arrived in her
chariot of honeysuckle drawn by ten bees, and she brought Heartsease's
mother with her, and Heartsease's old nurse, whom she had released from
prison. You can imagine their surprise, and how they all cried for joy!
and how happy they all were!

Then the King said to the vagabond: "You shall wed Heartsease and
receive half my kingdom; but who are you, noble prince, and what is your
name?"

And the vagabond answered: "I will wed Heartsease, but I have a kingdom
of my own, and we must live there and nowhere else; and as for my name,
it is Love, the Vagabond, but now I shall wander no more."

Then Crookedshanks was banished from the Court, and the Fairy of the
Azure Lake changed Prince Silvergilt into a candlestick, and King
Sharpsword into a grindstone, and she found two kind new husbands for
Elsa and Elfrida. And a great wedding was held, and the day after it
Love the Vagabond put Heartsease on a snow-white steed, and they started
for the kingdom of Love the Vagabond, and they galloped across the
plains, down the valleys, and over the hills until they came to the sea,
which is at the end of the world, and they rode over the sea as easily
as if it had been a grassy meadow.

And on the other side of the sea they came to a country of blue hills
and green woods and golden cornfields, and there in a garden full of
roses was a little cottage covered with honeysuckle, round which the
bees hummed and boomed.

"This," said the Vagabond, "is my kingdom. Here is our home where we
shall live happily together."

And Heartsease and the Vagabond lived happily in this little cottage for
ever afterwards; and the King and Queen, and their sisters, and Simple
Simon and Lizbeth his wife, often paid them long visits.

[Illustration: TURNING ROUND SHE SAW AN OLD WOMAN]




THE MINSTREL


Once upon a time, in a small village in the mountains, there lived a
blacksmith and his wife. They were poor but they were happy; the
blacksmith had always plenty of work, and their only sorrow was that
they had no children.

One day the blacksmith's wife walked from the village down into the
valley to a farmhouse to buy some eggs from the farmer, whom she knew.
On her way back, as it was a fine spring day and the snows had melted,
she loitered on the mountain so as to gather some wild-flowers.

As she was picking the flowers she heard some one muttering behind her,
and turning round, she saw an old woman, bent and worn, who was
muttering a supplication.

"What can I do for you?" asked the blacksmith's wife.

"Give me the eggs you have in that basket," said the old woman.

The blacksmith's wife, although she was afraid she would be scolded at
home, durst not refuse, and gave the eggs to the old woman.

"Thank you kindly," said the old woman; "in return for your kindness I
will grant you a wish."

The blacksmith's wife at once answered: "I wish to have a daughter who
shall be more beautiful than the Queen's daughter."

"Your wish shall be granted," said the old woman. "But take this charm,
hang it up over your hearth, and never give it away, for if you do, you
will give your daughter with it."

So saying the old woman gave the blacksmith's wife a small copper coin
made in the shape of a heart, and as soon as she had done this she
hobbled off into the wood.

The blacksmith's wife went home and told her husband about her
adventure, and they hung the copper coin over their hearth and they
laughed for joy.

As the fairy had predicted, a daughter was born to them, and she grew to
be such a lovely little child that the blacksmith and his wife were
almost frightened. She was more like a fairy than a mortal. It seemed as
if she had invisible wings; her skin was more delicate than a pearly
sea-shell, and one expected to see little elves dancing round her when
she played in the fields.

They had christened her Snowflower, because she was like the flowers
that grew on the great mountains. And the name was a proper one, for she
loved the snow-fields and the spaces of the great hills. Everybody who
saw her was amazed--some said that she would wed the King's son; others
that she would one day be the Empress of the West; but one old crone,
who was spiteful, said that she was much too beautiful to live long.

One day when Snowflower was nine years old, her father and her mother
had gone up into the hills to visit some friends. It was Saturday
afternoon, and they had left Snowflower in charge of the shop, and had
said that they would not be back till late. Snowflower was sitting
outside in the street, watching the sunset--it was a warm summer's
eve--when she heard some one singing a strange song.

Never had she heard anything so strange and so beautiful before: the
voice was a man's voice, deep and hoarse, and it seemed to come from
very far away; the song he sang was soft and sad, but it had a piercing
note in it, something that made you listen whether you wished to or no;
it was a voice which you felt must be obeyed.

Snowflower was lost in dreams, and when the singing stopped, she would
have given worlds and worlds for it to begin again. While she was
wondering who the singer could be, she suddenly became aware of a shadow
across the street, and she saw before her a tall minstrel carrying a
lute. His face was half muffled in a black cloak; and all that she could
see distinctly were two dark eyes, very sad, but bright as stars. The
sun had set, the stars were coming out, and Snowflower was afraid.
Nevertheless she at once asked him whether it was he who had been
singing. He said--

"Yes, it was I."

"Shall I ever hear you again?" asked Snowflower.

"Yes, if you will give me a reward," said the minstrel.

"What can I give you?" asked Snowflower. "I have no money, and my father
and my mother have gone to the farm and they won't be back till late."

"All I want," said the minstrel, "is the little copper coin in the shape
of a heart that hangs over your hearth."

"Oh! you may have that with pleasure," said Snowflower, "it is only a
brass farthing." And she ran indoors, and fetched it, and gave it to
him. "Only now you must sing to me again," she said.

"I promise to sing to you again, but not now," said the minstrel, and he
walked away into the darkness.

When Snowflower's father and mother came home, they noticed at once that
the little copper coin had gone, and Snowflower told them that she had
given it to a wandering minstrel.

Her mother was vexed and cried; but her father said--

"Never mind, never mind, no harm ever came yet of giving alms to the
poor."

The years passed by, and Snowflower never once saw the mysterious
minstrel again, and she soon forgot all about him. She grew up into a
most beautiful maiden; and when she was seventeen, there was no one to
compare with her in the whole country. She was dazzling like the snow on
the mountains, and soft as the blush that steals over them in the dawn,
and her eyes were like the pools that reflect the sky in the hidden
places of the hills. So beautiful was she that the fame of her spread
far and wide, and the King thought that she would make an excellent wife
for his only son, who was just old enough to marry.

So he sent one of his courtiers in disguise to the village in the
mountains; he was to find out whether what the people said about
Snowflower was true or not.

He came to the village and saw Snowflower, and when he returned to the
palace once more, he told the king that Snowflower was far more
beautiful than what men told of her, and that it was indeed impossible
to describe her, for she was more beautiful than all mortals, but like a
fairy or a dream-child. When the King heard this, he set out with many
of his courtiers for the village in the hills, and they found Snowflower
sitting and spinning at the door of the blacksmith's shop.

The blacksmith and his wife were astonished and frightened when they saw
all these grand folk coming to their home, and when the King said that
he wished his son to marry their daughter they could hardly speak for
surprise. The King's son was as fine and as brave a lad as any in the
land, but it was settled that he was not to marry till he was
twenty-one, and now he was only twenty. So the King said he would come
back in a year's time and fetch Snowflower.

The blacksmith was of course delighted at his good fortune; but
Snowflower said that she did not wish to leave her native village, and
her father's home, and that she was quite happy where she was. And her
mother, remembering what the fairy had said, and how Snowflower had
given away the copper coin, was frightened, and she and Snowflower cried
bitterly together. But the blacksmith said this was nonsense, and
laughed at the two women for being so silly.

After a year had gone by, the King sent a whole train of courtiers to
fetch Snowflower, and they put her on a pony and they brought her to the
city and the palace of the King.

It was arranged that the wedding should be held a few days after her
arrival.

Snowflower was given a gorgeous room in the palace looking out on to a
wide courtyard, round which there were statues and colonnades; and
splendid preparations were made for her wedding ceremony.

She was introduced to the Prince directly, and he fell in love with her
at first sight. As for Snowflower, she knew not whether she loved the
Prince or not, but she thought she had never seen so charming and
handsome a person before, and she would have been quite happy but for a
home-sickness which never left her, for she longed for the sight of the
snowy mountains, the green valleys, and the little village where she was
born; and she felt that she could not live for ever far away from the
snows, and the streams, and the flowers of the great white hills.

She had gone to bed early and fallen asleep at once, but towards
midnight she was awakened by a sound which seemed to be familiar to her;
she ran to the window and looked out into the courtyard, whose pillars
were gleaming in the moonlight. Again she heard a sound, and then on the
midnight wind there were borne into the room the notes of a song which
she thought she had heard once before, long ago, in her home in the
hills. It was a hoarse voice, which seemed to come from far away; a
mournful voice and sweet, but in spite of its sweetness there was a
strange spell in it and something which called for and demanded
submission. She listened, and now, although she knew she had heard it
before, she could not tell when or where; it was different from
anything she remembered, and more beautiful; and yet, as she listened,
her heart beat fast, and she knew not whether it was the voice of a
friend or an avenging foe who was singing that hoarse serenade.

She withdrew from the window in fright, but the song grew louder; it
called her with sound like that of bugles on a field of battle in the
evening when the fight is ended--silvery, manful, and triumphant.

And then her heart beat faster than ever, for she knew that the voice
was that of a lover; and she knew that she could not resist his song.

And she looked once more out of the window, and there in the courtyard,
dark against one of the gleaming pillars, she saw a tall man muffled in
a black cloak, a man whom she recognised. She ran back from the casement
and called out in a great terror, but nobody answered her call.

Then across the cobblestones of the yard she heard the tramp of loud
footsteps, as though a knight in armour were walking across it; and
presently she heard the same heavy tramp on the wide marble steps that
led up to her room. Nearer and nearer they came, till she heard a rap
like that of a great sword against her door. He knocked so loudly that
the noise was like thunder, and yet no one in the palace seemed to be
disturbed. She tried to call out once more, but her voice died away in
her throat; she tried to run, but she remained motionless.

Then the door was opened wide. And there entered, muffled in a dark
cloak so that you could only see his eyes, the minstrel to whom she had
given the heart-shaped copper coin that used to hang over her father's
hearth. And then all at once she knew that the minstrel was not a foe
but a friend, and she stretched out her hand and grasped his hand.

As soon as she did this he threw aside his cloak, and there stood before
her a wonderful knight in armour, whose face was bright as snow and
whose eyes were like stars. And he took her in his arms and carried her
down the broad steps into the courtyard, and there a horse was waiting,
and he mounted it and set Snowflower in front of him, and they galloped
away through the gates, through the city, and over the plains beyond.

The next day Snowflower could not be found anywhere, and although the
whole kingdom was searched far and wide, no trace of her was discovered.

When Snowflower went away from her village, the blacksmith's wife was
very sad, although Snowflower had promised to visit her often. But when
she woke up on the morning that Snowflower should have wedded the
Prince, she was astonished to see that the little copper coin was
hanging once more over their hearth, and she felt quite happy once more;
for she knew now, although she could not tell why, that all was well
with Snowflower.




THE HUNCHBACK, THE POOL AND THE MAGIC RING


There was once upon a time a King and a Queen who had three sons. The
two eldest were big and strong, but the third was a cripple and a
hunchback, because a wicked fairy, whom the Queen had forgotten to
invite to his christening, had cast a spell over him in his cradle. Yet
the King and the Queen loved their third son best of all, and this made
his brothers jealous. When the three brothers were grown up, the King
fell sick, and he knew that he was going to die. And so he called his
three sons to him on his deathbed.

"Now that you are big and strong," he said to the two eldest, "it is
time you went out into the world to seek your fortune. I will give to
each of you a good horse, a suit of armour, a bag of gold, and a sharp
sword; and to you," he said to the youngest, "I will give this castle,
because you are not strong enough to go and seek your fortune for
yourself. So you shall stay at home and look after your mother."

And soon after he had said this he died.

Now the two eldest brothers were very angry because the hunchback had
been given the castle, and they said to each other: "Our father was old
and feeble and did not know what he was doing: we will not give our
brother the castle. Indeed, it would be of no use to him, but we will
keep it for ourselves, and we will get rid of him, because it is a
disgrace to have a hunchback in the family."

So they told their mother that they were going to take their brother
with them, to show him the world, and they promised to look after him
carefully. They started the next day, early in the morning, and when
they had reached a large forest, they told the hunchback that he must
seek his fortune by himself, and they took away his horse from him and
his sword and his cloak. And the next day they rode home to the castle
and said that their brother had been eaten by a bear in the night,
entirely owing to his own fault.

When the young prince was left to himself, he was very sad, and did not
know what to do, and he sat down by the side of a pool and cried
bitterly. As he was crying, he heard a voice coming out of the pool and
asking him what was the matter.

"I am crying," he said, "because I am a hunchback and I have been
deserted by my two brothers," and he told all his story. Then he heard
the voice laugh softly and say that everything could be put to rights.
"Look into the pool," said the voice, "and tell me what you see at the
bottom of it."

The hunchback looked, and said that he saw a gold ring.

"You must pull out the gold ring and put it on your finger," said the
voice.

The hunchback thrust his arm into the pool and pulled out a gold ring,
and no sooner had he put it on his finger than a beautiful woman stood
in front of him. She had golden hair which fell to her feet, and large,
soft eyes, and he thought she must be a fairy. And so she was: but she
had been imprisoned in the pool by the same wicked fairy who had not
been invited to the christening of the young Prince.

"You have done me a great service," said the fairy, "and I will not be
ungrateful. Look into the pool."

The hunchback looked into the pool and saw his own reflection. But
something wonderful had happened, for he was no longer hunchbacked, but
far taller and stronger than his brothers, and the handsomest and most
gallant-looking young Prince that the world had ever seen.

"Now," said the fairy, "all will be well with you. You have only to go
into the world and you will make your fortune; but you must remember
carefully what I tell you now. You must not lose the ring which I have
given you, and never take it off your finger; and above all things you
must never put it back into the pool. For whenever you take it off your
finger, you will become a hunchback once more, and if you put it back
into the pool, you will remain a hunchback for ever." And so saying the
fairy disappeared.

Then the hunchback walked through the forest, whistling for joy; and at
sunset he reached a large town. As soon as he reached the town, a large
coach drawn by six cream-coloured horses passed him, and in the coach
was a beautiful Princess, driving with her father, who was King of the
country. Directly she caught sight of the Prince she stopped the coach
and begged him to get in, and they drove to the palace. "At last," she
said to her father, "I have found a man whom I will consent to marry."

And when the King, her father, learnt who the stranger was, he was very
pleased, and offered him the hand of his daughter. And the Prince
learned that from far and wide suitors had come to seek the hand of the
Princess, but she had never been willing to look at any of them. And as
the King was anxious that his daughter should marry, because she had a
bad temper, he was very pleased at what had happened.

The Prince consented readily enough to marry so beautiful a Princess;
but when they were left alone he told her all his story. The Princess
did not believe it, and so as to prove the truth of his words he took
off his ring, and he stood before her in his true shape, a cripple and a
hunchback.

The Princess screamed and burst into a flood of tears, and abused the
poor Prince, and although he had put the ring on again and resumed his
splendid shape, she bade him begone out of her sight for ever. "For how
could I marry a man," she said, "who might turn into a monster if he
happened to lose a ring?"

So the Prince went away with a heavy heart, and started on his travels
once more. He travelled far, and visited many cities, and wherever he
went he was received with the greatest favour; for no one had ever seen
so handsome a Prince, and many kings offered him their daughters in
marriage. But the Prince turned a deaf ear now to their offers, and he
was sad at heart, for he felt that the magic gift which he had received
brought him no happiness, and he knew that he was wearing a mask and
deceiving himself and the whole world.

Now it happened that one day during his travels he reached the seashore,
and as darkness was falling he asked for shelter from a fisherman who
had a hut on the beach. The fisherman bade him welcome, and told his
wife to bring him some porridge. And as he sat eating his supper the
fisherman's daughter worked at her spinning-wheel in the corner of the
room, and sang a song which was like this:--

    "He brought me silver, he brought me gold,
      I bade him go his way;
    My heart was bought and my heart was sold
      Upon a summer's day.

    He brought me horses and banners bold,
      I bade him go his way;
    My heart was bought and my heart was sold
      Upon a summer's day.

    For a sigh, a song, and a tale half-told,
      And for a wisp of hay,
    My heart was bought and my heart was sold
      Upon a summer's day."

He looked at the fisherman's daughter. Her eyes were blue as the sky,
and her cheeks were fresh as the salt sea. He looked at her and he fell
in love with her at first sight. And she blushed and looked down, and
although neither of them had spoken a word, they both knew that they
would love each other for ever and ever.

The next day the Prince said good-bye to the fisherman's daughter, and
when he said good-bye her eyes filled with tears so that it hurt him to
go away. The sun was shining on the sea and a fresh breeze was blowing,
and many white sails were scudding in the distance through the foam, and
something stirred and leapt in the Prince's heart, and before he knew
what he had done, he said: "I love you, and I shall always love you, and
I am going away."

"Take me with you," said the fisherman's daughter, and the Prince smiled
and lifted the fisherman's daughter on to his saddle, and they galloped
away into the morning. They rode on and on, but the Prince guided his
horse to a dark forest. The thick grass underneath them was wet with
dew, and the bushes and the undergrowth glistened in the sunlight. The
blackbird was whistling, and the finches answered him from the
oak-trees, and far away the cuckoo called over and over again.

[Illustration: THE SUN WAS SHINING ON THE SEA AND A FRESH BREEZE WAS
BLOWING]

Soon they reached a dark pool. Up to now the Prince had not spoken a
word. He got off his horse and lifted the fisherman's daughter, who was
as light as a feather, on to the ground.

"Now," he said, "I have got a sad tale to tell you. I am not really what
you think I am. I am not a handsome Prince, but only a poor crippled
hunchback, so ugly that people hate to look at me."

"What does it matter?" said the fisherman's daughter. "I would love you
whether you were a hunchback or not. Perhaps I should love you even
more."

"We will see," he said; "at any rate I have made up my mind to be what I
am for ever and not to deceive people any more." And he threw his ring
into the pool.

Then a soft moan was heard in the forest, and the birds flew away from
their nests. The Prince stood before the fisherman's daughter in his
true shape: a hunchback and a cripple. He was so sad that he cried
bitterly, just as he had done on the day when his brothers had deserted
him.

The fisherman's daughter cried too, to see that he was sad; but she
kissed away his tears, and she told him that she loved him more than
ever, and he knew by the sound of her voice that it was true.

Then he heard a voice coming from the pool, which said: "Look into the
pool."

And they both looked and saw the reflection of the Prince. The hunchback
had gone, and he was big, handsome, and strong, and just as he had been
when the fisherman's daughter had first seen him. And then they both
laughed, and kissed each other over and over again. The Prince had
regained his splendid shape, which he was never to lose again; and he
put the fisherman's daughter on his horse, and they rode home to the
castle where he had been born, and they found his mother looking out of
the window in case he should come back that day; and they were married
the next morning in great pomp, and his two brothers came
back--everything had fared ill with them, and they were poor and
miserable--and he forgave them, and the Prince and the fisherman's
daughter lived happily for ever afterwards.




THE SILVER MOUNTAIN


There was once upon a time a King who lived in a golden palace on the
top of a high hill. He was powerful, wise, and good; his reign had been
a scroll of glory, and he had scattered happiness and plenty on the
people of his kingdom. The King had three sons, and when he felt that
his death was approaching, he grew troubled in his mind as to which of
them should inherit his kingdom. In his country it had been the
everlasting custom for the King to leave his kingdom not to his eldest
son, but to that one of his family whom he considered to be fittest to
rule.

Now the King's eldest son was a soldier, a fine lad and a brave man;
indeed, he was said to be the strongest and bravest youth in the land.
The second son was a scholar; from his earliest youth he had pored over
books, and he remembered what was in them even after he had finished
reading them; he knew all about the habits of animals, and he looked at
the stars through a long telescope of his own invention. The third son
was a fool.

The King was perplexed as to which of these three should inherit his
kingdom, for he reasoned thus: "My eldest son is too wild, my second son
is too clever, and my third son is too foolish." So the King thought the
best thing he could do would be to consult his Fairy Godmother, and he
wrote her a long letter explaining the difficulty.

His Fairy Godmother answered his letter directly. She said she was sorry
she could not come and see him, but that she was kept indoors by a bad
cold. She quite understood the difficulty of the choice, but she advised
the King to send his sons to look for the Silver Mountain, and to leave
his kingdom to him who should find it.

The King said to himself, as soon as he had read this letter: "Of
course; how extremely stupid of me not to have thought of this before!"
So he sent for his sons, and he said: "To-morrow morning I wish all
three of you to start and to look for the Silver Mountain, and I will
leave my kingdom to him who finds it."

Early the next morning the three youths--they were all grown up--started
on their search. The eldest son took his swiftest horse and went off at
a gallop. He had not gone very far before he met a man who was also
riding on a swift horse in the same direction. He asked him where he was
going, and the second man said he was looking for the Silver Mountain,
as he had heard that the man who found it should inherit a rich kingdom.

"That is true," said the King's son, "nevertheless the quest is not for
you; it is only the sons of the King who are entitled to take part in
this quest."

"But," said the stranger, "I intend to fight the King's sons and to kill
them; then I shall find the mountain and inherit the kingdom."

"We shall see about that," said the King's son; and he proposed that
they should fight then and there, which they did, and the King's son
was victorious. He overcame the stranger and killed him, and leaving the
body to be picked by the crows, he went on his way.

After many days, he came to a large town where the palace and chief
buildings were all draped in black, and the people of the place were
walking about with sad faces, talking in whispers. He asked some one
what was the cause of all this grief, and he was told that the chief man
of the country, who some time ago had set out upon some fantastic quest,
had been killed by a robber in the woods, and that it was only now his
bones had been brought home.

"It is for this reason we are sad," said the man, "for we are without a
king."

On hearing this the King's son said: "There is no cause for grief. I
will be your king." And he rode straight to the palace, and dismounting
from his horse walked up the steps of the throne and placed the crown
upon his head, and nobody durst say him nay.

Then the King's son thought to himself: "I have now solved the whole
matter. It is needless for me to search all over the world for a Silver
Mountain which I possibly may never find at all, or which my brothers
may find sooner than I do, in order to inherit a kingdom, when I can
thus gain almost as good a kingdom without any trouble at all."

So he thought no more about the Silver Mountain, or of his father, or of
his ancient home, but he remained in this foreign country and married a
wife, and ruled over it, and he lived in splendour and plenty.

The first thing which the second son did when he started on his quest
was to consult an old scholar who lived in a hermitage, and who was
famous for being the most learned man in the whole world. The King's
second son went to him and said: "I want to find the Silver Mountain in
order that I may inherit my father's kingdom."

The scholar said to him: "It is a good thing that you came to me for
advice. Nobody in the world can help you as well as I can. There is no
such thing as the Silver Mountain, and I daresay you know that already;
nevertheless your father was a wise man to have made this quest the
condition of the inheritance."

"But," said the King's son, "if there is no such thing as the Silver
Mountain, there remains nothing for me to do but to go home and claim my
inheritance."

"Not at all," said the old man. "It is of no avail to say that there is
no such thing as the Silver Mountain, especially when almost everybody
in the world is quite certain that the thing exists. Where your task
lies is to find out what people think is the Silver Mountain, and to
prove to them that it is not silver at all, but an ordinary mountain
just like any other. That is what you must do." And so saying the old
man refused to discuss the matter any further.

So the King's son set out on his quest once more, and on the way he met
many people who were all seeking for the Silver Mountain. They were all
anxious to find it, because they said that the man who found it would be
a great king; and the King's son asked them to guide him to the place
where it was likely to be. This they were willing to do, and after they
had journeyed for many days, through forests and swamps, across large
rivers, down steep valleys, and over wooded hills, they reached a wide
plain; and beyond this plain rose a great chain of mountains, and in the
centre of this chain there towered one mountain higher than the rest,
and it was covered with clouds.

The people pointed to this mountain and said: "Without doubt, that is
the Silver Mountain."

The King's son said he would climb this mountain, and he took the people
with him. The ascent was steep and perilous, and many a time those who
were with him would have turned back, had he not encouraged them and led
them on by his fiery words, and after many days of toil and hardship,
they reached the summit of the mountain, whence they obtained a view
over the whole country.

Then the King's son said to them: "This is the highest mountain in the
whole of the land--the whole of the land is now revealed to us. We know
all there is to be known about this country, and it is quite plain that
this mountain is a mountain just like any other, and that in the whole
world there is no such thing as a Silver Mountain; therefore we will now
go back and tell this to the whole world, and save our friends and our
brothers from wasting their time and exhausting themselves in fruitless
labour over an insane quest."

So they went back to the country, and announced the news far and wide
that there was no such thing as a Silver Mountain, and that those who
had set out on the quest of it had better return to their homes.

Now when the people heard this they were angry, and they threw stones at
the King's son, and he was compelled to flee from their city and to seek
shelter in the old scholar's home. But from that time forward many
people in the country ceased to think of the Silver Mountain any more,
or to search for it, and even among those who were angry with the King's
son there were many who felt that his words were true nevertheless.

The third son started also on the quest. He sought out all the highest
mountains of the country, and convinced himself that none of them could
be the Silver Mountain, and yet he was sure there was such a thing
somewhere, and he persisted in believing this, and in saying it. He
spent many years of fruitless search, but he never gave up the quest,
nor did he ever lose hope that one day he should accomplish it.

One evening, after he had been searching all day, he lay down, footsore
and weary, and he said to himself aloud: "If only the fairies would help
me, I should find the mountain soon enough."

No sooner had he said this than a beautiful fairy stood before him and
said: "I will help you to find the Silver Mountain," and she gave him a
small mirror made of polished steel, whereupon she immediately vanished.

The King's youngest son took the mirror and looked into it, and there he
saw very distinctly the image of his father lying ill, propped up by
pillows, dying and lonely, without any of his children about him. And
the King's youngest son said to himself--

"What does it matter to me whether I inherit the kingdom or not? Before
I think of that I must go back and see my father before he dies. I would
much rather my brothers found the mountain before me, and inherited the
kingdom, than that my father should die without my saying 'Good-bye' to
him."

And he turned back, and made for his home as quickly as possible.

Now the King's palace was on the top of a high hill, and the King's
youngest son approached it from the back, where he had never been before
in his life, and towards evening he emerged from the forest and saw this
hill before him, shining in the sunset, with the King's golden palace at
the summit of it; and in the clear glory of the sunset the hill shone
like silver, and the King's youngest son, as he looked at it, said--

"Why, this is the Silver Mountain!" And as he ran up the hill as fast as
he could he saw that it was of silver after all. So he rushed into his
father's bedroom, crying: "Father, I have found the Silver Mountain--it
was here the whole time--at home--and we have all lived on the top of
it without knowing it!"

[Illustration: TOWARDS THE EVENING HE EMERGED FROM THE FOREST]

The King was very pleased to see his son, and he said: "My son, what you
say is quite true, and you shall inherit my kingdom." And the King
kissed him, and soon after this he died, and the King's son reigned in
his stead, and reigned happily ever after as the King of this country.

[Illustration: HER MOTHER FOUND A SILVER HORSE-SHOE]




THE RING


Once upon a time there was a King and a Queen who had only one daughter,
called Windflower. Just before Windflower's ninth birthday, the Queen,
her mother, when she was walking in the garden of the palace, found a
silver horseshoe lying on one of the paths. Now a silver horseshoe was
always found in the garden just before the death of a Queen, so the
Queen went to bed at once and sent for her daughter.

"My child," she said, "I have found a silver horseshoe in the garden,
and that means I have not long to stay in this world. So listen
carefully to what I have to say. You will be the most beautiful Princess
the world has ever seen, and I hope you will find a husband who is
worthy of you. Take this ring; it is was given to me by my mother, who
in her turn received it from my grandmother. The ring is faery, and you
must keep it and wear it always, for as long as you keep it you will be
sure of true love; but if you give it away you will give your heart and
all its power away with it, and evil will come of this. And if you are
blessed with a daughter you must give it to her before you die; but if
you have no daughter then you must cast the ring into the sea, for its
work will be done."

When the Queen had said this she kissed Windflower and put the ring on
her finger. Then she sent for the King and bade him be a good father to
their child, and after she had said farewell she fell asleep and never
woke up again.

Two years after the Queen died, the King married again. This second wife
had already been married before, and she had a daughter of her own who
was called Emerald, and who was just the same age as Windflower. As the
years rolled on the new Queen became jealous of her step-daughter,
because Windflower grew up into the most lovely creature that had ever
been seen. She was tall and slender, and her eyes were like dew and her
face like the petal of a flower. She danced like the surf of the sea,
and she sang like a bird.

But Emerald, although she was handsome, had a proud face, with envious
green eyes that glittered balefully. And as, of course, everybody liked
Windflower much better than Emerald, this made the Queen angry, and she
determined, when the children were grown up and it was time that they
should marry, that none of the princes of the land should set eyes on
Windflower until Emerald was married. So she sent Windflower to a lonely
tower which was in a forest outside the city, and she told the King and
the Court that Windflower was not well, and had been ordered by the
physicians to live in a quiet place. So Windflower lived by herself in
the forest and saw nobody but her old nurse; but she was not sorry to
get away from her step-sister, who teased and pinched her dreadfully.

When Emerald's seventeenth birthday came, the King and the Queen
prepared a grand banquet to celebrate it, and they invited all the
princes of the land, and of these the youngest and the handsomest was
Prince Sweetbriar. As he was heir to a large kingdom, the Queen was
anxious that he should marry Emerald.

Now it happened that as Prince Sweetbriar was riding to the palace in
company with several other Princes, he dropped behind his companions and
lost his way, and presently he found himself in the forest where
Windflower lived, and he rode past just under the tower. Just then
Windflower was leaning out of the window. Her hair, which was like a
golden mist, was hanging about her shoulders, and her face blushed like
the dawn. Sweetbriar looked up, and he fell in love with her at first
sight, and Windflower looked at him and smiled and fell in love with him
too. Then he rode on till he found the city and the palace.

The Queen paid every attention to him, and gave him the most gorgeous
room in the palace. The banquet was held in the evening, and after it
was over there was a State ball. Sweetbriar looked everywhere for
Windflower, but in vain. He asked one of the courtiers whether the King
had not got another daughter, and he was told that there was another
called Windflower, but nobody ever saw her because she was ill. But
Sweetbriar could think of nothing else but Windflower's face, and, in
spite of all the Queen did, he took no notice of Emerald.

When the ball was over he found out from his page, who had been
gossiping in the kitchen, that Windflower was none other than the
beautiful maiden he had seen in the forest. So early next morning he set
out for the forest, and he found the tower without difficulty.
Windflower looked even more beautiful than before, and Sweetbriar
declared his love and asked her to be his wife, and she answered "Yes,"
and they spent the whole morning together, talking about how happy they
would be.

Then Sweetbriar rode back to the palace and asked the King for the hand
of his daughter Windflower, whom he had met in the forest. The Queen, of
course, tried to make objections, but Sweetbriar would not hear of
them; so the King gave his consent, and the Queen could do nothing more,
and Sweetbriar and Windflower were married.

For a year they were as happy as the day is long, and a little daughter
was born to them whom they christened Sundew; but after a year had gone
by the Queen took counsel with her daughter Emerald, and said--

"All is not yet lost, and if you are skilful we may defeat the minx yet.
You have only to persuade Sweetbriar to make Windflower give him the
ring which her mother gave to her, and all will be well."

"I will do it," said Emerald.

So one day Emerald said to Sweetbriar: "You have a very beautiful wife.
I hope she is as devoted as she is beautiful."

"Of course she is!" said Sweetbriar.

"Do you think she would do anything you wished?" asked Emerald.

"Of course," answered Sweetbriar.

Then Emerald laughed, and said: "I am sure she would not even give you
the ring she wears on her finger."

Sweetbriar laughed, but Emerald only said: "Try."

So that very same day Sweetbriar said to Windflower: "Emerald is so
jealous of you that she says you would not even give me the ring which
you wear on your finger, if I ask it of you."

Windflower was distressed when she heard this, and she told Sweetbriar
of her mother's warning, and Sweetbriar said that she had much better
not give him the ring, since he needed no ring to tell him that she
loved him.

But when he next saw Emerald she mocked him, and said: "What did I tell
you? She doesn't even love you enough to give you a ring!" And every day
Emerald taunted him like this, and she said: "I've no doubt she finds
excellent excuses, but she will never give you the ring!"

At last one day Sweetbriar could bear it no longer, and he said to
Windflower: "What does it matter if you give your heart away to me? Your
heart belongs to me already, so there can be no harm in giving me the
ring. Give it to me, for I can no longer bear Emerald's taunts."

So Windflower gave him the ring. Now the ring, as I said, was faery; as
long as she kept it her heart was her own and had the power to bind her
husband's heart, but as soon as she gave the ring away, she gave away
her heart and with it all its power; so that, although her heart still
belonged to Sweetbriar, Sweetbriar's love no more belonged to her--and
he soon forgot all about Windflower.

As soon as the Queen and Emerald saw this, they drove Windflower and her
child from the palace, and left them in a wood to perish, and they said
they had been devoured by wild beasts, and Sweetbriar was wedded to
Emerald.

But Windflower and Sundew did not perish. A woodcutter showed them the
way out of the wood, and they wandered for several years from city to
city begging their bread. One day, when they were both very hungry, and
Windflower had just earned a crust of bread, an old woman came up to her
and asked for alms.

"I have got no money," said Windflower, "but take this; you need it more
than we do." And she gave her the crust of bread.

"You are a good child," said the old woman; "keep your bread and ask for
a gift and I will give it you."

"The only gift I crave is what nobody can give," said Windflower. "It is
my husband's love, which has been taken from me." And she told the old
woman her story.

And the old woman said: "There is only one way of winning back your
husband's love. You must earn the ring which you gave him, and he must
give it you back and your heart with it in return for his life." So
saying the old woman disappeared.

Windflower at once set out for the King's city, and when she got there
she found every one in woe and trouble because Prince Sweetbriar was
lying mortally sick and nobody could cure him. The King had offered half
his kingdom to any one who should cure the Prince, but nobody had even
tried.

Windflower, who was in rags and quite unrecognisable, crept into the
kitchen and begged a little bread for herself and her little daughter
Sundew. She was allowed to warm herself at the fire, and she heard that
the Prince had been wounded by a poisoned arrow, and that if some one
would suck the poison from his wound he would recover; but nobody would
do this, for they knew that they would die themselves, and what was the
use of half a kingdom to a dead man?

So Windflower went to the King, and offered to cure the Prince on the
condition that he should give her as a gift anything she should ask for.

The King agreed, and Windflower went to the Prince and sucked the poison
from his arm. Sweetbriar at once began to get well, and he asked
Windflower what she craved as a reward.

"The ring upon your finger," said Windflower.

Sweetbriar gave her the ring, and immediately her heart came back to
her, and with it Sweetbriar's love, and he remembered everything and
recognised Windflower, and with a great cry he took her in his arms.

And Windflower's heart overflowed with joy. She slipped the ring on her
little daughter's finger, then she looked at her husband and smiled, and
fell asleep in his arms. She never woke up again, because the poison she
had sucked from Sweetbriar's wound was deadly.

And Sweetbriar drove Emerald and her mother from the house, and although
his heart was broken, he said no word and he shed no tear, for he knew
that it had all come about through his own fault, and that Windflower
was very happy and glad to be asleep, because she was so tired.

But his little daughter Sundew laughed, and played with him every day,
and she mended his broken heart for him very well, although it was never
quite the same as it had been before. And she grew up to be as beautiful
and as good as Windflower, and she never gave away her mother's
ring.




THE MERCHANT'S DAUGHTER

(A GREEK STORY)


Once upon a time, long ago in Greece, there was a merchant, who used to
earn his living by trafficking with goods among the Greek Islands and
along the coast of Asia. Sometimes he used to go as far as Persia and
India. He possessed many argosies, and he used to take with him large
bales of embroideries, silks and other stuffs, spikenard, and all kinds
of rare scents and ointments, and these he used to sell for as much
money as he could get for them.

But although he was wealthy, he was a kind merchant; and although he
considered trade to be important, and struck as good a bargain as he
could, when the time for bargaining came, yet there was something that
he considered more important than merchandise and than bargaining, and
that was his daughters. He had three daughters. The eldest was called
Heliodore, the second Hermione, and the third Daphne. They were all
three of them extremely beautiful. The eldest, Heliodore, was tall like
a lily; the second, Hermione, was dark like a rose; and the third,
Daphne, was like a flower that grows in the springtime.

One day, when his daughters were grown up, it was necessary for the
merchant to make a long journey to the East--a longer journey than he
had ever made before. He was obliged to go to India in order to sell
some vases cunningly worked, which Indian princes were especially fond
of. Before he started he called his daughters to him and said good-bye
to them. They each of them kissed him on both cheeks, and begged him to
bring them back something from India. They knew that India was a
marvellous country, full of rich and strange things. He promised to
bring back something for each of them, and he asked them what they would
like. Heliodore said she would like a scarf woven of moonbeams, such as
is only to be found in the mountains which are in the north of India.
Hermione said she would like a necklace made of rubies, such as are
only found in the mines of India, where little gnomes work all day and
all night underground and never see the sky. But when he asked Daphne
what she would like, she answered: "The only thing that I want is the
Golden Ring." And Heliodore and Hermione laughed at her, and said:
"Silly child! she could buy a golden ring in any shop in Athens. What a
foolish thing to ask for."

Before the merchant started, Heliodore, Hermione, and Daphne burnt a
sacrifice on the altar of Hermes, and they prayed that the winds and the
waves might be favourable to their father, and they entreated him that
he should remember his promise to them, and should not forget the gifts
which they desired; and they said at the end of their prayer: "If our
father forgets to bring back these gifts which he has promised us, then
grant us that his ship, swift Hermes, may not stir from the shore." And
the merchant confirmed their prayer, and burnt incense on the altar
himself. Then he started for India.

He arrived in India without difficulty, and during several months he
carried on his trade and did excellent business. He sold cunningly
wrought cups to the Indian princes, and statues, and garments, and
sandals, and lamps, and many other things besides. He travelled all over
India, trafficking and striking bargains; and during his travels he went
up to the northern mountains, and bought from an old woman a veil made
of moonbeams, for his eldest daughter Heliodore. This veil was
expensive, and he was obliged to give in exchange for it some of the
grass of Parnassus, gathered while Apollo was playing upon his fiddle,
and some water from the spring of Helicon, taken in a crystal flask on
the night when the Muses cease from quarrelling and sing in unison to
the new moon.

After he had bought this veil at such a high price, he went to the
plains in the centre of India, and walked into the heart of a mountain,
and reached the caves which are under the earth, where the gnomes work
all day and all night, and there he asked the King of the Gnomes to
sell him the necklace of rubies. The King of the Gnomes said: "What will
you give me for it?" And the merchant said: "I will give you whatever
you ask." And the King of the Gnomes said to him: "I will have in
exchange for a necklace of rubies the nightingale that sings in the
thickets of Daulis." So the merchant gave him this nightingale, although
he was sorry to part with it, and received the necklace of rubies in
exchange.

The merchant remembered these gifts, which were so difficult to get, but
he quite forgot what he had promised to his third daughter, which was
only a golden ring, and he started home without the golden ring. When he
reached the coast, and embarked on his argosy, there was a fair breeze,
and he was pleased because he thought his journey would be swift. But
what was his surprise to find that the ship would not stir from the
shore. Many other ships belonging to other sailors were scudding fast
through the waves, leaving behind them a trail of foam, and yet his
ship, although she was an excellent seaboat, refused to stir. And this
lasted all day and all night.

At last he disembarked and sat down on the shore, and thought, saying to
himself, "What spell has been put on my ship? What have I done? In what
way have I displeased the gods that they prevent me from going home?"

As he was pondering over this, a peasant walked along the coast. He was
carrying a basket of eggs home from the market, and he stopped and asked
the merchant what he was thinking of.

The merchant hardly liked to tell him about his private family affairs,
but the peasant said to him: "I am sure there is something on your mind,
otherwise it is impossible that your ship should not be scudding over
the sea. Perhaps you promised something to somebody before you started."

The merchant thought about this, and then at last he remembered what he
had promised to Daphne, and he said to the peasant: "I promised my
daughter to bring her back the Golden Ring from India, and I have
forgotten to do so."

The peasant said: "That accounts for it all. If you have promised to
bring back something to somebody who is dear to you and have forgotten
it, it is quite impossible that you should sail back home."

"That is all very well," said the merchant, "but can you tell me where I
can find the Golden Ring? You see, there are many golden rings
everywhere, but my daughter Daphne, who is my youngest daughter, asked
me to bring her back _the_ Golden Ring."

The peasant nodded and turned round, and then he said: "You see this
road running in front of you into the distance? Walk along it, without
looking to the right or to the left, and when you have walked for three
hours you will reach a spot, and in that spot is the Golden Ring."

The merchant did what the peasant had told him, and he walked for three
hours without looking to the right or to the left. When the three hours
were over he reached a milestone, on which was written: "To the Coast,
three hours; to the Palace, one minute." Near the milestone an old man
with a long grey beard was sitting, so the merchant spoke to the old
man, and said to him: "Sir, can you tell me where I can find the Golden
Ring?"

The old man answered him: "The Golden Ring is in the palace of the King.
The palace of the King is a minute's walk from here. You turn to the
right, and before you you will find two golden gates. You must open
these gates, walk through them, and you will find the palace of the King
in front of you. In this palace there is a Prince, who is the King's
son, and that Prince is the Golden Ring."

The merchant did as he was told. He walked for a minute, and found in
front of him two golden gates. Here he stopped a moment, because he was
afraid to walk into the house of somebody whom he did not know.
Nevertheless he took heart and opened the gates, and walked straight
along a broad road until he reached the steps which led to the front
door of the King's palace. Now the King's palace was made entirely of
red marble, and when the merchant saw it he was frightened. However, he
walked up the steps, and knocked loudly on the door, and immediately a
slave appeared and asked him what he wanted.

"I wish to see the King," said the merchant, "and to ask him if I may
enter into his palace."

The slave went away, and presently he came back again and said to the
merchant: "The King will be very glad if you will do him the honour of
entering his palace. Moreover, the King would like to talk to you
himself. He is at this moment in the Throne Room, sitting on the
throne."

So the merchant was ushered into the Throne Room, and there was the King
sitting on a throne made of ivory and studded with emeralds. As he
entered this room, the King walked down the steps of the throne, and
asked him politely what was his business.

The merchant said: "Your Majesty, I want to speak to the Prince."

The King said that nothing was easier, and he led the merchant through a
long corridor into another room, which belonged to the Prince.

The Prince was a young man, scarcely twenty-one years old. His hair was
as bright as the rice-fields in winter, and his eyes were as blue as the
sea. He was strong and nimble, and his voice was as tuneful as a bell.

The Prince said to the merchant: "I am very glad to see you. I am always
glad to see people who come from a far country; but what do you want of
me?"

So the merchant told him all his story--how he had three daughters; how
he had remembered to bring back the gifts which the two eldest had asked
of him; and how he had forgotten the Golden Ring which he had promised
to his youngest daughter, Daphne.

Then the Prince said: "I quite understand. Is your daughter Daphne very
beautiful?"

And the merchant said: "All my daughters are beautiful. My eldest
daughter, Heliodore, is as beautiful as the day; and my second daughter,
Hermione, is as glorious as the night; but my third daughter, Daphne,
is like the first day of spring. She is more beautiful than any woman in
the world."

Then the Prince led him along a long corridor into a room in which there
were many beautiful pictures of beautiful women; and he said to the
merchant: "Is your daughter Daphne as beautiful as any of the people who
are pictured here?"

And the merchant said: "My daughter Daphne is a thousand times more
beautiful than any of these pictures."

And the Prince knew by the tone of voice in which he said it, that what
he said was true. He then led him into another room, in which there was
only one picture, and this was a picture of a woman he had once seen
long ago, in a dream, when he had dreamt of her who should be his wife;
and this picture was the most beautiful picture in the world; and the
woman who was painted in this picture was like a dream or a vision, so
that those people who looked at it could not believe that such a
beautiful thing could possibly be true. When the Prince had drawn the
curtain from this picture he said to the merchant, "Is your daughter as
beautiful as that?" and the merchant answered, "That is my daughter
Daphne." Then the Prince said to him: "I thought so. I will give you
something to take back to her."

He took the merchant into another room, and gave him a letter written on
parchment, a cup made of crystal, and a small golden ring of plain gold,
and he said to the merchant: "Please do not forget to take these three
gifts to your youngest daughter, Daphne. Farewell."

The Prince said good-bye to the merchant, and the King said good-bye to
him also, and a slave was sent with him to show him the way out of the
palace, and the nearest road to the coast; and there he found his ship
waiting for him, and directly he got on board and set sail, the ship
answered to the breeze, and swiftly and surely he arrived in his native
country.

Now no sooner had he got home than his daughters asked him: "Father,
have you brought us back the presents which you promised us?"

"Yes," said the merchant, "I have. I have brought Heliodore a veil woven
of moonbeams, which I found in the northern hills of India, and it was
very expensive. And I have brought Hermione a necklace of rubies, in
exchange for which I had to part with a precious nightingale. And I have
brought Daphne the gifts which she asked for." So saying, he gave his
daughters their various presents, and to Daphne the letter, the cup, and
the ring which the Prince had given him.

When Heliodore and Hermione saw what their father had brought Daphne,
they were very pleased, because they thought a piece of paper, a cup
such as was to be seen in almost any shop in Athens, and a golden ring
worth at the most a few pieces of silver, were indeed shabby presents
compared with the treasures which they had received, and they laughed at
their sister.

But Daphne paid no heed to this. She took her gifts to her room, and
locked herself in, and there she unrolled the scroll of paper which her
father had given her, and read what was written in it. It was written on
the parchment that she was to pour water into the crystal cup, throw the
Golden Ring into it, and call three times aloud: "Come hither, come
hither, come hither, my Golden Ring!" No sooner had she read this than
she filled the crystal cup with water, threw the Golden Ring into it,
and called out to the ring as she had been told to do; and as she
called, lo and behold! a wood-pigeon flew into her room and alighted on
the crystal cup, and dived and swam in the water; and as soon as its
body was completely immersed in the water, it changed into the very
Prince whom the merchant had seen in India.

"I am Prince Fortunate," said the Prince, "and I live in India. I have
seen you many times in my dreams, and the first time I saw you I made up
my mind that you should be my wife, for you are the most beautiful woman
in the world, and I love you with all my heart." And Daphne told the
Prince that she loved him too, although she had never seen him before,
except in her dreams, and they talked happily together for more than an
hour.

Then the Prince dipped his fingers into the crystal cup, and instantly
changed into a wood-pigeon, and flew away through the window. But before
he flew away, the bird gave Daphne a nut, and told her to crack it and
to put on what she should find inside it.

As soon as Daphne was left alone, she cracked the nut, and she found
inside it a beautiful dress, as dark as a summer night, but on the folds
of which were painted the sun, the moon, and all the stars of heaven.
She put it on, and went for a walk in the garden, and her dress shone
like a starry night, and it was a wonderful sight to behold; and her
sisters, who were leaning out of a window which overlooked the garden,
were dazzled by the sight of the shining garment, and they wondered
greatly, and they were filled with envy and jealousy.

The next day all this happened again. The pigeon flew in at Daphne's
window, changed into the Prince, and talked to her for an hour, and
when the hour was over changed back into a pigeon again and flew away,
leaving her a fig, which he told her to cut open, and to wear what she
should find inside it. She cut open the fig, and inside it she found a
dress on which the azure sea and all its white waves were painted. This
dress was like the sea at dawn, when the wind ruffles it, and little
waves of crested foam dance for joy in the morning air.

Daphne put it on, and went for a walk in her garden, and her sisters,
who were leaning out of the window, were amazed at the lovely sight, and
cried out in surprise--for at first they thought it was Queen Aphrodite
just fresh from the sea; and they envied Daphne sorely.

The next day the same thing happened again. Daphne threw the ring into
the cup, and all happened as before; and when the pigeon flew away, he
left her a hazel-nut, and told her to crack it and wear what she should
find inside it.

Daphne cracked the hazel-nut, and inside it she found a garment on which
the month of May with all its flowers was painted. She put it on, and
she again went for a walk in the garden, and her sisters, who were
leaning out of the window, gave a great cry when they saw her--for
beautiful as had been the dress on which the sun, the moon, and the
stars were painted, and beautiful the dress on which were pictured the
sea and all its waves, this one was far lovelier still, for it was as
frail as blossom, and as soft, and fragrant exceedingly; and as Daphne
walked across the grass in it, her sisters thought that Queen Proserpine
had left her dismal home and had come back to visit the earth once more,
arrayed in the glory of May--and then they saw that it was only their
sister Daphne, whom they had always despised. This made Heliodore and
Hermione so jealous that they took counsel one with the other how they
might do Daphne harm, and at last they settled on a plan.

[Illustration: A GARMENT IN WHICH THE MONTH OF MAY IN ALL ITS FLOWERS
WAS PAINTED]

Every morning, as soon as the sun rose, the three sisters used to go to
the baths and bathe. So the morning after Daphne had walked about in the
garden, in the dress, on which the month of May and all its flowers
were painted, as they were walking together to the baths, Heliodore took
with her a bag full of seed-pearls, and all at once she pretended to
slip, and in slipping scattered the pearls on to the path. Then she said
to Hermione and Daphne, "You go on in front, whilst I pick up my
pearls." As soon as Hermione and Daphne were out of sight, she swept up
the pearls with a small broom and put them all back into the bag, and
then she returned to the house. There she took the key of Daphne's
room--for she had noticed that Daphne always hid this key in a crevice
on the hearth--and she opened Daphne's door, went into her room, and
searched in every corner to see what she might find; and there, at the
back of the cupboard, she found the Prince's letter, the crystal cup,
and the Golden Ring. She read the Prince's letter, filled the crystal
cup with water, threw the Golden Ring into it, and called out the magic
words. But it so happened that Daphne had that day left her knife in the
cup; so when Heliodore cried out, "Come hither, come hither, come
hither, my Golden Ring!" the wood-pigeon flew in at the window, and
dived into the crystal cup, but just as he was going to change into the
Prince he fell upon the knife, and he flew away with a wound in his
breast.

Now when Heliodore saw that there was a drop of blood in the crystal
cup, she was afraid, and she ran away from Daphne's room, and rejoined
her sisters at the baths.

When they came back from the baths, Daphne went to her room and took the
cup from the cupboard. But when she saw that there was a drop of blood
in it, she cried bitterly, for she saw what had happened, and she
understood what her sister had done; and when she had cried for a long
time by herself, she went out of doors, and she found her father and
said to him: "Oh sir, buy me a man's dress, such as will prevent those
who see me from recognising me, when I wear it; and buy me a swift ship,
so that I may travel."

Her father gave her the dress and the ship, and she embarked on it and
started for India, disguised as a pedlar, in order to find the Prince.

She sailed to India, but when she disembarked, she was at a loss as to
what to do, for she did not know where the Prince lived, nor the way to
his palace. As she was brooding in her perplexity, she caught sight of
two pigeons who were quarrelling with each other, and one of them was
threatening to kill the other. Daphne listened to their conversation,
for she understood the language of birds because of the Golden Ring
which she wore on her finger. And one of the birds was saying to the
other: "Prince Fortunate is sick, and the physicians do not know how to
cure him." And the other bird said: "Will he be cured?" And the first
pigeon answered: "If some one were to kill us and to dip our bodies in
the spring which is hard by, and then make an ointment of the water of
the spring, and rub the Prince with that ointment, he would surely get
well."

Directly Daphne heard this she took a stone and killed the pigeons, and
dipped them into the water of the spring, and made an ointment, as they
had said. No sooner had she done this than a wandering minstrel passed
her, and asked her whither she was going.

"I am looking," said Daphne, "for the King's palace, where Prince
Fortunate lives, but I do not know where it is."

The minstrel said: "Come with me, for I know the way. But what is your
trade?"

"I am a physician," said Daphne, "and I have good medicine to sell."

So presently she reached the King's palace, and called outside the
windows: "Good medicine to sell. Good medicine to sell."

When the King heard that there was a physician there, he sent for him
and said: "Can you cure my son?"

Daphne answered: "In eight days I will make him so well that he will
ride on his horse, and shoot with his bow and arrow."

The King was pleased; but when the other doctors heard of this, they
said that if this new physician cured the King's son in a week, the King
would be at liberty to cut off their heads.

So Daphne, in the disguise of a doctor, was taken to the Prince, and she
rubbed him with the ointment she had made, and instantly he grew a
little better, and in two or three days' time he grew much better, and
in a week's time he was quite well and able to ride on his horse and to
shoot with his bow and arrow.

Now, when the King saw this, he was greatly pleased, and he said to the
physician: "You have cured my son; what can I do for you in return?"

And the physician answered, "All I desire is that your Majesty should
give a great banquet, and invite to it all the kings and princes of
India."

The King said: "That is but a trifling favour to ask." And he gave
orders at once that a great feast should be prepared, and he invited to
it all the kings and princes of India, Persia, and Arabia, and they ate
and drank and made merry.

When the banquet was over, Daphne, in the disguise of the doctor, said
to the King: "Let there be silence, for I have a story to tell the
company." The King gave orders, and every one was silent. Then Daphne
told the whole of her story, as I have told it now, and she told
everything except one thing--she did not say who she was, for she was
keeping this to the end. But when she reached the end of the story and
told how the merchant's daughter had disguised herself as a doctor in
order to cure the Prince, she said--

"I am the merchant's daughter. My name is Daphne, and in the disguise of
a doctor I cured the Prince. I did it because I am betrothed to him, and
because he will make me his wife; and I never did the Prince any harm,
but my sister did that evil thing from envy, because she was jealous of
our happiness."

As soon as the Prince heard this, he recognised Daphne, and he embraced
her and said: "It is true. This is Daphne, my betrothed, and my bride
that is to be."

And the King prepared a splendid wedding-feast, which lasted three days,
and they were married in a temple of gold, and on the first day of the
feast Daphne wore the dress on which the sun, the moon, and the stars
were painted; and on the second day she wore the dress on which were
pictured the sea and all its waves; but on the third day she wore the
dress which was adorned with the month of May and all its flowers, and
on that day she was more beautiful than ever she had been before, for it
was her wedding-day. And she lived with the Prince happily for ever
afterwards.




THE CUNNING APPRENTICE

(A RUSSIAN STORY)


Once upon a time there was an old man and an old woman who had one son.
The old man was poor, and he wished his son to acquire knowledge, so
that he should be able to comfort his parents in his youth, to support
them when he grew up, and to pray for them after their death. But what
is to be done when one has no money? He took him to the village.
"Perhaps," he thought, "somebody will give him lessons for nothing." But
nobody wished to teach his son for nothing. The old man returned home,
and he and his wife cried bitterly, lamenting their poverty.

Once more he took his son to the town. As soon as he reached the town a
stranger met them, and asked what was the matter. "Why, old man," he
said, "are you so sad?"

"How can I not be sad?" answered the old man. "Look, I have taken my
son everywhere, and nobody will teach him for nothing, and I have no
money."

"Well, give him to me," said the stranger, "and in three years I will
teach him all the knowledge there is. And in three years' time, on this
same day and at the same hour, come and fetch your son. But take care
that you are not late, for if you come in time and recognise him you
shall receive your son back again, but if you are late he shall remain
with me."

The old man was so pleased that he did not ask who the stranger was,
where he lived, or how and what he would teach the lad. He left his son
with him, and went home. He reached home in great joy, and told his wife
all about it. Now the stranger was a wizard.

Three years passed. The old man had long ago forgotten on what day and
at what hour he had left his son with the stranger, and he did not know
what to do. But the son, on the day before the appointed space of time
came to an end, flew to him in the shape of a bird, and entered the
cottage in his true shape. He greeted his parents, and said: "Father,
to-morrow my apprenticeship, which has lasted three years, comes to an
end. Do not forget to come and fetch me." And he told him where to come
and how to recognise him.

[Illustration: HE CHANGED HIMSELF INTO A HAWK]

"I am not the only apprentice at my master's: there are eleven more lads
like myself, who remain with him for ever, and all because their parents
did not know how to recognise them. And if you do not recognise me, I
shall also stay with him for ever, and be the twelfth. To-morrow, when
you come for me, my master will change us into twelve white pigeons, all
alike, feather for feather, tail for tail, and head for head. Now
listen: All of us will fly high in the air, but I will fly higher than
the rest. My master will ask, 'Have you recognised your son?' And you
must then point to the pigeon which is flying higher than the others.
After this he will bring to you twelve ponies, all of the same colour,
and all with their manes on the same side, and just alike. When he takes
you to these ponies they will all be standing still, but I shall give a
kick with my right leg. My master will ask you, 'Have you recognised
your son?' And you must then point me out. After this he will bring to
you twelve lads, all of the same height, all alike, hair for hair and
voice for voice, and all dressed alike. As soon as you see them look
carefully; on my right cheek there will be a little fly, so that you may
recognise me."

He said good-bye to his parents, and went out of the house, changed into
a bird and flew away to his master.

The next morning his father got up, made ready and went to fetch his
son. He arrived at the wizard's. "Now, old man," said the wizard, "I
have taught your son everything that is to be known, but if you don't
recognise him, he must stay with me for ever and ever." He then let fly
into the air twelve white pigeons, all alike, feather for feather, tail
for tail, and head for head; and he said: "Old man, do you recognise
your son?"

The old man looked and looked, and when one pigeon flew higher than the
rest, he pointed to it and said: "I think that is my son."

"You have recognised him, old man," said the wizard. He then brought
twelve ponies, all of the same colour, and their manes all on the same
side. The old man walked round the ponies and looked, and the wizard
asked: "Now, old man, have you recognised your son?" "Not yet, wait a
little." And when he said that, one of the ponies gave a kick with his
right leg. He pointed to him immediately and said: "I think that is my
son."

"You have recognised him, old man," said the wizard. He then brought him
to twelve lads, all of the same height, all alike, hair for hair, and
voice for voice, as if they were the children of one mother. The old man
walked round the lads and noticed nothing. He did so a second time, and
again noticed nothing. He walked round them a third time, and then he
saw that on the right cheek of one of the lads there was a fly, and he
said: "I think that is my son."

"You have recognised him, old man. Yes, and it is not you who are
cunning and wise, but it is your son."

The old man took his son and went home. They walked along the road, and
whether it was long or whether it was short, and whether it was far or
whether it was near, it takes but little time to tell, but it took a
long time to do. On their way they met some huntsmen who were hunting a
red beast. In front of them a fox was running as though it would escape.

"Father," said the son, "I will turn myself into a hound and catch the
fox. When the huntsmen come up to take the animal, say to them, 'O!
huntsmen, that is my dog; I make my living by him.' The huntsmen will
say, 'Sell him to us,' and they will count out to you much money. Sell
the dog, but do not give them the collar and the chain." He immediately
changed himself into a hound, ran after the fox and caught it. The
huntsmen rode up. "Old man," they cried, "why have you come here to
spoil our hunt?"

"O! huntsmen," answered the old man, "that is my dog; I make my living
by him."

"Sell him to us."

"Buy it."

"Is it dear?"

"A hundred roubles."

The huntsmen did not bargain, but paid him the money and took the dog,
and the old man took off its collar and its chain. "Why do you take off
the collar and the chain?"

"I am a traveller," said the old man, "and the chain is necessary to me
to bind up my cloth leggings."

"All right, take it," said the huntsmen, and they whipped their horses
and rode off at a gallop. But the fox got away again; they started their
hounds after it; the hounds ran but could not catch the fox. One of the
huntsmen said: "Let us try the new hound." They let it loose, and what
did they see? The fox ran off in one direction, and the hound in
another, and he caught up the old man and changed into a lad just as he
had been before.

The old man went on further with his son. They came to a lake where
huntsmen were shooting geese, swans, and wild ducks. A flock of geese
was flying, and the son said to his father: "Father, I will change
myself into a hawk, and I will pursue the geese. The huntsmen will come
to you and begin to make a fuss. You say to them, 'That is my hawk; I
make my living by him.' They will bargain with you for the hawk. You
sell the hawk, but do not give up its jesses on any account." He changed
himself into a hawk, flew higher than the flock of geese, and began
pursuing them and driving them to the earth. As soon as the huntsmen saw
this, they came to the old man and said: "Old man, why are you spoiling
our sport?"

"O! huntsmen," he answered, "the hawk is mine, and I earn my living by
him."

"Will you sell your hawk?"

"Why should I not sell him? Buy him."

"And is it dear?"

"Two hundred roubles."

The huntsmen paid the money, took the hawk, and the old man took off its
jesses. "Why are you taking off the jesses?"

"I am a traveller," answered the old man, "and if something comes off my
leggings, they serve to tie them up with." The huntsmen did not dispute
the matter, but went after their game. The flock of geese flew away.
"Let us loose the hawk," they said, and they loosed him, but what did
they see? The hawk flew higher than the geese, and flew right away to
the old man, and caught him up, touched the green ground, and changed
himself back into a lad as he had been before. And the father and son
went home and lived in clover.

Sunday came, and the son said to his father: "Father, to-day I will
change myself into a horse. You shall sell the horse, but on no account
sell the bridle, for if you do I shall not come home again." He rolled on
the earth and changed into a magnificent horse, and his father led him
off to sell him. The merchants surrounded him, horse-dealers all of
them; one of them offered a large sum of money, another offered a still
larger sum of money. But the wizard, who appeared there, offered more
than all of them. The old man sold him his son, but did not give him the
bridle.

"And how shall I be able to lead the horse without a bridle?" said the
wizard. "Give me the bridle to lead him as far as my house, and then
take it back, for I do not want it."

Then the horse-dealers fell upon the old man and said: "That is only
fair; if you sell the horse you must sell the bridle." What could he do?
The old man gave up the bridle. The wizard led the horse to his house,
put it in the stables, tied it fast to the ring, and pulled his head up
high so that the horse stood on his hind legs, and his fore legs did not
touch the ground. The wizard called his daughter and said: "I have
bought the cunning fellow." "Where is he?" asked his daughter. "He is in
the stables." His daughter went to see, and she was sorry for the young
lad. She loosened the bridle and made it longer, and the horse shook his
head so that at last he freed himself from the bridle, and galloped away
for several miles. The daughter ran to her father and said: "Father,
forgive me, I have done a wicked thing. The horse has escaped."

The wizard struck the green earth, changed himself into a grey wolf, and
pursued the horse. As soon as he got near him the horse galloped to a
river, struck the earth and changed himself into a minnow, and the
wizard changed himself into a pike. The minnow scudded through the water
and reached a pond, where beautiful maidens were washing linen and
wringing it out. He changed himself into a golden ring and lay close by
the hand of the merchant's daughter. The merchant's daughter saw the
ring and put it on her finger. The wizard changed himself into a man
once more, and said: "Give me your golden ring."

"Take it," said the beautiful maiden, and threw the ring on to the
ground. As soon as it struck the ground, in that moment it changed into
a seed-pearl. The wizard changed himself into a cock and ran to pick up
the seed-pearl. But before he had picked it up, the pearl changed into a
hawk, and the hawk immediately flew at the cock, and killed him. After
that he changed once more into a fine lad, and fell in love with the
beautiful maiden, the daughter of the merchant, and married her. And
they lived happily and merrily together.

That is the end of the story.

[Illustration: THE DRAGON APPEARED]




ORESTES AND THE DRAGON

(A GREEK STORY)


There was once upon a time a King who had three sons and one daughter.
Not far from the King's palace there was a large garden, and in this
garden lived a dragon. The King told his children never to go into the
garden lest they should be caught by the dragon, which had wings. But
one evening the youngest of the King's sons, whose name was Orestes,
went with his sister into the garden and began to play. No sooner had
they begun to play than the dragon appeared, and seizing the little
Princess with its tail, flew away into the air and took her to a high
mountain which no one could climb.

When Orestes went home and told of the misfortune, the King was very
sad, and a black flag was hoisted on the top of the palace, and the
whole Court went into mourning.

Now Orestes, since it had been through his fault that his sister had
been lost, wished to be allowed to seek her; but his father would not
let him do this, for Orestes was his favourite son. But one day when his
father was busy, Orestes stole out of the house and walked to the foot
of the high mountain, whither the dragon had taken his little sister. He
wondered how he could climb it, and the task seemed difficult, indeed
almost impossible, since the mountain was as smooth as glass.

While he was thus wondering he noticed two snakes which were fighting.
One was black, and the other was white, and the black snake was getting
the best of the fight and on the verge of killing the white one. Orestes
at once killed the black snake, upon which the white snake said to him--

"You have saved my life! What can I do for you in return?"

"I wish for nothing," said Orestes, "save to be able to climb to the top
of this mountain."

"Catch hold of my tail," said the snake, "and I will take you to the top
of the mountain."

And the snake wriggled up the mountain, pulling the Prince after him,
and as soon as they reached the top it disappeared.

Upon the top of the mountain, Orestes found a shepherd looking after the
sheep of the dragon, and he entered into the service of this shepherd as
a herdsman. One day when he was looking after the sheep he met his
sister, and said to her: "I am your brother Orestes, and I have come to
set you free."

His sister was surprised to see him, and frightened, and she said: "We
must be very careful and cunning, lest the dragon should find us out,
for it is impossible to escape from this place, nor can we save
ourselves from the dragon. His rooms are all full of princesses whom he
has taken captive, and who cannot climb down the mountain."

And she asked her brother how he had been able to climb it. He told her
about the snake, and then he said--

"This evening, when the dragon comes back to his house, ask him where
his strength lies, and I will come to-morrow and you shall tell me."

In the evening the dragon came home, and the Princess asked him where
his strength lay, and the dragon told her that he had three golden hairs
on the top of his head, and with these hairs one could open a room in
which there were three doves; and were any one to kill the first dove,
he would grow sick; and were any one to kill the second dove, he would
grow worse; and if any one were to kill the third dove, he would die.

The next day, when the dragon had gone out on his daily business, which
was to look for disobedient children in the country round and to catch
them, the Princess went to her brother and told him what the dragon had
said.

Orestes told her that when the dragon came back in the evening and fell
asleep, she was to take a pair of scissors and cut off the three golden
hairs, and open the secret room and kill the doves which were in it.

In the evening when the dragon came back and fell asleep, which he did
at once, for he was tired, the Princess took a pair of scissors, cut off
his three golden hairs, opened the secret room and killed the doves;
and immediately the dragon gave a great groan and died.

As soon as he was dead, all the doors of all the rooms in the house,
which had been carefully locked, flew open, and hundreds and hundreds of
prisoners were set free. Among these there were three princesses.
Orestes and his sister walked with these three princesses to the edge of
the mountain top, and when they reached it Orestes saw his brothers, who
were waiting at the foot of the hill.

Orestes took a rope, and first he let down his sister; then he let down
the eldest of the princesses and said: "She shall be the wife of my
eldest brother." Afterwards he let down the second of the princesses,
and said: "She shall be the wife of my second brother." And, lastly, he
let down the youngest princess, and he said: "This shall be my wife."

But when his brothers saw that the youngest princess was the most
beautiful of the three, they were angry, and they jerked the rope out
of Orestes' hands and left him on the top of the mountain.

Orestes was most sorrowful, and he went into the castle of the dragon
and looked into all the rooms.

Now in one room, which was carpeted with green grass, he found a silken
greyhound which was hunting a silken hare; and in another room he found
a golden beaker and a golden jug; and in another he found a golden hen
with golden chickens. Then he went to the stables, and there in a stall
he found three horses with golden wings, and one was white, and one was
red, and one was green.

"By opening the doors of our stable," said the horses, "you have done us
a great favour. What can we do for you in return?"

"I do not wish for anything," said Orestes, "save to be taken to the
foot of this mountain!"

"Get on my back," said the green horse; and Orestes got on his back, and
the horse flew in a moment to the bottom of the mountain. Then each of
the horses gave him two golden hairs, and said: "When you have need of
us, burn one of these hairs and we will come."

After some days had passed, Orestes went into the city where the King,
his father, lived, and putting an old blanket over his head he pretended
to be a beggar, and entered into the service of a goldsmith.

Now when the little Princess and her two brothers reached their father's
house, with the three princesses who had been set free, the King asked
them what had become of Orestes, and they said that Orestes had died;
and the eldest of the brothers wished to marry the eldest of the
princesses, but she refused to wed him unless he could find her the
silken greyhound which hunted the silken hare. It was in the house of
the dragon.

The King's herald proclaimed this everywhere. Then the beggar said to
the goldsmith that he could accomplish the quest. "You need only give me
a jug of wine and a basketful of chestnuts, and leave me alone in my
room."

The goldsmith did this and shut the beggar up in his room, and he
looked through the keyhole to see what he was doing. But the beggar did
nothing at all; he merely ate the chestnuts and drank the wine, so the
goldsmith went to his bedroom and went to sleep. Then the beggar took
one of the hairs which the white horse had given him and burned it, and
immediately the white horse appeared and said: "What do you wish?"

"I wish," said the beggar, "that you should bring me the silken
greyhound and the silken hare."

The horse brought them immediately, and the beggar gave them to the
goldsmith. The goldsmith went to the palace and sold them for much money
to the eldest prince.

On Sunday the eldest brother married the eldest princess, and everybody
went to a field and played quoits. And the beggar burned another golden
hair, and immediately the green horse appeared and brought him a green
garment. The beggar put it on, and went into the field and played quoits
with the company. After he had played for a whole hour everybody had
lost; he alone had won much money, and scattering on the grass the
money he had won, he went back to the goldsmith's shop and put the
blanket on his head once more.

The next Sunday it was arranged that his second brother should marry the
second princess; she said she would not wed him unless he could bring
her the golden beaker and the golden jug which were in the house of the
dragon.

The King sent for all the goldsmiths in the country, and asked them to
get him the golden beaker. And once more the beggar told his master that
he could get it, and that all he needed were two basketsful of chestnuts
and two jars of wine. And being left alone in a room he ate the nuts and
drank the wine. Then he burned one of the hairs, and immediately the red
horse appeared, and he said to him: "Bring me the golden beaker and the
golden jug."

And the horse brought them, and the beggar went to the King, and the
King bought them for a large sum of money. Again they went to play
quoits in order to celebrate the second wedding, and the beggar burned
another of the hairs, and immediately the red horse came to him and
brought him a red garment, and when he put it on he went and played
quoits. After he had played for a long time, all had lost save himself,
and he went away, leaving the ground strewn with gold coins.

On the following Sunday the youngest princess was to be married to a
brother of the King, but she did not wish to wed him, and she said that
she would not, unless he brought her the golden hen and the golden
chickens.

Once more the beggar obtained these, and on Sunday, when the wedding was
to be held, they went and played quoits, and the beggar went riding on a
white horse and wearing a white garment; and as he was playing he threw
the quoit at his uncle who was to wed the youngest princess, and killed
him. And they took him to the palace, and the King said to him: "Why
have you killed my brother?"

And the Prince told him everything that had happened, and as soon as the
King heard the story he gave orders that the two eldest brothers should
be put to death, and he gave the youngest princess to Orestes for a
wife.

And they were married, and they lived happily for ever afterwards.




THE WISE PRINCESS

(A RUSSIAN STORY)


Once upon a time in a certain kingdom there lived a King and a Queen.
They had three sons, who were all young, unmarried, and so brave that no
fairy tale could tell, no pen could write down, how brave they were. The
youngest was called Ivan-the-King's-Son. The King spoke to his children
thus: "My dear children, take each of you an arrow, draw your bow at a
venture, and shoot in various directions. And there, where the arrow
shall fall, go take a wife."

The eldest brother drew his bow at a venture, and the arrow fell on a
nobleman's house, right opposite the women's attic. The second arrow
fell in the yard of a merchant's house, on a flight of steps; and on the
steps stood a beautiful girl, the merchant's daughter. The youngest
brother drew his bow at a venture, and the arrow fell into a dirty
marsh, and a frog caught it.

Ivan-the-King's-Son said: "How can I marry a frog? She is not my size."

"Marry her," said the King. "It means that such is your fate."

So the sons of the King were married. The eldest married the
nobleman's daughter; the second one, the merchant's daughter; and
Ivan-the-King's-Son married a frog. And the King called them to him and
gave the following command:--

"Each of your wives must bake me a soft white loaf of bread for
breakfast to-morrow."

Ivan-the-King's-Son went to his room with a heavy heart and hung his
head.

"Ivan-the-King's-Son, why are you so sad?" the frog asked. "Has your
father spoken an angry or an unkind word to you?"

"How can I not be sad? The King, my father, has ordered you to get ready
a loaf of soft white bread for his breakfast to-morrow."

"Do not worry, Ivan-the-King's-Son, go to bed and sleep. In the morning
you will be wiser than in the evening."

She sent him to bed, and no sooner had she done so than she threw off
her frog's skin and turned into a most beautiful girl, for she was none
other than the Wise Princess. She went out on to the steps and called
out in a loud voice: "Oh you, my nurses, get ready, get ready! Provide
yourselves with what is necessary, and make me a white loaf such as I
used to eat in my father's house."

In the morning, when Ivan-the-King's-Son got up, the frog's loaf had
been ready for some time, and it was so excellent that the like of it
had never been seen. The loaf of bread was ornamented with various
devices: on the sides of it were kings' palaces, and stately towers with
their gardens and their walls. The King thanked Ivan-the-King's-Son for
the loaf, and at the same time he gave the following order to his three
sons:--

"Your wives shall each of them weave me a carpet by to-night."

Ivan-the-King's-Son came home with a heavy heart and hung his head.

"Croak, croak," said the frog, "why are you so sad? Has your father
spoken a cruel or an unkind word to you?"

"How can I not be sad?" answered Ivan-the-King's-Son. "The King, my
father, has ordered a silken carpet to be woven for him by to-night."

"Do not worry, Ivan-the-King's-Son, lie down and sleep. In the morning
you will be wiser."

She put him to bed, and threw off her frog's skin, and turned into a
beautiful maiden. She went out on to the steps and called out in a loud
voice: "Oh, you boisterous winds, bring hither that same carpet on which
I used to sit in the house of my father."

No sooner said than done. In the morning, when Ivan-the-King's-Son
awoke, the carpet had been ready for some time, and it was so beautiful
that the like of it had never been seen before. It was adorned with
gold, silver, and cunning devices. The King thanked his son for the
carpet, and at the same time he issued a new command, namely, that his
sons were to be present, each with his wife, at the grand review.

Ivan-the-King's-Son returned home with a heavy heart and hung his head.

"Croak, croak, Ivan-the-King's-Son," said the frog, "why are you so
sad? Have you heard from your father anything cruel or unpleasant?"

[Illustration: SHE WENT OUT ON TO THE STEP AND CALLED OUT IN A LOUD
VOICE]

"How can I not be sad? The King, my father, has ordered that I should be
present at the review with you. And how can I show _you_ to the people?"

"Do not worry, Ivan-the-King's-Son! Go by yourself, and pay your
respects to the King. I will follow; and as soon as you hear a noise
like thunder, say, 'My little frog is coming hither in a basket.'"

The two elder brothers appeared at the review with their wives, all in
beautiful clothes; they stood there and laughed at Ivan-the-King's-Son,
and said: "Why have you come here, brother, without your wife? You might
have brought her in your pocket. And where did you find such a beautiful
lady?"

Suddenly a loud noise like thunder was heard, and the whole palace
shook. The guests were frightened to death, and jumped up from their
places and did not know what to do. But Ivan-the-King's-Son said: "Do
not be afraid, gentlemen, this is my little frog who has come here in a
basket."

A golden coach drove up to the palace, drawn by six horses, and out of
it came the Wise Princess, so beautiful that it is impossible to
describe her. She took Ivan-the-King's-Son by the hand, and led him to
the oaken chairs and the spread tables. The guests began to eat and
drink, and to make merry. The Wise Princess, as she drank from a glass,
let a drop fall on to her left sleeve; and as she ate a piece of roast
swan, she hid one of the bones in her right sleeve. The wives of the
elder sons noticed this, and did the same. Afterwards, when the Wise
Princess was dancing with Ivan-the-King's-Son, she shook her left
sleeve, and at once a lake appeared. She shook her right sleeve, and
white swans swam about on the lake.

The King and his guests were astonished, and when the elder sons' wives
began to dance they shook their left sleeves, but the only result of it
was to splash the guests. Then they shook their right sleeves, and in
so doing a swan's bone hit the King in the face. The King was angry, and
drove them away in disgrace. During that time Ivan-the-King's-Son took
the opportunity of going home. He found the frog's skin, and threw it
into a big fire.

The Wise Princess arrived and asked where her frog's skin was. Then not
finding it, she grew sad and said: "Oh, Ivan-the-King's-Son,
Ivan-the-King's-Son, what have you done? If you had waited a moment I
would have been yours for ever. But now good-bye. Seek me at the end of
the world, in the Kingdom of Nowhere. Wear out three pairs of iron
boots."

So saying, she turned herself into a white swan, and flew away out of
the window.

Ivan-the-King's-Son wept bitterly, and prayed to God with all his might.
He put on iron boots, and walked on straight in front of him. He walked
and walked, and after a time he met an old man.

"Good morrow, young man," said the old man; "what are you looking for
and where are you going to?"

Ivan-the-King's-Son told him all his misfortunes.

"Ah, Ivan-the-King's-Son, why did you burn the frog's skin? You did not
put it on, and it was not for you to take it off. The Wise Princess was
so far more cunning and wise than her father, that he clothed her in a
frog's skin and bade her be a frog for three years. Here is a ball for
you. Wherever it rolls, you must boldly follow."

Ivan-the-King's-Son thanked the old man, and followed where the ball
rolled. Whether it rolled far or near, for a short time or a long time,
the story does not say; but it stopped at a cottage. This cottage stood
on chicken's legs and wobbled about. Ivan-the-King's-Son said--

"Cottage, cottage, stand as you used to stand--still, as your mother
placed you, back to the wood and front to me."

The cottage turned round, with its back to the wood and its front to
him. Ivan-the-King's-Son went into the cottage, and there lay an old
woman, all bony, with a nose which grew to the ceiling. She said to him
in an angry voice: "Fie, fie, fie! Why have you come here,
Ivan-the-King's-Son?"

"Oh, you old woman," he answered, "before asking me questions you should
give me something to eat and to drink, and you should prepare me a hot
steam bath; and then you can ask me questions."

The old woman gave him food and drink, and a steam bath, and then the
King's son told her he was looking for his wife, the Wise Princess.

"My child," said the old woman, "it is a pity you did not come before.
In the first years, after her flight, she remembered you, but now she
has ceased thinking of you. Go at once to my second sister; she knows
more than I do."

Ivan-the-King's-Son set out on his journey, and followed the ball. He
walked and walked, and again there stood before him a cottage with
chickens' legs.

"Cottage, cottage, stand still, as your mother placed you, with your
back to the wood and your front to me."

The cottage turned round. Ivan-the-King's-Son went into it, and there
stood an old woman with bony legs. She saw the Prince and she said:
"Fie, fie! Ivan-the-King's Son, have you come here of your own accord or
because you were obliged to?"

Ivan-the-King's-Son answered: "I have come here of my own accord, and
also because I can't help it. I am looking for the Wise Princess."

"I am sorry for you, Ivan-the-King's-Son. You should have come before.
The Wise Princess has quite forgotten you. She wants to marry another
husband. At this moment she is living with my eldest sister. Go thither
quickly, but remember one thing, that as soon as you have entered the
cottage, the Wise Princess will turn into a spindle and my sister will
begin to spin golden threads, and to turn her wheel. Mind that you lose
no time in taking away the spindle from her and breaking it in two;
throw half of it behind you and the other half in front of you. Then the
Wise Princess will appear."

Ivan-the-King's-Son set out on his journey. He walked and walked, but
whether the way was long, or whether it was short, whether it was near
or far, the story doesn't say. He wore out three pairs of iron boots,
and at last he reached a cottage with chickens' legs.

"Cottage, cottage, stand still, as your mother placed you, with your
front to me, and your back to the wood."

The cottage turned round, the King's Son went into it, and there an old
woman all bony was sitting and spinning gold. She took her spindle, shut
it up in a cupboard, and locked the door with a key. But
Ivan-the-King's-Son managed to snatch the key and to open the cupboard.
He took the spindle and broke it in two pieces; he threw one piece
behind him and one piece in front of him. At the same moment the Wise
Princess appeared before him.

"Ah, Ivan-the-King's-Son, what a long time you have been coming! I had
nearly married some one else." Then she took him by the hand, and they
sat down on a magic carpet, and flew back to Ivan-the-King's-Son's
house.

On the fourth day the carpet stopped at the royal palace. The King met
his son with great joy and gave a large feast. When it was over, he
appointed Ivan-the-King's-Son to be his heir.


THE END


  Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & CO.
  Edinburgh & London





End of Project Gutenberg's The Blue Rose Fairy Book, by Maurice Baring

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLUE ROSE FAIRY BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 36008.txt or 36008.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/0/0/36008/

Produced by David Edwards, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
