The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pullman Boycott, by W. F. Burns

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Pullman Boycott
       A Complete History of the R.R. Strike

Author: W. F. Burns

Release Date: May 1, 2011 [EBook #36004]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PULLMAN BOYCOTT ***




Produced by Barbara Kosker, Odessa Paige Turner and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This book was produced from scanned images of public
domain material from the Google Print project.)









  The Pullman Boycott


  A Complete History
          of
  The Great R. R. Strike.


  BY W. F. BURNS.




  1894:
  THE McGILL PRINTING CO.
  ST. PAUL.




  COPYRIGHTED 1894

  by

  W. F. BURNS.




CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER.                                               PAGE.

       I--The American Railway Union,                       7

      II--The Boycott,                                     15

     III--First Day of the Strike,                         26

      IV--An Appeal from Debs,                             32

       V--The Federal Government Sides with the
          Managers,                                        40

      VI--Troops at Blue Island,                           51

     VII--A Protest from Gov. Altgeld,                     55

    VIII--Incendiarism and Bloodshed,                      66

      IX--Slaughter of Citizens,                           81

       X--Business Men's Protest,                          92

      XI--Indictment of President Debs,                   100

     XII--A Protest by the Peoples Party,                 108

    XIII--An Offer of Settlement,                         115

     XIV--Debs in Jail,                                   124

      XV--Blacklisting Begins,                            139

     XVI--Trial of Debs,                                  147

    XVII--A Convention of the American Railway Union
          Called to Take Action on the Strike,            159

   XVIII--The Strike Lost,                                167

     XIX--The Commission,                                 176

      XX--Altgeld Investigates Pullman,                   288

     XXI--Conclusion,                                     310




INTRODUCTORY.


In presenting this work to the public, I beg leave to say that I lay no
claim whatever to literary ability, and will ask the reader to kindly
overlook the crudeness of this my first effort.

My line of work since boyhood has been confined principally to railway
service; in short I am a switchman, and in that branch of the service,
have been frequently confronted with the differences that arise between
the management of the various railroad corporations and their employees.

While I disclaim any credit for ability as a writer, by years of
experience and careful study of the condition of affairs as they have in
the past and do in the present exist, I profess to be able to fairly
present the facts of the Pullman strike. This strike was a matter of
unusual interest to me, not alone because my individual interests were
involved, but because the independence of every man in America who earns
his bread by the sweat of his brow, was in the balance.

The right to organize for mutual protection was questioned, nay more,
the right to be heard, a right granted to the greatest criminal in any
part of the civilized world, was refused by the power representing the
capital of this country. This power fortified by the Federal troops, by
the mandate of the Federal courts, instigated by the chief executive,
the president of the United States, the account of this strike as
presented to the public by the Associated Press, was George M. Pullman's
and the General Managers' side of the question, distorted and colored to
suit their purposes.

My aim in presenting this book, is to disabuse the minds of the people
as far as possible, from the misleading statements given out by the
General Managers' Association through their mouth piece, the Associated
Press.

To this end I have carefully collected facts from the best and most
reliable sources, aside from what personal knowledge I had of this
strike.

I obtained information from telegrams received in our Central Committee
rooms, from all parts of the country, also from committees appointed to
investigate the authenticity of reports received from different parts of
the country where the strike extended.

The general accounts I quote largely from the "Chicago Times," a paper
whose honorable and manly stand throughout that great struggle, gained
for it a world wide reputation for honesty and fairness.

The accounts herein contained are truths pure and simple, and upon these
truths I base the merits of this book.

  Very respectfully,

  W. F. BURNS.




CHAPTER I.

THE AMERICAN RAILWAY UNION.


In order to give a clear conception of the greatest strike in the
history of railroad organizations, it will be necessary to go back to
the birth of the American Railway Union.

This organization was instituted on the 17th day of August, 1893, in the
city of Chicago, and owes its existence to its present leader Eugene V.
Debs.

Mr. Debs' connection with the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen dates
back to the early seventies, and be the credit due to that organization
for introducing to the laboring people of America, a leader who stands
absolutely without a peer in the labor world to-day, possessed of the
collective traits of some of the greatest men of the past.

I know no better description of Debs than that of Wm. C. Pomeroy in the
Eight Hour Herald, as follows: "I am sitting on the stage of a great
meeting of people, my eyes are closed in dreamy reverie, I hear a voice
whose resonant tones are familiar to my ears, the voice, the words bear
me in imagination back to the days of Rome, and Caius Gracchus is
proclaiming the coming liberty of the people. The words of flaming
eloquence suddenly change into the rugged tones of Cola di Rienzi,
crying: 'Arouse, ye Romans; arouse, ye slaves.' The words are sweet to
the ears, and stir my soul to extacy. Soft, I am no longer in the
Eternal City, but wander among the hills and dales of Judea, and the
voice has changed again. This time 'tis the compassionate tones of Him
of Galilee, beseeching to 'love ye one another,' now swift changing in
its mellifluous harmony, I hear Pandora whisper 'the dawn approaches,
take heart of hope,' and Prometheus answers with the echoed groans of
the suffering, sighing souls. The air is now filled with stirring
martial music, and above its changing cadences pours forth in passionate
appeal the stentor voice of Peter, the Hermit, raising in the bosom of
men, the lethargic love of duty. Aye; on the German hilltops, pulpited
he speaks, and Hermanic in deep-toned thunder hurdles back, 'I come.'
Now there is a silence for a space, and the changing draperies of
imagination disclose a newer scene. I am in the meeting of the Virginian
Burgesses, and the voice has taken on the tones of Patrick Henry. It
says: 'Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty,' and, 'he who would be
free himself must strike the blow.' Now 'tis Thomas Jefferson giving
utterance to, 'we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are
born free and equal.' And lo! even as the soft tones of the 'chosen son'
die into the distance, the voice of Andrew Jackson hurls forth the edict
'each man and every man in this country, by the eternal, must and shall
be free.'

"The echoing ages take up the dictum and it becomes mingled with the
tones of him who at Gettysburg spoke the immortal flaming words: 'This
nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom, and the government
of the people, by the people and for the people, shall not perish from
the earth.' Scarce had the utterance of the martyr ceased to fill the
air when Lowell softly says:

  "'He's true to God, who's true to men, whenever wrong is done.
  To the humblest and the weakest of all the beholding sun;
  That wrong is also done to us, and they are slaves most base,
  Whose love of right is for themselves, and not for all the race.'

"My brain is puzzled. How comes it, I ask myself, that these heroes dead
and gone are near me here to-day?

"What power permits them to quit their abiding places within the crusty
bosom of mother earth, and visiting again the haunts of mortal man, pour
forth their immortal utterances? My rummaging mind takes on a newer
consciousness. Reverie lifts her leaden hand from off my brow, my eyes
open and gaze upon a vast multitude of people--men, women and children.
Men are standing on the seats and hurling their hats in the air; women
are weeping in joy and waving handkerchiefs, all, all shout in clamorous
accord. Their eyes are riveted upon the stage, and upon a man who is
gracefully bowing acknowledgement to the thunders of applause. I am near
him, I gaze in his face. 'Tis the face of Eugene V. Debs."

To my mind the above beautiful comparisons are not overdrawn.

In 1874 he was admitted to the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen, and in
1877 his brother members of the local lodge, recognizing his superior
ability, sent him to the Indianapolis convention to represent them. The
next year he was a delegate to the Buffalo convention. Here he was
chosen associate editor of the Locomotive Firemen's Magazine, and three
years later he was elected editor, and assumed full control.

In September, 1880, he was elected Grand Secretary and Treasurer in
Chicago, and to prove the confidence placed in him by this organization,
he was unanimously elected to that office for thirteen consecutive years
without a dissenting vote, and at the last convention, held in San
Francisco, he was again nominated after making a speech, courteously but
firmly declining, and was finally forced to refuse the nomination before
his declinature would be accepted.

When Mr. Debs assumed control of this office, the Brotherhood was on the
verge of disruption.

From this condition he, by his untiring devotion and wonderful executive
abilities, elevated the Brotherhood to one of the most powerful
organizations of the age, and thus it was through the instrumentality of
the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen he was brought before the
laboring people. Some few years ago he saw that class organization would
not be successful, owing to the petty jealousy existing between the
different orders, and that in every instance where one organization had
a grievance with a railroad corporation, the management would use one or
all the others to crush the one having the grievance.

In order to remedy this, he promulgated a plan of federation whereby all
the different organizations, engineers, firemen, conductors, trainmen
and switchmen would stand as a unit in case of a grievance.

This federation was accomplished, but owing to the treachery of some of
the chiefs, proved unsatisfactory and was finally dissolved.

But this did not discourage Mr. Debs, on the contrary, it made him more
determined than ever to save the employes from the grinding power of
railroad corporations, and to that end he instituted the American
Railway Union, embracing all classes in the railway service from the
trackmen to the engineers. This infant organization that so recently
became such a power, was by no means the offspring of a premature
conception. President Debs deliberated long and well, carefully
considering all the points, and conscientiously weighing the advantages
and disadvantages that would arise from the formation of such a union,
before taking active steps to organize.

He finally decided that in the American Railway Union were the only true
principles of organization, and in conjunction with a few of his
associates, men true as steel, such men as Howard, Rodgers, Burns and,
Kelliher, this union was founded.

The first strike that was authorized by the American Railway Union was
that on the Great Northern Railway Line, against a sweeping reduction in
wages in all departments on that system.

This strike commenced on April 13, and after a stubborn fight of
eighteen days (where one of the shrewdest and ablest railroad presidents
in the United States was met in his every stronghold and defeated by the
grandest labor leader in the world, the matchless Debs) the strike was
settled, and victory perched on the banner of the American Railway
Union.

Then it was that the true principles of this organization were
recognized by railroad employes, and applications for charters came
pouring in from all parts of the country.




CHAPTER II.

THE BOYCOTT.


The American Railway Union is in every sense an American Institution,
whose aims and objects as previously stated are to protect and shield
its members from the grinding power of railroad corporations. Its motto
is unity: "One for all and all for one."

The Pullman employes were admitted to this organization and consequently
entitled to the protection guaranteed to all members, therefore when
they walked out, after every honorable means to avert a strike was
exhausted, the American Railway Union was in duty bound to sustain them.

The strike was ordered on the 11th day of May, after an all night
session by a committee of forty-six members representing every
department in the Pullman works. When the word was given four thousand
employes responded to the call, and this proved to be the beginning of
the most gigantic strike in the history of organized labor.

The wrongs of the Pullman people were not generally known to the public,
the cruel and inhuman treatment they were subjected to, was kept
strictly from the public ears.

They were reduced to a condition of slavery beneath that of the black
slave of the South prior to the civil war, for while the black slave was
clothed, housed and fed, the white slave of Pullman was forced to work
for wages entirely inadequate to furnish a sufficient amount of food to
keep body and soul together. In this condition, on the verge of
starvation, with all hope of justice from the hands of George M. Pullman
gone, they revolted. Whether the grievance of these men was a just one,
or their resistance to further encroachments on their rights was right
or wrong, after reading the report of the committee appointed to
investigate and report to the American Railway Union Annual Convention,
at that time in session in the city of Chicago, it will be for the
reader to decide.

The report, as condensed, in one of the Chicago daily papers, copied and
commented on by the St. Paul Branch of the American Railway Union, was
as follows:

After showing by way of contrast, that $30,000,000 worth of Pullman
stock paid its holders 9-1/2 per cent in dividends last year, the report
goes statistically into a comparison of wages in the past year, with the
wages received by the Pullman employees when the strike was inaugurated.
A fair example of the general reduction is given in a comparison in the
price of labor involved in the construction of a freight car in 1888 and
1893.

    Lot 1526.             Oct. 1888.     Nov. 1893.

  Car carpenter             $13.00          $7.00
  Truck builder                .90            .60
  Truck labor                  .31            .09
  Hanging brakes              1.20            .65
  Delivering, forging
    and casting               1.05            .35
  Delivering lumber            .88            .21
  Framing                      .40            .12
                            ------          -----
          Total             $17.74          $9.02

Other comparisons in the same department show that the wages of men
employed in building freight cars, have been reduced 49, 57-1/2 and 47
per cent on contract work since 1888 and 89, and a long list of figures
from the account of men in the upholstering department, show that cuts
have been made in the prices paid for piece work during the last twelve
months ranging from 33-1/3 to 50 per cent. The painters, according to
the figures given, have been cut 20 per cent since 1893 and were
receiving, when the strike went into effect, only 23 cents per hour,
while the union men employed by the boss painters in Chicago were all
busy under the scale, whereby they are paid 35 cents per hour until June
15th, and 32-1/2 cents during the summer months.

The machinists, sheet iron and tin workers, foundrymen and blacksmiths
had all been reduced from 30 to 50 per cent during the last year, and
even heavier reductions, according to the report, have been made in
other departments. Although wages had been previously reduced, the
greatest cut went into effect last fall in the higher grades of labor.

The reduction then made was from 80 to 20 per cent and in the lower
grades 30 per cent. For example, the price paid for the decorating
finish on the outside of a Pullman sleeper before the reduction, was
$40.00, and now it is $18.00.

By working hard for ten hours a decorator may earn $1.90.

This sweeping reduction included all classes, and the laborers were
compelled to work for from 70 cents to $1.00 per day, all this in the
face of the fact that when a reduction was made three years ago, the men
were told that as long as the shops stood there would never be another
cut in the wages of those who worked upon the Pullman sleepers.

A committee of girls, from those who were barely keeping body and soul
together by working piece work for $2.50 and $3.00 per week, asked the
foreman for an increase to enable them to live, and his answer was: If
you cannot live upon the pay you are getting, go out and hustle for
more. Why should we wonder that houses of prostitution find no
difficulty in procuring inmates?

Think of young women having to board and clothe themselves, and in many
instances supporting an invalid mother or young brothers and sisters on
such meager wages.

The cold blooded avarice of the Pullman company is not even satisfied in
requiring its employes to work for starvation wages, for in what he
exacts from his tenant employes he is even more grasping.

That model town of Pullman is owned by the Pullman company and
everything about it is made to pay toll to this grasping monopoly.

All employes must rent their houses from this slave driving corporation.
There is now in the city of St. Paul a gentleman who formerly worked in
Pullman, and growing tired of paying so much rent for such poor
accommodations, moved to the adjoining hamlet, and rented a better house
for $8.00 per month. He was at once informed that if he wished to retain
his situation he would have to move back, and he did so. The house was
of the average kind and was called a cottage, consisting of two rooms
down stairs, each 10 x 14 feet, and three rooms up stairs, one of which,
the front room, was 10 x 12 and the two rear rooms each 8 x 10 feet,
lighted front and back, with no bath room or other convenience, and the
whole, a part of a solid row or block. For this abode there was exacted
a monthly rental of $17.00 although the cost would not exceed $1,000. A
four room flat rents for $14.50 per month, and if you should want one of
these cheap cottages with inside blinds for the front window, you must
pay 50 cents per month for that much style. Some tenants have paid 50
cents per month for this luxury for more than thirteen years, which is
pretty good interest on the cost of those blinds.

About 100 acres of land is covered with dwellings and the rent derived
is about $500,000 annually, which is over 8 per cent per annum on the
investment.

In many of these houses families are crowded into attics in order to
reduce expenses to enable them to procure the necessaries of life.

Recently a new church was erected in Pullman, known as the Green church
and parsonage, for which is demanded a monthly rental of $60.00 and for
a good sized audience room, and two smaller ones attached Mr. Pullman
charges the Methodist Episcopal society $500 per year. These rents must
be paid in advance and are deducted from the wages of the men, and
notwithstanding that the wages have been reduced no reductions have as
yet been made in the rent.

The manner in which these men have been bled in the matter of rent, is
fully equaled in the manner in which money for water and gas has been
extorted from them. When the town was built a contract was made with
the Village of Hyde Park, to furnish water at the rate of four cents per
thousand gallons, and incredible as it may appear, this water was
furnished to the Pullman tenants at ten cents per thousand gallons. In
other words he charged $3,000 per month for the water which cost him but
$1,200. This represents an annual profit on this one item of $21,000.

Could cold blooded heartless avarice go further? Yes; in the matter of
gas which was manufactured and furnished to the people by the Pullman
company itself, and although the cost is but 33 cents per thousand cubic
feet, the tenants pay $2.25 per thousand while the same gas is furnished
the residents of Hyde Park for 75 cents per thousand.

This adds from three to four dollars per month to living expenses in the
average house at Pullman.

Another source of income which is wrung from the unfortunate victim is
for heat, for which the company charges for six months in the year
$10.80 per month.

It might be well to state also, that no person is allowed to keep a
horse, unless the animal is kept at the company stables for which $3.00
per week is charged.

Such were the conditions of affairs discovered by the investigating
committee in this model town, nor was this all. Miss Curtis, a delegate
to the convention representing a ladies' lodge of the American Railway
Union at Pullman, and whose father died in September, '93, was obliged
to work fourteen hours per day in order to earn fifty cents at the same
work for which she received prior to the first reduction $2.25 per day,
and not satisfied with reducing her wages to this starvation point, the
company insisted on the payment of a debt of $60.00 contracted during
her father's illness. This is but a sample of the devilish cruelties
perpetrated on the employes by the Pullman Company to satisfy their
hellish greed for gold.

This corporation cannot plead poverty for thus treating its employes, as
its capital stock is $30,000,000 and carries an enormous surplus of
$18,000,000 which is termed a reserve fund. Mr. Pullman's personal
wealth is estimated at about $25,000,000. Quarterly dividends of not
less than two per cent have been paid regularly on the capital stock,
and the stockholders receive every three months $600,000 as their share
of the earnings. It is to enable them to pay this immense sum every
three months, that the wages of its employes have been reduced. Can it
be wondered that the American Railway Union took the matter in hand and
declared a boycott on Pullman cars. When the report was received every
brother present was deeply moved, and it was the unanimous sentiment of
the convention to declare a boycott, but before taking action, apprised
the various local unions of the state of affairs then existing, and
received the sanction of the local bodies. They then decided that if the
Pullman Company would not submit the difficulty to arbitration on or
before the 26th day of June, to cut off the Pullman cars and refuse to
handle them until the matter was settled. This action was taken June 22,
and decided action held off until June 26, in hope that committees
appointed to wait on Mr. Pullman would be successful in gaining some
concessions whereby a peaceable settlement could be arrived at before
resorting to the boycott, and, although several committees were sent to
the management and every honorable means resorted to in order to bring
about an amicable settlement, it was of no avail and there was nothing
for the American Railway Union to do but enforce the boycott.




CHAPTER III.

FIRST DAY OF THE STRIKE.


The 26th day of June was awaited with more than ordinary interest by the
people of Chicago on account of the proposed boycott.

The first train to leave Chicago handling Pullman cars was the Chicago
and Erie Buffalo Express, and hundreds of men gathered to witness the
departure at 2:55 P. M.

It started out on time with several Pullmans attached and several
Pinkerton detectives on board. This was owing to the fact that it had
been made up before the time set for the boycott to go into effect, but
drawbars had been chained together and fastened with padlocks as a
safeguard against cutting out the Pullman cars. Everyone was anxious to
see if the engineer would pull it out. All doubt was soon set at rest
however, as the engine backed onto the train and started out on time as
usual. The crowd then waited to see if the next train, the Limited
Express, on the Grand Trunk, due to leave at 3:10 P. M., would
meet with the same success, and after seeing this train also pull out on
time, the crowd dispersed.

The trains on the Monon Route, Santa Fe, and Eastern Illinois also
departed with their accustomed regularity and without interference, and
at 6.00 o'clock, as every train was running on time, Mr. Pullman and the
railway officials were quite jubilant at what they considered a complete
failure of the American Railway Union to perform the task it had
undertaken. But inside of three hours they were doomed to
disappointment, for at that time not a wheel was turning on the Illinois
Central with the exception of express trains that had been started
before the strike was ordered.

The strikers might have stopped the Diamond Special which leaves at 9:00
P. M., but through consideration for the passengers who had
already purchased berth tickets, and adhering strictly to the
instructions of their leaders to do nothing to discommode the travelers
who in all probability were not acquainted with the existing state of
affairs, this train was allowed to proceed. The strike that paralyzed
the traffic of the entire country was started in this manner. Early in
the afternoon a committee of five switchmen, employed on the Illinois
Central, made their appearance at the headquarters of the American
Railway Union in the Ashland block, to learn authoritatively the nature
and purpose of the order issued requiring them to refuse to switch the
cars of the Pullman Company, as the instructions received by them
through Organizer Meyers of the union, were not sufficiently definite,
so they claimed, to warrant their resisting the railroad company, and
forfeiting their positions by such action. The switchmen, they said were
willing to help the Pullman strikers, but they wished to know to a
certainty what was expected of them. The directors of the union
immediately held a conference with the delegates the result of which was
an order to strike if the company insisted on them switching the Pullman
cars. Those who were not members of the American Railway Union were
guaranteed equal protection if they joined the strike, and the result
was a complete tie up of the Illinois Central R. R.

The Chicago Times, in an article next morning, said that for rapidity of
conception and execution this strike which probably involves five
thousand men, beats anything of the kind on record, and in the same
article says: the efforts to sidetrack the cars of the Pullman company
yesterday was carried on with strict conformity to law and order.

With the exception of a crowd attracted out of a curiosity to see what
might happen, there was nothing unusual about the depot, there was no
boisterous talking, no threats were made, and the few squads of police
officers sent there to preserve order, had nothing to do.

Train No. 7, due to leave at 9 o'clock, hauling two Pullman coaches
filled with passengers, did not leave on time there being a delay of 30
minutes before it finally pulled out of the depot. After running within
one hundred yards of Grand Crossing it stopped, there being a crowd of
about five thousand people at this point of whom there was not to exceed
one hundred and twenty-five railroad men. The engineer refused to start,
and although Supt. Collins expostulated with him it was of no avail, and
any further attempt to move the train was abandoned for the time being.

At 11:30 P. M. tower man Cable, who controls the switches at
Forty-third street, left his post, and two south-bound suburban trains
were whistling for the switches. They were soon joined by three
north-bound trains, a freight train, Michigan Central Fast Mail, and
Illinois Central Limited, and all were tied up until one o'clock in the
morning when the superintendent of terminals threw the switches. The
Chicago Great Western, Baltimore & Ohio, Chicago and Northern Pacific
and Wisconsin Central were next to fall in line and refuse to handle
Pullman cars.

President Debs, after reviewing the situation, asked the men as
individuals to consider the problem involved, saying, that if the
Pullman Company was right, then the strikers must be wrong, but if you
feel assured that those men are only striking to gain that which is
every man's right--living wages, then we ask your moral support. There
is but one hope for the laborer. Labor must stand by labor. The
corporations have now forced a fight upon us by combining to help the
Pullman company; they have forced us to combine and use the only weapon
which the workingman possesses, the strike and the boycott. The
railroads have never done anything for labor that the latter should
hesitate to use these weapons.

It is a battle between allied monopoly against the rights of working
people, it is a matter of broad humanity. I want to see the switchmen,
the car inspectors and other employes wait upon the officials in a manly
way, and refuse to handle these boycotted cars.

I want to appeal only to your reason, and not to influence your passion,
but I ask you to take a manly stand in the aid of men, women and
children who have been ground down by the iron heel of the oppressor.

I would rather be a manly pauper than an unmanly millionaire.

I ask every man, as an individual to think for himself and to do what he
thinks to be right.

President Debs appealed to the men to commit no acts of violence but act
in strict accordance with the law.

The strike had now reached St. Paul, Omaha, Denver, Trinidad, Cal.;
Raton, N. M.; Cincinnati, St. Louis and Duluth, and no intimidation, no
threats, no violence of any kind whatever was resorted to. When the men
were asked to handle the Pullman cars, they simply stepped down and
out.




CHAPTER IV.

AN APPEAL FROM DEBS.


As the light of dawn proclaimed the birth of a new day so the events
that this day would bring forth was the all absorbing thought and theme
of a great number of the American people.

All were anxious to learn the situation, whether interested in the
boycott or otherwise, as by this time the whole western part of the
United States had begun to feel the heavy hand of the American Railway
Union boycott, and every railroad from the Missouri to the Pacific
coast, from Manitoba to Mexico, and all centers of importance in the
West, Southwest and Northwest were tied up, because the American Railway
Union men, in the cause of humanity and right, would not operate them
with Pullman sleepers attached, and the railroad managers, in the cause
of oppression, would not allow them to run otherwise.

Thirteen roads centering in Chicago were now completely tied up, the
Santa Fe, Chicago & Northern Pacific, Southern Pacific, Chicago &
Western Indiana, Pan Handle, Monon Route, Chicago & Grand Trunk, Chicago
& Erie, Illinois Central, Baltimore & Ohio, Chicago & Great Western,
Wisconsin Central and Cincinnati Southern, and the General Managers had
begun to realize the futility of carrying on the fight, and if they had
not received encouragement and aid from outside sources, would have in
all probability ended the strike at once by dropping the Pullman cars.

As a prominent railroad man said when asked about the strike situation:
"It is my opinion that the railroads will drop the fight just as soon as
the American Railway Union can demonstrate the fact that Pullman cars
can not be hauled without a long and expensive fight with their own
employes. I know that this view of the case was taken by some of the
managers at a meeting to-day, and Mr. Pullman will be notified that he
must make a settlement with his men at once, otherwise the effected
roads will drop his cars and resume business."

The Union now felt confident of success. President Debs said: "We are
sure to win as our cause is just, there will be no disturbances as the
men have orders that there must be no rioting and no interference
whatever with the roads, other than to refuse to assist to operate them.

"Whatever the officials can do for themselves with the few men at their
command let them do; we propose to be fair and square in this fight, and
if within my power to prevent, not one spike belonging to any road will
be damaged."

And thus the second day of the great strike came to an end.

June 28th added nine more roads to those already tied up.

The Chicago & Northwestern; Chicago & Alton; Union Pacific; Denver & Rio
Grande; Chicago & Eastern Illinois; Pittsburg, Ft. Wayne & Chicago;
Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul; Chicago, Burlington & Quincy, and the
Stock Yard Terminals, making in all twenty-two roads out and twenty
thousand men on strike in the city of Chicago, and not one act of
violence committed that could be charged to a striker.

The Mobile & Ohio at this time succumbed to the boycott and sidetracked
its Pullman cars promising not to haul them again until the strike was
settled. This rail road is a large corporation, and its surrender to
the American Railway Union was considered a great victory, and the
directors at once ordered the boycott raised as far as this line was
concerned.

Minneapolis and St. Paul was now beginning to feel the effect of the
boycott.

The Northern Pacific was the first in the fight, and the same plan of
action outlined at Chicago was followed at these points when the time
came to make up passenger trains. The switchmen refused to couple on the
Pullman's and were discharged.

The mediation committee at once took up the matter with the manager,
asking him to re-instate the discharged men, which he refused to do, and
as a result the entire system from the Pacific coast to Minneapolis and
St. Paul was called out.

This plan was adopted and carried out on all the rail roads entering the
Twin cities.

The boycott was no longer a fight in the interest of the Pullman
employes alone but had resolved itself into a gigantic contest between
organized labor on the one side, and organized capital on the other, and
although up to this time there had been no violence, no loud
demonstrations, no threats of any kind, the Illinois Central demanded
troops to protect their property, and the militia was ordered out. On
the Pan Handle the Cincinnati Express had the cars of Mr. Pullman
detached, and the officials cried "riot" and asked from Sheriff Gilbert
of Chicago a posse to protect the U. S. mail. This was furnished, and
although the mail cars were not molested in any way, the officials
refused to allow the mail to go forward without the Pullman sleepers
attached.

Seven more railroads had now come under the ban of the boycott making in
all twenty-nine at the close of the fourth day.

On June 29th President Debs issued the following appeal to railway
employes of the country.

"The struggle with the Pullman company has developed into a contest
between the producing classes and the money power of the country.

"This is what Lincoln predicted at the close of the civil war, and it
was this reflection that gave the great emancipator his gloomiest
forebodings. We stand upon the ground that the workingmen are entitled
to a just proportion of the proceeds of their labor. This the Pullman
company denied them. Reductions have been made from time to time until
the employes earned barely sufficient wages to live, not enough to
prevent them from sinking deeper and deeper into Pullman's debt, thereby
mortgaging their bodies and souls, as well as their children's, to that
heartless corporation.

"Up to this point the fight was between the American Railway Union and
the Pullman company. The American Railway Union resolved that its
members would refuse to handle Pullman cars and equipment. Then the
railway corporations through the General Manager's association, came to
the rescue, and in a series of whereases declared to the world that they
would go into partnership with Pullman, so to speak, and stand by him in
his devilish work of starving his employes to death. The American
Railway Union accepted his gauge of war, and thus the contest is now on
between the railway corporations arrayed solidly on the one hand, and
the labor forces upon the other. Every railroad employe of the country
should take his stand against the corporations in this fight, for if it
should be lost corporations will have despotic sway and all employes
will be reduced to a condition scarcely removed above chattel slavery;
but the fight will not be lost. The great principle of American manhood
and independence is involved. Corporate power, drunk with its own
excesses, has presumed too far upon the forbearance of the American
people, and, notwithstanding a subsidized press (to which there are many
notable and noble exceptions), public sympathy is with the striking
employes, who are merely contending for the right of their fellow
toilers to receive living wages for their work.

"I appeal to strikers everywhere to refrain from any act of violence.
Let there be no interference with the affairs of the companies involved
and above all let there be no act of depredation. A man who will destroy
property or violate law is an enemy, not a friend to the cause of labor.
The great public is with us and we need only to maintain a dignified,
honest, straight forward policy to achieve victory. Let it be understood
that this strike is not ordered by myself nor by any other individual;
nor is the strike inaugurated anywhere except by consent and authority
from a majority of the employes themselves.

"Neither is this a fight simply of the American Railway Union. The
question of organization ought not be raised, but every man who
believes in organized railroad labor should take his stand on the side
of labor, and its battles for his rights and those of his fellowmen. I
have faith in the great body of railroad employes of the country and am
confident they will maintain an unbroken front in spite of any
opposition that may be brought to bear against them.

"I am perfectly confident of success. We cannot fail.

  E. V. DEBS."




CHAPTER V.

THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SIDES WITH THE MANAGERS.


The fifth day of the great strike showed no cessation of hostilities,
the entire Northwestern and Southwestern portion of the United States
was practically at a standstill. Every road entering Chicago was
partially, if not completely tied up, and the General Managers
Association, under the leadership of John M. Egan was at sea.

They now realized that they had taken a contract that it would be
difficult to fulfill, and without the co-operation of some greater power
they would be defeated. A lack of confidence in their ability to subdue
the strikers and compel them to work, was well illustrated in a meeting
between Sir George Pullman and Vice-President Harahan of the Illinois
Central. W. M. Daley, of New Orleans, was the only witness to the
meeting and his presence undoubtedly saved Sir George from a masterly
drubbing at the hands of Mr. Harahan. Mr. Pullman entered the office of
Vice-President Harahan, and in the course of time his conversation
turned to the strike and its effect on the Illinois Central.

This was the opening round.

It aroused all the ire in the portly form of Mr. Harahan, and with
blazing eyes he turned on Sir George.

"You are not fit to govern men," he said; "instead of visiting your own
works, you have a number of superintendents who furnish you with
reports, and when they are colored to suit you take them as facts, and a
result is business is embargoed, poverty stalks all over your grounds,
you are alone responsible for the present condition of affairs on the
railroads. Why don't you go among your employes and see things for
yourself? If you did there would be no such trouble." Then followed a
number of epithets such as thick head, incompetent, over-rated, and the
official shook his fist under the stubby nose of Sir George in a very
threatening manner. Mr. Pullman tried to speak, but the Vice-President
broke in on him again. "You think you have a contract with this road
that you can rub it in on us, but you can't, never will we submit to
it, the railroads are losing $250,000 a day owing to your obstinacy. You
are unfit to act as president of any company, and if you were to visit
your much boasted town to-day, the chances are that you would be dealt
with severely. Why, you are nothing but a figure head, you are not the
actual president of the company, for if you were you would know
something about it. You know nothing in regard to the actual state of
affairs." It did not take long for the story to reach the different
railroad centers about the city.

It came to the knowledge of the American Railway Union that J. M. Egan
and Manager St. John of the Rock Island road had employed two thousand
men in Canada to fill the places of the strikers, and steps were taken
immediately to stop their importation, but with what success it was
impossible to determine.

All this time the strike was spreading and the membership of the
American Railway Union was increasing rapidly. The sensational reports
of rioting and bloodshed in various yards proved upon investigation to
be false, and beyond doubt circulated by the General Managers and
eagerly seized by the subsidized press to win the sympathy of the
public in the interest of the corporations.

The police when questioned positively denied the stories saying there
were no grounds for the reports.

Marching orders were received at the headquarters of the Missouri U. S.
troops, for the 15th infantry and though it was not known at the time
the orders were received from Washington, it was soon learned that they
were to go to Chicago and assist the General Managers to run their
trains.

At this time occurred the tie-up at Minnesota Transfer, which was the
most complete and effectual blockade of any in the strike district. The
Minnesota Transfer represents nine different roads. The Chicago,
Milwaukee & St. Paul; Chicago, St. Paul, Minneapolis & Omaha; Great
Northern; Northern Pacific; Minneapolis & St. Louis; Chicago Great
Western; Wisconsin Central; Chicago, Burlington & Northern and Belt Line
Ry.

All freight through the Twin Cities handled by these roads, is
interchanged at this point. It is situated midway between St. Paul and
Minneapolis and employes from three hundred to five hundred men
according to the volume of business. This is a freight yard exclusively,
and therefore had nothing to do with the handling of Pullman equipment.
But this little technicality did not prevent this body of men from
coming to the assistance of their brothers, and as each road was brought
under the ban of the boycott they refused to handle cars or in any way
assist them to operate their line.

On the night of the 1st day of July, the Milwaukee road now under
boycott brought in five cars of beer for delivery to the Great Northern.

The men including the yardmaster refused to deliver the cars, and were
sent home. A meeting was called for the night of July 2nd, and a
committee appointed to wait upon the superintendent, Mr. D. M. Sullivan,
and ascertain if the men were discharged. Mr. Sullivan answered in the
affirmative, and an unanimous vote to strike was then taken, over three
hundred men, the entire force with three exceptions quit work, and not a
wheel was turned except by the superintendent himself, for ten days.

The general Managers now got in their fine work by utilizing the
government. A Washington special to the Chicago Times says:

Our wretched administration is in the hands of the railroads, there is
no doubt about it, Cleveland, Lamont, Olney and Bissel are at the beck
and call of the corporations, from the White House down it has been
determined to put forth every effort even to Gatling guns, to employ
every arm of the government even to its Supreme Judges to destroy this
strike and the laboring people concerned in it. The case is decided
against the strikers in advance, the wired words of the General Managers
are accepted as settled facts; what they ask for they will get, what
they suggest will be adopted. The workingmen are to be ground beneath
the heel of the military, and if necessary, to force them into
submission they are to be sabered, bayoneted, shot down or taken
prisoners or whatever is deemed sternly necessary to compel them to
submit to such terms as their moneycrat owner sees fit to impose.

This is a railway administration. So promptly loyal has Cleveland proven
himself to be that it is to be believed that should the companies desire
it, they could have the Executive Mansion for a round house and the
White House grounds for switching purposes.

The managers wired Olney to name Edwin Walker, who is attorney for the
Milwaukee road as special solicitor for the government, to take measures
against the strikers as they had no confidence in Milchrist.

He seemed weak, his term was soon to expire and he seemed inclined to
avoid harsh measures ablest with the men. They wanted Walker, he was the
corporation attorney in the country; he had been cradled by, and grown
up at the knee of corporations; he was their body and soul in the life
and death struggle with their employes.

They urged Olney to clothe Walker with the special United States
authority to better protect them and overthrow the strike. By thus
making the railway attorney Walker solicitor for the United States, the
control of government power could be placed in the hands of the
corporations to wield against the men. Walker was appointed by Olney and
placed in control over Milchrist in the affairs of the strike. Mr.
Walker was known personally by Olney, and Olney is at the present time
one of the counsels of the Santa Fe and Chicago, Burlington and Quincy,
and said to be a director of the latter road. He has been for years
intimate with Mr. Walker, who, by the way, is a hot favorite of Fuller
of the supreme bench. There was, therefore a dozen good reasons for this
selection, which addressed themselves to Mr. Olney, who is in this not
as a cabinet officer, but as a friend and director of railway
corporations, and he therefore precipitately granted the request of the
general managers. Bissel, also a railroad director, shows Olney's
anxiety to come to the back of the roads. (The truth of the above
correspondence could not be denied.) In this way the entire available
force of troops at Ft. Sheridan, including infantry, cavalry and
artillery was ordered out by the President of the United States to
assist the railroad managers against the people. Such was the attitude
of this government "of the people, by the people, and for the people"
against the people. The railway managers having now secured the federal
troops, proceeds to issue injunctions restraining the strikers from
using the power of persuasion on those men still in the service, to
induce them to quit. This order drawn up by Judges Wood and Grosscup was
a lengthy one, and peculiarly in harmony with the corporation interest.

The Chicago Times, in an editorial says: In this Federal injunction,
which is in the main eminently just and equally unnecessary, appears a
claim in which certain persons named, and all other persons whatsoever
are ordered to refrain from compelling or inducing, or attempting to
compel or induce, by threats, intimidation, force or violence any of the
employes of any of the said railroads, to refuse or fail to perform any
of their duties, as employes of said railroads, in connection with the
interstate business or commerce of such railroads, or the transportation
of passenger or property between or among the states; or from compelling
or inducing or attempting to compel or induce by threats, intimidation,
persuasion, force or violence, any of the employes of any of said
railroads, who are employed by said railroads and engaged in its
service, in the conduct of interstate business or in the operation of
any of its trains carrying mail of the United States or doing interstate
business or transportation of passengers or freight, between and among
the states, to leave the service of such railroad. The Times
emphatically does not believe that any court whatever has a right to
order men to refrain from attempting by persuasion to induce others to
leave the employment they are engaged in. There is a natural law that in
the end will prevail over the formal law built up by lawyers and courts.
If as Judge Gary says, the law is common sense, this injunction will not
stand, for common sense will certainly pronounce an orderly and
respectful request to a railroad employee to give up his position and
join the organized strikers, no crime. It is idle to plead that a
discreet and just court will only enforce this injunction against actual
law breakers, for there is in it an opportunity for injustice and
oppression which makes it wholly bad. The injunction is becoming a
menace to liberty, it is a weapon ever ready for the capitalist, and
there should be more careful federal legislation limiting its use.

Certainly if the restraining order of Judges Wood and Grosscup be good
law there is no sense in maintaining organized labor. Childlike trust in
the benevolence and fairness of the employer must be the workingman's
future policy if this injunction be made a precedent.

In the meantime the General Manager's association and the subsidized
press were endeavoring to impress the public with the belief that the
strikers were a lot of disorderly and riotous law breakers of the worst
description. To show how much truth there was in these tales, I will
give the statement of Capt. J. Hartnett as made after dispersing a mob.
He said: There wasn't a railroad man in the whole outfit, but a lot of
bums who thought they would have a lot of sport at the expense of the
railroads. But we soon gave them a hustling, and I want to say this for
the strikers, and by that I mean the real railroad men, they are orderly
here and as quiet as possible, I have had no disturbance in any district
that can be traced to railroad men. It is well known that on occasions
like these every loafer turns loose and takes advantage of the strike to
start a row, but the genuine railroad men are too sensible to cause any
disturbance.

This was true also of all other cities engaged in the strike.




CHAPTER VI.

TROOPS AT BLUE ISLAND.


The Fourth of July dawned upon a scene that would start the blood of the
signers of the Declaration of Independence leaping in flames of fire
through their veins, if they could but reappear upon this land in the
vigorous manhood of their youth; those heroes whose blood baptized the
battlefields of Yorktown and Bunker Hill for the glorious cause of
liberty and equal rights; and behold the spectacle of this day, they
would think that they had fought, bled and died in vain, that victory
after all was but defeat.

Military despotism reigned supreme. The great masses of the liberty
loving people who were wont to celebrate this National holiday of
Independence in a manner befitting the occasion, began to think. Their
thoughts took them back to the days of English tyranny, and they ask
themselves, must this fight be fought again? The thoughts were
contagious, and when the American people began to think, their thoughts
are dangerous. The battle must and will be fought again, but not with
the weapons of '76, but with the weapon the old man can wield as well as
the young; the ballot.

Wholesale arrests followed the arrival of the federal troops at Blue
Island, free speech was eliminated, any man who passed along, who had
the appearance of striker or sympathizer was promptly arrested, and that
too without a warrant. The remark "that fellow is a scab," was
sufficient to send a man to the guard house. A fireman was asked by his
landlord, "where have you been lately?" That was enough, he was placed
with other shackled prisoners in the guard house, but was released later
on. In the morning there was a parade, but the old time patriotism was
noticeably wanting, a fireman arrested for refusing to go to work,
having a depressing effect. Patriotic speeches were prominent by their
absence, and people began to wonder what day was being celebrated.

The bloodcurdling lawlessness and rioting by the strikers at Blue
Island, as depicted by the corporation press; when simmered down to
facts proved to be as false as other similar reports sent out by the
plutocratic press. The so-called rioting amounted to nothing more or
less than expression of thought, and I believe if the General Managers,
corporation courts, Cleveland & Co., could conceive and put into
execution some plan whereby they could put a restraining order on the
minds of the striker and deny him the right to think, it would be done.
The gist of the rioting as I said before was simply expression of
thought. A man as he watched a train pass by remarked: "There are d----d
few Pullmans anyway." He was promptly arrested. Another remarked that
some fellow was a scab, and was also taken in. This and other like
remarks were samples of the Blue Island rioting at Chicago.

Upon the arrival of the federal troops, the General Managers Association
shifted the responsibility from their own shoulders to those of Uncle
Sam, and the eager willingness that the representatives of the people
exhibited to assist Sir Duke Pullman and the railroad corporation to
subjugate and reduce the working people to a condition of serfdom, was
sufficient evidence that the managers knew what they were about. They
felt secure in the knowledge that their interest would be well taken
care of by the administration, and sought the much needed rest that
these weary sessions of plotting and scheming had earned for them.




CHAPTER VII.

A PROTEST FROM GOV. ALTGELD.


It was plain to be seen that the presence of U. S. troops in Chicago had
a bad effect. The people felt disposed to resent this uncalled for
interference of the President. His unwarranted and illegal action in
sending federal troops into the state of Illinois uncalled for by the
civil authorities (waiving all question of courtesy), was a reflection
on the efficiency of the civil authorities to maintain order, and a
direct insult to the intelligence and loyalty to the citizens of the
state. The governor protested against this high-handed proceeding, and
in no mild terms insisted that he was amply able and willing to preserve
order if called upon to do so.

He assured the President that it was not troops the railroads needed but
men to run their trains, and this was the exact truth, as the strikers
were not interfering with the running of trains but refused to run them,
and the companies could not operate their roads without the aid of the
men who left the service.

But they needed a shield to hide their helplessness, and this they found
in the federal troops, therefore it requires but little reasoning to
understand the bad effect on the people, made by the presence of United
States troops, equipped for war in time of peace. This ill feeling,
mingled with curiosity produced excitement. Excitement invited the
presence of the tough and lawless element, which was exactly what the
railroad magnates were striving for, as the strikers had no intention of
interfering with their trains, and they knew that it was necessary to
incite rioting in order to have an excuse for not operating their roads.

Their devilish schemes succeeded only too well. A mob composed of the
tough and hoodlum element congregated at the Rock Island yards and from
Nineteenth to Fortieth Street, overturned box cars and destroyed
everything that came in their way. The mob increased until not less than
ten thousand people participated in the work of destruction, but be it
said to the credit of the _impartial_ press of that city, they announced
that no strikers had taken part in the lawlessness. Mayor Hopkins, who
went in person to the scene, said that from what he had heard, and what
he could see for himself, that no railroad men were implicated in the
depredations, and business men whose veracity could not be questioned
corroborated his statement.

This occurrence was much to be feared by the strikers, as it was not the
first time that such means had been employed to turn public sentiment
from the side of the workingmen.

Realizing this the men did their utmost to prevent it, and by threats
and entreaties tried to persuade the mob to desist from the work of
destruction, but were successful only for a short time. One of the
strikers remarked to an officer at the time: "By Heavens! this won't do,
there is not a striker in that crowd; this is done to injure us, and
those fellows are not trying to stop it," meaning the troops.

The strike had now reached Toledo, Cleveland and Buffalo, and was
rapidly spreading east, the entire country was in a whirlpool of
excitement, and the strikers were jubilant. The general managers with
the combined forces of the federal troops, state militia, and Cleveland
and his cabinet could not operate the roads. One simple word from the
general managers to Pullman would have been more effective in starting
the trains than all the armies and courts in the United States or all
the scabs from Canada, but rather than speak that one word,
"arbitration," they would bankrupt every system of railroads in the
country.

On July 5, President Cleveland received by wire the following protest
from Gov. Altgeld of Illinois:

"Dear Sir:--I am advised that you have ordered federal troops to go into
service in the state of Illinois. Surely the facts have not been
correctly presented to you in this case or you would not have taken this
step, for it is entirely unnecessary and as it seems to me
unjustifiable. Waiving all question of courtesy I will say that the
state of Illinois is not only able to take care of itself, but it stands
ready to-day to furnish the federal government any assistance it may
need elsewhere.

"Our military force is ample and consists of as good soldiers as can be
found in the country. They have been ordered promptly, whenever and
wherever they were needed. We have stationed in Chicago alone three
regiments of infantry, one battery and one troop of cavalry, and no
better soldiers can be found. They have been ready every moment to go
on duty and have been and are now eager to go into service.

"But they have not been ordered out because nobody in Cook county,
whether official or private citizen, asked to have their assistance or
even intimated in any way that their assistance was desired or
necessary.

"So far as I have been advised the local officials have been able to
handle the situation, but if any assistance were needed the state stood
ready to furnish 100 men for every one man required, and stood ready to
do so at a moment's notice. Notwithstanding these facts the federal
government has been applied to by men who had political and selfish
motives for wanting to ignore the state government.

"We have just gone through a long coal strike more extensive here than
in any other state because our soft coal fields are larger than that of
any other state. We have now had ten days of the railroad strike, and we
have promptly furnished military aid wherever the local officials needed
it. In two instances the United States marshall for the southern
district of Illinois applied for assistance to enable him to enforce the
processes of the United States court and troops were promptly furnished
him, and he was assisted in every way he desired. The law has been
thoroughly executed and every man guilty of violating it during the
strike has been brought to justice.

"If the marshall of the northern district of Illinois or the authorities
of Cook county needed military assistance they had but to ask for it in
order to get it from the state.

"At present some of our railroads are paralyzed, not by reason of
obstruction but because they cannot get men to operate their trains. For
some reason they are anxious to keep this fact from the public and for
this purpose are making an outcry about obstructions in order to avert
attention. Now, I will cite to you two examples which illustrate the
situation: Some days ago I was advised that the business of one of our
railroads was obstructed at two railroad centers, that there was a
condition bordering on anarchy there--and I was asked to furnish
protection so as to enable the employees of the road to operate the
trains. Troops were promptly ordered to both points. Then it transpired
that the company had not sufficient men on its line to operate one
train. All the old hands were orderly but refused to go. The company
had large shops in which worked a number of men who did not belong to
the railway union and who could run an engine. They were appealed to to
run the train but flatly refused to do so. We were obliged to hunt up
soldiers who could run an engine and operate a train.

"Again two days ago appeals which were almost frantic came from
officials of another road stating that at an important point on their
line trains were forcibly obstructed and that there was a reign of
anarchy at that place and they asked for protection so that they could
move their trains. Troops were put on the ground in a few hours' time,
when the officer in command telegraphed me that there was no trouble and
had been none at that point, but the road seemed to have no men to run
the trains and the sheriff wired that he did not need troops, but would
himself move every train if the company would only furnish an engineer.
The result was that the troops were there over twelve hours before a
single train was moved although there was no attempt at interference by
anyone. It is true that in several instances a road made an effort to
work a few green men and a crowd standing around insulted them and
tried to drive them away, and in a few other instances they cut off
Pullman sleepers from trains. But all these troubles were local in
character and could easily be handled by the state authorities. Illinois
has more railroad men than any state in the Union, but as a rule they
are orderly and well behaved. This is shown by the fact that so very
little actual violence has been committed. Only a very small per cent of
these men have been guilty of any infractions of the law. The newspaper
accounts have in many cases been pure fabrications and in others wild
exaggerations.

"I have gone thus into details to show that it is not soldiers that the
railroads need so much as it is men to operate trains, and that the
conditions do not exist here which bring the cause within the federal
statutes, a statute that was passed in 1881, and was in reality a war
measure. This statute authorizes the use of federal troops in a state
where ever it is impracticable to enforce the laws of the United States
within such states by the ordinary judicial proceedings. Such a
condition does not exist in the state of Illinois. There have been a
few local disturbances but nothing that seriously interfered with the
administration of justice or that could not easily be controlled by the
local or state authorities for the federal troops can do nothing that
the state troops cannot do.

"I repeat that you have been imposed upon in this matter, but even if by
a forced construction it were held that the condition here came within
the letter of the statute, then I submit that local self government is a
fundamental principle of our constitution. Each community shall govern
itself so long as it can and is ready and able to enforce the law, and
it is in harmony with this fundamental principle that the statute
authorizing the president to send troops into states must be construed.
Especially is this so in matters relating to the exercise of the police
power and the preservation of law and order. To absolutely ignore a
local government in matters of this kind, when the local government is
ready to furnish assistance needed and is amply able to enforce the law,
not only insults the people of this state by imputing to them an
inability to govern themselves or an unwillingness to enforce the law,
but is in violation of a basic principle of our institutions.

"The question of federal supremacy is in no way involved; no one
disputes it for a moment but under our constitution federal supremacy
and local self government must go hand in hand and to ignore the latter
is to do violence to the constitution.

"As governor of the state of Illinois I protest against this and ask the
immediate withdrawal of the federal troops from active duty in this
state.

"Should the situation at any time get so serious that we cannot control
it with the state troops we will promptly and freely ask for federal
assistance, but until such time I protest with all due deference against
this uncalled for reflection upon our people and again ask the immediate
withdrawal of the troops. I have the honor to be,

  Yours respectfully
  JOHN P. ALTGELD,
  Governor of Illinois."

To the above communication President Cleveland answered as follows:

"To the Hon. John P. Altgeld, governor of Illinois. Federal troops were
sent to Chicago in strict accordance with the constitutions and laws of
the United States upon the demand of the post office department that
obstructions of the mails should be removed, and upon the
representations of the judicial officers of the United States that
process of law federal courts could not be executed through the ordinary
means, and upon abundant proof that conspiracies existed against
commerce between the states. To meet these conditions, which are clearly
within the province of federal authority, the presence of federal troops
in Chicago was deemed not only proper but necessary, and there has been
no intention of thereby interfering with the plain duty of the local
authorities to preserve the peace of the city.

  GROVER CLEVELAND."




CHAPTER VIII.

INCENDIARISM AND BLOODSHED.


The 6th day of July was one long to be remembered, as the first act of
incendiarism was committed. A conflagration was started along the tracks
of the Pan Handle, Baltimore & Ohio; Chicago & Northern Pacific, and
Belt Line R. R., which terminated in the burning of whole trains of
cars, switch houses and tool-houses belonging to these companies. A
splendid tower house belonging to the Pan Handle was saved through the
supreme efforts of the strikers, who tore away the burning sidewalks
which connected the tool-house with the tower-house. This fine structure
was recently built and cost the company $40,000. Upon the authority of
the city police and firemen, I can state that the fires were started by
a crowd of young hoodlums and toughs living in the vicinity, and the
strikers were in no way responsible for them.

There was only a small crowd of these young toughs around the yards,
they scattered in different directions and simultaneously fire broke out
in different places. One boy was seen to set fire to a bunch of waste,
and throw it into the empty cars as he ran, and the dry woodwork was
soon a mass of flames. Between eight hundred and sixteen hundred cars
were destroyed by this conflagration and the loss aggregated over
$200,000, besides three men killed outright and seven wounded.

The peaceable and law abiding city of Chicago was feeling the effects of
a reign of terror. Innocent men, women and children were being shot down
or bayoneted by the tools of railroad corporations in a most cold
blooded and heartless manner. According to the statements of eye
witnesses some young fellows under the age of sixteen years, and
therefore not strikers, threw stones at the soldiers who at once began
to shoot indiscriminately into a crowd composed of men, women and
children who had no connection whatever with the affair, then with fixed
bayonets charged upon the people, and those who were unfortunate enough
to be caught were severely dealt with. One old man, a Pole, who was
standing in his own door yard, and seeing the people run took fright
and started into his house, was pursued by a soldier who saw him run and
stabbed in the back. The old man fell shrieking to the ground, begging
for mercy, when the brutal fiend plunged the bayonet twice more into the
helpless form and left him in a dying condition.

One young lady was shot while standing on the roof of her own house, and
fell a corpse in her brother's arm.

Still another victim was a man who was shot while standing in the
doorway of his home and a rioter by the name of Burke was shot and
killed in the charge.

In an editorial the Chicago Times says: "Let us examine the net results
of the activity of the troops on Saturday; results of which the amateur
soldier Brigadier General Wheeler remarked: "I am glad that the troops
made a stand and that blood was shed." There is some conflict in the
reports of the day's carnage, but the salient facts seem to be these:

"Three persons in all were shot dead, one of these, an eighteen year old
girl, was standing on a distant house top watching the fray, when a
bullet pierced her heart. Of course she was not a striker nor was her
continued life a menace to American institutions.

"John Burke, identified by the police as a professional crook, was
another victim and his presence in the mob adds evidence to the claim of
the Times that the rioting was the work of chronic toughs and criminals
and not of workingmen. Joseph Warzouski, the third to fall before a
military bullet, was sitting smoking before his house door when wantonly
shot down by a regular. He was not a striker, and not within one hundred
yards of railroad property when murdered.

"Of the wounded five were women, one of whom looses an arm and another a
leg. Six were boys under nineteen years of age, and one was a baby.

"The points which these facts demonstrate, is that the rioting is not
the work of members of the American Railway Union, or in fact of
workingmen of any organization, but the acts of toughs and pluguglies
and boisterous boys, with whom this city like other large cities,
abound. Though the crowd looks large and dangerous, the actual number of
combatants is comparatively small, and the clubs of the police instead
of the bullets and bayonets of the soldiers, would have been the proper
weapons to use. Then Chicago would not have been disgraced by shedding
the blood of women and children and taking innocent lives."

On July 6, Mr. Debs issued the following clear and succinct statement of
the causes and status of the present condition of affairs:

"To the public:--So many misleading reports have been given currency in
reference to the great railroad strike now in progress that I am
prompted, in the interest of justice and fair play, to give the public
an honest, impartial statement of the issues involved and the facts as
they actually exist. My purpose in this is to have the great American
public--the plain people--in every avenue of life conversant with the
situation as it really is, that they who constitute the highest tribunal
we know, may pass judgment upon our acts, condemn us if we are wrong,
and uphold us if we are right.

"First of all let it be said that the Pullman employes who struck May
6th, last, did so entirely of their own accord."

"Their action in so doing was spontaneous and unanimous. They simply
revolted against a series of deep-seated wrongs of long standing, and no
power could stay them. It has been charged, and the charge has been
widely accepted, that they were induced to strike by their "leaders" and
labor agitators; that if left alone they would have remained at work.
The charge is wholly untrue.

"The fact is that the officers of the American Railway Union used all
their influence to pacify the employes and advised them repeatedly not
to strike, but to bear patiently their grievances until a peaceable
settlement could be effected. To the truth of this statement the
employes themselves will bear willing testimony.

"But the grievances of the employes, men and women, had become so
aggravated, so galling, that patience deserted them, and they abandoned
their employment rather than to submit longer to conditions against
which their very souls revolted. Whether they were right or not, let
only those judge who comprehend the conditions under which these
faithful employes toiled and groaned. Let us avoid sentiment. The bare
facts will suffice, and they are haggard enough to excite the sympathy
of every good citizen, rich or poor, employer or employed.

"The Pullman company, be it understood owns the town of Pullman, owns
the houses, the homes of employes, controls the light and water, and
other necessaries of life, and wages are so adjusted to living expenses
that in a large majority of cases the employes are barely able to
support their families. Proof overwhelming can be furnished. One
instance will suffice. At the time they struck the employes were in
arrears to the Pullman company $70,000 for rent alone. Wages had been
repeatedly reduced but rent and other expenses had remained the same.

"At this rate it would be a question of a short time only until the
employes would have been hopelessly involved in debt, mortgaged soul and
body to the Pullman company.

"The employes from the beginning, have been willing to arbitrate their
differences with the company. That is their position to-day. The company
arrogantly declares that there is nothing to arbitrate. If this be true
why not allow a board of fair and impartial arbitrators to determine the
fact?

"At this point we appeal to the public as to whether the position of the
employes is entitled to the sanction of the public conscience. If the
employes were to assume the position of the Pullman company and
defiantly declare they had nothing to arbitrate, and arbitrarily demand
unconditional surrender as the only basis of settlement they would
merit the condemnation of the public and it would certainly and swiftly
fall upon them with crushing severity. Committee after committee waited
upon the officials of the Pullman company with the vain hope of
effecting a settlement. They were willing to make concessions, to
compromise in the interest of peace. All their advances were repelled.

"The company was, and is, unyielding as adamant. Finally, June 12th, the
delegates of the American Railway Union, representing 425 local unions
of railway employes located on the principal lines of American railways,
met in convention at Chicago. The Pullman trouble had been discussed at
their local meetings. Many of the delegates came instructed. The
grievances of the Pullman employes were taken under consideration, and
two separate committees were sent to the officials.

"Not the slightest satisfaction could be obtained. As a last resort the
delegates by a unanimous vote determined that unless the Pullman company
would agree to do justice to their employes within five days, the
members of the order would refuse to haul Pullman cars. This action be
it remembered, was not taken until the strike had been on six weeks, and
every conceivable effort to obtain redress had failed because of the
obstinacy of the company.

"Up to this time the trouble had been confined to the Pullman company
and its employes. How, then, did the strike extend to the railways? Let
the answer be given in accordance with the facts. The day before the
order of the delegates declining to haul Pullman cars, went into effect,
the General Managers' association, representing the principal Western
railways, met and passed a series of resolutions, declaring in substance
that they would uphold the Pullman company in its fight upon the
employes, that they would haul Pullman cars and that they would stand
together in crushing out the American Railway Union. The resolutions in
question were published in the city papers and can be referred to in
substantiation of this averment. It will thus be seen that the railway
companies virtually joined forces with the Pullman company, went into
partnership with them so to speak, to reduce and defeat their half
starved employes. In this way the trouble was extended from line to
line, and from system to system until a crisis has been reached. The
business of the country is demoralized to an extent that defies
exaggeration.

"To say that the situation is alarming is entirely within the bounds of
prudent statement. Every good citizen must view the outlook with grave
concern.

"Something should, something must be done. The American people are a
peace-loving people--they want neither anarchy or revolution. They have
faith in their institutions, they believe in law and order, they believe
in good government, but they also believe in fair play. Once aroused
they will not tolerate arbitrary and dictatorial defiance, even on the
part of an alliance of rich and powerful corporations.

"What can be done to dispel the apprehension that now prevails, and
restore peace and confidence? The American Railway Union on whose
authority and in whose behalf this statement is made, stands ready, has
from the beginning stood ready, to do anything in its power, provided it
is honorable to end this trouble.

"This, briefly stated, is the position the organization occupies. It
simply insists that the Pullman Company shall meet its employes and do
them justice. We guarantee that the latter will accept any reasonable
proposition.

"The company may act through its officials or otherwise, and the
employes through their chosen representatives. Let them agree as far as
they can, and where they fail to agree, let the points in dispute be
subjected to arbitration. The question of the recognition of the
American Railway Union or any other organization is waived. We do not
ask, nor have we ever asked for a recognition as an organization. We
care nothing about that, and so far as we are concerned it has no part
in the controversy. Let the officials deal with the employes without
reference to organizations. Let the spirit of conciliation, mutual
concession, and compromise animate and govern both sides, and there will
be no trouble in reaching a settlement that will be satisfactory to all
concerned.

"This done let the railway companies agree to restore all their employes
to their situations without prejudice and the trouble will be ended. The
crisis will thus be averted, traffic will resume and peace will reign.
The railways are not required to recognize the American Railway Union.
This has never been asked nor is it asked now.

"If there are those who discover in this statement a 'weakening' on the
part of the employes, as has been so often charged when an exposition of
the true attitude of our order was attempted, we have only to say that
they are welcome to such solace as such a perverted conclusion affords
them. We have been deliberately and maliciously misrepresented, but we
have borne it all with an unwavering faith that the truth will finally
and powerfully prevail. We firmly believe our cause is just, and while
we hold that belief, we will not recede. If we are wrong we are ready to
be convinced. We are open to reason and to conviction, but we will not
be cowed or intimidated. Were we to sacrifice the multiplied thousands
of wageworkers who have committed their interests to our hands and yield
to the pressure of corporate power, we would be totally unworthy of
American citizenship.

"It may be asked what sense is there in sympathetic strikes. Let the
corporations answer.

"When one is assailed all go to the rescue. They stand together; they
support each other with men, money and equipments. Labor, in unifying
its forces, simply follows their example. The corporations established
a precedent. If the proceeding is vicious and indefensible let them
first abolish it.

"In this contest labor will stand by labor. Other organizations of
workingmen have themselves felt the oppressive hand of corporate
capital. They will not be called out, but will go out. And the spectacle
of Mr. Pullman, fanned by the breezes of the seashore while his employes
are starving, is not calculated to prevent their fellow wageworkers from
going to their rescue by their only means at their command.

"A few words in reference to myself, although ordinarily I pay no
attention to misrepresentation or vituperation, may not be out of place,
not because of myself personally, but on account of the cause I have the
honor to in part represent, which may suffer if silence is maintained
while it is assailed with falsehood and malignant detraction. I shirk no
responsibility, neither do I want credit to which I am not entitled.
This strike was not 'ordered' by myself nor by any other individual. I
have never 'ordered' nor 'called' anybody out. Under the rules of the
American Railway Union members can only strike when a majority of the
members so decide.

"The votes of the delegates in this instance was unanimous, and where
ever men have struck they did so of their own accord. I have simply
served the notice after the men themselves had determined to go out.

"This is the extent of my authority and I have never exceeded it. My
alleged authority to 'call' or 'order' out has been made the pretext on
which to assail me with every slander that malignity could conceive. So
far as I am personally concerned, detraction cannot harm me, nor does it
matter if it could. I do not amount to more than the humblest member of
our order--perhaps not as much. Fate or fortune has assigned me a duty,
and, no matter how trying the ordeal or severe the penalties I propose
to perform it. The reflection that an honest man has nothing to fear
sustains and comforts me in every hour of trial.

"In closing let me repeat that we stand ready to do our part toward
averting the impending crisis. We have no false pride to stand in the
way of a statement. We do not want official recognition. All we ask is
fair play for the men who have chosen us to represent them.

"If the corporations refuse to yield and stubbornly maintain that there
is 'nothing to arbitrate,' the responsibility of what may ensue will be
upon their heads, and they cannot escape its penalties.

  EUGENE V. DEBS."




CHAPTER IX.

SLAUGHTER OF CITIZENS.


The situation at Hammond, Ind., would compare favorably with Chicago in
so far as the wanton shooting of innocent citizens was concerned. The
town had become infested with a gang of toughs from Chicago, who
overturned a number of box cars and blocked the passage of trains. About
noon of July 8th, the U. S. troops arrived, and their appearance
attracted large crowds of citizens on the streets, in the vicinity of
the railroad tracks. The troops who were ensconced in passenger cars
were being hauled up and down the track, when a gang of toughs attempted
to overturn a Pullman coach. The soldiers, who could easily have left
the coaches and placed the lawbreakers under arrest opened fire, but
strange to say these sharpshooters, under instructions to shoot to kill,
did not wound even one of the lawless rioters. Not so, however, with the
citizens who were walking along the street and had no connection
whatever with the mob. Charles Fleischer, who lived near with his wife
and five children, walked down the street in search of his little son,
when without a moment's warning he fell to the ground a corpse pierced
with a law and order bullet. This man had no connection whatever with
the riot nor even with the strike.

Miss Flemming, of Chicago, who was visiting friends in Hammond was on
the street when the shooting occurred and was seriously injured by a
shot in the knee. Wm. Campbell, Victor Dizuttner and an unknown man were
also shot and seriously injured by the regulars without the slightest
provocation.

These people had no connection with the rioters, were citizens of
Hammond, and not on railroad property.

Bullets crashed through frame walls, and I was told by a man whose head
was grazed by a bullet while in his room, that nothing short of a
miracle saved many persons from being shot down in their own dwellings.

Mayor Reily whose anger knew no bounds, after the killing rushed to the
telegraph office and wired Governor Matthews, asking if martial law had
been proclaimed. I should like to know, he said, by what authority the
U. S. troops come to our city and shoot down our citizens without the
slightest warning.

Immediately after the fatal occurrence, A. Shields and Dr. F. E. Bell,
representing the citizens of Hammond, wired Governor Matthews the
following message: "Federal troops shooting down citizens promiscuously
and without provocation. Cannot something be done to protect citizens?
Act quickly."

The governor replied that he had sent troops to restore order, enforce
law, and protect lives of law abiding citizens. Lawlessness and rioting
must be suppressed. Citizens obeying law had nothing to fear.

Was ever military despotism more thoroughly demonstrated? What further
proof was necessary than the reply of the chief executive of the state,
to the citizens, that they were at the mercy of, and subject to the
arrogant brutality of military despotism? The governor in his reply
said: "Citizens obeying law have nothing to fear, that lawlessness must
be suppressed." According to that we can only arrive at one conclusion;
that the persons overturning cars and destroying property were obeying
the law, as they were not shot down nor were they arrested, but on the
other hand peaceable citizens who were in no way connected with the
rioting, were shot and maimed by the troops.

The people were beginning to regard the law with suspicion, they no
longer felt that sense of security, the implicit confidence, they were
wont to place in the constitution. The law of to-day, if the interests
of the railroad corporations so required, would be reversed to-morrow.
Under those circumstances could it be wondered that the people were
beginning to lose the respect that had been accorded the law, and to
which it was entitled? Could it be wondered that they became restless
and exhibited signs of revolting against such damnable brutality, and
the indignities to which they were subjected under the guise of the law?

Cleveland was now beginning to fear, that in his eagerness to assist the
railroads in crushing the strikers he had overreached himself and the
wanton murder of citizens, he feared, might have a damaging effect on
his future political plans. His uneasiness was quite apparent, while on
the other hand his co-conspirator, Olney, was in a happy state of mind.
He claimed to be able with the anti-trust bill, to break up every labor
union in America.

The general managers, finding out that the city would not be held
responsible for the loss of and damage to railroad property, were now in
favor of removing the troops from the city of Chicago--but knowing the
effect of such action after making an appeal for their assistance--did
not ask for their removal.

The situation throughout the country had not materially changed, and the
prospects for a final victory for the strikers looked very favorably.

General Miles circulated a story that ninety per cent of the citizens of
Chicago were in sympathy with the Pullman company and the railroads.

The railway managers took advantage of this report and spread and
distorted it in order to discourage the strikers.

Now for facts: The trades unions of Chicago alone represent 750,000
people, adding to this the membership of the railway unions you have a
total of 900,000 or ninety per cent of the citizens, who were in direct
sympathy with the strikers. And it was not confined to members of
Unions alone; such men as Bishop Fallaws, Rev. Dr. Henson, Prof. E. W.
Bennis, Rev. G. P. Brushingham, Rev. W. H. Carvardine, Mayor Hopkins and
hosts of other men prominent in the affairs of the city endorsed the men
and denounced the railroad corporations.

Resolutions by the score were passed by business men, by the
Typographical Unions and other organizations endorsing the American
Railway Union, and denouncing Pullman and the railroads, also condemning
the action of Grover Cleveland in upholding the corporations against the
workingmen.

Resolutions were passed requesting all sympathizers to wear a white
ribbon, the badge adopted by the American Railway Union, and the sea of
white ribbons to be seen in Chicago would not bear out the statement of
Gen. Miles.

The labor unions now signified their willingness to strike in support of
the movement if called upon by the American Railway Union.

Grover Cleveland at this time issued a proclamation which--to all
intents and purposes--declared martial law in the city of Chicago. This
was what Gen. Miles desired, as it virtually gave him full power to
rule with despotic sway over the citizens and civil authorities.

The following protest was wired the President of the United States by
President Debs, of the American Railway Union and Grand Master Sovereign
of the Knights of Labor.

"To the Hon. Grover Cleveland, President of the United States, Executive
Mansion, Washington, D. C.

"Dear Sir:--Through a long period of depression, enforced idleness and
low wages, resulting in wide spread poverty, and in many cases actual
starvation, the working people have been patient, patriotic and law
abiding, and not until the iron heel of corporate tyranny was applied
with the intention to subjugate the working people to the will of
arrogant monopolies, did they make any effort to stay their oppressors.

"The Pullman strike was not declared until the employes of the Pullman
company were driven to the verge of starvation, their entreaties spurned
with contempt, and their grievances denied a hearing. No refusal to
handle Pullman cars was declared by any railway employe until all
propositions looking towards arbitration and conciliation were rejected
by the Pullman company. Notwithstanding the truths set forth above were
known to the public and the national authorities, you have seen fit
under guise of protecting the mails and federal property to invoke the
services of the United States army, whose very presence is used to
coerce and intimidate peaceable working people into a humiliating
obedience to the will of their oppressors.

"By your acts, insofar as you have supplanted civil and state
authorities with the federal military power, the spirit of unrest and
distrust has so far been augmented that a deep seated conviction is fast
becoming prevalent that this government is soon to become a military
despotism. The transmission of the United States mails is not
interrupted by the striking employes of any railway company, but by the
railway companies themselves, who refused to haul the mail on trains to
which Pullman cars were not attached. If it is a criminal interference
with the United States mails for the employes of a railway company to
detach from a mail train a Pullman palace car, contrary to the will of
the company then it holds true that it is the same criminal interference
whenever a Pullman palace car is detached from a mail train in
accordance with the will of a railroad company while said mail train is
in transit. The line of criminality in such a case should not be drawn
at the willingness or unwillingness of railway employes, but at the act
itself, and inasmuch as it has been the common practice of railway
corporations to attach and detach from mail trains Pullman palace cars
at will while said trains are in transit and carrying the mails of the
United States, it would seem an act of discrimination against the
employes of the railway corporations to declare such acts unlawful
interference with the transmission of the mails when done by employes
with or without the consent of their employers.

"In view of these facts we look upon the far-fetched decision of
Attorney General Olney, the sweeping un-American injunctions against
railway employes, and the movements of the regular army as employing the
powers of the general government for the support and protection of the
railway corporations in their determination to degrade and oppress their
employes.

"The present railway strike was precipitated by the uneasy desire of the
railway corporations to destroy the organizations of their employes and
make the working people more subservient to the will of their
employers; and as all students of government agree that free
institutions depend for their perpetuity upon the freedom and prosperity
of the common people, it would seem more in consonance with the spirit
of democratic government if federal authority was exercised in deference
of the rights of the toiling masses to life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness. But on the contrary there is not an instance on record where
in any conflict between corporations and the people the strong arm of
the military power has been employed to protect the working people and
the industrial masses from the ravage and persecution of corporate
greed. But the measure of character has been in the line of declaring
the corporations always good and in the right, and the working people
always bad and in the wrong.

"Now, sir, we pledge to you the power of our respective organizations,
individually and collectively, for the maintenance of peace and good
order and the preservation of life and property, and will aid in the
arrest and punishment of all violators of the civil and criminal laws of
the state or nation. In the present contest between labor and railway
corporations we shall use every peaceable and honorable means at our
command consistent with the law and our constitutional rights, to secure
for the working people just compensation for labor done and respectable
consideration in accordance with the inherent rights of all men and the
spirit of republican government. In doing so we appeal to all the
liberty loving people of the nation to aid and support us in this most
just and righteous cause.

  By EUGENE V. DEBS,
  President.

  "Order of Knights of Labor,
  By J. R. SOVEREIGN,
  Grand Master Workman."




CHAPTER X.

BUSINESS MEN'S PROTEST.


The town of Danville, Ill., was now visited by martial law with the
result that two women were killed and two men fatally wounded. A
non-union brakeman fired three shots into a crowd that was jeering him,
whereupon some one in the crowd returned the fire hitting him in the
neck. The militia then opened fire, killing a Mrs. Glennon who was
standing in her own yard and Miss James seated at the organ in her own
house. This was the effect of federal troops in Danville, and so it was
in every town and city where Grover's minions were stationed. The
damnable outrages perpetrated on the people of the commonweal by the
federal troops under the guise of law and order was goading the citizens
to a state of open rebellion. The business men of Chicago fearing a
general outbreak determined on sending a committee to the Pullman
company with a view to reaching a settlement whereby this dire calamity
would be averted. A committee was formed composed of representative
business men, members of the city council, and members of the various
trades of the city. The committee met with no success.

Mr. Wickes, who represented the Pullman company, informed them that the
company had nothing to arbitrate and wished to see no committee. The
proposition they wished to submit to Mr. Wickes as the representative of
the Pullman company was this: That Mr. Pullman had said there was
nothing to arbitrate while the men contended that there was. Let the
Pullman company appoint two men and the circuit court two men. Let these
four select a fifth, if necessary, to determine if there was anything to
arbitrate and in case there was, that would take care of itself later.
If not, the strike would end just as soon as the decision was reached.
Surely this proposition was fair and manly but speaking for the Pullman
company Mr. Wickes flatly refused to entertain it for an instant.
Alderman McGillen, who acted as spokesman, then made an eloquent plea
for the Pullman company to take steps, which he considered would go far
toward settling the strike. He said: "Mr. Wickes we received a request
from the trades-unions--their representatives who are now here you have
already met--to see if some means to settle this strike peaceably could
not be found.

"It has been demonstrated that your company had no subject for
arbitration, that the request of the employes for arbitration could not
be acceded to?"

Mr. Wickes: "Yes, sir."

Ald. McGillen: "We are here to suggest that it might be possible to
obviate all differences between the company and the men--strikers,
ex-employes, or whatever you wish to call them. We would suggest a
committee to ascertain whether there is any matter needing arbitration
as you are a quasi public."

Mr. Wickes, interrupting: "Do you come as representatives of the city
instructed by the mayor? We have nothing to arbitrate, the Pullman
company cannot recede from its position."

Ald. O'Brien: "There must be some trouble?"

Mr. Wickes: "Our men made complaint, we promised to investigate, but
before we had time to do so they struck."

Ald. O'Brien: "But that will not settle the matter."

Mr. Wickes: "Unfortunately not."

Ald. McGillen: "We suggest that this committee be made up of
representative men, the best men in Chicago, men who occupy positions of
honor."

Here attorney John S. Runnell appeared and was closeted with Mr. Wickes
for a quarter of an hour.

On his return to the room Mr. Wickes said that neither the Pullman
company or the railway manager's association created the situation of
to-day. When our men went out we told them that we could not do the work
at the scale of wages we were paying. We had contracts to fill then,
some of them we let out and some we retained. No men can arbitrate this,
you, as business men would let no man say how that business should be
conducted.

Ald. McGillen then said: "You require protection from us. You call on
the police, on the county, on the state, and on the nation for
protection. Your only valued assets are the patents which the nation
gives you in recognition of the genius which built the Pullman car.
Remove that asset and you are ruined. You utterly ignore our request. It
is not dishonorable men we ask to investigate your affairs. Think of the
sickness, starvation, want, disaster and bloodshed which is coming if
the strike assumes larger proportions. The climax is fast approaching
and who will be to blame. I am here for the common weal, and I hope and
beg of you not to refuse."

Mr. Wickes: "There is a principle involved. Every business should have
the right to dictate to its own labor, we will brook no interference,
national, state, county or municipal."

Ald. McGillen: "Compulsory arbitration is not a law but it will be if
this strike does not stop."

Mr. Wickes: "We have nothing to arbitrate."

Ald. Warreinner: "We are not asking for arbitration, we want a committee
appointed to see if there is need of it. Will you consent to that?"

Mr. Wickes: "No."

Ald. McGillen: "In the name of humanity let me beseech you to reconsider
your negation."

Mr. Wickes: "Gentlemen, the Pullman company has nothing to arbitrate, we
want to see no committee, the Pullman company cannot recede from its
position. This is final."

When the committee met again at 4:30 to make its final report, it was
completely discouraged. Mr. Elderkin stated the proposition that had
been made to the Pullman company and its direct refusal. The alderman
begged the labor representatives not to strike and cause widespread
suffering.

The general manager's and Pullman's position was so clearly defined that
it would be impossible for the public to fail to see it in any but its
true light.

The companies were losing millions of dollars but the general managers
had determined if necessary to bankrupt every system in the United
States in order to crush labor organizations out of existence. The
Pullman matter was something of the past, with them they were after the
labor organizations, and they were after them with a vengeance.

The government was backing them. The attorney general of the United
states,--a corporation attorney as well,--had pledged himself to disrupt
every labor organization in the country. President Cleveland, another
railroad attorney, had encouraged and abetted them to the same end.

With the subsidized press, the bankers unions, the moneycrat
manufacturers and the federal courts arrayed against them, what in the
name of justice could they expect?

Surely the martyred president and savior of mankind, the immortal
Lincoln, must have anticipated the present deplorable condition when in
his message to the second session of the thirty-seventh congress,--to be
found in the appendix to the Congressional Globe of the thirty-seventh
congress, second section, page 4--when he said: "Monarchy itself is
sometimes hinted at as a possible refuge from the power of the people.
In my present position I could scarcely be justified were I to omit
raising a warning voice against this approach of returning despotism. It
is not needed nor fitting here that a general argument should be made in
favor of popular institutions, but there is one point with its
connections not so hackneyed as most others to which I ask a brief
attention. It is the effort to place capital on an equal footing with,
if not above, labor in the structure of government. It is assumed that
labor is available only in connection with capital, that nobody labors
unless somebody else owning capital somehow by the use of it induces him
to labor. * * * Labor is prior to and independent of capital. Capital is
only the fruit of labor and could never have existed if labor had not
first existed. Labor is the superior of capital and deserves much the
higher consideration. * * * No men living are more worthy to be trusted
than those who toil up from poverty; none less inclined to take or touch
aught which they have not earned. Let them beware of surrendering a
political power which they already possess and which, if surrendered,
will surely be used to close the door of advancement against such as
they, and to fix new disabilities and burdens upon them till all of
liberty shall be lost."




CHAPTER XI.

INDICTMENT OF PRESIDENT DEBS.


The railroad managers and federal courts were leaving no stone unturned
to secure the indictment and incarceration of Eugene V. Debs. If
successful, it was their intention to dispose of all the officers and
directors of the American Railway Union in the same manner.

Attorney General Olney, acting for the railroads, was hatching a scheme
to incarcerate the officers of the union and refuse them bail. Attorneys
Walker and Milchrist were ready to prove that Debs ordered the boycott,
that he conspired against the lives and liberty of the people, that he
conspired to overthrow the government, in short, they were ready to
prove anything that would further the ends of the corporations which
they represented.

These diabolical plotters never doubted for one instant that the
officers of the American Railway Union were innocent of the charges
preferred against them. They knew very well that they (the officers)
had no authority to order a boycott or strike, and that it was ordered
by a majority vote of the men employed on each system. They also knew
that from the inauguration of the strike, not one word or act of Eugene
V. Debs could be construed into an offense and make him amenable to the
law.

That he counseled moderation and appealed to the men to refrain from
acts of violence from the start, was a well known fact. This was very
clear to them, but the powerful magnetism of his presence in restraining
the men from acts of violence would also have a tendency to keep their
ranks firm and intact. This was also known to them and they must devise
some scheme to shackle him or get him out of the way. With consummate
skill they proceeded with the avowed effort to accomplish this end.

At 3:00 P. M., July 10, the special grand jury summoned by
Judges Wood and Grosscup set the machinery of federal law in motion, and
after one hour and seven minutes--most of which time was occupied in
waiting for advice from the Western Union Telegraph Co., in New York, to
its manager in Chicago--returned indictments against E. V. Debs, G. W.
Howard, L. W. Rogers and Sylvester Kelliher. No sooner were the four
officers of the American Railway Union indicted than they were arrested
and the private papers as well as the documents of the union were
seized.

The four men were admitted to bail and the joint bond of $10,000 was
signed by J. W. Fitzgerald and Wm. Skakel.

The special grand jurors selected by the court for the express purpose
of indicting the officers of the American Railway Union were well
chosen. An elaborate charge from his honor, the judge, a pretense of
examining a lone witness, just a farcical formality, and Debs, Howard,
Rogers and Kelliher were indicted. These men were virtually indicted
before the grand jury went into session. This is a fact that defies
contradiction, Z. E. Holbrook, one of the jurors, was a man who two
years ago went to Homestead, Pa., at the request of H. C. Frick, manager
of the Carnegie Company, and after obtaining a supply of alleged facts
from Mr. Frick, returned to Chicago and made a speech before the Sunset
Club, in which he charged the Homestead strikers with being
conspirators, anarchists and murderers, and he denounced and abused in
no measured terms all labor unions and sympathizers. So bitterly did he
attack labor that he was roundly hissed by members of his own club.

The city directory sets him down as a capitalist, and he is known
throughout the city as a bitter enemy to labor unions. Such is the
character of one of the men who was chosen to indict Eugene V. Debs. Was
ever court of justice so utterly debauched?

What has become of our boasted liberty? Are we freemen? No! in the
burning words of Rienzi, the Roman, we are slaves, the bright sun rises
to its course and sets on a race of slaves. Slaves, not such as
conqueror led to crimson glory and undying fame, but base, ignoble
slaves, slaves to a horde of petty tyrants, feudal despots.

The same conditions that emanated these immortal utterances from the
ancient Roman is absolutely the condition of the working people of
America to-day.

The federal courts had now accomplished a master stroke; they had
indicted the president of the American Railway Union for conspiracy.

When the wires flashed the news to the various local unions throughout
the country, the excitement was intense. The illegal proceeding was
condemned by every good citizen, regardless of vocation or station in
life. Millions of men in every branch of labor threatened to strike, but
were held in check by the assurance of their leaders that all would be
well in the end.

Mr. Debs, fearing the bad effect his arrest would have on the working
people, sent out the following appeal for order:

"To all striking employes and sympathizers:

"In view of the serious phases which the strike has assumed, I deem it
my duty to again admonish you to not only refrain from acts of violence
but to aid in every way in your power to maintain law and order. We have
everything to lose and nothing to gain by participating, even by our
presence in demonstrative gatherings. Almost universal unrest prevails.
Men are excitable and inflammable. The distance from anger to vengeance
is not great. Every precaution against still further aggravating
conditions should be taken. In this supreme hour let workingmen show
themselves to be orderly and law abiding by freely co-operating with the
authorities in suppressing turbulence and preserving the peace. Our
position is secure and the people are with us. We have made every
effort that reason and justice could suggest to obtain redress for our
grievances.

"Our advances have been repelled. The responsibility for the grave
situation that confronts the country is not with us. The indications now
are that the stoppage of work will become general. This in itself will
be a calamity, but if order be maintained it may yet prove to be a
blessing to the country. I appeal to every workingman to entirely keep
away from places where trouble would be likely to occur. What, under
normal conditions, would probably be a peaceable gathering may now
become a demonstrative mob. All good citizens deprecate the loss of life
and the destruction of property. Grave as these complications are, our
civilization is far enough advanced to find and apply a remedy without
resort to violence. We are merely contending for justice for our fellow
workingmen, who have been reduced to want by a power that now defies
public opinion. Strong in the faith that our position is correct, that
our grievances are just, we can afford to await the final verdict, with
patience. The great public may be slow to act, but in the fullness of
time it will act. Then the wrong, wherever found will be rebuked and
cloven down, and the right will be enthroned. However serious the
situation may become, let it not be intensified by lawlessness or
violence.

  Eugene V. Debs."

If there is anything tending to conspiracy, any anarchistic sentiment in
the above appeal then it is certain that Debs was guilty as indicted,
but if there is not, then the railroad managers and federal court were
guilty of a greater conspiracy and should be dealt with accordingly. In
all the appeals, instructions or advice given verbally or otherwise by
E. V. Debs, not a solitary one was of a more inflammatory nature than
this, and yet this man was accused of this serious crime.

The Chicago Times in an editorial on the indictment of Debs says in
part: "We can perhaps leave to the lawyers who are so eager to indict
Mr. Debs, determination of the legal position of this rebel Wickes,
declaring that his tottering corporation will brook no interference
national, state, county, or municipal. The times has learned many things
of late showing the power of corporations over the national government
but we still cling to the belief that Uncle Sam is bigger than Duke
George, and if either the national, state, county or municipal
government determines to interfere with the affairs of the Pullman
corporation, Mr. Wickes will have to brook it or take refuge in Canada
with his titled chiefs, embezzlers, boodlers, forgers and other harpies
of society, who from time to time have fled thither."




CHAPTER XII.

A PROTEST BY THE PEOPLES PARTY.


The newsboys of Chicago now decided to join the boycott by dropping the
papers unfavorable to the American Railway Union, and after a noisy
session in which parliamentary rules were freely discussed, and several
amusing antics were indulged in, they voted to boycott the Tribune,
Herald, Mail, Inter-Ocean, Post and Journal. When the Times was
mentioned, they yelled themselves hoarse, and declared that it was the
only paper they would sell. Hill, the circulator of the Post, caused the
arrest of five of the little fellows and they were locked up.

L. W. Rogers, editor of the Railway Times, the official organ of the
American Railway Union finally succeeded in getting the attention of the
boys and informed them that the union could not accept any sacrifice
from the newsboys of Chicago. He assured them that the men were strong
enough to do their own boycotting and requested them to continue the
sale of the papers. He said: "We do not want to take one red cent out
of your earnings, if things were as they should be, you lads would be at
school in the day time and in comfortable homes at night instead of
selling papers on the street."

At the conclusion of Mr. Rogers' remarks they all sped away to the Times
office, where cheer after cheer was given for the peoples paper.
Notwithstanding the remarks of Mr. Rogers, the Times, Record, Dispatch
and News were the only papers to be had on the streets.

The Knights of Labor and Trades Unions as well as business men's unions
were holding meetings all over the country, denouncing the action of
Cleveland and the courts and endorsing the American Railway Union in its
manly fight for rights. The strike situation had not changed to any
great extent with the exception of passenger service. Passenger trains
were beginning to run with more regularity, but the freight business was
to all practical purposes dead. The men whom the companies had succeeded
in getting so far to fill the places of strikers were green men,
entirely unused to that kind of work, and incompetent men who had
previously been discharged for drunkenness and other causes. The yard
service was a failure, and as an illustration--to show the kind of men
the different roads had secured to make up trains--I was passing a
certain yard and stopped to watch a switching crew, and carefully noted
how they performed their work. An engine with one car backed up to
couple unto some cars on a lumber track. Two of the would-be switchmen
with a long stick were holding up the link, one men on either side of
the coupling, but just as the link was about to enter the drawbar one of
them jumped away, at the same time stumbling over a pile of lumber, and
the way that fellow scrambled about in his frantic endeavor to get out
of the way, would lead a person to believe he had fallen upon a hornet's
nest.

After several such attempts they finally succeeded in making the
coupling. This is the kind of men with which the company proposed to
fill the places of the strikers.

The Grand Trunk engineers, who up to this time had refused to work with
other than brotherhood firemen decided to work with scabs, and their
decision was hailed with delight by the officials. They said that the
strike was now settled and they could run their trains without
difficulty.

The engineers and firemen on the Chicago & Alton road also decided to
stand by the company. The firemen, switchmen and other employes of the
Grand Trunk called a meeting, and after denouncing the action of the
engineers, voted to stand by the American Railway Union to the end.

One amusing incident that occurred about this time, was the refusal of
the Washington National Guards to ride on a train that was run by scabs.
The entire company of sixty men refused to ride on a Northern Pacific
train for this reason, and they were promptly placed under arrest, put
into box cars and taken to Sprague.

General Master Workman Sovereign had at this time an order drawn up for
a general walk out of members of the Knights of Labor, but it was
withdrawn after a consultation with other labor leaders. Many comments
were made by newspapers throughout the country on this order, of which a
copy was furnished the papers under the impression that it would go into
effect at once.

People who had remained passive up to this time were now aroused to the
gravity of the situation. The pending crisis was near at hand, and a
general uprising of the laboring people to assert their rights was
imminent. The tyrannical and dogged persistency of plutocratic capital
to dominate over the laboring classes with utter disregard for their
constitutional rights, was nothing more or less than an open declaration
of despotic supremacy, and the outcome was looked forward to with the
gravest apprehension.

The following communication addressed to the chairman of the National
Committee of the Peoples Party was sent to Washington, D. C.

"To the Hon. H. E. Taubeneck, chairman National Committee, Peoples
Party:

"Through the gloom of civil war the enemies of human liberty laid the
foundation upon which the giant monopolies of to-day have been built. On
public lands, with public funds they built the railroads which they now
use to plunder the producers of this nation, and with the wealth and
power thus obtained they now usurp the power and functions of government
to reduce the people of this country to a condition of serfdom. The
workmen in the cities, the miners in their isolated communities, and
the railroad men throughout the land have risen in manful protest
against a threatened military government of the railroads and their
associate monopolies.

"In this hour of need the duty of the Peoples Party is clear and plain.

"Quick as the lightning's flash will bear the message, must go forth
that the Peoples Party recognize the gravity of the situation, and by
common impulse aligns itself to the side of the toiler in the shop and
mine, and on the railroads; their battle is our battle, because it is a
struggle for liberty and the right to exist--a peaceable contest on the
part of toil against the combined armies of greed and force.

"The farmer knows the means best calculated to help his brother in this
conflict. The railroads intend to run their trains under military guard
and expect American citizen to patronize public means of traffic,
operated under military despotism. The Peoples Party of Cook county, in
common with organized labor demand immediate arbitration, and urges
immediate action on the part of our national committee to the end that
all organizations in sympathy with labor be united in common cause
against a common enemy.

  "Signed: T. O'Brien, Chairman,
  I. H. Hawley, Sec'y.
  H. S. Taylor,
  Henry Vincent,
  John Bagley,
  D. M. Fielwiler,
  John Schwartz,
  C. G. Dixon,
  J. P. Grimes,
  Committee."




CHAPTER XIII.

AN OFFER OF SETTLEMENT.


Senator Pfeffer, of Kansas, arraigned congress for its defence of
monopolies, and its stand against the people. Senator Kyle, of Dakota,
also charged congress with being in collusion with the railroads, but
Senator Davis, of Minnesota, on the other hand, denounced Debs and the
strikers. He said the strike grew from a strike to a boycott, from
boycott to riot, from riot to insurrection, that the acts, if committed
on the high seas, would be piracy and punishable by death. He spoke of
the injustice being done the farmers of the United States, and how they
were effected by the strike in Chicago. He urged that it was time some
action should be taken to put down the rising tide of anarchy. He held
that a nuisance should be abated and that Debs was a nuisance.

Senator Gordon, of Georgia, and Senator Daniels, of Virginia, followed
in the same kind of demagoguery as Davis.

A great meeting was held in Dubuque, and prominent among the speakers
was County Attorney Mathews who insisted on obedience to law, but
denounced Judge Grosscup for issuing an injunction which denied the
constitutional right of free speech and trial by Jury.

Mayor Hopkins, of Chicago, Mayor Pingree, of Detroit, Michigan, and
Erskine M. Phelps conferred with Mr. Wickes, and Mrs. Brown and Runnell
of the Pullman Company at the request of some fifty mayors, representing
about one-third of the population of the United States--and urged
arbitration as a means of settling the strike. The efforts of these
gentlemen were in vain. The imperious Pullman company through its
representative, though not saying so in as many words, intimated that
the company would not establish a precedent whereby workmen could
interfere in its business. Mayor Pingree, of Detroit, corresponded with
almost every mayor of the larger cities of the United States, and
received answers favorable to arbitration from all with one exception,
that of Mayor Gilroy, of New York City, whose answer to the telegram of
Mayor Pingree was an emphatic no.

The wildest excitement now prevailed at Sacramento. The United States
troops commanded by Col. Graham and consisting of infantry, cavalry,
artillery, and gatling and Hotchkiss guns, presented a most war like
aspect. The strikers on learning of this movement on the part of the
government armed themselves, and it was feared that a desperate conflict
would take place.

The Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers in this district called upon
Supt. Filmore of the Southern Pacific and stated that they were ready to
resume work at once. This weakened the cause of the strikers to some
extent and caused a smile of satisfaction on the faces of the railroad
managers.

After much persuasion due to the untiring efforts of Congressman McGann,
President Cleveland consented to appoint a committee of three to
investigate the strike, under section 6 of the arbitration act, prepared
some years ago under the eyes of Powderly, McGuire and Hays of the
Knights of Labor, offered by Representative Quail, of St. Louis, and
made a law on Oct. 1, 1888. This determination on the part of Cleveland
was received with satisfaction throughout the country. This was just
what the American Railway Union wanted. This was what the Trades and
Labor Unions of the United States had appealed for, and what the
business men and city representatives had so long demanded, begged and
entreated of the Pullman company, but without avail.

It looked at this time as if an investigation would be forced on Duke
Pullman, and the people were looking forward to a speedy settlement of
the trouble. The American Railway Union, having no fear of the final
decision of the investigating committee, and viewing the vast amount of
destruction of property, loss of life and extreme hardship to which the
people were subjected on account of the strike--decided to take the
necessary steps to call off the strike, they drew up the following
proposition which was given to Mr. Hopkins, mayor of Chicago, to present
to the general managers.

"To the Railway Managers:

"Gentlemen:--The existing trouble growing out of the Pullman strike
having assumed continental proportions, and there being no indications
of relief from the wide spread business demoralization and distress,
incident thereto, the railway employes, through the board of directors
of the American Railway Union respectfully make the following
proposition as a basis of settlement:

"They agree to return to work in a body at once, provided they shall be
restored to their former positions without prejudice, except in cases,
if any there be, where they have been convicted of crime. This
proposition looking to an immediate settlement of the existing strike on
all lines of railway is inspired by a purpose to subserve public good.
The strike, small and comparatively unimportant in its inception, has
extended in every direction until now it involves or threatens not only
every public interest, but the peace, security and prosperity of our
common country. The contest has waged fiercely, it has extended far
beyond the limits of interest originally involved, and has laid hold of
a vast number of industries and enterprises in nowise responsible for
the difference and disagreements that led to the trouble.

"Factory, mill, mine and shop have been silenced. Widespread
demoralization has sway. The interests of multiplied thousands of people
are suffering, and the common welfare is seriously menaced, The public
peace and tranquility are imperiled, and grave apprehension for the
future prevails. This being true, and the statement will not be
controverted, we conceive it to be our duty as citizens and as men, to
make extraordinary efforts to end the existing strife and approaching
calamities whose shadows are even now upon us. If ended now, the
contest, however serious in some respects, will not have been in vain.

"Sacrifices have been made, but they will have their compensations.
Indeed, if lessons shall be taught by experience, the troubles now so
widely deplored will prove a blessing of inestimable value in the years
to come. The difference that led up to the present complications need
not now be discussed, every consideration of duty and patriotism demands
that a remedy for existing troubles be found and applied. The employes
purpose to do their part by meeting their employers half way. Let it be
stated that they do not impose any condition of settlement except that
they be returned to their former positions; they do not ask recognition
of their organization or any organization.

"Believing this proposition to be fair, reasonable and just it is
respectfully submitted with the belief that its acceptance will result
in the prompt resumption of traffic, the revival of industry, and the
restoration of peace and order.

  "Respectfully,
  E. V. DEBS, Pres.
  G. W. HOWARD, V. Pres.
  S. KELLIHER, Secy.
  American Railway Union."

The proposition was rejected and spurned by the General Managers
Association.

Is there a man so utterly lost to the sense of justice, that would
conscientiously dispute the manly fairness of this communication?

The object of the general managers was too apparent, their position was
clearly defined. Their determination to wipe out of existence all
railroad organizations was as fixed and unmovable as the Rock of
Gibraltar and why should they recede from their position?

The federal courts and federal government (owned and controlled by the
corporations) decided that the constitutional rights of free speech and
trial by jury, equal rights to all and special privileges to none, was a
farce. In their narrow money-loving minds there could be no rights for
honest labor, and determined there should be no rights for a
workingman. After this decision of the general managers the American
Railway Union could do nothing but fight out the battle to the bitter
end.

Eugene V. Debs,--representing a body of honest toilers with no other
motive than to obtain for them living wages, his heart overflowing with
generous impulses and humane kindness, his noble nature revolting
against the tyrannical oppression of his fellow man by the soulless
corporations, a man who loves his country with patriotic devotion,--for
these reasons and no other, was indicted and arrested on the charge of
criminal conspiracy, while John M. Egan--representing the General
Managers Association, a giant monopoly and powerful money grasping
trust, built on the people's land and with the people's money, a
combination foreign to American institutions, usurping the functions of
the government with avowed intent and purpose to take away the rights of
organization from the working man and reduce him to a condition of
absolute slavery,--was allowed to continue his nefarious work without
interruption. Surely this partial, one-sided distribution of justice,
openly and defiantly administered, deserves the severest condemnation of
every loyal American citizen.

The Pullman boycott had now ceased to be the point at issue in the
strike. It was now the life or death of railroad organizations.




CHAPTER XIV.

DEBS IN JAIL.


The strike situation still looked very bright for the men.

At St. Paul and Minneapolis the business of the railroads, with the
exception of the Soo Line, St. Paul & Duluth and the Great Northern, was
practically at a standstill.

On the St. Paul & Duluth the men as a whole refused to strike, a few
firemen and switchmen left their positions at the call but did not
seriously affect the operation of trains. This was also true of the Soo
Line. The Great Northern so far was not implicated as they used no
Pullman cars and positively refused boycotted freight, that is, freight
offered by railroads whose employes were on a strike. The Minnesota
Transfer, which was the key to the coast lines, was completely blocked,
and this condition was duplicated in almost every railroad center
throughout the country.

Encouraging telegrams were being received from all points contradicting
the reports circulated by a subsidized press that everything was running
as usual. So far the men in the Twin Cities were conducting themselves
in such an orderly manner that even the press could not rake up one
charge against them. They strictly adhered to the advice of President
Debs to keep out of saloons and away from railroad property. The only
action taken by the strikers was to induce other men by moral persuasion
not to take their places and assist the managers to operate the roads.

For this Charles J. Luth was foully murdered by one Leonard, chief clerk
in the office of James McCabe, superintendent of the C., St. P., M. & O.
Ry.

On the evening of July 14, Leonard, in company with Bert Nash, also an
employe of the same railroad, brought a lot of non-union men to a
boarding place in St. Paul, known as the Minnesota Home. Luth followed
them into the house and requested the proprietress of the Home not to
board them as they were in the city to take the place of strikers, and
while explaining the situation, became involved in an altercation with
Nash. Leonard interfered and was told by Luth that he was little better
than a scab, whereupon Leonard drew a revolver and fired five times, all
of the shots taking effect in the body of Luth. Two of the shots were
fired after Luth had fallen to the floor.

These facts were given by an eye witness who afterwards took the
revolver from Leonard.

This dastardly, cold blooded murder worked the strikers into a frenzy of
excitement, and had it not been for a herculean effort on the part of
older and cooler heads, a lynching would surely have occurred.

This foul deed was absolutely unwarranted as Luth was unarmed and alone,
and if he had harmed or threatened to harm any one, an officer could
have been called and he would have been promptly arrested.

Luth left a wife and two small children to mourn his loss and grieve
over his tragic end.

The funeral procession that followed the remains to the grave headed by
the Knights of Pythias and Foresters, was the largest ever seen in St.
Paul.

President Debs felt confident of victory. Addressing a meeting at Ulrich
Hall, he said:

"We have just finished reading 160 telegrams in not one of which there
is any sign of weakening." He dwelled on the action of the general
managers refusing to entertain the proposition made to them, and the
necessity of the men remaining loyal to one another. "The law seems to
be against us as it is read by some, but if the law makes it a crime to
advise you men against the encroachments of capital, by all the Gods
united I will rot in jail." Referring to the attitude of other railroad
organizations, he said: "Men in such positions as myself and Mr. Howard
cannot afford to be on good terms with general managers. If we are we
cannot be your friends. It is true, however, that certain officers of
certain other organizations ride on annual passes and spend months on
fishing excursions at the expense of the railroad managers, but it comes
out of your wages in the end."

Members of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers present, informed the
officers of the American Railway Union that Chief Arthur had issued
orders for men to work with scabs, and that he was supplying scabs to
take the places of men on strike. In other words, he was running an
employment agency for the benefit of the railroads.

The general managers' defeat on the fifth day of the strike was beyond
all question of a doubt. They had summoned to their support the federal
government with the result previously mentioned, but the government aid
was not sufficient to operate their roads. They must have a number of
the old men to educate and aid the scabs in the performance of their
duties. At this critical time the services of their faithful allies were
badly wanted. In this, their time of need they knew that those men who
had feted, dined and wined at their expense would prove faithful to them
and traitors to the orders they represented.

The damnable spirit of treachery that evoked Benedict Arnold to betray
his country predominated in the hearts of these double-dyed scoundrels.
They were not only ready and willing but feverishly anxious to assist
the corporations to enslave the men that they were oath-bound as well as
duty bound to protect. Grand Chief Arthur, representing the engineers,
who had grown old in the service of the corporations, and whose wealth
was estimated at half a million dollars, in direct violation of the
constitution of his order, ordered his men to work with scab firemen.
Not only this, he ordered all those who were on strike to return at once
to their engines and in case of their refusal he would supply men to
take their places. This was also true of Grand Chief Sargent of the
Firemen and Wilkinson of the Trainmen. Clark of the Conductors, and
Barrett of the Switchmen advised their men to return to work as they had
no grievance. But only a part of these men would be taken back by the
companies, and what under the sun did these chiefs intend to do with the
others? Positively nothing. But the result was exactly what they
intended it should be, and the men were applying to the companies--in
lots of ten and twenty in the different cities--for their positions.

The dark deeds of treachery were now rife in many places especially in
the Twin Cities. At this point the blockade, which was on since the
strike began, and which was the key to the situation in the Northwest
was raised.

The Great Northern was the only line in operation to the coast, and
under instructions from J. J. Hill, the president, refused to accept
any freight from roads included in the boycott. The men were instructed
to decline even to throw a switch or assist in any manner any road on
strike, as the Great Northern company did not wish to be drawn into the
difficulty. In fact the men on this line were, almost to a man, members
of the American Railway Union, and could not even if asked to do any act
that might prove a detriment to their brothers. At this time there
happened to be sixty car loads of twine in St. Paul, a greater portion
of which was at Minnesota Transfer. This freight was consigned to points
on the Great Northern Line and a committee headed by Harry Gray,
chairman of the general board of mediation of the American Railway Union
on that system, appeared at the rooms of the central strike committee
and asked permission to switch out the twine, giving as an excuse that
the farmers were in need of it.

This permission the committee was loth to grant as any move toward
raising this blockade in the Twin Cities might prove detrimental to
their cause, and further action on the matter was deferred until it
would be submitted to the different unions interested.

That night at a meeting held at Plummer Post Hall in Minneapolis, the
American Railway Union headquarters, a committee of farmers, from the
peoples' party convention in session there at that time, were admitted.

When appraised of the nature of the trouble they stated that they had
contracts with the twine companies to deliver their twine and on failure
to do so the farmers would suffer no loss. They further stated that the
farmers would bind their grain by hand before they would ask the men to
do anything detrimental to the success of the strike. This settled it as
far as the twine was concerned. However, the next day, the officials of
the Great Northern took an engine and switched the twine out themselves
without any objection being made by the men who stood by while the work
was being done.

This was the beginning only.

The next move was a positive assurance of treachery.

The Burlington road had about thirty cars of water pipe for the Great
Northern, and this same man Gray again waited on the central committee
for permission to move the freight, saying, that he had the assurance of
the company that no more concessions would be asked. His request was
promptly refused. Later a committee of switchmen called on the central
committee for instructions and were told not to move the freight under
any conditions.

They left apparently satisfied, but nevertheless the cars were moved; no
one seemed to know how but it became apparent to the strikers that a
traitor was in their ranks, and took immediate steps to ferret him out,
and have the embargo once more placed on business at this point.

Gray of St. Paul, and Foster of St. Cloud, were openly accused of being
the traitors to the cause, although others were thought to be
implicated. Charges were preferred against Gray in the Union, but
nothing ever came of it. Every conceivable means was used to again cause
a blockade at this point but to no avail.

The switchmen promised to refuse to handle boycotted freight if the road
would support them in case of discharge, which they well knew was
inevitable. It would be simply a sacrifice to strike in the yards of St.
Paul and Minneapolis without the support of the whole system, although
after a canvas of the road, when it was found that the majority of the
men voted against a strike, the switchmen of these cities sent word
that they were ready to ask for their time and quit the service of the
company if the Union so desired. This proposition the strikers would not
accept, not caring to sacrifice a few loyal switchmen whose places could
be easily filled if the rest of the employes remained at work.

This result was wired to Chicago, and Director Goodwin was sent out to
see what could be done. His efforts were fruitless. The road was again
canvassed with the same result, and Goodwin returning to Chicago, Mr.
Burns, another director of the Union, was sent to take his place, but
with no better success.

They positively refused to strike. The traitors with the price of their
treachery in their pockets had been there first and accomplished their
purpose.

The damnable traitors responsible for the raising of the blockade were
also responsible for the suffering and untold misery of the noble men
whose sympathetic hearts went out to their brothers in Pullman, and who
without money were obliged to leave their homes (in many cases only
partly paid for) and seek employment elsewhere in order to provide for
their families.

The switchmen in the employ of the Milwaukee road at Minneapolis,
now--fearing that the treachery of the men on the Great Northern Line
would lose the strike in the Northwest--applied for their positions, and
all who were wanted were taken back. The men who were employed by the
Omaha Railway at East St. Paul, took the same course, but all others
declared their intention of standing out until the American Railway
Union called off the strike.

Disasters seemed to follow one another in rapid succession at this time.
In many places the weak-kneed men were applying for work and circulating
false stories to induce others to do the same. The news went flashing
over the wires that Debs, Howard, Rogers and Kelliher were in jail. But
this news did not have the depressing effect on the men that was
expected, in fact it only caused a feeling of indignation and the
strikers were now more determined than ever to stand up for their rights
and fight out the battle with renewed energy.

In making this statement I do not refer to the poltroons who were
continually raising the cry: We are lost, but I refer to the noble men
who spoke from their manly hearts, and with words of no uncertain sound
declared their intention to go down to defeat if need be with those
grand, noble, generous hearted men, who signified their willingness to
rot in jail, or even mount the scaffold in defence of the just and
righteous cause they had wrapped their lives in.

Could it be charged that they were actuated by selfish motives in the
cause in which they had enlisted? No! A thousand times no! If Eugene V.
Debs could be induced to turn his magnificent executive abilities over
to the railroads instead of the poor enslaved workingmen, these
corporations would place him upon the highest pinnacle of plutocratic
fame, and no one can dispute George W. Howard's title to being a
workingman's friend, for by his actions on more than one occasion he has
proven himself to be a friend indeed, and actions speak louder than
words.

Yes; the four officers of the American Railway Union were in jail.
United States Attorney Milchrist appeared before Judge Seaman in the
United States district court on the morning of July 17, and on behalf of
the government filed information presented by George R. Peck, who
represented the general managers and receivers of the Santa Fe system.

In response to the prayer of the district attorney, Judge Seaman issued
writs of attachment for the appearance of Debs, Howard, Rogers and
Kelliher, directing them to be present at the afternoon session of the
court and show causes why they should not be punished for contempt in
continuing to disregard the injunction of the court. W. W. Erwin, of St.
Paul, W. A. Shoemaker and S. S. Gregory, of Chicago, were retained to
defend the men on behalf of the American Railway Union. The voluminous
information made up of telegrams, copies of injunctions, etc., was read
by Attorney Milchrist, after which the court ruled that two separate
attachments be issued and separate records be kept.

Mr. Gregory stated that he failed to see why the government should
interfere to protect property rights of railroads, and this called forth
a retort from Mr. Walker that Uncle Sam was seeking to protect only the
interstate commerce and the mails and not the railroad property.

The information embodied almost everything pertaining to the strike, and
over an hour was consumed in its reading. Telegrams sent out to strike
leaders by President Debs were submitted but contained no startling
facts.

One of these addressed to H. E. Sarion, Garrett, Ind., read as follows:
"Have all classes of employes withdrawn from service at once." Another
to Charles Fink, Oakland, Cal., says: "Commit no violence." Mr. Debs'
communication to the railway managers suggesting a settlement of the
strike was incorporated in the information as was also the question of
Chicago public health in the matter of removing dead animals from the
city. Several newspaper interviews and a copy of the original injunction
issued by Judges Wood and Grosscup was also contained therein, and after
Peck of the Santa Fe had sought to bolster up the information with an
argument, Mr. Gregory urged that the defendants had not been charged
with violence, and declared that it was his belief that the testimony
should be taken by a master. Mr. Walker opposed this in favor of a
hearing in open court and was sustained. This led up to a long legal
wrangle participated in by both sides, and a fiery speech by Mr. Irwin
of the defence, in which he denied the jurisdiction of the court, and
hinted at monarchy and dictatorial methods. Mr. Walker pressed his
motion that the defendants be placed under bonds to appear before the
court and Judge Seaman fixed the bail in each case at $3,000. Mr. Debs,
declining a score of offers from prominent men to furnish the necessary
security, decided to go to jail. In reply to a question Mr. Debs said:
"This is the first time in my life that I have been incarcerated in a
jail, but with us it is a matter of principle. We have had many offers
of bail but have refused them all. The poor striker if arrested would be
thrown into jail and we are certainly no better than he, we will eat
regularly, prison fare, and expect to be treated as any other prisoners
would be."

Their trial was set for the following Monday.




CHAPTER XV.

BLACKLISTING BEGINS.


The strike situation was now in the balance. The managers and their
faithful allies the press, had given it out that the strike was off. One
fact that could not be denied, was that P. M. Arthur, of the General
Managers Association,--though still representing the engineers--was
doing great work for the companies, as the engineers were returning to
work pretty generally throughout the country. Sargent of the firemen was
also playing his cards well, but not meeting with the same success as
the "grand old chief." Wilkinson of the trainmen was sending out his
orders and ultimatums, thick and fast and his men were now fast
returning to their old positions.

It was now a question of whether the men would prove loyal to themselves
and their best interests, or loyal to the companies who were putting
forth their best efforts to trample them to earth, and it is a painful
fact that many of them were so blinded to their own interests,--through
their craven cowardice--that they returned to work, and, to what will be
in the near future beyond a question of a doubt, longer hours, less
wages, and the complete annihilation of all semblance of rights.

The strike was fast resolving itself into a switchmen's fight against
the railroads. The yards were in the worst imaginable shape, and the
engines were sadly in need of repairs. Shopmen, freight handlers,
trackmen, and car-repairers were still out. Office men were now back at
work with the exception of a few. The majority of the strikers were
still loyal to the cause and the American Railway Union was sure of
winning. The Knights of Labor did not respond to the call of Grand
Master Workman Sovereign as generally as was expected, and the
Federation of Labor had decided not to strike at present, perhaps this
may be accounted for by the reports given out by the general managers
that the strike was off and trains running as usual.

The United States troops in the pay of the government were still doing
service for the railroad corporations.

Authenticated reports--given out by the striking committees--from
different parts of the country would not seem to bear out the statements
of the general managers.

These committees had reports in regards to the operation of the roads,
as complete as the officials of the roads themselves. They were
thoroughly posted on the number of cars moved each day by each company,
the number and character of switch crews at work and the number of
strikers who had gone back to work. In short, everything that had a
bearing on the result. This was part of the duties imposed upon them and
they were faithfully carried out.

Thirteen Pan Handle switchmen brought to Chicago from Pittsburg through
misrepresentation, when informed of the true state of affairs, refused
to go to work, and demanded transportation back to Pittsburg. They were
given orders for the necessary transportation, but on presentation the
companies refused to honor them. This was also true in the case of half
a dozen men brought in by the Ft. Wayne road.

The scabs on the Chicago & Eastern Illinois, through ignorance and
incompetency burned up five engines and wrecked as many more. One
splendid new engine was blown up twenty miles from Terre Haute, while
en route to Chicago. Yard service was of the worst possible kind.

The Illinois Central was doing no freight business to speak of, in fact
the condition of this road was still worse than the Chicago & Eastern
Illinois.

The Northwestern shops at Fortieth street, employing over 2300 men, were
idle, only about twelve men signifying their willingness to work. The
Galena division of this road, while making quite a bluff at handling
freight, was not accomplishing very much, as it took them two days to
unload a stock train.

The Milwaukee road was doing better, having at work fifteen engines days
and fourteen nights, but being manned mostly by green and incompetent
men, were not making great headway. In all some 350 cars were gotten out
and about 300 received in one day which is very small business for this
line.

The Wabash had only one engine at work nights, and this was guarded by a
company of troops and about twenty deputy police. They succeeded in
breaking down two posts, one at Polk street and another at Taylor street
station, causing a damage of some $300 which was all accomplished in
one night. The Chicago and Blue Island were now working two engines
(this company generally worked ten), manned by scabs, one of whom was a
nigger.

A committee man from the Grand Trunk reported that only three men had
returned to work.

He said a personal friend of mine, a business man from Valparaiso, and
whom I know, is in touch with the Grand Trunk, informed me that a Grand
Trunk official had said in his presence that his company could not do
business unless they made some kind of a settlement with the switchmen.

Through John Downey and Miles Barrett, of the Switchmen's Mutual Aid
Association, a meeting of switchmen was called in a hall at Eden to
induce the switchmen to return to work. This meeting was "packed" in
order to secure a majority vote in favor of returning but the scheme did
not work.

All the officials on the Pan Handle admitted that they could do nothing
without the assistance of the old men. They had a few "stake" men whom
they were paying $5.00 per day, but not enough to do any business.

At Union Stock Yards all switchmen and assistant yard masters were out,
and at the yard of the Street Stable Car Co. out of 300 men only three
were at work.

All men at the Burton Stock Car Co., the Canada Cattle Car Co. and the
American Life Stock Co.'s yards were out, and refused to work under
police protection. At Armour's car shops only nine men returned out of
sixty who went on strike, and at Swifts only five out of forty-two. The
yard trackmen were all out, as were also the Illinois Central switchmen
and the Rock Island machinists and boiler makers.

This was the condition of the strike in Chicago and the same existed in
all parts of the strike district. Messages were received from many
points saying that only those men who were subservient to the orders of
their chiefs had returned to work, and from some points came the news
that the strike had gained strength owing to the arrest of President
Debs.

The enemies of the American Railway Union had now began a systematic
course--as dark and devilish as it was designing--of poisoning the
public mind against Debs, who was, so to speak, a gagged prisoner and
unable to defend himself.

Such reports as: Mrs. Highenbotham was dying in Montana and Mr.
Highenbotham appealed to Mr. Debs to allow her to be brought home by
special train and see her friends, and Mr. Debs' brutal answer that not
a wheel would turn.

Whole columns of such falsehoods were published and circulated broadcast
throughout the land, but not one word was written of the generous acts
of this noble hearted man. When he was seen to pause in the most trying
moment of his life to listen to the tale of distress and suffering
related by a poor widow woman, and going down into his pocket, hand her
a five dollar bill, all he had with him, this great and just public
press was silent.

Then the blacklisting of ex-employes began, the Missouri Pacific taking
the initiatory step. The following certificate given to a yard clerk
will speak for itself.

"This is to certify that ---- has been employed in the capacity of yard
clerk of the Missouri Pacific system from April, 1893 to June, 1894, at
which time it was necessary to lay him off on account of a strike in the
yards. He applied for work on July 18th, but in the meantime it was
learned that he was a member of the American Railway Union and was in
sympathy with the strike movement, so we could not re-employ him. His
work and conduct up to the time of the strike was perfectly
satisfactory.

  J. S. JONES,
  Terminal Supt."




CHAPTER XVI.

TRIAL OF DEBS.


On the 23d day of July, the day set for the trial of the officers of the
American Railway Union,--Debs, Howard, Rodgers and Kelliher were on hand
to answer to the charge of contempt.

The court room was densely packed, when Judges Wood of Indianapolis and
Grosscup of Chicago entered and Judge Wood raised a serious objection to
the crowded condition, saying that only those finding seats should be
allowed to remain,--lawyers, and possibly reporters.

After signing and swearing to the answers, the defendants filed in at
11:40 and Judge Wood asked if the Santa Fe road was represented.
Attorney Miller stepped forward and was asked if both proceedings could
not be heard at the same time. Judge Wood favored this to save time, and
it was finally agreed that if the Santa Fe cases be heard later the
government testimony on this bearing be admitted. Attorney Gregory
thereupon submitted the answers to the information filed before Judge
Seaman in the contempt proceedings, and suggested that the trial for
which the defendants had given bail be immediate and have precedence
over the contempt proceedings. Judge Woods said that the court could
decide upon a motion for delay, much more intelligently could they have
the government information and the answers filed by the defendants.
Attorney Milchrist then read the court the information.

As Attorney Gregory had previously moved that the information be
dismissed and the defendants discharged on their sworn answers, Attorney
Erwin followed by reading the answers.

At the conclusion of the reading he said that the defendants had made
and filed a motion to quash, holding that the information was not
sufficient. They now asked that the defendants be discharged, and also
that the district attorney and government counsel to elect whether they
should proceed under the indictment or under the contempt cases. No man
could be tried twice for the same offense. Judge Wood said that the
counsel for the government could proceed with either case. Attorney
Walker elected to go ahead with the contempt proceedings.

Attorney Gregory in the opening made an eloquent appeal for a trial by
jury instead of a criminal proceeding in a contempt case, as he held the
present proceeding to be. He cited a number of authorities in support of
his position. He argued that it was the rule that there could be no
appeal from the decision of a federal court in a contempt case, and that
consequently, where the question of a crime was involved, a sentence
from the court would practically be a conviction on the original
criminal charge without a trial by jury which is guaranteed by the
constitution.

Mr. Gregory then took up the question of the motion to dismiss the bill
on the grounds that the information did not set out in specific forms
any violation of the specifications in the injunction granted by the
United States court.

He held that the men had a right to combine, choose leaders to advise,
and quit work if they wished to do so and persuade others to quit work,
that the injunctions did not prohibit them from doing so. Judge Wood
asked if he considered that the defendants had a right to ask men to
tumble goods out of cars that were ready for transportation. Mr. Gregory
replied that he did not consider that they had any such right, and
claimed that there was nowhere in the information a distinct allegation
that the defendants had counseled violence or infractions of the orders
in the injunction. While he was willing to admit that violence had been
done during the present strike, nothing was charged in the information
that the violence was due to the acts of the defendants.

Attorney Walker for the government followed. He held that the defendants
had no right to go into other states and persuade men to quit work for
the purpose of paralyzing railroads, and that the issuance of these
orders was a willful and vicious violation of the order of the court.

Mr. Walker said the telegrams were the strongest evidence in the hands
of the state to show that this had been done. He spoke for three
quarters of an hour and directed his remarks more to the general charge
against the defendants for violation of the injunction, than to the
legal points raised by Mr. Gregory.

It will be remembered that the answers filed by the attorneys for the
defense, was a complete denial of the charges.

After hearing all the arguments, Judges Wood and Grosscup decided that
the contempt proceedings against Mr. Debs and the others, were in the
nature of proceedings in equity, and therefore the defendants could not
be discharged on their denial of the charges under oath.

Mr. Walker gave as an excuse for wanting the case heard at once, that
the defendants were liable to continue calling out the men unless they
were restrained from so doing by the court.

"Then," said Mr. Gregory, "you wish the court to practically call the
strike off."

Mr. Walker smiled and said that such an order would suit him all right.

Judge Wood then added that it was within the bounds of the injunction
called, for him to insist that the strike be declared off.

Attorney Greeting, reviewing the information, raised the insufficiency
of the allegations, he also raised the question of the bearing of the
statutes under which the defendants were enjoined.

The following are the sections of acts under which the United States
courts issued injunctions restraining the American Railway Union, its
officers or agents, from interfering in any way with the interstate
traffic on railroads.

"SECTION 1. Every contract combination in the form of trust or
otherwise, or conspiracy in restraint of trade or commerce among the
several states or with foreign nations, is hereby declared to be
illegal. Every person who shall make any such contract or engage in any
such combination or conspiracy, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$5,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both; said
punishments at the discretion of the court.

"SECTION 2. Any person who shall monopolize or attempt to
monopolize or combine or conspire with any other person or persons to
monopolize, any part of the trade or commerce among the several states
or foreign powers shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished etc.

"SECTION 3. Every contract combination in form of trust or
otherwise or conspiracy in restraint of commerce or trade in any
territory of the United States or of the District of Columbia, or in
restraint of trade or commerce between any such territory and another,
or between any such territory or territories and any state or states or
the District of Columbia or with foreign nations, or between the
District of Columbia and any other state or states or foreign nations,
is hereby declared illegal Every person who shall make any such
contract or engage in any such combination or conspiracy shall be
declared guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as in the case of Sections
1 and 2.

"SECTION 8. The word person or persons wherever used shall be
deemed to include corporations and associations existing under, or
authorized by, the laws of either the United States, the laws of any of
the territories, the laws of any state or the laws of any foreign
country."

"This law was never intended to cover the case of these defendants,"
said Mr. Greeting. "It is clearly directed at the trusts and
combinations which conspire to rob such people as the defendants. It
seems to me that the district attorney would have been acting more
within the spirit of the law if he had charged the railroads and the
Pullman Palace Car Co., with conspiracy to monopolize interstate
commerce, as it is a well known fact that the railroads have contracted
with Pullman to haul none but his cars."

A sickly smile spread over the features of the railroad attorneys
present. It was evident that the words of Mr. Greeting sunk deeper than
some of them would care to acknowledge.

District Attorney Milchrist argued that the court had perfect
jurisdiction in these cases, he held that the government derived revenue
from postal service and interstate commerce. It had suffered in a
pecuniary way hence the bill of information filed had a proper place in
court.

In regard to the information and answers, Mr. Milchrist said: "Either
the counsel for the government deserved to be disbarred for willful
misconduct for filing it, or the defendants in their sworn answer
embodying a sweeping denial of the charge in the information had been
guilty of rank perjury."

Attorney Erwin then proceeded, prefacing his remarks with the statement
that this was a court of equity. When these defendants denied under oath
before the court, the allegations made in the bill, equity shut its
doors. There was a remedy at law. The men could be punished for perjury
in swearing falsely in their answers. No court of equity could hear such
a case. Mr. Erwin held that the information was filed in equity and that
the answer filed by the defendants was final and the remedy then was at
law in a charge of perjury.

"Is it any indication of the power of a court," interrupted Judge Wood,
"to hold a man convicted on a charge of perjury?"

Attorney Erwin said that the perjury charge could purge the defendants
in the case of contempt.

"You say in your answer," said Judge Wood, "that the defendants deny
ordering strikes because it was not in their power to do so. Is it not
enough to deny that you ordered the men out without going further and
denying that you advised them in this matter."

"We say," answered Mr. Erwin "that every strike was voted on by a
majority of the American Railway Union men upon each road upon which
there had been a strike. The defendants deny the power to order or
coerce the members of the American Railway Union."

When questioned as to the answers denying the telegrams Mr. Erwin said
the denials were sweeping. They had covered every point and purged
themselves of any desire to disregard the orders of the court and the
proceedings should be dismissed. He said: "Had Special Counsel Walker
who set before the grand jury made his charges more specific, and not
sought to prejudice the minds of the court by holding his averments for
the attachment proceedings, and making them in vague and declamatory
charges."

Judge Wood said if the defendants had asked for more specific charges he
thought the court would have granted it.

Attorney Erwin here remarked that they would prefer to make a motion to
quash, which Judge Wood announced could not be done in this case unless
the bill was wholly defective.

Mr. Erwin said that Attorney Walker had drawn the bill up hastily, and
it was signed only by himself and the district attorney, who verified it
merely by belief. He urged that the court should not add the information
by continuing the consideration of the imperfectly drawn and inadequate
bill. The court should not be a detective to ferret out the alleged
truths of certain charges the evidence of which should have been
collected by the government officers before a rule against the
defendants was issued.

Mr. Bancroft for the Santa Fe followed Mr. Erwin. He vigorously defended
the information filed, and proceeded to color the telegrams admitted by
the defendants, to suit the purposes of the government.

After a legal tilt between the counsel on both sides, Judge Wood
overruled the motion of defendant's counsel to quash the information,
and postponed the case until September 5.

In conclusion he said that from what he had heard, he thought it
necessary for the court to have its hand on the matter. It was evident,
he said, that the defense intended to attempt to put forward a quantity
of irrelevant matter as to the allegations regarding a combination on
the part of the railroads. He said that while it was irrelevant he would
hear it as a matter of curiosity and for public disclosure.

The above synopsis of the proceedings of the trial, will give a fair
idea of the course the government--on behalf of the railroads--pursued
in conducting the prosecution of the officers of the American Railway
Union.

After a conference with their counsel--although opposed to it on
principle--the officers of the American Railway Union decided to give
bail.

This decision was due to the fact that matters of an important nature
demanded their immediate attention. They were placed under $7,000 bonds
each, signed by Wm. Skakel and Wm. Fitzgerald, these gentlemen
qualifying to the extent of $50,000 and $250,000 respectively.

For the time being the officers of the American Railway Union were free
men.




CHAPTER XVII.

A CONVENTION OF THE AMERICAN RAILWAY UNION CALLED TO TAKE ACTION ON THE
STRIKE.


In an editorial on the trial, headed: The Press against Justice, the
Chicago Times had this to say: "When it became evident that the rights
and actions of E. V. Debs and his associates in the American Railway
Union strike were to be reviewed in court this paper said editorially:
"The Times appeals to its contemporaries and to the people to join with
it in avoiding all clamor which may in the least degree influence the
findings of the court or bring its proceedings into contempt." It
appears that the appeal fell upon deaf ears.

"Such papers as the Tribune and the Evening Journal seized upon the very
first utterance of Mr. Debs' counsel as an opportunity for insidious
effort to prejudice the court and the people against the cause of the
labor leaders.

"Two of the editorials and two of what it calls editorialettes were
necessary to the Tribune yesterday in order to give its advice to the
prosecuting lawyers and the court proper expression. The other organs of
plutocracy though less lavish of editorial space, employed their news
columns to the same end. The first strike of the allied newspapers is to
pronounce the opening plea of the counsel for the defense, Mr. Erwin, in
effect an assertion of the gospel of anarchy.

"Overworked as it is by the bigoted press the word anarchy still serves
as a more or less effective bogyman to frighten timid and ill-informed
people, but no one who will read the reports of Mr. Erwin's address will
find any anarchistic doctrines lurking therein.

"He charged that Pullman and the railroad managers had conspired
together against the interest of workingmen, that the manner of the
conspiracy made resort to the law hopeless, that lawmakers could not or
would not act, and under these conditions the men were justified in
combining, resisting and refusing to work longer for Mr. Pullman or the
roads allied with him.

"The Times is unable to discern the savour of anarchy in that. It is in
effect only a declaration that when employes combine to resist them,
neither by direct statement or by innuendoes did the attorney suggest
or excuse violence or the destruction of property. He erred, the Times
thinks, in describing Pullman's course of procedure as illegal, for
unhappily, law as it stands, protects Pullman in his most despotic and
oppressive acts. If Pullman's course had been illegal, action at law
instead of a strike and boycott would have been the remedy for it, but
with the exception of this over-statement which may have been due to
inadvertence, Mr. Erwin said nothing that men of fair and judicial minds
can denounce as false, and nothing at all incendiary. The clamor of the
conspiracy is raised to defeat justice."

After the release of the officers a meeting was called at the Revere
House, of the directors of the American Railway Union. They concluded to
call a convention of the delegates from the different local unions, to
meet in Chicago, August 2d, and take some action on the strike. Each
local union was notified of this action and instructed to send a
delegate with full power to act.

After this meeting of the officers, they at once repaired to Ulrich
Hall, where an enormous crowd greeted Mr. Debs with the greatest
enthusiasm.

Mr. Debs,--after being introduced by the chairman of the meeting, Mr.
Adams,--was given three cheers with such a vim that the building fairly
shook. He then advanced to the platform and said: "I see you have
changed your quarters since I saw you before, and I am glad to say we
have changed ours also.

"When Judge Wood delivered his ruling yesterday he declared it to be
illegal for men to combine and strike.

"If that is the law, labor organizations had better disband at once. If
we have no right to strike, no right to combine, no right to exercise
the functions which are delegated to us, then we might as well give up
and acknowledge that we are slaves.

"If that is the law we have no right to resist or defend ourselves
against the injustice of employers.

"No matter how much has been said about the stars and stripes and the
freedom of the workingman, if that is the final tribunal, corporate
capital has the right to suck the life blood from the toiler who must
make no sign. But I am not prepared to believe that this is in harmony
with the constitution. If this is the constitution, then our liberty is
gone. Mr. Erwin sounded the slogan yesterday when he declared that there
is a higher power than the courts, a power greater than the aggregated
combinations of capital and railroads. That is the inherent rights of
workingmen to strike at the polls.

"What we want then is to rid ourselves of the old party shackles.

"We want to change the constitution so that even federal judges will be
elected by the people. Then no judge will render a decision defying all
law and justice. It is wonderful how sensitive the machinery of justice
is to any complaint directed against the workingman.

"But how is it when corporations combine? Is it of record that any
officials of any one of them has ever been in prison for violating the
law?

"It is a notorious fact that the Santa Fe has robbed the people of
$7,000,000 in the face of the interstate commerce law. Why not bring
these colossal scoundrels to justice too? They say we must obey the law.
I say we are law-abiding, and I defy any man to show a single instance
where the heads of the labor organization have advocated violence. If
the authorities want the law respected let them enforce it against the
rich and poor alike.

"In July, 1892, when the switchmen struck, the soldiers were called out
to suppress them. Deputy marshalls set fire to a lot of box cars in
Buffalo, N. Y., and this furnished the railroads an excuse to call on
the government for soldiers. The railroads are still violating the eight
hour law for which the men struck. They arrested the switchmen while the
corporations are still allowed to trample the law under foot.

"Is not that enough to bring disrespect of the law? As it is now, the
whole thing is a roaring farce. Has anybody ever heard of soldiers being
called out to guard the rights of workingmen? Whatever else I have
suffered myself, I have not lost the right of free speech. If Judge Wood
expounds the law I would rather rot in jail than be an alleged freeman.
There is no man in the country who can directly charge me with violating
the law of this country. Did any one of you ever hear me advocate
violence? (A mighty no went up in response.) On the other hand did
anyone here ever hear me counsel the men to be frank and straight
forward, and honest and law-abiding in all they did?"

The audience shouted yes to this and President Debs continued:

"Before we get through with this trial it will be shown that the real
conspirators are the railroad managers. Then if I go to the penitentiary
Mr. Egan will have the distinction of accompanying me. We will produce
the proof that the real purpose of the General Managers Association was
to reduce wages, and that until we stopped them on the Great Northern,
they were going around the circle with that end in view.

"When it comes to striking at the polls we know the people will be with
us, it will be a contest against the money power by which this country
has been absolutely ruled for so many years. Havemeyer goes into the
United States Senate and dictates what the duty on sugar shall be, and
all the people combined can't stop him. Let a poor man go to Washington
to protest and he is arrested for treading on the grass.

"I am a populist and favor wiping out both old parties, so they will
never come into power again. I have been a democrat all my life and I am
ashamed to admit it. I want every one of you to go to the polls and vote
the peoples' ticket."

At the conclusion of his address, Mr. Debs announced his intention of
going to his home for a few days.

On hearing this, the members of the American Railway Union determined to
escort him to the depot, and, although they had but two hours to make
arrangements, a procession a couple of miles in length was formed.

On arrival at his home in Terre Haute, President Debs was tendered a
great reception. Thousands of his fellow citizens in all stations of
life welcomed him with outstretched arms. Early in the evening the
Naylor Opera House was packed to completion, and hundreds of people were
denied admission owing to the dense throng of people who wished to do
honor to this great leader. When President Debs appeared upon the stage
he was greeted by a roar of applause that shook the building to its very
foundation. His eloquent address on the strike situation and the causes
that led up to it was received with thunders of applause.

This was the man whom the corporate courts had indicted for criminal
conspiracy.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE STRIKE LOST.


Through the machination of the general managers, the courts and the
press and the Benedict Arnolds of labor, the cause of the railroad
corporations was beginning to triumph. Discouraged and disheartened by
the treachery in their own ranks, a great many strikers had lost
confidence in the success of their undertaking and were now silently
awaiting the result of the convention called at Chicago. This was made
known on the return of the delegates.

The action taken was to decide by a majority vote of each system whether
the strike would continue in force or be declared off.

After thoroughly discussing the matter, it was decided to call off the
strike owing to the fact that they were forced to fight against
overwhelming odds and rank treachery, and the men were instructed to
make application for their positions at once, in view of getting as many
as possible re-instated.

This action was taken on all roads with the exception of the Chicago and
Eastern Illinois, the Santa Fe and the Northern Pacific.

Very few of the men were successful in securing positions, for instance
at Minnesota Transfer the switchmen waited on the superintendent in a
body (all who were still in the city) and made applications to be
reinstated.

Mr. Dudgeon the superintendent, who, by the way, was appointed during
the strike to fill the vacancy made by the resignation of Mr. Sullivan,
informed the men that he had more applications already than would fill
all vacancies for the next two years. He said: "I will not mislead you
boys for one minute, not one of you will be taken back."

I was not present at this interview, but being informed that Mr.
Hastings, president of the company, had signified his willingness to
hear us, we consulted together and decided to call on him at his office.

John F. Keenan and myself were appointed as a committee to confer with
him, and, after introducing ourselves, stated our mission.

He received us in a gentlemanly manner, said that he was always ready to
listen to the switchmen, as he had been a switchmen himself at one
time, and while he assured us that he knew we had not interfered with
the company property during the strike and conducted ourselves in a
creditable manner, he could do nothing for us. He also said that he had
more respect for us than he had for those who were hanging on the fence,
but he had nothing to do with the employes of the Minnesota Transfer, as
he had left that matter entirely in the hands of the superintendent. We
told him that we were informed that Mr. Dudgeon would take some of the
men back if the president of the company was satisfied.

"Whatever arrangements you boys make with Mr. Dudgeon will be
satisfactory to me," answered Mr. Hastings.

He then referred us to Mr. Dudgeon who was present and who then said
that he had already given us our answer which was final. He said that he
had promised steady work to the men he had already employed if they
proved themselves competent, and as they were doing the work
satisfactorily, he would not consider any more applications.

This statement regarding the work we knew to be a bluff, as it would
take an old switchman, if unacquainted with this yard, at least three
months under the most favorable circumstances to learn, if unaided,
enough to enable him to give efficient service, as the yard is very
complicated. And again in contradiction of this statement it is known
that freight was refused from different roads for four days at a time to
enable them to get the yard in shape, and after the freight of
twenty-four hours was received, the same operation would be necessary,
although they had the services of competent switchmen from the Omaha and
other railroads.

So speaking for the Minnesota Transfer the general managers were winners
so to speak, in the game of freeze out waged against the switchmen. The
men in all other departments were taken back with but few exceptions,
but it was now a settled fact that the switchmen must look elsewhere for
employment. The officials were credited with saying that they would
permanently close the transfer, rather than reinstate a single
switchman.

It would be nothing more than justice at this time to say that the
former superintendent, Mr. D. M. Sullivan, had resigned his position
during the strike for the reason that the management would not allow him
to take back the old men. Mr. Sullivan contended that it would be
impossible to operate the yard without the assistance of a goodly
portion of the old employes.

In a newspaper article he denied that his resignation was handed in on
that account, but it is nevertheless credited by those who know him
well, and by the employes themselves.

We then applied at all the yards in the Twin Cities but with like
result, and although not told in so many words, we were given to
understand that we were blacklisted, and this was the case not only with
us, but with men all over the country.

The Soo Line had now put in force an ironclad agreement that all
employes were obliged to sign if they wished to remain in the service of
the company. This debarred the men from belonging to any labor
organization for five years. Another rule put in force at this time was
that engineers would hire their own firemen. This would appear to be a
blow at the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen.

The railroad corporations exulting in their victory, determined to
boycott every striker and sympathizer throughout the country, as far as
it was in their power.

The weapon, that it was made a criminal offense for a striker to use,
and for which the officers of the American Railway Union were sent to
jail, was now in the hands of the railroad corporations to use at will.

What was decided by the courts unlawful in the hands of the American
Railway Union was legal in the hands of the General Managers
Association. This the federal judges made no effort to investigate.
Judge Wood said regarding the charge of a combination on the part of the
railroads, that while it was irrelevant he would hear it as a matter of
curiosity.

Expressions like this emanating from a judge of the United States court,
immediately following his ruling against the strikers, are too plain to
be misunderstood. While he might condescend to hear the charges against
the general managers, it is very evident that a motion to quash any
proceeding against the corporation would be granted.

The greatest pressure of evidence brought to bear by the American
Railway Union against this illegal combination would have no weight with
the judge, therefore it could not be wondered that when the General
Managers Association started a systematic course of boycotting the
American Railway Union by blacklisting its members, there was no action
taken to prosecute them.

The Union Pacific, now in the hands of the government, not only
discharged every striker and sympathizer but blacklisted them also.

This is a sample of justice. Some of the men had worked for the company
for twenty years, and the only charge against them was that of being
members of the American Railway Union and struck in sympathy with the
starving Pullman employes.

Their system of blacklisting is so perfect that every avenue of escape
is closed against an employe.

They have what is known as the blacklist book. The names of the strikers
are entered in the book of which a copy is held by all railroads. When a
man makes application his name is taken and the book is then consulted.
If his name is registered he is told that no more men are wanted, if
not, he is told to call the next day, by which time, if he is a striker,
it is known, and he will have to travel.

An assumed name will do no good, as he will be asked to give reference
signed by his last employer, so you will see very plainly that the
strikers lot is not a bed of roses.

President Debs has been accused of being responsible for this condition
of affairs. There is absolutely no truth in that accusation, as in the
first place it was directly against his wishes and advice that the
Pullman employes struck, and only after a personal investigation of the
case--and realizing that the causes which led to it would admit of no
denial that the men were justified in their action--did he approve of
it.

The boycott that followed the Pullman strike, as has been previously
stated, was not ordered by Mr. Debs. He did not have the power to order
it, therefore he could not be held responsible for the result.

The men who were the victims of this unfortunate boycott, were
themselves responsible for its beginning, as by an almost unanimous vote
they ordered it. Perhaps they may have acted hastily, it has been stated
many times that this was the case, but when the brutal inhuman treatment
of the Pullman employes came to light through the investigation of the
delegates to the convention, they would be less than human if they had
refused to come to the assistance of these men who were being ground
down by a merciless corporation.

After reading the facts brought to light by the witnesses before the
strike commission appointed by President Cleveland, and also Gov.
Altgeld's personal investigation I do not believe that any one with a
spark of humanity in his heart will condemn them for their actions.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE COMMISSION.


The commission appointed by President Cleveland to investigate the
strike began its work Aug. 15, at 10 o'clock in Judge Grosscup's court
room. Most of those present were members of the American Railway Union.
Prof. Bemis, of the Chicago University, was in attendance. Neither the
Pullman Company or the railroad companies were represented. The
witnesses examined were Geo. W. Howard, vice-president of the American
Railway Union, and James R. Sovereign, grand master workman of the
Knights of Labor. Acting with the commission were B. J. Hastings, of
Utica, N. Y., and Deputy United States Marshall Bartlett. Chairman
Wright announced that they were in session pursuant to the President's
call which the clerk read. This document directed an inquiry into the
causes and the conditions of the controversy between the Illinois
Central and the Rock Island roads and their employes. After the reading
chairman Wright made the following statement: "By the act recited in
the commission of the President that has just been read, this commission
is directed to examine into the causes, controversies and difficulties
existing between the roads named and their employes at the time the
commission of the President was issued. The board is constituted as a
temporary body for this purpose and not for the purpose of arbitrating
the difficulties that existed. It is practically a court of inquiry and
its proceedings will be in accordance with the usages of such courts. It
will proceed first to hear all witnesses in behalf of the employes and
then those of the corporations named. All such witnesses are requested
to hand their names to the clerk. Under the law parties may be
represented by counsel or appear in person as they see fit, and examine
and cross-examine the witnesses. After all the witnesses have given
their testimony the commission will then consider arguments or
suggestions to be made upon the questions before it. All suggestions and
arguments presented in writing will be filed and considered by the
commission, but the question as to how far the commission will listen to
parties who desire to be heard orally will depend upon the time left to
the disposal of the commission and will be determined after the
testimony is concluded. By the act creating it this commission possesses
all the power and authority of the United States Commissioners appointed
by the Circuit Courts of the United States. The hours of sitting will be
from 10:00 A. M. to 4:00 P. M. Parties and their counsel and witnesses
attending will find seats within the rail."

Vice President Howard was the first witness sworn. In answer to
questions as to his age, residence and occupation, Mr. Howard replied
that he was 46 years old, resided in Chicago, and was vice president of
the American Railway Union. For nearly 30 years he had been identified
with the railroad service filling positions from trackman to general
superintendent. He had been a member of the Yard Masters' Association,
the B. of L. E. and O. R. C. By request of Mr. Wright he gave the
following connection of the American Railway Union with the strike.

"We began organizing the Pullman employes in March of this year. Early
in May they struck. The strike was voted by themselves not by the
American Railway Union, indeed we advised against the strike.

"Immediately after the strike was called I accompanied a committee of
forty-three representing every branch of the Pullman service to a
conference with Mr. Wickes at Pullman. Mr. Pullman refused to arbitrate
but promised to give their grievances immediate attention if they would
return to work. I inquired of Mr. Wickes if there would be any prejudice
against the members of the committee and was assured by him that there
would not be. After receiving this assurance from Mr. Wickes, I advised
the men to go back to their work, which they did. Next day three of the
committee were discharged, not on order or with the knowledge of Mr.
Wickes or Mr. Pullman, but by some under boss in the shops. This so
incensed the rest of the employes who considered it a breach of promise
that they unanimously struck again.

"June 12, the convention of the American Railway Union met in Chicago.
The Pullman strikers were represented by seven or eight delegates. The
situation at Pullman received consideration. A joint committee
representing the convention and the Pullman strikers was appointed to
wait on the Pullman company. The committee was informed that the Pullman
company would confer with only its employes, consequently this body was
discharged and a committee consisting of Pullman employes appointed. The
action of the Pullman company was reported to the American Railway Union
convention whereupon each delegate wired his local union for
instructions. The result of this was that the members of the American
Railway Union all over the country voted to discontinue handling Pullman
cars if at the end of five days from that date the Pullman company
refused to arbitrate with its employes.

"In this connection I wish to say that Mr. Pullman stated to the
committee of forty-three, in my hearing, that his employes at that time
owed him $70,000 for rent and that he had not pushed them for payment
which fact clearly shows that his men were not making enough to pay
rent."

Mr. Wright: "That was the boycott order, was it?"

Mr. Howard: "I do not use the word boycott. The action taken was simply
that members of the American Railway Union would not handle Pullman
cars.

"Two days before the limit of five days--the dates I do not now
recall--but I will furnish them--the General Managers' Association took
action declaring that they would share the expense of whipping the
American Railway Union.

"Pullman would not arbitrate and first the men on one road then on
another refused to handle Pullman cars. They did not decline to handle
other cars, but switchmen, you understand, would not attach Pullmans to
trains. Engineers, conductors, firemen and trainmen would not take out
trains which Pullman cars were attached to. There was no attempt to
interfere with the mails but on the contrary every effort in our power
was made to help the roads carry them. The companies held the mails in
their determination to attach Pullman cars to trains.

"Of my personal knowledge I know of a road that abandoned a mail train
to take out an excursion train, not having crews to take out both. In
another instance I know of a mail train going out on the order of the
railway officials after the Pullmans had been cut off by the employes.
Things went on in this way for several days. No violence was committed
by the employes and the police were in full control of the situation to
prevent violence from outsiders.

"The first pistol was drawn by one Miller, an employe of the Tribune at
Blue Island, wholly without cause, and after the troops were on the
ground. The violence that was afterward committed was not as was
believed by members of the American Railway Union but by outsiders--some
acting in passion, because they saw in the presence of the soldiers an
instrument of tyranny. Others in a spirit of mischief and love of
destruction and others still--hired by the General Managers in order to
create public sentiment against us. Yesterday I gave the mayor of
Chicago the name of a man who claimed, while under the influence of
liquor to have received $400 for burning cars. The Committee of safety,
at Springfield, sent us the names of three men who quarreled about the
division of $500 received for burning cars. $200 of which was paid in
advance by John M. Eagan, of the General Managers' Association."

Regarding the motives actuating the organization of the American Railway
Union Mr. Howard denied that it was to destroy the old organizations but
because they no longer fulfilled the necessities of the situation. If
the old brotherhoods could get together amicably there would be no need
of the American Railway Union, but they never can. There are two many
causes for jealousy, for instance: There are 10,000 locomotive engineers
who are not in the B. of L. E. but are members of the B. of L. F. In
case of a grievance the engineers are divided and are represented by two
organizations. The Brotherhood of Trainmen contains men who have been
promoted to conductors causing a friction between these two orders.

Mr. Wright: "Then the sole purpose of the American Railway Union in
taking the action it did was to oppose the Pullman company and it was
not actuated by any desire to injure the other railway organizations?"

Mr. Howard: "That is it exactly. After the action taken by the General
Managers' Association we had to act as we did or lie down."

Mr. Wright: "Did the officers of the American Railway Union advise the
men on roads other than those using Pullmans to go on strike?"

Mr. Howard: "The men on all roads represented by the General Managers'
Association were advised to go out on strike."

Mr. Kernan: "Was this order extended to roads not using Pullman cars or
which were not represented in the General Managers' Association?"

Mr. Howard: "No, sir."

Mr. Kernan: "Were there any such road?"

Mr. Howard: "Yes. General Manager Clark, of the Mobile & Ohio, sent us
word that his road would drop the Pullman service if the men would
continue at work. We advised the men to return to work under those
conditions, but the men at St. Louis argued that such action would
weaken their cause and refused to take our advice in the matter."

Mr. Worthingford: "How did you advise all other organizations to go on a
sympathetic strike?"

Mr. Howard: "We did not advise nor even request other organizations to
declare a strike. We invited the heads of all labor organizations to
come here and aid us by their advice or in any way they saw fit to help
us. I think Mr. Debs sent the invitation. When the representatives of
the other labor organizations met here, we went before the body and
explained the entire situation. They asked Mr. Debs what he wished them
to do. He replied that he did not ask anything of them but left it to
their best judgment and conscience to take such measures as would help
bring the trouble to an end. Mr. Debs read a communication which he had
prepared to present to the general managers, and asked the
representatives at the conference if they would act as a board of
arbitration or assume the role of peace-makers. President Gompers of the
American Federation of Labor, seemed afraid that such action would
involve the other organizations in some way and hesitated to accept our
request to take the communication to the general managers. We then
concluded to ask Mayor Hopkins to present our communication. The mayor
willingly granted our request."

Mr. Kernan: "Was any written record kept of that conference of the heads
of the labor organizations which was held at the Briggs House?"

Mr. Howard: "I do not know."

Commissioner Kernan: "What records have you of the proceedings of your
convention as to who invited the heads of other labor organizations to
meet here in conference, and what they were expected to do?"

Mr. Howard: "I think it was decided at the convention of the American
Railway Union, which met here June 12, to extend such an invitation. I
know it was talked over then."

Commissioner Wright: "Then the American Railway Union did not advise a
sympathetic strike of all organizations."

Mr. Howard: "No, sir. Mr. Debs left that question to the judgment and
conscience of the men themselves."

Commissioner Wright: "Was the action of the convention of June 12 a
strike?"

Mr. Howard: "Well, it was called a strike."

Commissioner Worthington: "Was the communication you referred to
presented to the general managers?"

Mr. Howard: "Yes, sir, and returned without an answer further than a
statement that the General Managers' Association had no business to
transact with the American Railway Union or its representatives."

Mr. Kernan: "It is charged that your organization, like others,
encouraged its members to persistently interfere with and prevent
unorganized labor from taking positions given up by their striking
members. Is that charge true?"

Mr. Howard: "It cannot be shown in one instance that anything of the
kind has been done."

Commissioner Kernan: "You won't go so far as to say that no interference
of the sort alluded to has ever been engaged in?"

Mr. Howard: "Certainly not. I mean that such interference was not
authorized or countenanced by the union."

Commissioner Kernan: "Did you take any steps to prevent such
interference?"

Mr. Howard: "We have taken the ground that when we go out on strike not
to interfere with any of the new men the companies may employ."

Commissioner Kernan: "You do countenance advice to such men not to take
the places of strikers?"

Mr. Howard: "Oh, yes. We claim the right to ask new men not to take our
places."

Mr. Kernan: "Is it not a fact that such interviews usually result in
violence?"

Mr. Howard: "No. I think the rule is to the contrary. We go no further
than to request the men to quit work and to commit no violence."

Commissioner Kernan: "Is there any punishment for violation of that
rule?"

Mr. Howard: "No. No organization has any power to punish a member for
violation of such rule except by expulsion. We leave the punishment of
such cases to the civil authorities."

Commissioner Kernan: "Don't you think some steps should be taken by
labor unions to punish their members who violate the rules in that
respect?"

Mr. Howard: "Yes, sir, I do, and we started out to do so here during the
strike but the trouble assumed such vast proportions that it was
impossible to do anything in that direction. In the case of the Great
Northern strike we appointed committees to guard the company's property,
and the men were instructed to shoot anyone found in the act of
destroying same."

Commissioner Kernan: "What, as a rule has been your experience in
strikes where violence was restored to?"

Mr. Howard: "The men have always been defeated."

Commissioner Kernan: "Then a resort to violence is rather detrimental to
the cause of the strikers?"

Mr. Howard: "Decidedly so. We want public opinion with us in a strike."

Commissioner Kernan: "Do you know of any organization that disciplines
its members for resorting to violence?"

Mr. Howard: "None, excepting the American Railway Union. Our argument is
that the only weapons labor has to fight its battles with are the strike
and the boycott. There is some talk about the ballot but some questions
cannot be settled by the ballot. Only the array of labor in one solid
phalanx will give it the power that will make strikes unnecessary."

Commissioner Kernan: "Does not history show that on account of
jealousies in your own ranks a complete organization of labor cannot be
effected?"

Mr. Howard: "Yes. That is history up to the present, but the workingman
is doing more thinking to-day than ever before."

Commissioner Kernan: "You regard such a strike as would be possible
under the conditions you outline as a desirable thing for organized
labor?"

Mr. Howard: "No, sir. If employers would be a little more considerate of
their men there would soon be no labor organizations in existence."

Commissioner Kernan: "You do not say that all grievances are just, do
you?"

Mr. Howard: "No. Many of them are frivolous."

Commissioner Kernan: "It is charged that there is a minority in all
labor organizations who are practically enslaved by the will of the
majority and that a man for that reason loses his independence when he
joins a union?"

Mr. Howard: "Well, I think the reverse is the rule. The hot heads and
agitators in the labor movement are in the minority; the quiet, thinking
men are always in the majority. It often happens that the man who is
really most anxious to strike assumes an air of indifference or positive
objection to such a move. He is merely waiting for a good excuse to stop
and let the blame lie with some one else. He wants some one to order him
to quit work so he can say to the superintendent that he is afraid to
remain at work for fear of personal violence."

Commissioner Kernan: "Was any other motive behind the strike other than
to force a settlement with Mr. Pullman?"

Mr. Howard: "No."

Commissioner Kernan; "Was there any object in breaking the older unions
so that the American Railway Union might profit thereby?"

Mr. Howard: "While the increase in membership in the American Railway
Union meant a decrease in the strength of the older organizations it was
not the object of the strike to break down the older unions."

In answer to a question by Commissioner Kernan as to what he would
suggest to prevent railroad strikes in the future, Mr. Howard replied
that the government ownership and control of railroads was the only
practical solution of the question. He argued that about one third of
the railroads of the country are practically under control of the
government, and thought the balance could easily be taken. He claimed
the Santa Fe was from two to four months behind in payment of wages;
that it would seem only fair that the government should see that the men
were paid. The government had gone to the extent of forcing the employes
of that and other roads to work whether they wished to or not and he
thought the other step might as well be taken at once.

Mr. Sovereign, grand master workman of the Knights of Labor, was the
next witness. He testified that he was a member of the American Railway
Union. Said the only official connection the Knights of Labor had with
the strike was the adoption of a resolution that they would not ride in
Pullman cars. He also stated that a general tie-up of all the industries
in the country to force public sentiment on Pullman and bring to bear on
the Pullman company the greatest possible pressure was contemplated, but
it was found the tie-up could not be made sufficiently general to bring
about the desired results, so it was not attempted.

Commissioner Kernan: "Then you do not consider the American Railway
Union responsible for the rioting that occurred?"

Mr. Sovereign: "No, sir. In fact I do not think there was any rioting."

Commissioner Kernan: "Do you consider burning cars a species of
rioting?"

Mr. Sovereign: "Not when it was done by U. S. marshalls."

Commissioner Kernan: "Was it so done?"

Mr. Sovereign: "I read reports in Mayor Hopkins' office to-day to that
effect--reports that seem conclusive on that point. Moreover I don't
think there was as much rioting as is generally believed. I came from
Des Moines on what was supposed to be the last train to Chicago. We
arrived without incident at Blue Island on July 6. There the train was
side tracked and we were told by the officials that it could go no
further because of the mobs between there and the city. I saw a west
bound mail train on another track and was told it had been there for
twenty-six hours and could not proceed on account of the mob and
violence beyond, though it would go on the very same track on which we
had just arrived. I bought a ticket from Blue Island to Chicago on the
Wisconsin Central. After coming a short distance the train stopped and
the conductor told us we could go no further on account of mobs ahead of
us. I picked up my grip with the intention of walking to the city, but
the conductor cautioned me against risking my life. However I walked in,
was not molested, saw no disorder and did not see more then ten men at
any one place."

Mr. Kernan inquired what views the Knights of Labor held about letting
non-union men take the places of strikers.

Mr. Sovereign: "That depends on circumstances. In the case of mine
owners, for instance, who have sold houses to their employes who have
partly paid for same, the unjust discharge of these men means a
forfeiture to the mine owners of all money paid on the property. We hold
that we must by all honorable means prevent others from taking their
places."

Commissioner Kernan: "But suppose honorable means are not effective?"

Mr. Sovereign: "Well, if it's necessary to prevent them from passing a
given line we clasp hands and keep them out."

Commissioner Kernan: "You do not assault them?"

Mr. Sovereign: "No. If they break through they assault us."

Mr. Sovereign did not think that strikes or compulsory arbitration was
the remedy for labor troubles. He believed that the government ownership
of railroads would settle the trouble for employes. He also believed the
employes of corporations had an equity in their positions and for unjust
discharge should have a remedy in a court of equity.

Mr. Kernan: "Why cannot the contract between employer and employe
provide for all you want the law to cover?"

Mr. Sovereign: "Because labor is always dependent, always has been at
least and is forced by the duress of circumstances to accept employment
without insisting on protecting conditions."

George W. Lovejoy was the next witness to take the stand. In answer to a
question by Commissioner Wright, he said: "I am familiar with the
history of the strike on the Rock Island road. Beside the order passed
by the convention to refuse to handle Pullman cars, the men at La Salle
had a special grievance that consisted of unjust treatment of the
members of the American Railway Union which had a local lodge at that
point. I for one was dismissed without any cause being assigned.
Complaint was made to Supt. Dunlap and an explanation asked as to why
the men were discharged. He refused to consider the grievance submitted
to him so the men concluded to strike."

Commissioner Wright: "Was the grievance submitted in writing?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "It was. I have not a copy, but think I can get one from
the local union."

Commissioner Wright: "What part did your local union take in the Pullman
strike?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "It decided to sustain it."

Mr. Worthington: "Was there any violence at La Salle?" Mr. Lovejoy:
"No, sir. None whatever."

Commissioner Kernan: "Have any of the old men been taken back?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "No, sir. And never will."

Mr. Worthington: "Is it on account of the strike that they cannot get
back?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "I suppose it is."

Commissioner Kernan: "How general was the strike at La Salle?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "It extended to every branch of the service. Switchmen,
firemen, engineers, conductors, brakemen, telegraph operators, clerks,
round-housemen and trackmen."

Commissioner Kernan: "Now tell us about the cause that led to your
discharge as you understand it?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "Six months previous to the convention of the American
Railway Union which met in Chicago, June 12, I had an understanding with
the superintendent that I would get a leave of absence and was to put a
man in my place while absent. When I got ready to come to Chicago, I
sent a note asking for such leave of absence and transportation. The
transportation was sent me, but no answer to my note was given. When I
came to Chicago I called at the office of the superintendent to have an
understanding about my leave and he told me that a written notice was
not necessary. Whenever I wanted to go anywhere all I had to do was to
put a good man in my place and go. The Tuesday following the opening of
the convention the assistant superintendent went to La Salle and put
another man in my place permanently. No reason has ever been given me
why such action was taken."

Commissioner Wright: "Mr. Lovejoy, I suppose you have given the subjects
of labor troubles and strikes some study. I wish to ask if you can
suggest any solution of these troubles."

Mr. Lovejoy: "Yes, sir, I have and I consider the only way to solve the
question is for the government to own the railroads."

Commissioner Kernan: "What is your reason?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "I think the employes would receive better treatment and be
better satisfied. I think they would get the same kind of treatment as
the postal employes and there would be no strikes under these
conditions."

Commissioner Kernan: "What do you think of arbitration as a remedy?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "I have never seen arbitration tried to any great extent
and while I believe in the principle I am not prepared to say that I am
in favor of compulsory arbitration."

Commissioner Wright: "If the government owned the railroads how would
you avoid the changes incident to a change in administration?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "I consider that railroad employes would be in practically
the same position as postal clerks. They would be under civil service
rules to the extent of being pensioned after a term of years of faithful
service."

Commissioner Kernan: "Would it not cause jealousy among other branches
of workingmen if such a system should be adopted toward railroad men?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "I do not think so. I am not jealous of postal clerks."

Commissioner Wright: "What would you suggest as the next best thing if
government ownership proved impracticable?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "That the government keep hands off altogether; let the
roads and their men fight out their troubles free from outside
interference. It is the knowledge that the government can be called to
their aid that makes many of the railroad officials so arbitrary with
their men."

Commissioner Kernan: "Don't you think that disputes ought to be settled
by some other method than open warfare?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "There would be none if the authorities would keep away.
The employes would settle their grievances by arbitration."

Mr. Worthington: "What would you think of a law providing that upon
application of a certain number of employes the railroads should be
compelled to come before a board of arbitration and make answer to the
grievances of the men or vice versa before a strike could be declared? I
mean by that a law which would compel a hearing of disputes by a
constituted tribunal even though that tribunal had not the power to
force a decision in the matter?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "I would be in favor of such a court and believe that the
railroad men would abide by its decision voluntarily if they had some
choice in the selection of the arbitrators."

Commissioner Kernan: "Is it not one of the greatest troubles the
railroad men have to contend with that they cannot get a hearing of
their grievances?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "Yes, sir. It is. And if the men could always be sure of
getting a fair and impartial hearing I do not believe there would be any
strikes. As a rule the men are opposed to strikes and resort to them
only when every means of settling grievances has failed."

Commissioner Kernan: "Is it not true that strikes usually end
disastrously to the men?"

Mr. Lovejoy: "Strikes often fail to accomplish the particular end in
view, but I believe on the whole their tendency is toward a betterment
of the conditions of the men. The strike we have just passed through has
demonstrated to the working people of this country that they must get
together as one solid body before they can win. They have found out that
when they undertake to assert their rights they have no friends but
themselves. The press, the judiciary, the ministers and office holders
are all against them."

Secretary Kelliher of the American Railway Union was next to testify. He
promised to furnish the commissioners with certified copies of any of
the proceedings of the convention, and the correspondence which occurred
during the strike. In answer to questions by the commissioners he
considered government ownership of railways the only solution to
strikes. While he favored arbitration, he did not think compulsory
arbitration would be satisfactory to the men.

Thomas J. Heathcoat, a resident of Pullman, and one of the strikers, was
the next witness examined. He testified to the condition of Pullman
prior to and at the time of the strike and gave a full account of the
strike and the causes that brought it about. He gave in detail the scale
of wages paid prior to June, '93, and the constant reductions since.

Mr. Heathcoat, in answer to Commissioner Kernan asking him to explain
the mode adopted by the Pullman Company in cutting wages for piece work,
said:

"Take, for instance, that desk behind which you sit. Suppose it were
given to me to make. I figured that I could do the work for $20.00, and
took it at that price. As a good mechanic I could make $4.00 per day at
it. For the next one the foreman would allow me $18.00. Being anxious to
make good wages, and being a good mechanic, I would use extra effort and
still make $4.00 per day. The next one the foreman would allow me only
$16.00 for. Yet, by extraordinary effort I could still make $4.00 daily.
The next one the foreman would allow me $12.00 for, and with my utmost
endeavors I could make only $3.00 per day. As a good mechanic I would
refuse to take any more at that price and the work would be given to an
inferior workman who could make only $1.25 per day. This is the way the
Pullman Company has worked its piece work system."

Commissioner Wright: "Did the cuts in other departments average as much
as in yours?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "They averaged the same though they were not alike. The
new men in the freight car department suffered more than we did and
there were others in some of the departments that were making pretty
good wages at the time of the strike."

Commissioner Wright: "You have spoken of asking the company for a
reduction in rent. What rent do you pay, and what did you get for it?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "Up to the beginning of the strike I paid $17 a month
rent and 71 cents per month for water. Gas I did not use. Could not
afford it. The company charged $2.25 per 1,000 feet. My house had five
rooms, cellar and back yard." Commissioner Wright: "What would similar
houses rent for elsewhere?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "I know of eight and nine room cottages with front and
back yards, in every way more desirable than the house I live in, that
can be rented for $8.00 and $9.00 per month."

Commissioner Worthington: "What, in your opinion, would it cost to build
houses such as you live in?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "I should like to take the contract for building them at
$600 apiece."

Commissioner Kernan: "What other accommodations do you get for the rent
you pay, say in the way of paved streets?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "There are cheap wooden sidewalks in front of the house
and the company keeps a force of men on the street picking up paper and
hauling away garbage. That's all I know."

Commissioner Wright: "Have you applied to the Pullman company for work
since the strike?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "No, sir. I understand that I am blacklisted. They have a
blacklist, you know. I have one in my pocket now."

Commissioner Wright: "Will you let me see it?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "Yes, sir. Here it is."

Commissioner Wright: "Have you any objection to telling us where you got
this?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "Yes, sir. I got it from a friend of one of the clerks in
the Pullman office and I would not like to tell the name of either, as
it would cost the clerk his position."

Commissioner Wright: "Have you any other evidence of the existence of a
blacklist?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "Yes, sir. One of the men who applied to Mr. Childs at
the Rock Island shops for work. He was asked his name and the same being
found on one of their lists he was told that he was a Pullman striker,
consequently could not get work. I understand the Pullman company's
blacklist was sent to all the railroads so that others besides myself
can never get work in the railroad shop again."

Commissioner Wright: "Do labor unions ever blacklist non-union men?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "The American Railway Union does not. That is the only
labor union I ever belonged to."

Commissioner Wright: "What was the feeling of the employes toward Mr.
Pullman previous to the strike?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "As a rule I think the employes had a high regard for Mr.
Pullman until Harry Middleton took charge two and a half years ago. He
is not a practical car builder. He wastes material for which we are
charged. He displaces men who have earned their positions by good work
and promotes his favorites. He makes arbitrary and tyrannical shop rules
which deprive us of part of our pay. For instance, suppose a car
carpenter be given a lot of cars, the work to be finished in a certain
time. Within a day of the time limit it is seen that there is still six
days work for one man. He will put on five extra men, regardless whether
that many can work to advantage, and pay them by the hour charging the
same to the man who took the job as piece work."

Commissioner Kernan: "Is not time enough allowed to finish the work so
that such instances would be due to the neglect of the man who took the
job?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "No, sir. It is not, except in rare cases. It is
misjudgment on the part of the manager, Mr. Middleton, as I said before,
who is not a practical car builder. As an instance of a waste of
material--There was a set of car sashes, made of mahogany. Care was not
taken to see that the mahogany picked out was all of the same color.
Instead of picking out those of the set that were alike in color and
completing the set with new ones and using the off color ones in another
set with wood picked out to match, Middleton had the whole set smashed
and charged the men with the cost of the material and refused to pay
them for their time when it was not their fault at all."

Mr. Wright: "Referring now to the committee appointed to wait on Mr.
Pullman--tell us what you said and what was said to you."

Mr. Heathcoat: "We asked Mr. Wickes and Mr. Pullman to adjust our wages
so that we could support our families. We wanted either the wages of
June, 1893, or a reduction in rent and some increase in wages. Mr.
Pullman said he could not reduce rents as he was making only 3-1/2 or
2-1/2 per cent., I don't know which now, on his investment. He said he
could not increase wages because he was losing money on his contract
work. But he did not say what was a fact that nine tenths of the work
that had been done since the cut began was Pullman and not contract
work."

Commissioner Kernan: "What do you mean by Pullman work?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "Work on cars owned and operated by the Pullman Company
and not work on cars sold to railroads. One result of this was that the
company was getting work from us for $1.90 for which it paid the
railroads when they did this work $2.50 and $2.70. Two days after he
told us the company was losing money on its contract work, a quarterly
dividend of 2 per cent. was declared."

Commissioner Kernan: "That might have been paid from accumulations and
not from earnings."

Mr. Heathcoat: "Mr. Pullman did not make any such explanation to us when
we spoke to him afterward. If he had, perhaps we would not have felt so
badly about it. But it did seem hard that when men were working and not
getting enough from the company to buy enough to eat that it should pay
out $600,000.00 in dividends."

Commissioner Wright: "Were there those not getting enough to eat?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "I have seen men faint by the side of cars on which they
were working because they had not had enough to eat. After the cuts,
while working as hard as I could to earn enough to support my family, I
have been obliged to sit down in the middle of the forenoon to rest
because I had not had enough food to enable me to do such hard work and
there were hundreds worse off than I. If rents had been reduced I
believe there would have been no strike. We wanted to submit the
question of rent and wages to a board of arbitration, we to choose one,
the Pullman company one, and the two a third. We would have abided by
any decision the arbitrators made."

Commissioner Wright: "Did not Mr. Pullman offer to let you look over the
company's books to convince you that what he said was true?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "Yes. But what would we know about them? Besides, we did
not believe that the books would show the real facts. I have been told
that there is only one accountant in the city who understands the
company's books and we did not have money enough to buy bread let alone
to hire an accountant. I have seen men crying at the paymaster's window
when their pay checks for two weeks would be eight cents or 35 cents,
or one dollar or two dollars over their rent and the company expected
them to support their families on that 'till next pay day. You see the
men got two pay checks, one for just the amount of rent owed and the
other for the balance of their two weeks pay. The rent checks they are
expected to indorse and turn over at once to the town agent in payment
of rent. The law will not allow the company to deduct the rent from the
pay and retain it, but the check must be turned over just the same for
you cannot cash it unless you can persuade the agent that you cannot
possibly live unless you are allowed to retain it. Then perhaps you will
be allowed to retain a part or all of it. I have been insulted by the
clerks in the agent's office because I told them I could not get along
without the money for my rent check. Yet such was the case for there was
one time when my pay after the rent was deducted left only eight cents a
day for each member of my family to live on until the next pay day."

Mr. Worthington: "Are the Pullman employes required to live in Pullman?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "Yes, sir. As long as there are any houses in Pullman
vacant the men must live there, unless they own houses somewhere else or
are favorites of the shop bosses. In fact during last winter I knew of
people who owned houses in Roseland leaving them unrented and moving to
Pullman so they could get work. When you apply for work you are required
to make application if you are a man of family."

Mr. Worthington: "Are there any lots in Pullman bought and sold so that
you could form an idea of the value, for instance, of the lot on which
the house you live in stands?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "No, sir. No lots are sold but I know of a house and lot
over in Roseland on the boulevard near One hundred and eleventh street
which were bought two years ago for $2,500 and can be rented for $12 a
month. The house is better than the one I live in, is bigger and in a
good location while mine is on a back street and I would not pay more
than $1,000 for the house and lot."

Mr. Worthington: "If your house could be built for $600 and only yields
3-1/2 per cent the lot must be worth more than $5,000. Is it?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "No, sir. It is not, but there are some frame houses in
Pullman which the company charges eight dollars a month for that could
be built for $100."

Mr. Wright: "It was said at the beginning of this strike that the
Pullman people owed $70,000 for rent. How far back did that accumulation
begin?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "I should say about Nov. 1, 1893."

Mr. Wright: "Tell us if you know what the cuts in wages were in
departments other than your own."

Mr. Heathcoat: "The freight car builders suffered more than others, but
the commission can find out best by having some one from each department
come before it."

Commissioner Kernan: "Don't the people of Pullman know that we want to
hear from every one that can throw any light on this subject?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "Yes, sir. They understand it but there are lots of them
who have not money to get down here."

Mr. Wright: "Tell us if you can what was the average pay of the
employes, say in April last?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "On a lot of elevated cars on which I worked I made 16
cents per hour, on one car and 15 cents per hour on another, but there
were men working alongside of me who made only four and five cents per
hour. I would say that in January, February and March the mechanic's pay
averaged $1.50 and the laborers' pay $1.30 per day. Some times the
laborers' checks were bigger than the mechanics'."

Commissioner Wright: "Have you any suggestion of a remedy for labor
troubles?"

Mr. Heathcoat: "Yes, sir. The ownership of railroads and banks by the
government would do it. I never heard of a strike in the post-office
department or the navy yard."

Miss Curtis next took the stand. She was an employe of Pullman and
president of the Girls Union of the American Railway Union at Pullman.
Beginning her testimony she said: "In June, 1893, the wages in my
department were 22-1/2 cents per hour, $2.25 a day. In April, 1894, they
were 70 to 80 cents a day. There were two cuts in one week in November
and another in January. In April the best wages any of us could make was
eighty cents a day, while some could not make more than from 40 to 50
cents a day. Last June they could make at least $1.50 per day."
Commissioner Wright: "Do you pay rent?"

Miss Curtis: "Not now. My father worked for the Pullman company thirteen
years, during which time he paid rent. He died last September and as
there was some expense connected with his sickness he owed $60 back
rent. Then I went to work in the repair shop and boarded out. The
company made me pay $3 per week on account of the back rent. I still
owed $15 on the day of the strike and owe it yet. Some weeks I did not
earn enough to pay my board and rent too and then I paid only part of
the $3."

Commissioner Wright: "Were you on any of the committees that waited on
Mr. Pullman and Mr. Wickes?"

Miss Curtis: "Yes, sir. I represented the girls on that committee. We
wanted our wages raised as the men did theirs. Mr. Wickes said it was
impossible to raise wages as they were losing money on their contracts
and it was utterly impossible to reduce rents. An appointment was made
to meet Mr. Pullman on another day. When we saw him he said the same
that Mr. Wickes told us."

Commissioner Kernan: "What work was done in your department?"

Miss Curtis: "We made the silk, satin and velvet drapings; the carpets,
tapestries and mattresses for the sleeping coaches, the linen for the
dining cars, sewed the fringe on cushions and all that sort of thing."

Theodore Rhode was the next to testify. He said: "Four years ago I had a
good job. Then they wanted me to do a kind of work that no one else
could make a living at. Four or five of us were to work together. I was
to have charge of the work and we were to divide whatever we made. I
said I would try it, but if I didn't like it wanted my old job back.
This was agreed to. When I became satisfied that I could make nothing at
the new work I asked for my old place, but they would not give it to me
and told me that if I didn't like what I was doing I could quit working
for the company. After a while we got so we could make from $2.60 to
$2.85 for 10-3/4 hours work. Then the cuts came, and work for which we
had received $9.00 paid only $4.25. It was impossible to make $1.25 per
day, and we were told by the foreman to quit if not satisfied. I paid
$15.00 a month for rent and 71 cents for water. I could rent as good a
house in Kensington or Roseland for $7.00 a month. On the day of the
strike I owed $2.50 for rent. Have not paid it since, although the
collector has been around two or three times lately. Low wages and high
rents are not all the trouble. It is the abuse. They talk to men as they
would to dogs. They are constantly experimenting with new materials. If
it don't prove satisfactory we get no pay for our work. Take English
varnish, for instance. The atmosphere must be just right or it won't
work. Oftentimes, owing to a dampness in the air, we were obliged to do
our work over two or three times for which we get no extra pay. In April
my wages every two weeks were from $12.00 to $15.00. I understand they
pay the men who took our places from $2.50 to $3.00 and $3.00 to $5.00
per day. I have not applied for work again."

R. W. Combes. For 30 years a car carpenter and for 10 years employed at
Pullman, was next called before the commission.

"A year ago," he said, "wages in his department was $2.25 at piece work,
and 17-1/2 cents per hour. In March, piece work was cut so that they
could not make more than 68 cents a day."

Commissioner Kernan: "How much would you have gotten at the rate of
wages in force in March or April?" Mr. Combes: "We did not built the
same kind of cars in 1894, but had we, we would not have received
anything for them. In February I had $3.50 to support my wife and two
children after paying rent. Had the men received fair treatment there
would have been no strike. John Pearson, superintendent of the freight
car department, is the whole cause of the strike. He is abusive and
tyrannical. I was inspector in April and Pearson told me if the men did
not do what I told them to take a club and knock their damned heads off.
That's the kind of a man he is. I have not applied for work. Middleton
told me I never could work there again."

H. F. Griswold, a switchman, testified that he had last been employed by
the C. M. & St. P. Ry.--that he lost his position through the
strike--had tried to get work within the last few weeks on the Penn. R.
R., at Pittsburg, Altona and Columbus and at each of these places had
been shown a blacklist with his name on it as a member of the American
Railway Union.

Several other witnesses testified as to being blacklisted on account of
being in the strike.

Charles Naylor, a fireman on the Ft. Wayne road up to the time of the
strike, was next examined. In answer to questions as to what he thought
of arbitration he said: "From my knowledge of railroad men I do not
believe they would have much confidence in arbitrators elected in the
same way public officials are. My idea is that they should be appointed
when their services are required and a new set of arbitrators selected
for each case. The board should be composed of one man selected by the
employes, one by the roads, and a third by these two."

Commissioner Wright: "That is the law now."

Mr. Naylor: "Yes, but it is not enforced. It seems to me that if Mr.
Cleveland had followed in the line of action pursued by Mr. Gladstone,
during the coal miners' strike in England, there would have been no
trouble here. If he had told the railroads when they called on him for
troops that they must submit to arbitration or they would get no support
from the government, the men would have thought a good deal more of his
honesty and fairness, but when they see the whole power of the
government thrown on the side of the railroads they lose confidence in
the justice of the government."

Commissioner Wright: "There was no law under which the president could
have told the roads to arbitrate the trouble with their men."

Mr. Naylor: "From all that I can learn there was as much law for him to
do so as for him to send troops here without the request of the governor
of the state."

Mr. Worthington: "In your suggestion of a board of arbitrators there
would be but one of them unprejudiced?"

Mr. Naylor: "I think such a board would always be able to effect a
compromise between the parties. I have acted in the capacity of
arbitrator between the company and the men in adjusting grievances and
have always found that a spirit of compromise was met in a like spirit
and that is the principle, after all, upon which such questions must be
settled."

Vice President Howard of the American Railway Union, was recalled to
make an explanation regarding some testimony which Mr. Heathcoat had
given the day before. He said: "Mr. Heathcoat told you that Mr. Pullman
had promised to allow a committee to examine his books, to prove the
correctness of his statements to the effect that his company was losing
money on its contracts. The next day, Wallace Rice, a reporter on the
Herald, called on Mr. Pullman and asked him if he would allow an expert
to examine his books on behalf of the union. Mr. Pullman replied that
what he meant by allowing an examination of his books was that he would
have his own book-keeper prepare a statement to be submitted to the
committee. He said he never had any idea of allowing the committee to
actually examine his books. Mr. Howard then asked if he might make a
statement of a couple of matters of importance to the employes. The
commissioners looked doubtful about this, but finally Mr. Wright said he
might go ahead if the matter had anything to do with the subject under
consideration.

Mr. Howard then said: "The United States government is blacklisting
3,000 employes of the Union Pacific Railroad now."

Mr. Wright: "We have no authority to go into that question."

Mr. Howard: "And the other matter is that all the other roads are making
a threat against the M. K. & T. to boycott its business if the road
persists in making a certain rate to Washington."

Mr. Wright: "Has that anything to do with the American Railway Union?"

Mr. Howard: "Yes, sir. If the government allows the railroads to violate
the laws it ought to keep hands off in disputes between the roads and
the men."

Rev. Mr. Cawardine was called and related what he knew about the matter.
Mr. Cawardine is pastor of the M. E. church in Pullman. His testimony
was directed chiefly to the exorbitant rents. In answer to Mr. Wright,
saying that he had been charged with being an anarchist, and a
socialist, Mr. Cawardine said: "I have considered the charge so
contemptible in the bitterness and prejudice of its origin as to be
beneath answer. That I, an American born citizen and the son of a
soldier who died for his country, should be charged with being
anarchist, seems to me incomprehensible. It is simply an evidence of
what has been made very apparent that a good many people are violently
prejudiced against working men and will not listen to what may be said
on their side or read what may be written. I find this feeling even
among many of my brethren in the ministry. I regret it too, because the
labor problem can only be solved by a consideration of it from all
sides."

Andrew W. Pearson, a real estate agent who formerly worked in Pullman,
was called on the stand and in answer to a question put by Mr. Wright,
said:

"Houses which rent for $17.00 in Pullman can be rented in Kensington and
Roseland for $10.00. Pullman houses which rent for $25.00 can be rented
elsewhere for $15.00, and $10.00 Pullman houses for $5.00. In Grand
Crossing, a manufacturing town, $8.00 a month will rent a five-room
brick cottage. The rents I am giving now are the present rents. There
has been a decline since two years ago everywhere but in Pullman."

Commissioner Kernan: "How much higher are rents in Pullman than
elsewhere?"

Mr. Pearson: "I should say fully one-third."

Frank P. McDonald, a locomotive engineer and author of the Great scab
route circular, testified that he was a member of the American Railway
Union and a delegate to their convention. He said he was opposed to the
strike, but voted for it as it was the unanimous sentiment of his local
union. His reason for opposing it was because he did not think the union
was strong enough to win.

President Debs, of the American Railway Union, was the next important
witness to testify. Mr. Debs outlined the trouble from its inception
down to the special convention in Chicago on Aug. 2. In answer to
questions by Commissioner Wright, Mr. Debs said he was 38 years old, a
resident of Terre Haute, Ind., and had been president of the American
Railway Union since June 20, 1893. He was a practical railroad man, had
been employed four and a half years in the capacity of locomotive
fireman and was at present editor of the Fireman's Magazine. Mr. Wright
told him to go ahead and give a history of the late strike so far as he
knew from his own experience.

Mr. Debs said: "In the early part of May, while at home in Indiana, I
received a telegram from Mr. Howard notifying me of the probability of a
strike at the Pullman shops, the employes of which were members of our
union. I authorized Mr. Howard to take full charge of the matter, but to
do all in his power to prevent a strike. My reason for this was that the
American Railway Union had just been involved in a strike on the Great
Northern railway. At a meeting of the general officers of the union we
had discussed the possibility of other strikes arising on account of the
victory the union had won on the Great Northern railway, and we decided
that it would be good policy to be very cautious in encouraging the men
to go into strikes whenever there was a possibility of avoiding them.
May 11th, I heard that the Pullman employes had struck. A few days
after, I came here and made a personal investigation of the trouble.
After a trip to St. Paul I again went down there and the result of my
investigation was that the conditions at Pullman justified the men in
the course they had taken. I found that wages and expenses were so
adjusted that every dollar the men made found its way back to Pullman
coffers. The men were not only not getting enough wages to live on but
were getting deeper and deeper in debt every day. They had not money
enough as a rule to get away. There seemed to be no escape for them.
Wages had been reduced, but expenses remained the same. After I had
satisfied myself of the truth of the men's statements regarding their
conditions, I made up my mind to do everything possible in law and
justice to right the wrongs of our members who had gone out on strike.
We first tried to get the company to arbitrate. We were confident that
any fair and impartial board would decide in favor of the employes. The
company, however, refused every proposition of that sort saying that it
had nothing to arbitrate. I then suggested that the Pullman company
select two men to act with two judges of the circuit court and a fifth
person whom they should select to act as a board to investigate the
question whether there was anything to arbitrate. This proposition was
refused.

"June 12, delegates representing 425 local unions of the American
Railway Union met here in the first quadrennial convention of the
organization. The Pullman question came up for consideration before the
convention sitting as a committee of the whole to hear reports etc. I
wish to say in this connection that all of our deliberations were held
with open doors, except one executive session at which the question of
finances was considered, in which we felt the general public had no
interest, but at all the other meetings the entire press of the city was
represented. I mention this in refutation of the statements which have
been made as to the American Railway Union forming a conspiracy against
the railroads and committing offenses against the United States. If a
conspiracy were intended it seems improbable that we should have sat
with open doors. The first steps taken toward securing a settlement of
the trouble, was the appointment of a committee composed partly of
Pullman employes and in part of other delegates present, with authority
to call on Mr. Wickes to find out if anything could be done toward
effecting a settlement of the strike."

Here Mr. Debs related how Mr. Wickes refused to confer with a committee
composed of any but his former employes, and finally refused to confer
with them, stating that he had nothing to arbitrate.

He then continued: "The matter was then referred to a special committee
with authority to act in the matter. This committee reported that if the
Pullman Company refused to concede anything after five days time to
consider the question, it was the sense of the convention that the
members of the union would refuse to handle Pullman cars. Under the
constitution of the American Railway Union the majority rules in all
questions under consideration. No strike can be declared except by a
majority of the men involved. In order to conform to this rule, the
delegates were instructed to communicate by wire with their respective
unions to ascertain the sentiment of the members on the question before
the convention. After reports had been received from all the local
unions, the convention by a unanimous vote decided to adopt the report
of the special committee.

"Since the railroad employes have been criticised for engaging in a
sympathetic strike, I wish to make some statement regarding the general
situation. In many instances they had local grievances themselves, and
besides, there was this general condition which aggravated the whole
situation.

"In the spring of 1893, just before the opening of the World's Fair, the
general managers of the various roads centering in Chicago, were very
apprehensive lest there should be a general strike among all classes of
railroad employes for an increase of wages. The officers of the
organizations appealed to the men not to strike, arguing that it was
their patriotic duty to bear with patience their grievances until the
fair was over. The result was there was no strike anywhere. The men all
worked in harmony throughout the country. Some of the managers promised,
by implication at least, that there would be an increase of wages to
reward the patriotic action of their men. Instead of doing as they
promised, the general managers during this time equipped their
organization to protect their mutual interests."

Mr. Debs then read an article from a Chicago paper which told how the
general managers had formed an air tight association which would be able
to deal with any strikes that might arise in the future, and suggested
that the association rather courted than feared trouble with employes of
the railroads.

Continuing, Mr. Debs said: "Shortly after the new association had
completed its organization it became apparent what course it intended to
pursue. About Sept. 1, the Louisville & Nashville road made a sweeping
reduction of 10 per cent in the pay of all its employes--the section men
getting 67-1/2 cents a day under this reduction. Then in succession
followed the East Tennessee, Virginia & Georgia, the Richmond &
Danville, the Mobile & Ohio, Nashville & Chattanooga, Big Four, New York
& New England, New York, New Haven & Hartford, Wabash, Union Pacific,
Northern Pacific, Monon, Great Northern and the Great Western was just
on the point of declaring a reduction when the strike was declared. "It
was significant that no two roads declared a reduction at the same time,
and in most instances the reductions began with the unorganized and
poorest paid men in the service. The men viewed these reductions with
apprehension and unrest. This was particularly the case after Judge
Caldwell had declared upon investigation that the cut on the Union
Pacific was unwarrantable. In two cases the reductions annulled and the
original pay of the men restored. On the Union Pacific--on the order of
Judge Caldwell and on the Great Northern through the efforts of the
American Railway Union. In the later case the matter was decided by a
board of arbitration, composed of leading capitalists and business men
of St. Paul and Minneapolis.

"These conditions confronted the American Railway Union, when its
delegates met here in convention. The employes felt that other systems
in sound financial conditions had taken advantage of the unfortunate
condition of the country to reduce wages. The men had lost confidence in
their old unions which had failed utterly to protect them against these
reductions and they came in the hope that the American Railway Union
would take some steps to resist them and protect its members against
the rapacity of the railroad companies. This was the reason they were
ripe to take up the cause of the Pullman strikers. They were wrought up
to a point where they were willing to jeopardize their positions to
protect both themselves and the Pullman employes. The primary purpose
was to cut off Pullman's revenues by cutting off his cars and thereby
force him to a settlement."

Mr. Wright: "I understand you to say you advised against the Pullman
strike. Why did you do so?"

Mr. Debs: "We had just gone through a strike on the Great Northern and I
did not think it advisable to go into another at that time."

Mr. Wright: "What would have been the action of the convention if there
had been no strike at Pullman? Did not that strike force the issue?"

Mr. Debs: "There would have been no trouble with the railroads, I think,
but for the Pullman strike. That and the depressed condition of the
country aggravated the situation so as to bring about a general strike."

Mr. Wright: "Was the general strike precipitated by the Pullman
troubles?"

Mr. Debs: "Yes sir, it was."

Mr. Wright: "Was a notice of the action of the convention served on the
different companies?"

Mr. Debs: "Not by the convention. That matter was left to the men on the
various systems. From the action of the managers toward the American
Railway Union generally, the matter of serving a formal notice of our
action on them was not looked upon as necessary, as we were very sure it
would be ignored."

Mr. Wright: "Was notice served on the Illinois Central and Rock Island
roads?"

Mr. Debs: "I think so, but am not sure."

Mr. Worthington: "Did they have notice through the press?"

Mr. Debs: "Yes, sir."

Mr. Wright: "Do you know the date on which the general managers adopted
their resolution to resist the strike?"

Mr. Debs: "I think it was June 24, four days after our action. It was
currently reported at that time, though I have no written or other
evidence of the fact that the general managers resolved among themselves
to exterminate the union."

Mr. Wright: "If the American Railway Union had had its own way in
regard to its policy would a general strike have been postponed?"

Mr. Debs: "Yes, sir. The conditions were not altogether propitious and
we were fully aware of the fact."

Mr. Wright: "What was the number of your membership at that time?"

Mr. Debs: "About 150,000."

Mr. Wright: "Did you consider that strong enough for a general strike?"

Mr. Debs: "Yes, sir. But it was not a question of membership altogether.
There were other reasons." Mr. Debs said there was one other point to
which he wished to call the attention of the commission. One great
reason the men had in resisting a reduction of wages was the fact that
the companies never restored them voluntarily. The tendency had
therefore been for the employes to get closer together to resist the
combined efforts of the managers. That was the principle, he said, which
had inspired the idea of the American Railway Union. Then resuming the
history of the strike Mr. Debs said:

"Pursuant to the order of the convention, which was practically the
order of 150,000 men composing the American Railway Union, the members
refused to handle Pullman cars. It has been claimed that the president
of the union was a self appointed leader who had ordered the strike,
etc. In this connection I wish to say that while such is not the case,
when the report came in I gave it my approval as president. I do not
wish to avoid any of the responsibility. If I had had the authority I
would have ordered it under the same circumstances. June 26, the men
began to refuse to haul Pullman cars. They had been advised not to
handle the cars on any system where they could not get the sanction of a
sufficient number of men to make such a refusal effective. The officers
of the union opened headquarters at Uhlics Hall and as committees came
in from various roads and made their reports they were advised how to
act, and above all else to avoid trouble and violence and to maintain
order. We advised them of their right to quit in a body and told them
their rights ended there, and that the railroad companies had a right to
hire new men and their right began there."

Commissioner Kernan: "What steps if any did you take to prevent
violence?"

Mr. Debs: "When we saw there was to be trouble we issued an appeal to
the men not to commit any acts of violence. Fourteen years of experience
taught me that violence was the worst thing that could happen for any
strike."

Commissioner Kernan: "How about the telegrams sent by you?"

Mr. Debs: "None of them were inflammatory."

Commissioner Kernan: "How about that 'save your money and buy a gun'
telegram?"

Mr. Debs: "I can explain that telegram very easily. Among those who were
employed at headquarters to take charge of our correspondence and
telegraphing was a young man named Benedict. He had authority to sign my
name to telegrams in answer to questions, etc. The telegram was sent to
a man whom Mr. Benedict had worked under as a telegraph operator in
Montana. The allusion to the gun was a playful expression which they had
been accustomed to use in joking each other, and was understood in that
way by the man who received the telegram. I have his letter in
explanation of the matter which I will be glad to turn over to the
commissioners. I never saw many of the telegrams sent out and did not
see the one you refer to. The employes, obedient to the order of the
convention, began as I have said, to refuse to handle cars. The refusal
usually came from the switchmen who refused to make up trains with the
Pullman equipment. As they refused they were discharged--when the others
would quit.

"July 1st. After five days of strike the general managers were
completely defeated and their immediate resources exhausted. Up to that
time there had been no signs of violence anywhere. Our men were intact
and confident. Then the intervention of the courts was called into play.

"July 2d. I was served with a sweeping injunction restraining me from
sending out telegrams or issuing orders having the effect of persuading
the men to quit work. This injunction was issued wherever the trouble
existed. The result was to reduce our influence to nothing. This was the
point from which the strike was conducted by telegrams and otherwise.
Then a special grand jury was called to inquire into my conduct with the
result that I was indicted with other officials of the union and
warrants issued for our arrest. We were held under a joint bond of
$10,000. Then followed an attachment issued for contempt of the
injunction of July 2d, and our incarceration in the county jail. As
soon as our men found we were under arrest they quit. The U. S. courts
ended the strike, not the soldiers." Mr. Debs told of the seizure of his
mail and personal effects. He said he merely cited the fact to show to
what extent the U. S. authorities were willing to go to defeat the
strikers. He also commented on Gen. Miles who was reported to have gone
directly to the General Managers headquarters on his arrival with the U.
S. troops. He said Gen. Miles was quoted next day as having said he had
broken the back bone of the strike. Mr. Debs thought Gen. Miles had
mistaken his mission which was to preserve order and not to help the
railroads run their trains. He said:

"I think Gen. Miles was vulgarly out of place, both when he went to the
General Managers and when he made the remark credited to him." He said
he thought if the General Managers were compelled to bring into court
copies of their telegrams sent to the attorney general as the American
Railway Union had done he could substantiate the charge that it was the
object to annihilate the American Railway Union.

Mr. Worthington: "Did I understand you this morning to charge the
General Managers Association with the responsibility of the strike?"

Mr. Debs: "Not in that broad and general way. The American Railway Union
ordered the strike and is responsible for it, but there were aggravating
circumstances which ought to go in mitigation under any view of the
situation. But the attitude taken by the General Managers' Association,
their expressed determination to crush the American Railway Union, in
that respect and in refusing to arbitrate they were responsible. We felt
if they could combine we could and each was culpable."

Mr. Worthington: "You believe in enforcing the law, do you not, and in
the proper authorities using sufficient force to do it, do you not?"

Mr. Debs: "Most certainly I do."

Mr. Worthington: "You have doubtless given considerable thought to the
matter. How do you think strikes can be avoided?"

Mr. Debs: "There are two ways. First. By submitting to reduction in
wages and other grievances as the old organizations have done for years.
When the general manager determines to reduce wages he proposes a cut of
20 per cent when he only intends to make a 10 per cent reduction. Then
there is a conference when they finally agree on 10 per cent. This
avoids strikes but it reduces wages. The second way is a unification of
all, or practically all the railroad men of the country in a prudently
managed organization. That would prevent strikes on railroads, for even
if the railroads could unite to beat such an organization, it would be
expensive."

Mr. Worthington: "Do you believe that such an organization would be so
strong as to compel the adoption of all reasonable demands?"

Mr. Debs: "We did believe it, or the American Railway Union would never
have been organized. We see now that it cannot because all the organized
forces of society and of the government are arrayed against it. When a
strike inconveniences no one, no one is particularly interested in it
and it gradually dwindles down to the little end of nothing. But when a
strike does inconvenience the public, as railroad strikes must of
necessity do, the organized forces of society and the government, a
practically impregnable force, and properly so, is arrayed against it.
Take, for instance, the Ann Arbor strike. It inconvenienced the public
and immediately the roads applied to the courts, and Judge Taft issued
an injunction against the men. The first of the injunctions that have
been so much questioned both by lawyers and laborers."

Mr. Worthington: "Is it justifiable to incommode the public as such
strikes do?"

Mr. Debs: "It depends on circumstances. I believe with Admiral Porter,
that a pin is worth fighting for if a principle is involved. To resist
degradation is justifiable no matter what the result. If there were no
resistance, things would be, if possible, worse than they are and
without resistance degradation is inevitable. If the railroads treated
their men fairly there would be no labor organizations. Every
organization of railroad men is traceable to oppression. The Brotherhood
of Locomotive Engineers was born of the tyranny of the Michigan Central
road. I have that from the lips of Mr. Robinson, the founder of that
organization. The first meetings were held in secret because the men
would have been discharged if the management knew they were organizing.
Everywhere organization originated from similar causes. No legislation
can reconcile railroad employers and employes while human nature is in
it. Confidence has been destroyed. The men have been so treated that
they have grown suspicious, and when general managers, who are
themselves employes, order a reduction of wages on instructions from
those above them, that it is necessary because of hard times or slack
business, the men are not at all assured that such are the reasons. They
may accept the reduction, but they are not satisfied. In many instances
the general managers obey orders to reduce wages with regret for they
are humane men, many of them. Soon after the Great Northern strike, the
president of a railroad told me that I now had the opportunity to make
myself a most enviable reputation, both among railroad employers and
employes by advising the men themselves to propose a reduction of say 10
per cent in their wages during these dull times, thus putting the road
under obligation to increase wages when business improved. I said to
him, only a few months ago your road was doing a phenomenally heavy
business. Did you propose an increase of even 5 per cent in your
employes wages because you were making money? Every time a decrease in
wages has been prevented or an increase secured, it has been the result
of weeks of labor and pleading and the expenditures of thousands of
dollars by the men. Every schedule ever adopted is evidence of that.
Now that the strike is practically over the usual persecutions will be
indulged in against those who took part in it. Some people are
felicitating themselves that the strike has been suppressed, but the
safety valve has been screwed down, that's all. The men are no more
satisfied than they were. Some of them will get back their old
positions; others will get work on other roads; still others will find
work elsewhere, while some will be forced to remain idle for a long
time. None of them are satisfied with the conditions and sooner or later
strikes will break out again, I fear. You might as well try to stop
Niagara with a feather as crush the spirit of organization."

Commissioner Kernan: "If it should be shown that government ownership of
railroads resulted in poorer service and more expensive management, do
you think it would be a good thing?"

Mr. Debs: "Government ownership of railroads is decidedly better than
railroad ownership of government. The time is coming when there must be
government ownership of railroads. Strikes cannot be averted
otherwise."

Commissioner Worthington: "Will government supervision answer the
purpose?"

Mr. Debs: "I don't think so."

Mr. Worthington: "Will arbitration answer?"

Mr. Debs: "I fear not. No good can come from compulsory arbitration,
that is a contradiction of terms, even if some means of enforcing the
decree could be devised. Those against whom the decree was rendered
would not be satisfied. The basis must be friendship and confidence."

Commissioner Worthington: "Admitting that there is some contradiction in
the term compulsory arbitration, it expresses what we mean though
compulsory attempts at conciliation would express it better. Would it be
of no avail in any case?"

Mr. Debs: "It would undoubtedly in many cases where trouble is local and
the conditions homogeneous, so that all of them could be considered as
for instance in the Pullman troubles. It could be put in force if there
was a trial by jury or something of that sort, as other courts are
constituted, but in interstate matters on railroads extending over
thousands of miles where conditions vary, no decree could be made to
fit the case. It is easy to compass local matters but not widespread
matters because the conditions are not homogeneous. It would be
impossible to force the decree."

                         "MR. DEBS' TESTIMONY."
                   An extract from the Chicago Times.

"People who read an Editorial from the Chicago Times of Eugene V. Debs
before the strike commission, as printed in the Times yesterday, cannot,
if they be fair-minded, fail to be convinced of the justice of the cause
in which he is working and of the sincerity and ability of the man
himself.

"In a struggle for the rights of humanity individuals are nothing. He
will be but a poor champion of the cause of the people who will pause to
eulogize certain champions when he should be fighting for principles.
But when a leader like Debs is attacked, as he has been attacked, and
all the agencies and all the influence of capitalism are set in motion
to 'make an example of him'--i. e., to so persecute him that no other
man will be willing to encounter like danger in the wageworkers'
cause--then must every spokesman of the working classes speak out in
defense of the leader so attacked.

"The slanders that have been directed against Debs during this struggle
simply baffled recountal because of their number. He has been called
crazy, drunken, revolutionary, criminal, incompetent. Newspapers have at
once declared his conduct of the strike impotent and denounced him for
having made it so effective. Labor has been entreated to throw him over
as a puerile leader and capital has been warned that he is a dangerous
man because of his surpassing ability. 'Anything to beat Debs' has been
the one policy which has animated the organs of capital for the last
four months.

"Well, Debs is beaten--in a certain sense. His effort in behalf of the
Pullman strikers has failed and the very journals which most strenuously
opposed his work are now printing the story of the dreadful destitution
bred of the Pullman despotism which Debs did his best to break down.

"It is too late now to fight over again the issues of the American
Railway Union strike and boycott. Debs and his associates now stand in
the shadow of the penitentiary for trying to avert by entirely proper
and lawful means the conditions which now engage the attention of the
governor of the state, and which must awaken the sympathy of all humane
people. The privileged corporations flocked to the aid of the Pullman
concern--no one conversant with the facts in the case can gainsay that.
The railroads stood by Pullman; every morning newspaper in Chicago
except the Times stood by the railroads; the government joined in with
the combination. Mr. Debs' testimony is to the effect that governmental
action, by hastily issued injunctions, killed the strike--a statement
which everybody cognizant of the course of that movement will indorse.

"There has been much evidence adduced before the investigation
commission, but none so exact or none more clear than that of Mr. Debs.
His explanation of the causes of the strike and boycott is perspicuous
and logical, his outline of the causes of its failure coherent and
convincing, his suggestion of means for avoiding its recurrence
absolutely right. He sees, as all clear-sighted and fair-minded men must
see, that under the private ownership of railroads there is no
possibility of justice for railroad employes. The public interest in the
smooth and uninterrupted course of traffic over the roads enables the
managers to call upon public opinion and even upon state forces to aid
them against the employes in any serious controversy. The government
ownership of railroads is indeed, as Mr. Debs has said, the one
effective remedy for strikes among railroad hands. Asked for a solution
of the general railroad problem, he suggested the co-operative
commonwealth--a solution, doubtless, but one so difficult of
accomplishment as to seem almost, if not quite, Utopian. Mr. Debs might
have proceeded logically from his declaration for government ownership
of railroads to government ownership and management of all other
industries which tend naturally and inevitably to become monopolies.
This accomplished, the repeal of all laws giving private persons the
benefit of artificial law-created monopolies would follow. Then the
abolition of all taxes upon industry. Finally, the throwing open to all
men on equal conditions of all natural opportunities so that every man
starting in life should have, so far as human power could accomplish it,
an equal chance with every other man. Under such an organization and
with such laws the co-operative commonwealth which Mr. Debs suggests
would probably prove unnecessary. Competition, which is essential to the
progress of civilization, would still continue, but it would be free
competition, not the calm triumph of man plus monopoly over the man
without it."

Following President Debs' testimony the matter of rioting was taken up
by the commissioners. Chief Deputy U. S. Marshall John C. Donnelly,
testified that there were between 1,400 and 1,500 deputies sworn in,
armed and paid by the government, concerning whose character and fitness
practically no inquiries were made, and that there were between 3,000
and 4,000 men sworn in as deputies at the request of the railroads,
armed and paid by them, and that no inquiries concerning their
characters were made at all. That this army of 3,000 or 4,000 armed men
clothed with the authority of the United States was not at all under the
control of the U. S. marshall and was not responsible and reported to no
one unless to the chiefs of detectives of the several roads. Most of the
reports of drunkenness and violence of deputies were from among those
hired by the railroads.

Malcolm McDonald, a reporter for the Record, was next to testify. In
answer to questions by the commissioners he said, he thought as a rule
the turbulent element was not composed of railroad men. He spoke to some
of the American Railway Union men about upsetting cars and they denied
having had any hand in it. He also said that the conduct of the U. S.
marshalls had not been such as to prevent trouble and they seemed to be
hunting opportunities to get into conflict with the men.

M. L. Wickman, pastor of the Swedish Methodist Church, testified that
many members of his church who worked for the Pullman Company, had to be
taken care of during the fall and winter of 1893 and 1894. He told of
one man who had his hand injured by a piece of flying steel. After a
great deal of expense at the hospital he finally recovered the partial
use of his hand and was taken back to work at reduced pay. Mr. Wickman
took the case before Manager Brown, and that officer confronted him with
a written statement by the injured man to the effect that the accident
was one for which the company was in no way responsible. It was
subsequently proved that the man's signature to the paper was forged.

Ray Baker, a reporter for the Record, said he was at Hammond during the
rioting there and thought the rioters were not railroad men.

H. J. Cleveland, a reporter for the Herald, testified that he was to
work along the Rock Island and Lake Shore tracks where considerable
rioting occurred between July 4 and 15. From an extensive acquaintance
among railroad men, he felt sure that there were few, if any railroad
men among the rioters. Criticising the deputy marshals, Mr. Cleveland
said that he saw many acts on their part which were calculated to cause
trouble unnecessary, and thought, as a rule, they were men not fit to be
in authority. He characterized the whole lot as a contemptible set of
men. The men who were doing the rioting, had the appearance of those who
had never done an honest day's work in their lives.

N. D. Hutton, reporter for the Tribune, was the next witness called. He
said that he was at Blue Island and about the stock yards district.
Thought some of the rioting was done by railroad men, but could not say
so from personal knowledge of the fact.

Mr. Miller, a reporter for the Tribune was next examined. He testified
that he was sworn in as a deputy marshall and detailed to go to Blue
Island. After relating his experience as to rioting, Commissioner Kernan
asked him if he had an extensive acquaintance among railroad men.

Mr. Miller: "In the course of my work I have learned to know a great
many of them by sight at least."

Commissioner Kernan: "Did you see anyone whom you know to be a railroad
man engaged in violence or encouraging others who were so engaged?"

Mr. Miller: "Never, except once. That was when a meat train had been cut
in two and switches were being turned. He was not doing any of it but
the general tenor of his talk was in the nature of advice to what was
being done. Most of the trouble was caused by hoodlums and toughs. In my
reports I characterized them as hoodlums. Many were boys."

Commissioner Kernan: "What was your observation as to the sobriety or
otherwise of the strikers at the meetings?"

Mr. Miller: "I scarcely remember of seeing one under the influence of
liquor. Sobriety was the rule and drunkenness the exception."

Commissioner Kernan: "Did the speakers at the meetings advice against
violence or did they encourage it?"

Mr. Miller: "They advised against it."

Commissioner Kernan: "Did you think them sincere in this advice or was
it simply a cloak?" Mr. Miller: "I believed them sincere particularly
the brainier men."

Victor M. Harding, a reporter for the Times, was the next witness, he
testified to being present during the rioting on the Rock Island road,
and saw boys throwing burning waste into cars within a hundred yards of
a cavalry camp."

Commissioner Kernan: "Did you ever see anyone you knew to be a railroad
man engaged in any violence?"

Mr. Harding: "I never did. The stock yards furnish the most glaring
examples of the false and exaggerated reports of riot and disorder made
by the newspapers. This district has been for years made to bear the
burden of the crimes committed in this part of the city. There was
comparatively little disorder at the stock yards during the strike, but
the newspaper reports contained accounts of fights, shooting affrays and
riots almost every night. Capt. O'Neil, of the stock yards police told
me that the reporters and the militia were both responsible for this.
Volleys of shot fired by the soldiers or militia were to be heard every
day and night, which on investigation proved to have no cause other than
a desire to create excitement. The militia men, he said, were in the
habit of firing merely for the sake of making a sensation. A crowd would
naturally gather, reporters would flock around and then there would be
something to tell and brag about. I know this is so from talk with the
men themselves. They intimated that they were getting tired of doing
nothing and were desirous of creating some excitement. One night Capt.
O'Neil said he heard a volley of shots, went to the spot and found that
the shooting had been done by a lot of sentries. They said they had
fired at a Polak--the common name for a Pole--who was seen crawling
under a car. The soldiers claimed it was dark, the man was at a distance
and was not hit. Yet they knew he was a Polak. Equally absurd stories in
explanation of shooting were given the police captain on other
occasions."

Assistant Fire Marshall John Fitzgerald testified that he had been on
duty at all fires of any importance and had witnessed many acts of
incendiarism. In all instances he stated that these acts had been
committed by boys or youths belonging to the hoodlum element. He said
the eldest could not have been over nineteen years old. The fire
department had never been obstructed in any way in reaching fires. On
one occasion railroad men, whom he knew to be strikers, aided in placing
an engine in position, though he had never solicited aid of any kind
during the period when the fires were most numerous.

The Pullman side was now taken up by the commissioners.

Frank W. Glover was the first witness. He described himself as a real
estate dealer who owned a sub-division in Kensington, besides acre
property there, owned and sold houses and lots, and had tenants. In
reply to Commissioner Worthington as to what he knew of the rents in
Pullman, Kensington, Roseland and other similar suburbs, how they would
compare, Mr. Glover said: "I should say a six-room house in Pullman for
$17.00 is better than one of my six-room houses in Kensington which
rents for $10.00 to $12.00. The Pullman houses are connected with
sewers. The land on which they stand is better drained and from what I
should judge from outside appearances they have more of what are called
modern conveniences. My houses have no sewer connections, the land is
low, and in spring and fall is liable to have water on it; besides I
understand the Pullman Company keeps their houses in repair, while I do
not."

Paul E. Hearns, stationer and newsdealer at Pullman, was the next
witness. In his opinion there would have been less suffering if some of
the men had let beer and whiskey alone.

L. H. Johnson, a hardware and furniture dealer, testified next. He
expressed the belief that the Pullman employes were as thrifty,
economical and temperate a class of people as others of a similar class.

Wm. R. McKay, a reporter for the Mail, was next heard. He said that he
had been detailed to look after the American Railway Union headquarters
and the meetings at Uhlics Hall. The speeches at all these meetings were
against violence and in favor of observing the law as the only means of
winning the strike.

B. H. Atwell, a reporter for the Daily News, was the next witness. He
testified that he was at Blue Island during the trouble. He said the
deputy marshalls had drawn revolvers without any reason. Most of the men
who made trouble there were not railroad men. Railroad officials had
said to him that the strikers were not making the trouble. At the stock
yards also, such violence as was done was not by railroad strikers but
by toughs.

The next witness called was Alex Lungren, a wood-carver. In answer to
Commissioner Kernan's question if foremen had absolute power over the
men in their departments, Mr. Lungren replied that he did not know.

Commissioner Kernan: "Are the workingmen compelled to obey the orders
given by the foremen?"

Mr. Lungren: "Yes. They must obey orders."

Commissioner Kernan: "Is there any appeal from these orders?"

Mr. Lungren: "No."

Commissioner Kernan: "Then there is no way of getting the matter to the
officials or superintendent?"

Mr. Lungren: "No."

Commissioner Kernan: "Then there is no system of obtaining a hearing
from the officials concerning any grievance?"

Mr. Lungren: "No there is no system and it is very difficult to see any
of the officials to obtain redress."

Commissioner Kernan: "What were the conditions of your re-employment
with the company?"

Mr. Lungren: "I had to leave the American Railway Union."

Commissioner Kernan: "Were you obliged to sign any contract relating to
your membership in any labor organization?"

Mr. Lungren: "Yes. There was a written contract which I signed. It
stated that I would have nothing to do with the American Railway Union."
Mr. Lungren also testified that he did not vote to strike. He did not
attend the meetings; said he quit work in accordance with the notice
posted by the company that the works would be closed down.

Dr. John W. McLean was the next witness. He said he had been a
practicing physician since 1863, and had been in the employ of the
Pullman company since 1894. He thought the strike had been brought about
by the general depression in business throughout the country. Did not
think the rents exorbitant in Pullman. Said he attended the Pullman
employes who were injured, free of charge. When asked by Commissioner
Kernan if he thought intemperance one cause of the Pullman strike, he
said:

"Yes, I think all labor troubles are directly due to this cause."

General Manager E. St. John of the Rock Island road was the next witness
examined. His testimony, which would fill several pages, was in brief a
general contradiction of all evidence offered by the reporters, and
American Railway Union witnesses. He charged the rioting to the
strikers. He was opposed to the government ownership of railroads and
also thought arbitration impracticable. He admitted that a greater
reduction of wages was liable to follow unless the present depressed
condition of business was soon remedied. Regarding the losses incurred
by his road on account of the strike he said it was his impression that
they would be somewhere between $800,000 and $1,000,000. When the
question of communications from the officers of the American Railway
Union came up Commissioner Kernan asked why the General Managers
Association declined to receive it.

Mr. St. John: "Because we considered such an organization unworthy of
consideration."

Commissioner Kernan: "Were you determined not to recognize any union?"

Mr. St. John: "Not exactly, but the American Railway Union least of
all."

Commissioner Kernan: "Were not the roads united sympathetically? Now
what had the Lake Shore road to do with the Rock Island road?"

Mr. St. John: "What had the Rock Island to do with the Lake Shore?"

Commissioner Kernan: "Is it not true that the roads were united
sympathetically?"

Mr. St. John: "Let me ask you a question."

Commissioner Kernan: "No, I am not on the stand. I may be some day and
then you can question me."

Mr. St. John: "When a neighbor's house burns we all unite to fight the
blaze. When an assault is made on all the roads, they unite to resist
it."

When General Manager St. John resumed the witness stand, he had with him
one of the twenty-six sets of books mentioned by Mr. Howard, containing
the scale of wages and rules of employment of all classes of railway
employes on the roads represented in the General Managers' Association.
When questioned by Commissioner Kernan he admitted that a committee had
been appointed to formulate from these a schedule of what was a fair
rate of wages for all classes of employes and uniform rules of
employment. That committee reported, but the report was never acted on.
This committee was appointed under a resolution passed February 15,
1894. Its report was made in March, and if adopted would have affected
125,000 men at least. One or two roads, he admitted, might have reduced
wages about this time, but there was no agreement with the other roads
concerning it. It became known that Mr. Wright, chairman of the
commission, had an annual Pullman pass. He said concerning it that he
and Mr. Pullman had been personal friends for several years, and it was
to him as a personal friend that the pass was given several years ago
and had been renewed annually since. He deemed that it was for the
glowing reports of Pullman, made by Mr. Wright and others in 1884, for
he did not know Mr. Pullman then. He said that he had not used it since
the appointment of the commission.

Following Mr. St. John, John M. Eagan took the stand.

Mr. Eagan admitted that as the manager of the General Managers'
Association he was authorized to incur any expense to secure force to
crush the strike, but was not authorized to do anything to settle it
peaceably. Of his connection with the General Managers' Association he
said that he was requested to take charge of the association during the
strike.

Commissioner Worthington: "Did you have anything done in relation to the
appointment of deputy marshals?"

Mr. Eagan: "Each road appointed an official to select the men they
wanted to act as deputy marshalls and turned 'em over to me. I sent them
to Arnold to be sworn."

Commissioner Worthington: "Did those men serve as employes of the road
while acting as marshals?"

Mr. Eagan: "My judgment is that they were to take care of the interests
of the roads."

Commissioner Worthington: "Did they act in the double capacity as
marshals and as railroad employes? That is, would an engineer, for
instance, while wearing a star showing his authority, run an engine for
the road?"

Mr. Eagan: "I believe they did that. They were sworn in as deputy
marshals to give them a chance to protect themselves."

Commissioner Worthington: "By whom were the deputy marshals to be paid
or by whom will they be paid?"

Mr. Eagan: "Each road is supposed to pay its own men."

Commissioner Worthington: "What do you know of any efforts made by the
officers of the American Railway Union or the city officials to settle
the strike amicably?"

Mr. Egan: "A party named McGillen, Alderman McGillen, I think, told me
that Howard and Debs wanted a conference with me about settling the
strike. I told him I had no authority to confer with them."

Commissioner Worthington: "Did you not have authority to talk with them
and find out what they wanted or could do, without making any agreement
with them?"

Mr. Eagan: "Not with those parties--I did not think I had. A few days
later I found the mayor and Mr. McGillen in the office of the General
Managers' Association. They said they had come with a letter from Debs,
Howard and Kelliher. I told the mayor he ought not to make a messenger
boy of himself for these parties of the American Railway Union. Later I
was given the document to give to the mayor. He was at Kensington, so I
left it with the chief of police, and wrote a letter telling him I
could not receive the letter he had brought."

Commissioner Worthington: "Were any other overtures of settlement made
to you?"

Mr. Eagan: "That's all I know of any overtures."

Commissioner Worthington: "Was there anything insulting or offensive in
the language of the letter the mayor brought you that made you refuse to
receive it?"

Mr. Eagan: "The letter was published that evening and next morning and
speaks for itself."

Commissioner Worthington: "I am asking you how you regarded it. Did you
consider that there was anything insulting or offensive in the letter?"

Mr. Eagan: "I considered that any parties that had fought railroads as
they had and been beaten as I believe they have been had lots of cheek
to dictate the terms of their surrender."

Commissioner Worthington: "You do not answer my question. Were there not
soldiers, U. S. marshals, deputy sheriffs and policemen engaged in
guarding the railroads, and were you not hindered in the operation of
the roads?"

Mr. Eagan: "Yes."

Commissioner Worthington: "Now was not the letter courteously composed
and looking to a settlement of the difficulty?"

Mr. Eagan: "We didn't need a settlement--we had 'em already."

Commissioner Worthington: "The soldiers, marshals, sheriffs and police
remained on duty sometime after that--didn't they?"

Mr. Eagan: "Yes, we needed the soldiers to protect our property."

Commissioner Worthington: "If a settlement could have been reached at
that time between the railroads and the strikers, couldn't the soldiers
and marshals have been dismissed. They wouldn't have been needed after
an amicable settlement had been reached, would they?"

Mr. Eagan: "It was their intention not to recognize the American Railway
Union."

Commissioner Worthington: "Then it is true is it that the reason this
communication was not received was not because it was not courteously
worded or because it was discourteous or insulting but because the
General Managers would not recognize the American Railway Union?"

Mr. Eagan: "Well, that's as I understood it." Commissioner Worthington:
"What would have been out of the way in your talking with Debs and
Howard when they asked a conference with you?"

Mr. Eagan: "I didn't have any authority to talk to them."

Commissioner Worthington: "Then your authority extended to this. You had
authority to contract at the expense of the railroad for all the force
necessary to crush the strike but had no authority to settle it by
peaceful means?"

Mr. Eagan, "Well, yes. I suppose so."

Commissioner Worthington: "When you rebuked the mayor did you think it
derogatory to bear a respectful message looking to a peaceful settlement
of the difficulty?"

Mr. Eagan: "I believed the American Railway Union was whipped at that
time."

Commissioner Worthington: "It was then the condition and not the
character of the men that signed the document that made you refuse to
receive it?"

Mr. Eagan: "We believed we had the strike won."

Commissioner Worthington: "Did you ever try to use anything but force
to settle the difficulty?"

Mr. Eagan: "None, except to the different parties that came to see me,
men that I knew personally had quit work. I told them to go back to
work." In regard to violence Mr. Eagan knew nothing about it personally,
but assumed that the strikers did it.

Superintendent Dunlap, of the Rock Island, was asked if he recognized
any of the ex-employes among the rioters, and said that he did not know
many of the men but was sure that they were present. He was also asked
by Mr. Wright if he knew one John T. Norton to which he answered no.

Superintendent of Police, Michael Brennan, was next examined. He
testified that but a small per cent of the rioting was done by strikers.

John T. Norton, a locomotive engineer, was next called to the stand and
testified that he was employed on the Illinois Central road prior to the
strike, and had since obtained a position on the Calumet & Blue Island.

This line uses the Rock Island track to Joliet. He said that he passed
an examination on the C. & B. I. and also on the Rock Island. He had
made one trip when informed that the Rock Island road had barred him and
would not allow him to run over any part of their line. He consulted a
lawyer and was told to see Superintendent Dunlap. He called on him in
company with a friend named Fraser. He asked Mr. Dunlap if he was barred
off the Rock Island, who said yes, and he then saw that he was
blacklisted.

Mr. Kernan: "Do you call that evidence of a blacklist?"

Mr. Norton: "I do. After getting a letter from Superintendent Conlin I
was barred out by Superintendent Dunlap who has just sworn he did not
know me."

Mr. Kernan: "Can you produce Mr. Fraser. We would like to hear his
testimony?"

Mr. Norton: "I will."

Mr. Kernan: "Were you concerned in any violence during the strike?"

Mr. Norton: "No."

Mr. Kernan: "Are you an officer of the American Railway Union?"

Mr. Norton: "Yes. I am president of local union No. 193."

Mr. Gompers of the American Federation of Labor was next examined but
refused to be sworn. Mr. Gompers went into the labor question in a
general way. In reference to strikes, he said that so long as the
present industrial and commercial systems last, so long will strikes
continue.

George M. Pullman, president of the Pullman company, was now before the
commissioners. He submitted a lengthy statement in relation to the town
of Pullman, and under examination he told of the increase of the Palace
Car company from $1,000,000 to $36,000,000 and the accumulation of a
cash surplus of $25,000,000. When questioned concerning the grievance of
the employes, he was not so well posted. When asked by Mr. Wright if it
was the practice of the company to reduce wages from time to time, he
said:

"I am not familiar with the details of the manufacturing department and
must refer you to the second vice-president."

Mr. Worthington: "Did you ever express any unwillingness to arbitrate?"

Mr. Pullman: "I did express unwillingness and refer you to my published
statements. I was aware of the losses of the company in paying the
wages it did when contract prices were so low, and I knew it was
impossible for the company to pay a higher scale. It was a question
whether the shops should be closed, or secure work at a low figure. It
was the principle involved in letting a third party determine how the
company should transact its business."

Mr. Worthington: "But you paid the usual dividend of eight per cent last
year?"

Mr. Pullman: "Yes. But the profit during the World's Fair helped out the
amount."

Mr. Worthington: "Now don't you think that the Pullman corporation which
paid a dividend of $2,800,000 for the year just ended should have borne
with the employes and shared its profits to some extent?"

Mr. Pullman: "I don't see why we should take the money from the
stockholders to pay a set of men higher wages because the manufacturing
business paid well, to pay this money to men working at Pullman when the
employes at Ludlow, Wilmington and St. Louis had no complaint to make.
The efforts of the American Railway Union to call a strike there was a
failure."

Mr. Worthington: "Has the Pullman Company ever voluntarily raised
wages?"

Mr. Pullman: "No; but it always has paid fair wages."

Mr. Worthington: "Now, Mr. Pullman, when you see the present unrest of
labor, and the possible consequences, what objection had you to
distributing a portion of the profits or increasing wages a little?"

Mr. Pullman: "The reason is embodied in my statement, it is a matter of
opinion, and then there is the principle involved. It is impossible
under the circumstances."

Mr. Worthington: "Impossible, what is impossible? Could not arbitration
determine the principle involved?"

Mr. Pullman: "As president of the company I do not care to give any
other."

Mr. Worthington then introduced a lease used between the company and its
tenants. This provided that the tenants should make all repairs to
plumbing, water pipes, gas, etc., and to surrender premises in good
repair. When such repairs were made by the company, the amount was
deducted from their salaries.

Mr. Worthington: "Now, the company does not make any repairs, does it?"

Mr. Pullman: "The company repairs the roofs or outside of the houses, I
am not familiar with the details."

Mr. Worthington: "But by the lease the tenants are bound to make all the
repairs, it is stipulated that the tenant shall repay the company for
all repairs made."

Mr. Pullman: "I will have to refer you to some official of the company."
(Laughter.)

Mr. Worthington: "The rent is deducted monthly, is it not?"

Mr. Pullman: "I am unable myself to identify that lease you handed me."

Mr. Pullman concluded with the statement that the company declined to
employ any member of the American Railway Union.

Mr. Worthington again asked if the company could not afford to pay an
increased scale of wages and this Mr. Pullman refused.

Mr. Kernan: "When the general cut in salaries was made, was your salary
reduced?"

Mr. Pullman: "No." (Laughter.)

Mr. Kernan: "That of officials, superintendents or foremen?"

Mr. Pullman: "No."

Mr. Wickes then took the stand. His evidence--which in main was
documentary--embraced every detail of the strike. He admitted having
promised members of the grievance committee that they would not be
discharged, and said the agreement had not been broken by him. From
statistics presented by Mr. Wickes, he claimed that the average rate of
wages paid for the year ending in April, 1893, was $2.63 per day and for
the same succeeding period $2.03, which fact, he said, disproved of
statements made by strikers.

In the case of Miss Jennie Curtis the books showed that her father had
owed but $17.00 at the time of his death, which sum had never been
repaid the company.

Blacklisting, he said, had never been practiced by the Pullman Company,
although the foreman kept a list of discharged men. He also said that
the company had been losing $500 per month by furnishing water. He said
that the men were advised by Mr. Howard not to strike.

Referring to rent and wages, he did not consider that there was any
connection between them. He said: "We paid the market price for labor
and we asked the market price for houses." He contended that wages were
regulated by the law of supply and demand. We go into the market to buy
labor, as we go into the market to buy other things. If a manufacturer
by reason of improved machinery, of special facilities, or greater
ability in securing supplies or disposing of products, or by more
effective handling of men, should be making larger profits than his
competitors and should increase wages, he would deprive himself of all
the benefits of these advantages which are his and to which his employes
do not contribute, and would make no more than the manufacturer who
conducted his business in a shiftless manner or without ability, energy
or enterprise.

Mr. Wickes concluded his testimony, and Inspector Nicholas Hunt was
called.

He testified that from June 27th, or the time his force was first called
to protect railroad property at various points, up to July 3d, there had
been no serious difficulty. When asked by Mr. Worthington if he had seen
railroad men take part in the destruction of property. He replied:

"I have not seen one railroad man interfere in any way."

A. J. Sullivan, general manager of the Illinois Central, was next to
testify.

He went into details concerning the trouble on his road. He was certain
that the acts of violence were committed by the strikers although he did
not witness it personally.

H. R. Saunders, general yardmaster for the Rock Island, testified for
the company in relation to the way the strike was ordered on the Rock
Island. He charged that Mr. Howard, vice-president of the American
Railway Union, with using abusive and violent language. Epithets applied
to Pullman and the expression, "if scabs take your places kill them with
a coupling pin," was declared to have been used.

W. D. Fuller, agent for the Rock Island road at Blue Island, testified
that he was present, and thought Mr. Howard's speech was very violent,
he applied epithets to Pullman, thought he ought to be hanged, and that
he (Howard) would like to head a crowd to do it.

L. A. Camp, a yardmaster for the Rock Island, was also at the meeting
and heard no violent language used.

G. D. Cruelly also a yardmaster for the same road, thought the strike at
Blue Island was due to Mr. Howard and Mr. Debs. Mr. Howard in particular
and Mr. Debs incidentally. Mr. Howard was violent and abusive in his
language. The witness is a member of the Order of Railway conductors but
not of the American Railway Union.

Fred Baumbach testified to hearing both Debs and Howard speak, but did
not remember of hearing either one of them using violent language.

Otto Moriling, a tailor, testified to being present. He did not hear any
violent language used except that Mr. Howard applied an epithet to
Pullman.

James Simmons also heard Howard speak, but did not hear him counsel
violence.

Alexander Quasso said he was present when Howard spoke but heard no
violence counseled except some reference by Mr. Howard to the justice of
hanging Pullman.

Vice President Howard now took the stand and testified regarding his
speech at Blue Island. He said:

"I want to begin by saying that among railroad men particularly
trainmen, it has been a constant habit and practice and has been for
years, to use a certain class of expressions which literally are very
offensive in the lightest and most ordinary way, and without meaning
anything in particular about them. Every old railroad man can bear me
out in this. A railroad man will address his best friend with a most
offensive epithet uttered in a most cordial way and intended to express
cordiality, so that the term I applied to Pullman, has among railroad
men a technical meaning, very broad it is true and expressing according
to the circumstances very different sentiments. But its use is so common
and I may say usual, that it has altogether lost the meaning it has,
among others than railroad men.

"I was telling them the condition of things at Pullman. I told them of
incidents that have been testified to before this commission. I was
trying to array them against Pullman. I used the language of railroad
men and I applied to Mr. Pullman the epithet I am charged with using.
But I used it in the railroad sense. I said he ought to be hung, that is
another railroad expression.

"I did not say that I would like to take part in the hanging or lead a
party to hang him. As to the coupling pin expression, what I said at
Blue Island, I have said at hundreds of other places, it was this I told
them, it was often said that capital would always defeat labor. I denied
this. I said that capital could only whip labor when it could divide it,
and make labor defeat itself. That in the last few years a wave of
religious intolerance had swept over this country, and the
representatives of the railroads had taken advantage of it as a means of
dividing labor. I gave instances where some emissary of the railroads
would come in, and going to the protestant members, instill distrust in
their minds of the Roman Catholic members, and then going to the Roman
Catholics and creating distrust of the Protestants. I urged them not to
allow themselves to be divided in the labor movement by questions of
religious differences, and I said that if any of those sleuths, and I
may have said sleuths of hell, come into this movement to array you
against each other in a question of religion, I hope some one will have
the nerve to hit him on the head with a round end coupling pin and send
him to his last long sleep.

"I said nothing about injuring men who came to take their places. I told
them if they struck, to put on their good clothes and keep away from the
railroad property. If the railroads could get men to run their roads,
let them, but if the men stood together, were united, the roads couldn't
get men and would have to yield.

"Far from advising violence, I have always advised against it. I have
some questions I would like the commission to put to the general
managers, either here, or in Washington. They are these:

"1st. Were not the general managers whipped on July 5, before there had
been any violence to array public opinion against the strikers, and
before the troops were here and by their presence provoked violence?

"2d. Did your company have a contract with the government to carry the
mails?

"3d. Was the contract dependent upon your ability to carry Pullmans?

"4th. Did your contract with the Pullman Company require you to refuse
to transport mail if you left the Pullmans off?

"5th. Did the strikers interfere to prevent carrying of the mails if you
left the Pullmans off?

"6th. Could you not have carried mails, if you did not insist in hauling
Pullmans?

"7th. Was your contract with the government less binding on you than
your contract with the Pullman Company, or was either dependent on the
other?"

Mr. Kernan had no objection to the questions being put to the general
managers, but did not think, under the circumstances, the commission
could prolong its sitting in order to ask them.

Mayor John P. Hopkins was then called and cordially shook hands with the
commissioners before taking the witness chair. His examination was
conducted by Judge Worthington as follows:

Mr. Worthington: "As mayor of the city and the actual head of the police
department, please state the general conduct of the police force during
the strike and the conditions attending the strike."

Mr. Hopkins: "The evening of June 25, Mr. Ellsworth, who claimed to
represent the different railroads, called on me and said he understood a
boycott was to be enforced on all roads hauling Pullman cars. He said he
understood I was going to Springfield that night and wished me to give
instructions to the chief of police and arrange for the protection of
the roads. So far as I know, the police did all the work required of
them, and I have ample assurance of that fact from railway officials.

"This condition existed until July 5. That morning Mr. Wright of the
Rock Island called at my office and claimed that riotous mobs were
interfering with the operation of trains, overturning cars, etc. I went
with him to the office of Mr. Cable of the Rock Island road, where we
discussed the matter. Mr. Cable said he thought the police were not
doing their duty, but from the information I had received, I was
confident that such was not the case. I then suggested that Mr. Cable go
with me to the scene of the alleged trouble, but he said that he did not
think it safe to do so. I proposed the same plan to Mr. Wright, but he
made the same objection. I then saw the corporation counsel and
suggested the same plan, which he accepted. A switch engine was secured
and we went. A crowd of probably 3,000 or 3,500 persons, mostly women
and children, had assembled at that point. On the tracks at
Thirty-seventh street four trains were standing, and just north of them
an empty freight car was lying across the tracks. Half an hour after we
arrived, a wrecking crew, accompanied by young Newell, Attorney Wright,
and other officials came up, and they started to take the car off the
track. On going down we had found the tracks entirely unobstructed, but
on going back found ten or fifteen overturned cars. I thought the police
did all they could to prevent such an occurrence. I stayed about two
hours, when I came back and issued the proclamation to the people which
was published. I also instructed the chief of police to suspend all
officers who had been stationed at the crossings where the cars were
overturned.

"That night I wired the governor at Springfield, that the militia, which
had been preparing to go into camp there, had better be retained in the
city, as it might be advisable to call out the troops within twenty-four
hours. The same night about 10:30, I was at the Hyde Park police
station when I heard that the "Diamond Special" had been stopped at
Kensington and that large crowds had congregated there. Inspector Hunt
sent re-inforcements to that point, and when I retired everything seemed
quiet. Friday morning, July 6, which was the first time the railroads
had intimated that the protection afforded them was inadequate, I heard
from Kensington that there was trouble in the Rock Island and Chicago &
Eastern Illinois roads. I then called on the governor for five regiments
of the state militia. Saturday, at 3:30 P. M., some trouble
occurred at Forty-seventh and Loomis streets, where a mob had collected.
The state troops fired and killed one man, two others dying afterward.
There was no trouble after that, so far as I know."

Mayor Hopkins then read a number of communications from railway
officials expressing satisfaction in regard to the perfect protection
afforded by the police during the strike. Among these were letters from
President Marvin Hughitt of the Northwestern, General Superintendent
Sullivan of the Illinois Central, President Thomas of the Chicago &
Western Indiana, and others. Several officers who were deemed worthy of
promotion for their good services at critical times were mentioned in a
letter from a Santa Fe official. The mayor then continued his testimony
as follows:

"So far as the management of the police was concerned I think it was
excellent. I wish to state that the Blue Island police are governed by
the officials of that town. The word police has been referred to
indiscriminately in the testimony, leaving the impression that Blue
Island was under the jurisdiction of the city.

"There was very little resistance to the police. The strikers treated me
all right, and the crowds seemed good-natured. There was some resistance
to the police, I believe, on the night of July 7, at Ashland avenue and
the Northwestern tracks. The police fired and killed a woman on the roof
of a house in the neighborhood."

Mr. Worthington: "How many were killed in all or who have since died in
consequence of injuries received?"

Mr. Hopkins: "About seven, I think in Chicago. Three at Forty-seventh
and Loomis streets, one at Kensington, the woman just mentioned, and I
think two others."

Mr. Worthington: "Please state about the militia engaged during the
strike."

Mr. Hopkins: "I will read my copy of the telegram to the governor to
which I referred. The next day I again telegraphed the governor
suggesting that five regiments be placed at the disposal of the city. In
one half hour I received an answer stating that the militia had been
ordered to report. There was virtually the entire militia of the state
in service, probably 2,000 men. The last detachment went home August 6."

Mr. Worthington: "You have stated that you gave orders to suspend
officers at certain crossings. Why was that?"

Mr. Hopkins: "The officers complained that people jumped over the fences
and that they could not prevent them. The Rock Island road is protected
on each side of the right-of-way by low fences, and empty freight cars
were standing for many blocks on the side track next the fence. The
people who lived near the tracks could easily jump the fence unseen and
tip the cars over. I ordered the men suspended for the general effect it
would have on the force."

Mr. Worthington: "I would like to ask a general question. As mayor of
the city, do you think the police, or a portion of them, either directly
or indirectly, took a part in promoting the strike in any way?"

Mr. Hopkins: "I would not deny that some of the men had sympathy with
the strikers. I am in sympathy myself with the Pullman strikers."

Mr. Worthington: "But do you think the police did their duty?"

Mr. Hopkins: "Yes, sir. Several times Mr. Eagan telephoned that trouble
was occurring at some point. When officers would investigate they would
find no trouble at all. There are 2,100 miles of railway in the city
limits; there are 1,360 trains daily, 160 railroad crossings, and 3,000
surface railroad crossings. The police force for this year is scheduled
at 1,928 patrolmen. There are 186 square miles of territory in the city
and you can readily see that every point could not be covered at once.
The amount of violence was not very great. In Pullman not one pane of
glass was broken in the three months of the strike. I live in Pullman
myself."

Mr. Worthington: "You may state whether at any time you advised the
American Railway Union or its members to strike?"

Mr. Hopkins: "No, sir."

Mr. Worthington: "Did the General Manager's Association either during or
since the strike request the city to arrest any individual strikers or
suggest such arrest?"

Mr. Hopkins: "No, sir; I think that President Newell swore out a warrant
for a man named Hall, but the information was furnished by the city."

Mr. Worthington: "Has the American Railway Union brought in any
information of this character?"

Mr. Hopkins: "Yes, sir; in the case of Hall, who was charged with
turning over cars; also in other cases, which upon investigation we
concluded not to take up."

Mr. Worthington: "Then the disposition of the American Railway Union
appears to have been to assist the city?"

Mr. Hopkins: "Yes, sir."

Mr. Worthington: "During or before the strike were there any overtures
made in regard to arbitration?"

Mr. Hopkins: "I met Mr. Pullman at lunch in the Chicago club one day
and he told me of a meeting his employes had held. Then July 3, there
was a further talk about protecting the works on the following day when
trouble might be expected. There was some talk about a settlement, but
the company seemed to regard the strikers as law breakers. Then a
committee of the council was appointed, and word sent to Mr. Eagan, but
he said he couldn't come. Then the committee called at Mr. Pullman's
office to discuss the question of arbitration--or if there was anything
to arbitrate. The answer received there was that the company refused to
arbitrate. July 11, I received a telegram from Mayor Pingree of Detroit,
asking if I would act with him in endeavoring to settle the strike. He
had communications from fifty other mayors giving their views on the
question. We saw Mr. Wickes, Mr. Runnels and Mr. Brown, and had a long
interview. Mayor Pingree took the point that arbitration should be
tested, and made a strong argument. He is a member of a shoe
manufacturing firm and related his own experience in a strike of nine
months' duration. Mr. Wickes, Mr. Runnels and Mr. Brown withdrew and
prepared a statement giving the position of the company and declining
the proposition. On July 13, Mr. Debs, Mr. Howard, and Mr. Kelliher
prepared a communication to the railway managers offering to settle the
strike if the railroads would re-instate the men as individuals or such
men as had committed no overt acts. With Mr. McGillen I went over with
the document to Mr. St. John. What occurred there has been published.
Now, while I think of it, I want to say that the statement published in
some papers that Mr. St. John told me I should not act as a messenger
boy for the American Railway Union is false. I deny most emphatically
that Mr. St. John used those words. I should not have allowed it. This
was the last action on my part to bring about a settlement.

"It has been said that I protested against the presence of the federal
troops in the city. I do say that the railways had never complained that
the civil authorities were unable to protect the roads. I have never
protested against the federal troops and think they did some good."

Mr. Worthington: "It has been stated in the press that you applied to
Mr. Debs to move trains."

Mr. Hopkins: "That is not true. A man named Brenock has a contract with
the city to remove dead animals, the place where they are rendered
being over the Indiana state line. He called upon me and said that there
was a train load of dead animals at the stock yards which could not be
pulled out; the men had quit work. I said I thought a volunteer crew of
trainmen could be procured which would do the work. I sent my secretary
to the American Railway Union with that request. A crew went down to the
yards and manned the train. When it proceeded some distance it was
discovered that a train load of dressed beef had been substituted and
the train crew abandoned the cars. The dead animals then remained where
they were for several days."

Mr. Kernan: "Then this action was simply a plan to guard the public
health?"

Mr. Hopkins: "Yes, sir; simply to remove the dead animals from the city
limits."

At the conclusion of Mayor Hopkins' testimony, President Carroll D.
Wright arose and declared the commission formally adjourned until
Wednesday, Sept. 26, at Washington, D. C.




CHAPTER XX.

ALTGELD INVESTIGATES PULLMAN.


In response to a piteous appeal for help from a committee of Pullman
strikers, John P. Altgeld, governor of Illinois, came in person to the
town of Pullman and made an investigation of the condition of the people
in order to satisfy himself regarding their complaints of suffering and
destitution. After only a partial investigation the governor returned to
his hotel satisfied with the correctness of the reports.

He said the starvation at Pullman was as bad if not worse than had been
reported by the Times that 1,600 families in Pullman and vicinity were
starving.

"Not only starving," said the governor, "but they are without fuel and
in rags. They must not starve and I will remain in Pullman until some
means can be devised for their relief.

"I went to Pullman in response to an invitation by the strikers'
committee, and found matters even worse than represented. I visited
their homes and went through every room in some of their houses. Two
representatives of the Pullman company who accompanied me, admitted that
the houses visited were a fair representation of every house occupied by
the strikers' families. Their condition is pitiful, there are families
numbering from two to eight members and I tell you they are slowly
starving to death. The little ones are crying with hunger and there is
nothing in the house to eat. Something for their relief must be done
immediately. I have thought of several measures, but as yet have arrived
at no conclusion. For several months the people may have to be cared
for, and it is well to go slow when one is treading in deep water. I
suppose I will be abused no matter what steps I take, but I don't care a
blank, as these people will not starve if I can prevent it, and I shall
see that I do prevent it."

The governor declined to say anything in relation to the cause which
created the present condition at Pullman. He said it was enough to know
that women and children were crying with hunger, it was time enough to
talk about the causes later.

Upon the governor's arrival at Pullman, a big man with gray whiskers
and a lordly air rushed forward and presented his card to his
excellency. He was August Rapp, chief designer of the company and
formerly superintendent of the works. With him was Chief Wilde,
Pullman's head accountant, whom he presented. It was evident that the
governor did not wish to see the Pullman official.

"Where are the members of the committee that sent for me?" he demanded.
"I want to see the men." Somewhat abashed Messrs. Wilde and Rapp stepped
backward and three or four mechanics came forward. There was Thos. W.
Heathcoat, G. A. Kreamer, Theo. Rhode and two or three members of the
relief committee. "I want to see what you men have to show me," said the
governor.

They repaired at once to the tenements on Fulton street, where the first
stop was made at No. 124, occupied by Mrs. O'Halleron. A blind widow was
found occupying four small rooms on the first floor. She told the
governor that she had two sons aged nineteen and fourteen respectively
and a daughter aged twenty. All three had worked for Pullman but were
now idle. They had applied for work but were told there was no work for
them. One of the boys had been a brass polisher and the younger son and
the daughter had worked in the laundry. They had lived in the town seven
years. There was no coal in the house, they had a little food, given
them by the relief committee, but they could not support themselves and
said there was no one to look after their condition.

"Have the Pullman people sent any one to see you?"

"They have not," replied the blind woman.

She said they paid $12.60 for the four rooms. One of her sons had drawn
$1.60 and the other 96 cents per day.

"Good luck to you, sir," she said as the governor walked away with his
teeth set firmly together.

F. H. Taylor, superintendent of the Pullman company, had now joined the
party taking the place of Accountant Wilde. Mr. Rapp pressed his way in
everywhere though paying no attention to the audible slurs of the people
about him.

Block B, across the way on Fulton street was next visited. The manner of
Gov. Altgeld was kindly and he introduced himself in a pleasant way,
asking questions in a manner calculated to inspire confidence.

There were six families in Block B, some of the tenants had gone back to
work. A poor woman in No. 3 said her husband was not working, he had
been in Pullman for six years and had asked to return to work, but was
told there was nothing for him to do, the shop was full. She had three
little children but little to eat, only a bit of flour, coffee and tea
from the relief store left.

In Block S, room 7, was John Carlson, a cabinet maker who had worked in
Pullman for seven years and could not get his position back He had
nothing in the house to eat.

"Have you eaten to-day?" asked the governor.

"I had some bread and coffee from a neighbor," said the man. "My wife is
sick and I divided with her, we haven't a thing in the house now."

Theo. Ericson, of 301 Fulton street, had six in family. He said he could
not get work and the money he had saved before the strike was all gone.
The relief committee had given a little food.

"How many in Pullman," said the governor, "are in the same fix, whom you
know of?"

"Lots of men, sir, I know of half a dozen in my neighborhood," answered
the man.

Olaf Olson had worked in the street car shops and was now idle. He had
six children and his wife to care for, they have nothing to eat, and he
could get nothing from the relief committee as their supplies were
exhausted.

Otto Wullf, of room 22, Block F, also had a wife and six children. He
said that all he had in the house to eat was two pounds of oat meal from
the relief store. As he told his story tears rolled down the cheeks of
the big bearded fellow and the governor was visibly affected. His wife
was sick abed he said and a newspaper reporter dropped a quarter into
his hand while he used a handkerchief to remove the moisture from his
eyes.

The man stated that his wages had been $1.30 per day, and his rent $9.60
per month for four small rooms.

Peter Anderson, of Kensington, said he had worked in the repair shop but
could not get work now as the shop was filled, or at least so he was
told when he applied.

He had five children and not enough to eat. He had borrowed a dollar
with which to buy a sack of flour. This was all he had.

Mr. Vanderwein had a wife and four children and could not get a
position. He had no money and only two pounds of oat meal, two pounds of
corn meal and a little flour left.

Here someone whispered to the governor and the latter turned to Mr. Rapp
and said:

"They tell me you are taking the names of those who complain, with a
view of keeping them out of work?"

"That is not so, sir," said Rapp, coloring deeply.

"And," said the governor, "they tell me you are largely responsible for
the reduction of the wages?"

"That is not so, sir," persisted Mr. Rapp.

"Well, men," said the governor, "let him come with us, this must not be
a star chamber affair."

A boy named Koopka spoke for his father who did not understand English.

He was one of three children he said, and they hadn't enough to eat. No
relief could be obtained now and every thing was gone but a few
potatoes.

Mrs. Nathan Booth stepped forward. She said she had six children, all
barefooted, the oldest eleven years, and the youngest six months. They
had been two years in Pullman and her husband had earned $1.30 per day.
He had no work now, and the only food was that given them by the wife of
the Methodist minister.

Andrew Schelly said he had worked for the Pullman company twelve years
but could get no work now, and his family had nothing to eat. He had
borrowed a pair of shoes in which he could seek work.

A. Bergstrom for seven years in Pullman said he could not get his old
position. He had five children, the eldest ten years, and they had no
money, no food, no trust.

Frank Mass had been three years in Pullman, had three children and
nothing to eat.

The wife of Pat Mullen, of Block E, room 1, appeared with a child in her
arms and a toddler at her skirts.

They had been in Pullman twelve years and had four other children. Her
husband could not get back to work because he was on the strike
committee. She did not know where the next meal was to come from.

Though wretchedly poor these people were clean and neat. They are all of
the better class of laboring people.

John Cedarland sat at a table and stared stolidly at the visitors, while
his wife with a baby at her breast and two at her heels stood by. A
neighbor who had given them of her scanty store, said the man was sick
and the family destitute. On Sunday she had given them a piece of meat,
and wood with which to cook it.

A reporter slipped a quarter into her hand and received a look worth
$8.00.

Two of John Smith's collectors, out with furniture bills as a matter of
form, told the governor that two-thirds of the old men were still idle,
and that the condition of these men was deplorable. They had called at
one place where one of the children was celebrating its birthday and all
there was for the feast was bread and onions. The collectors chipped in
for a few luxuries.

Mrs. Peter Camp appeared with two children and reported five more, and
there were scores of similar cases, all destitute and absolutely
without food.

On his way back to the city the governor would say but little.

Mr. Wickes, vice president of the Pullman company called and was
presented to his excellency in due form. The object of his visit was to
tender his services as guide and escort.

This was declined.

Mr. Wickes expressed his regret that the governor saw fit not to accept
the offer.

As a result of Gov. Altgeld's investigation he issued the following
proclamation:

"TO THE PEOPLE OF ILLINOIS, AND ESPECIALLY THOSE OF THE CITY OF
CHICAGO: There is great distress growing out of the want of food in
and around the town of Pullman. More than a thousand families in the
neighborhood of 6,000 people, are utterly destitute. Nearly four-fifths
of them are women and children. The men have endeavored to get work but
were unable to do so. I have made a personal examination of the case and
learn from the officials of the Pullman company that prior to the strike
they had 3,260 names on the pay roll; yesterday they had 2,220 people at
work, but over 600 of these were new men, so that they have only about
1,600 of their old employes at work, leaving about 1,660 that have not
been taken back. Several hundreds of these have left, but the remainder
are unable to go away and have nothing to eat. I find that immediately
after the beginning of the strike a relief association was formed to
provide for the needy, and the books of this association show that 2,463
applications were made by the Pullman employes, mostly heads of
families, to this association for aid. In fact, nearly all of the
employes, except the few hundred who left, have been supported by
charity for nearly three months.

"As a rule they are a superior class of laboring people, industrious,
capable, and steady and some of them have worked for the Pullman company
for more than ten years. Those who have been given work can get food,
but are still in such an impoverished condition that they cannot help
their neighbors if they would. The relief society is unable to get more
supplies. Last Saturday it gave to each family two pounds of oat meal
and two pounds of corn meal, and having nothing left it suspended
operations, leaving the people in an absolutely helpless condition. The
county commissioners of Cook county, as overseers of the poor, have
rendered some assistance, but owing to limited appropriation they can
furnish relief but for a short time.

"We cannot now stop to inquire into the cause of this distress. The good
people of this state cannot allow women and children by the hundred to
perish of hunger. I therefore call upon all humane and charitably
disposed citizens to contribute what they can toward giving relief to
these people. I am satisfied that any contribution sent to the Pullman
relief committee at Kensington, Ill., will be judiciously distributed. I
find their treasurer has given a bond to properly account for all moneys
received.

  "JOHN P. ALTGELD.
  "Governor.
  "Aug. 21, 1894.

  "TO THE HONORABLE, THE BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS OF COOK COUNTY--

_Gentlemen_: Your attention has already been called to the great
destitution that exists in and around the town of Pullman and you have
furnished some relief there. I have made a personal investigation of the
conditions there and find the suffering is very great for want of food.
I respectfully appeal to you as the officers upon whom devolves the
duty of providing for cases of this kind, that you do the uttermost in
your power to furnish immediate assistance to those people.

  Very respectfully,
  "JOHN P. ALTGELD.
  "Governor.
  "Aug. 21, 1894."

Before leaving Springfield to investigate the condition at Pullman, Gov.
Altgeld sent the following telegram to Mr. Pullman:

  "Aug. 19, 1894.
  "George M. Pullman, President of the Pullman's Palace Car Company,
    Chicago, Ill.:

"I have received numerous reports to the effect that there is great
distress at Pullman. To-day I received a formal appeal as governor from
a committee of the Pullman people for aid. They state that 1,600
families, including women and children, are starving; that they cannot
get work and have not the means to go elsewhere; that your company has
brought men from all over the United States to fill their places. Now,
these people live in your town and were your employes. Some of them
worked for your company for many years. They must be people of industry
and character or you would not have kept them. Many of them have
practically given their lives to you. It is claimed that they struck
because after years of toil their wages were so reduced that their
children went hungry. Assuming that they were wrong and foolish, they
had yet served you long and well and you must feel some interest in
them. They do not stand on the same footing with you, so that much must
be overlooked. The state of Illinois has not the least desire to meddle
in the affairs of your company, but it cannot allow a whole community
within its borders to perish of hunger. The local overseer of the poor
has been appealed to, but there is a limit to what he can do. I cannot
help them very much at present, so unless relief comes from some other
source I shall either have to call an extra session of the legislature
to make special appropriation or else issue an appeal to the humane
people of the state to give bread to your recent employes. It seems to
me that you would prefer to relieve the situation yourself, especially
as it has just cost the state upward of $50,000 to protect your property
and as both the state and the public have suffered enormous loss and
expense on account of disturbances that grew out of the trouble between
your company and its workmen. I am going to Chicago to-night to make a
personal investigation before taking any official action. I will be in
my office in the Unity block at 10 A. M. to-morrow and shall be
glad to hear from you if you care to make any reply.

  "JOHN P. ALTGELD."

The following letter was addressed to Mr. Pullman by Gov. Altgeld.

  "CHICAGO, Ill., Aug. 21.
  "George M. Pullman, President of the Pullman's Palace Car Company,
    Chicago.

"SIR: I examined the conditions at Pullman yesterday, visited
even the kitchens and bedrooms of many of the people. Two
representatives of your company were with me and we found the distress
as great as it was represented. The men are hungry and the women and
children are actually suffering. They have been living on charity for a
number of months and it is exhausted. Men who have worked for your
company for more than ten years had to apply to the relief society in
two weeks after the work stopped. I learn from your manager that last
spring there were 3,260 people on the pay roll; yesterday there were
2,220 at work, but over 600 of these are new men, so that only about
1,600 of the old employes have been taken back, thus leaving over 1,000
of the old employes who have not been taken back. A few hundred have
left. The remainder have nearly all applied for work, but were told that
they were not needed. These are utterly destitute. The relief committee
last Saturday gave out two pounds of oatmeal and two pounds of cornmeal
to each family, but even the relief committee has exhausted its
resources. Something must be done at once. The case differs from
instances of destitution found elsewhere, for generally there is
somebody in the neighborhood able to give relief. This is not the case
at Pullman. Even those who have gone to work are so exhausted that they
cannot help their neighbors if they would. I repeat now that it seems to
me your company cannot afford to have me appeal to the charity and
humanity of the state to save the lives of your old employes.
Four-fifths of those people are women and children. No matter what
caused this distress it must be met.

"If you will allow me I will make this suggestion: If you had shut down
your works last fall when you say business was poor you would not have
expected to get any rent from your tenants. Now, while a dollar is a
large sum to each of these people all the rent now due you is a
comparatively small matter to you. If you will cancel all rent to Oct.
1, you will be as well off as if you had shut down. This would enable
those at work to meet their most pressing wants. Then if you cannot give
work to all, work some half time so that all can at least get something
to eat for their families. This will give immediate relief to the whole
situation and then by degrees assist as many to go elsewhere as desire
to do so and all to whom you cannot give work. In this way something
like a normal condition could be re-established at Pullman before winter
and you would not be out any more than you would have been had you shut
down a year ago. I will be at the Unity block for several hours and will
be glad to see you if you care to make any reply.

  "Yours respectfully,
  "JOHN P. ALTGELD."

Mr. Pullman replied as follows:

  "THE PULLMAN'S PALACE CAR COMPANY,
  "OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

  "CHICAGO, ILL., Aug. 21, 1894.

"SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of this date, giving your impressions derived from your visit to
the town of Pullman yesterday. In pursuance of the invitation contained
in your telegram of the 19th inst. I caused Mr. Wickes, a vice president
of this company, who is thoroughly acquainted with its affairs at
Pullman, to call upon you and offer you every assistance in his power or
which could be offered by any officer of the company in making your
proposed personal investigation. Mr. Wickes offered to accompany you to
Pullman for this purpose, and I regret that you did not appear to
consider that he could be of service to you. As an indication of the
importance of the aid of local knowledge in making essential
discriminations I may say to you that I have the best reason for
believing that the husband of a wife who is published as representing
her family to you yesterday as in need of help, drew more than $1,300 of
his savings from a bank July 2 last for the purpose as he said of
buying lots.

"While it has not been represented to the officers of this company by
any persons concerned that there was any such extended distress at
Pullman, as was represented for the first time by the extraordinary
method of a published telegram to you in your official capacity, I do
not doubt that there are many cases of need caused by the refusal of the
employes for more than two and one-half months to earn offered wages of
more than $300,000; and that such cases have been increased and made
more severe by the persistence of more than 650 of our employes, of whom
about 350 live in Pullman, in refusing to apply for their old places
after the strike was practically over and after they were publicly
invited, July 16, to resume their work, until by the gradual coming in
of new men during the whole month their places have been filled and the
full force engaged for all work in hand. In addition to this there is,
no doubt, need among the old employes living in Pullman, a considerable
number of whom have persistently refused to apply for work at all, many
of them it is understood, considering themselves to be still engaged in
a strike.

"I mention these things so that the responsibility for the existing
situation, whatever it is may not be improperly placed. The situation,
however, is one which must be dealt with without regard to what has
caused it, and I shall give it the consideration which is due from the
company. I do not, however, anticipate, as you appear to do, that those
employes who have resumed their work will be limited to the satisfaction
of their most pressing wants, and as to those who are not at work the
cancelling of their rents is not, I venture to suggest, a question to
which attention should first be given at the present juncture if their
pressing needs are as you suppose them to be. The company will continue
in its efforts to secure work in order to employ as many men as
possible, and in that way relieve the situation as far as practicable.

"Your suggestion that the work should be divided so that a sufficient
number of our present employes should be put on half time in order to
give at least half time work for all was tried last winter. The result
has been that the gross earnings of various individual employes were
last winter so small as to give an erroneous impression with reference
to the sufficiency of the rate of wages. The policy of the company is
now to employ only as many men as it is possible to furnish work for on
full time.

  "Very respectfully yours,
  "GEORGE M. PULLMAN,
  "President.


  "The Hon. John P. Altgeld, Governor."
  "CHICAGO, Aug. 21.

  "George M. Pullman, Esq., President the Pullman's Palace Car Company,
    City.

"SIR: I have your answer to my communication this morning. I
see by it that your company refuses to do anything toward relieving the
situation at Pullman. It is true that Mr. Wickes offered to take me to
Pullman and show me around. I told him that I had no objection to his
going, but that I doubted the wisdom of my going under anybody's wing. I
was, however, met by two of your representatives, both able men, who
accompanied me everywhere. I took pains to have them present in each
case. I also called at your office and got what information they could
give there, so that your company was represented and heard, and no man
there questioned either the condition or the extent of their suffering.
If you will make the round I made, go into the houses of these people,
meet them face to face, and talk with them you will be convinced that
none of them had $1,300 or any other sum of money a few weeks ago.

"I cannot enter into a discussion with you as to the merits of the
controversy between you and your former workmen. It is not my business to
fix the moral responsibility in this case. There are nearly 6,000 people
suffering for the want of food--they were your employes--four-fifths of
them are women and children--some of these people have worked for you
more than twelve years. I assume that even if they were wrong and had
been foolish you would not be willing to see them perish. I also assume
that as the state has just been to a large expense to protect your
property you would not want to have the public shoulder the burden of
relieving distress in your town.

"As you refuse to do anything to relieve the suffering in this case I am
compelled to appeal to the humanity of the people of Illinois to do so.
Respectfully yours,

  "JOHN P. ALTGELD."




CHAPTER XXI.

CONCLUSION.


The condition of the Pullman strikers elicited by the commission
appointed by President Cleveland for that purpose as shown by the
preceding extracts from the investigation, was known to the delegates to
the convention of the American Railway Union held in Chicago in June. In
turn they made known to the various local unions these deplorable
conditions. Hence the boycott, or as it has been designated by the
general managers, a sympathetic strike.

They have been charged with striking without a cause other than a
fanciful grievance of the Pullman employe, and roundly censured for
their actions. That too by men of kind hearts and liberal views who were
not aware of the true situation. Had this commission been appointed
previous to the boycott, it is my honest conviction, there would have
been no trouble. The broad inherent spirit of humanity in American
hearts would assert itself and the powerful voice of public sentiment
would terrorize this inhuman corporation into doing justice to their
employes.

The defeat of the strikers was attributed to a great many causes, but
the real cause can be laid to the federal government or the
administration thereof.

President Cleveland, it is said, was and is a partner in a law firm who
are employed by four of the largest railroad systems in the United
States. The cabinet, with a few exceptions, are also connected with
railroad corporations either directly or indirectly.

The federal courts are absolutely owned by the railroads, and
consequently the whole federal government was arrayed against the
strikers.

The federal judges prostituted the courts to the use of the railroads in
granting injunctions to restrain the officers of the American Railway
Union from acting in any form for or with that organization. From the
time that Mr. Debs was successfully shackled by the courts, the strikers
were like some great beheaded mastodon, staggering about, vainly
endeavoring to retain the dying spark of life.

In order to be more explicit, just as soon as the officers of the
American Railway Union were incarcerated, reports were circulated by the
general managers at one point, that men at some distant point had
returned to work. The men, where these reports would be received, would
at once wire to the officers at Chicago, asking if it be true. The
officers of the union were prohibited from sending telegrams, and on
receiving no reply they would take it for granted that these reports
were authentic, and apply for work. In short, when they lost the
guidance of Debs, their ranks became demoralized. This was the real
cause of the defeat of the American Railway Union. Its first defeat
after twelve decisive victories, eleven of which were accomplished
without a strike.

The prostitution of the government--founded on the blood of our
forefathers--by the organized capital of this country, of which the
greater part is foreign gold, is something of the most vital importance
to every workingman in America to-day. This is a matter that demands the
gravest thought of every American citizen who is loyal to himself, to
his family and to his country.

The flagrant abuse of the constitution by the plutocratic money power,
if not checked by the people, will reduce them to a condition beneath
that of any nation in the known world.

This strike has clearly demonstrated the truth of this assertion. In not
one instance during the whole course of the trouble, have the
representatives of the corporations and the representatives of the
government failed to unite in destroying the constitutional rights of
the American workingman.

The devilish ingenuity of this corporate power goes still further to
retain the power they hold over the government. They have conceived a
plan to disfranchise in a manner all members of the American Railway
Union and deprive them of the right to vote. In this they have actually
accomplished their purpose by forcing its members out of employment, and
driving them from their homes to seek employment in foreign parts of the
country on the eve of election, where they would not be eligible to
vote.

The inherent cunning of this blood sucking money power would pale to
insignificance the most diabolical deeds of the prince of darkness.

Blinded by their victory over the American Railway Union--through the
assistance of the federal courts--they will stop at nothing to complete
the work of subjugation and annihilation. They have tested their power
over the courts and find them so completely subservient to their will
that they know they would be secure in carrying out any high-handed
proceeding which they may deem necessary to complete their work of
demoralization and hounding to death, if need be, the members of this
order.

This was the very condition of affairs that President Debs anticipated,
and tried to guard against. This was the impending danger against which
he warned the men, and for this he filled a felon's cell in Cook county
jail.

Against these conditions the people must unite and co-operate. We must
no longer close our eyes to the glaring fact that we are being made
parties to our own destruction by the corporations and trusts of this
country, and their allies the Democratic and Republican parties.

These two great political parties are so completely controlled by the
corporations, that anything asked of them is immediately granted, the
only difference between the two being their views as to the best method
by which they can serve these corporations.

The railroads combine and trusts of all kinds furnish the funds for
campaign purposes, and also incidentally furnish the votes to elect
their friends. They have in every precinct, ward, town, city, county and
state, their hirelings who beguile the people into voting as they
dictate.

The child like confidence of the people could not be shaken in the old
parties. They were ever ready to place implicit faith in these designing
politicians, believing that the laws made by them were just what was
wanted for the people's salvation.

This delusion cannot last, the time is now ripe for action. The masses
must protect their interests if they would be free to enjoy the rights
awarded them by the constitution.

The American Railway Union has proven the greatest blessing to the
working people of this country. It has torn the mask of hypocrisy from
these plutocratic professional politicians and revealed them in their
true character.

The working people can no longer afford to be deluded by these old
parties. They must unite and arise in one grand body and assert their
independence as freemen and intelligent American citizens, and by their
ballot take possession of this government of the capitalist, by the
capitalist, and for the capitalist, and again make it a government of
the people, by the people and for the people.

President Debs struck the keynote when he said that it was better for
the government to own the railroads than for the railroads to own the
government. Our only chance to succeed in obtaining our constitutional
rights is by legislation and this we must create ourselves. We never can
obtain it through either of the old parties and therefore must ally
ourselves to a new party.

It is time that every intelligent workingman would think and act for
himself. All semblance to aristocracy in labor must be eliminated, the
skillful artisan has no more guarantee of just treatment than has the
common laborer.

Every workingman should endorse the Peoples party. They must unite as
one, in one common cause and strike for their rights with the only
effective weapon left to them, "the ballot."

This strike has proven beyond doubt that the protective features in
railroad organizations, and other organizations as well, is a dead
letter as long as the federal courts are controlled by capital. Unless
this is remedied, all labor organizations might just as well send in
their charters and cease to exist.

I cannot believe that the American people will allow this state of
affairs to continue. There are many men in public life to-day whose
motives are pure and unselfish. Such men as Governors Altgeld, Waite,
Penoyer; Congressmen Kyle, Pfeffer, McGann, Pence, Goldgier; Mayor
Hopkins of Chicago, Sydney M. Owens, Clarence S. Darrow, Judge Tully,
Gen. Weaver, W. W. Erwin and hosts of others, who publicly espoused the
cause of the strikers.

The subsidized press, the most dangerous enemy of labor, and next to the
courts, the most effective weapon in the hands of the railroad
corporations in destroying the rights of labor and defeating the
strikers, has again fallen in line as the champions of the laboring
classes. With hypocritical pretensions to sympathy for the workingman,
the organs of the two great political parties have begun to knife each
other, and unite in denouncing the People's party, all for the benefit
of the poor farmer, railroader, mechanic and laborer. They are loud in
their denunciation of trusts, combines and corporations of all kinds
that have a tendency to crush the poor working people. Their great and
generous hearts are overflowing with sympathy for the poor oppressed
toiler.

The question is, can the American workingman be again deluded by these
organs of organized capital?

The laboring people do not want sympathy, neither do they want charity,
all they want is simple justice, and this they must and will have.

There are exceptions among the press and these should be remembered by
the people. Papers that were champions of right and justice and whom the
general managers could not buy.

And now, kind reader, in conclusion I will quote the words of him, whose
noble life is devoted to the cause of humanity:

"The strike was not a failure. It will pass into history as a noble
struggle for a righteous cause, and those who participated in it,
whatever their immediate sacrifices may be, will in the end feel amply
compensated for all their losses."

  THE END.



    +-------------------------------------------------------+
    |             Transcriber's Note:                       |
    |                                                       |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the          |
    | original document have been preserved.                |
    |                                                       |
    | Typographical errors corrected in the text:           |
    |                                                       |
    | Page    8  Crachus changed to Gracchus                |
    | Page    8  Pometheus changed to Prometheus            |
    | Page    8  lethergic changed to lethargic             |
    | Page   10  rumaging changed to rummaging              |
    | Page   10  consciousnes changed to consciousness      |
    | Page   13  Kelleher changed to Kelliher               |
    | Page   14  Kelleher changed to Kelliher               |
    | Page   16  resistence changed to resistance           |
    | Page   18  grestest changed to greatest               |
    | Page   18  120 changed to 20                          |
    | Page   19  averice changed to avarice                 |
    | Page   20  accomodations changed to accommodations    |
    | Page   22  averice changed to avarice                 |
    | Page   28  authoritively changed to authoritatively   |
    | Page   29  Fourty changed to Forty                    |
    | Page   38  to changed to too                          |
    | Page   38  chattle changed to chattel                 |
    | Page   41  epethets changed to epithets               |
    | Page   43  occured changed to occurred                |
    | Page   44  meetting changed to meeting                |
    | Page   44  apointed changed to appointed              |
    | Page   45  Gattling changed to Gatling                |
    | Page   46  counsles changed to counsels               |
    | Page   47  Sheriden changed to Sheridan               |
    | Page   47  attitute changed to attitude               |
    | Page   47  persuation changed to persuasion           |
    | Page   48  intimitation changed to intimidation       |
    | Page   48  threads changed to threats                 |
    | Page   48  persuation changed to persuasion           |
    | Page   49  persuation changed to persuasion           |
    | Page   50  know changed to known                      |
    | Page   50  than changed to that                       |
    | Page   51  spectical changed to spectacle             |
    | Page   51  depotism changed to despotism              |
    | Page   51  wanta changed to wont                      |
    | Page   51  contagous changed to contagious            |
    | Page   55  waving changed to waiving                  |
    | Page   56  where changed to were                      |
    | Page   57  coroborated changed to corroborated        |
    | Page   57  occurrance changed to occurrence           |
    | Page   58  Waving changed to Waiving                  |
    | Page   59  ignor changed to ignore                    |
    | Page   59  assistence changed to assistance           |
    | Page   61  importaut changed to important             |
    | Page   61  hour's changed to hours'                   |
    | Page   61  interferance changed to interference       |
    | Page   65  clearely changed to clearly                |
    | Page   70  art changed to are                         |
    | Page   73  grievences changed to grievances           |
    | Page   77  intimitated changed to intimidated         |
    | Page   77  their changed to there                     |
    | Page   79  aud changed to and                         |
    | Page   81  ensconsed changed to ensconced             |
    | Page   82  occured changed to ccurred                 |
    | Page   83  occurance changed to occurrence            |
    | Page   83  promisciously changed to promiscuously     |
    | Page   83  surpressed changed to suppressed           |
    | Page   84  wonton changed to wanton                   |
    | Page   88  interupted changed to interrupted          |
    | Page   89  criminalty changed to criminality          |
    | Page   89  discrimation changed to discrimination     |
    | Page   89  subservent changed to subservient          |
    | Page   92  guize changed to guise                     |
    | Page   93  Wicks changed to Wickes                    |
    | Page   93  contented changed to contended             |
    | Page   94  acceeded changed to acceded                |
    | Page   94  interupting changed to interrupting        |
    | Page   96  ignor changed to ignore                    |
    | Page   96  hear changed to here                       |
    | Page   97  vengence changed to vengeance              |
    | Page   99  independant changed to independent         |
    | Page  101  counciled changed to counseled             |
    | Page  101  device changed to devise                   |
    | Page  102  farcial changed to farcical                |
    | Page  102  Kelleher changed to Kelliher               |
    | Page  103  eminated changed to emanated               |
    | Page  104  inflamable changed to inflammable          |
    | Page  104  aggrivating changed to aggravating         |
    | Page  104  surpressing changed to suppressing         |
    | Page  105  peacable changed to peaceable              |
    | Page  105  contenting changed to contending           |
    | Page  106  coporations changed to corporations        |
    | Page  106  inflamatory changed to inflammatory        |
    | Page  108  parlimentary changed to parliamentary      |
    | Page  109  Ammerican changed to American              |
    | Page  109  busiuess changed to business               |
    | Page  109  drunkeness changed to drunkenness          |
    | Page  109  Roger's changed to Rogers'                 |
    | Page  110  endeaver changed to endeavor               |
    | Page  111  occured changed to occurred                |
    | Page  112  uprisal changed to uprising                |
    | Page  112  tyranical changed to tyrannical            |
    | Page  113  alligns changed to aligns                  |
    | Page  115  demagogery changed to demagougery          |
    | Page  116  Wicks changed to Wickes                    |
    | Page  119  propositiou changed to proposition         |
    | Page  119  extented changed to extended               |
    | Page  120  calamaties changed to calamities           |
    | Page  121  propisition changed to proposition         |
    | Page  121  Gibralter changed to Gibraltar             |
    | Page  121  unmoveable changed to unmovable            |
    | Page  122  interuption changed to interruption        |
    | Page  122  tyranical changed to tyrannical            |
    | Page  124  effect changed to affect                   |
    | Page  125  persuation changed to persuasion           |
    | Page  128  traiters changed to traitors               |
    | Page  129  intent changed to intend                   |
    | Page  129  blocade changed to blockade                |
    | Page  132  requst changed to request                  |
    | Page  132  concievable changed to conceivable         |
    | Page  135  pinacle changed to pinnacle                |
    | Page  136  seperate changed to separate               |
    | Page  136  intestate changed to interstate            |
    | Page  137  firey changed to fiery                     |
    | Page  137  defendents changed to defendants           |
    | Page  139  Wilkenson changed to Wilkinson             |
    | Page  140  anihilation changed to annihilation        |
    | Page  140  semblence changed to semblance             |
    | Page  140  immaginable changed to imaginable          |
    | Page  143  Valpraiso changed to Valparaiso            |
    | Page  144  poisening changed to poisoning             |
    | Page  148  defendents changed to defendants           |
    | Page  149  defendents changed to defendants           |
    | Page  150  defendents changed to defendants           |
    | Page  150  counselled changed to counseled            |
    | Page  154  interupted changed to interrupted          |
    | Page  155  or changed to on                           |
    | Page  156  draw changed to drawn                      |
    | Page  156  aid changed to add                         |
    | Page  157  irrevelant changed to irrelevant           |
    | Page  157  persued changed to pursued                 |
    | Page  160  pronunce changed to pronounce              |
    | Page  160  biggotted changed to bigoted               |
    | Page  160  affective changed to effective             |
    | Page  160  savory changed to savour                   |
    | Page  161  inuendoes changed to innuendoes            |
    | Page  161  precedure changed to procedure             |
    | Page  162  chariman changed to chairman               |
    | Page  164  it changed to is                           |
    | Page  165  destinction changed to distinction         |
    | Page  167  STIKE changed to STRIKE                    |
    | Page  171  assistence changed to assistance           |
    | Page  172  condecend changed to condescend            |
    | Page  173  bycotting changed to boycotting            |
    | Page  183  extented changed to extended               |
    | Page  186  extent changed to extend                   |
    | Page  189  restoring changed to resorting             |
    | Page  190  frivilous changed to frivolous             |
    | Page  194  compulsary changed to compulsory           |
    | Page  194  corporotions changed to corporations       |
    | Page  197  give changed to given                      |
    | Page  197  "there" inserted between "and" and "would" |
    | Page  199  content changed to contend                 |
    | Page  201  compulsary changed to compulsory           |
    | Page  203  accomodations changed to accommodations    |
    | Page  205  tyranical changed to tyrannical            |
    | Page  207  "you" inserted between "do" and "mean"     |
    | Page  207  divident changed to dividend               |
    | Page  208  "I" inserted between "family," and "have"  |
    | Page  210  their changed to there                     |
    | Page  214  things changed to thing                    |
    | Page  214  made changed to make                       |
    | Page  222  Terry changed to Terre                     |
    | Page  225  convenion changed to convention            |
    | Page  227  Chatanooga changed to Chattanooga          |
    | Page  233  inflamatory changed to inflammatory        |
    | Page  234  otherwis changed to otherwise              |
    | Page  237  avoides changed to avoids                  |
    | Page  238  degredation changed to degradation         |
    | Page  239  phenominally changed to phenomenally       |
    | Page  241  contradicture changed to contradiction     |
    | Page  241  concilliation changed to conciliation      |
    | Page  244  on changed to one                          |
    | Page  244  governtal changed to governmenetal         |
    | Page  246  drunkeness changed to drunkenness          |
    | Page  247  occured changed to occurred                |
    | Page  249  drunkeness changed to drunkenness          |
    | Page  252  decribed changed to described              |
    | Page  254  grievence changed to grievance             |
    | Page  266  lenghty changed to lengthy                 |
    | Page  272  vic changed to vice                        |
    | Page  272  Epethets changed to Epithets               |
    | Page  272  epethets changed to epithets               |
    | Page  273  taylor changed to tailor                   |
    | Page  275  intolerence changed to intolerance         |
    | Page  277  attenting changed to attending             |
    | Page  278  Sprinfield changed to Springfield          |
    | Page  281  resistence changed to resistance           |
    | Page  285  committe changed to committee              |
    | Page  287  voltneeer changed to volunteer             |
    | Page  290  superintendant changed to superintendent   |
    | Page  292  havn't changed to haven't                  |
    | Page  303  so changed to to                           |
    | Page  310  preceeding changed to preceding            |
    | Page  313  elligible changed to eligible              |
    | Page  314  immediatedly changed to immediately        |
    | Page  315  hypocracy changed to hypocrisy             |
    | Page  316  artesan changed to artisan                 |
    | Page  317  pretentions changed to pretensions         |
    | Page  317  Peffer changed to Pfeffer                  |
    +-------------------------------------------------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pullman Boycott, by W. F. Burns

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PULLMAN BOYCOTT ***

***** This file should be named 36004.txt or 36004.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/0/0/36004/

Produced by Barbara Kosker, Odessa Paige Turner and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This book was produced from scanned images of public
domain material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
