Project Gutenberg's Trevethlan: (Vol 2 of 3), by William Davy Watson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Trevethlan: (Vol 2 of 3)
       A Cornish Story.

Author: William Davy Watson

Release Date: May 14, 2011 [EBook #36107]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TREVETHLAN: (VOL 2 OF 3) ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                              TREVETHLAN:

                            A Cornish Story.

                      BY WILLIAM DAVY WATSON, ESQ.

                           BARRISTER-AT-LAW.


    IN THREE VOLUMES.
    VOL. II.

    LONDON:
    SMITH, ELDER AND CO., 65, CORNHILL.
    1848.

    London:
    Printed by STEWART and MURRAY,
    Old Bailey.




TREVETHLAN.




CHAPTER I.

    Pur' e soave cosa, a chi del tutto
    Non e privo di senso, il patrio nido:
    Che die Natura al nascimento umano,
    Verso il caro paese, ov' altri e nato,
    Un non so che di non inteso affetto,
    Che sempre vive, e non invecchia mai.

    Guarini.


Once more we stand on the shore of Mount's Bay. Far behind we have left
the whirl and tumult of the metropolis, and we hear only the hoarse roar
of the surges, driven by the last winds of January to beat against the
granite at our feet. When last we looked over the same waters, the
yellow leaves were falling from the trees, and the little waves rippled
musically upon the rock, while the voice of mourning was heard in our
halls. Yet if the year was declining, there was beauty in the decay; if
the season was sad, there was hope amidst the sorrow. We return to find
the fields desolate, and the sea tempestuous, and our house still
forlorn. The face of nature is gloomy and cold, and hope has vanished
from our fireside.

Such might be among the first reflections of the orphans of Trevethlan,
as they gazed from the windows of the castle over the well-known
landscape. They had come home, not as children from school to holiday,
exulting in freedom and buoyant with hope, to exchange coercion for
caresses; nor as older pupils, having learnt the value of time, merely
to modify the routine of occupation, and gladden parental affection with
their progress and prudence; nor yet as those who, having entered on the
labour of life, know that the bow must not always be bent, and rejoice
to seek relaxation around the hearth where they were nursed. Far deeper
than any of these were the emotions of the sister, and dark and stern
were the thoughts of the brother.

Helen's letter had fallen upon Polydore like a thunderbolt. She had,
indeed, in previous communications somewhat ruffled his serenity by
indistinct references to the new solicitude she detected in Randolph;
but the worthy chaplain readily explained all similar hints by the
novelty of his old pupil's situation. "He will become used to it before
long, Mr. Griffith," Polydore would say, when the steward ventured to
remind him of their difference of opinion respecting the orphans'
scheme. "'Tis only the roughness of a first meeting with the world. The
points will be soon rubbed smooth. There's a great difference between
the Temple and Trevethlan Castle." In reply to which sort of remark,
Griffith could only shrug his shoulders, and hope it might all turn out
well in the end.

So when the missive arrived, in which Helen announced that her brother
had proclaimed their real name, and abandoned his career, and that they
should follow the letter without delay, Polydore was struck with sudden
consternation. The steward was too delicate to show that he felt no
similar surprise in the chaplain's presence, but to his wife he avowed
that he was not in the least astonished. "A Trevethlan conceal his
name!" he exclaimed. "It's not in the blood. No, Charlotte Griffith; if
we are poor, we are also proud. The secret would be always on the tip of
his tongue. Why, suppose he quarrelled? Not unlikely, I can tell you, in
one of our house. D'ye think, Mrs. Griffith, Randolph Trevethlan would
go out as Mr. Morton? Pooh! pooh!"

Mrs. Griffith rather shuddered at the idea, but she remembered sundry
anecdotes of the picture gallery which forbade her to impeach the
justice of her husband's position. Whatever were the cause of the
return, she rejoiced at the effect, and spread the same feeling among
all the little household, by her orders to prepare for the reception of
her young master and mistress.

So they came. It was early in the afternoon when their chaise rattled
round the green of the hamlet; but a cold sleet drove along upon the
wind, and kept the villagers within doors. The folk hurried to their
windows only in time to see that the carriage had passed, but the
extreme rarity of such a visitation drew forth a few of the curious to
gaze after the chaise, as it wound more slowly up the ascent of the
base-court. Randolph lay back in his corner, gloomy and foreboding; but
Helen leant forward to catch the first glimpse of an old familiar face.
And Jeffrey was duly on the watch; he caught sight of the carriage as it
began the ascent; he soon recognized his young lady's face at the
window; the gates flew open under his hand; before the travellers had
alighted at the hall-door, he had run the old flag to the top of its
staff, and a faint cheer from the hamlet greeted the appearance of the
well-known signal. The orphans were at home.

Anxieties and forebodings vanished for a season in the warmth of
welcome. The time for questions and explanations was not arrived.
Everything seemed in exactly the same order as when the brother and
sister left; and were it not for the difference of the seasons--were it
not that a fire crackled cheerfully in the great chimney, and that
patches of snow lay on the bed of mignionette, they might have supposed
a night only had elapsed since their departure. But the change in
themselves told that the interval had been fraught with momentous
consequences for each of them.

When the first hurry of congratulation was over, Helen retired for some
confidential talk with Mrs. Griffith, and her brother accompanied the
chaplain in a walk round the castle. Yes, every thing remained exactly
as it was. In the library, even the volume which Randolph was reading
with his instructor, "Cicero on the Art of Divination," remained on the
table, as if closed but yesterday, and the subject brought a passing
cloud upon his brow. The portraits in the picture-gallery showed the
recent care of Mrs. Griffith.

"My mother's likeness is not here, Mr. Riches?" Randolph said abruptly,
as they passed along.

The chaplain, greatly surprised, shook his head in silence.

They ascended to the battlements, and faced the inclemency of the
weather. The ancient pieces of ordnance showed signs of that diligence
on the part of old Jeffrey, to which Polydore had alluded in a recent
letter to Hampstead. More dangerous they, perchance, to the defender
than the foe.

"Is there really so much alarm in the country, my dear sir?" Randolph
asked. "Are our good Jeffrey's perilous precautions in any way
warranted?"

"_It fama per urbes_--you know the rest," the chaplain answered. "We
will speak of it by and by."

They descended to the court-yard. If the castle was unchanged, its
scanty retainers were as little altered. At the great gateway Randolph
found Jeffrey pacing up and down under the arch in demi-military style,
while an old-fashioned brass blunderbuss rested against the wall.

"God bless you! Master Randolph," said the old man, taking the offered
hand between both of his; "and welcome back. And thanks be to Him, that
if so be these walls must fall to the riff-raff from Castle Dinas, why,
fall they will around a Trevethlan. But the day shall not come,
while"--he caught up his piece, and suddenly discharged it in the
air--"the evening gun, Master Randolph. A little too soon, and not like
that as was fired in the old time. But it just serves maybe to frighten
the rascals, and let 'em know old Jeffrey is awake."

Randolph thanked the trusty warder for his zeal, and expressed a hope
that his forebodings might not be realized; but the sentry shook his
head dolefully, and reloaded his gun, saying, "Ye might as well just
keep your pistols handy, Master Randolph."

Already, even in this short perambulation, the chaplain was greatly
struck by the change which he observed in his former pupil. The
stripling, meditative and gentle, had become a man, haughty and
impassioned. The disposition, of old plastic as wax, was now at once
obstinate and capricious. The change was marked in the imperiousness of
Randolph's bearing, in the curl of his lip, and the abruptness of his
speech. There was no want of his former respect or affection; but it was
plain that henceforth he acted on his own impulse, and was not to be
swayed by those who might surround him. "Is it for good or for evil?"
the chaplain asked himself, when Randolph parted from him to descend to
the beach, and intimated that he wished to be alone. "Pray Heaven for
good, or surely my life has been wasted."

It was becoming dusky. The sleet had passed over, and the sky was
cloudless; but the blast still whistled along the sea, and brought great
waves to break on the well-known promontory of rock. Randolph stood on
the point, heedless of the wind and spray, and gave vent to the emotions
which were struggling within his bosom.

"For what am I here?" he said. "Why have I come to my home? To bury
myself amidst these gray walls, and watch the gradual ebbing of all the
springs of existence? To die in sullen desolation, and find a lonely
grave in yonder churchyard? Hope it not, Esther Pendarrel. Not so easily
quenched is the fire within me: it may ravage all around it, but it will
not smoulder away, consuming only myself. But I must be alone. My sweet
sister must not be scathed by my waywardness. She will rest here, while
I go forth to achieve the one purpose of my heart. Our scheme has broken
to pieces, but my pledge remains. Alas, that my father should bind me by
so fatal an undertaking! Yet, if Esther loved--if Esther loved----

"And thou, too, whom I never knew, of whom no trace remains in my
memory, my mother! Would that thou hadst not been summoned hence so
soon! Would that I had felt thy softening influence, and he learnt of
thee to be merciful! Why have I thought of thee so often of late? Why
has that veiled shape glided through my dreams? Wilt thou not reveal
thyself to thy son? Visit me, oh my mother! fling aside the veil that
hides thy face, and be a light to my soul in the darkness that surrounds
it."

The muser dwelt long on this invocation, pacing to and fro on the narrow
strip of rock. It was the first time he had given expression to an idea
which for some while had been lurking among his thoughts. At last he
looked round the sky, and saw the mild radiance of the evening star.

"Beautiful planet!" he said, "which fancy chose for the arbiter of my
fate, is _she_ also beholding thee? Smile upon her, fair planet, and
remind her of me. Teach her to think of me, even as thou hast taught me
to remember her."

Tranquillized by the reflection, Randolph returned through the deepening
twilight to the castle, and joined his sister and the chaplain in a
small parlour, occupying a turret that overlooked the sea. It was a
favourite room. There, in the evening, Polydore described at some length
the state of the adjacent country. "Discontent," he said, "was very
general; not only among the miners, who thought they did not earn a just
share of their labour's produce, but also among the agricultural
population, who complained that wages were too low in proportion to the
price of provisions. And social dissatisfaction had partly assumed the
aspect of political disaffection. Agitators, strangers to the district,
were said to have gone about among the people. Minor outrages had not
been very rare, and expressions had been reported nearly equivalent to
the 'Guerre aux Chateaux' of the great French Revolution. Musters of men
in military array were said to have been held on the moorlands. Rumours
flew about of the landing of arms on different parts of the coast. But
all," Polydore concluded, "is vague and shadowy. I believe there is
great exaggeration abroad. Positive, however, it is, that a patrol of
cavalry occasionally dashes at speed by a lonely cottage, and that the
coast-guard display unwonted activity. Behold the confirmation of my
words!"

For while they were being uttered, his hearers might see a long line of
fire rise into the air from the shore of the bay near Mousehole,
denoting the flight of a rocket.

"That is the way they amuse us almost every night," continued the
chaplain. "'Tis too dark, I suppose, to see anything afloat. Let us put
the candles in the shade, and look."

So said, so done. Fruitlessly, for they could discover nothing on the
dark waters. But while they were gazing across the bay, a faint, rushing
sound fell on their ear, above the noise of the sea; and, turning
hastily, they perceived the last sparks of a second rocket, which had
been fired from their own coast.

"Yes, that is the way," Polydore repeated. "Of old, the folks would just
have wished the smuggler luck, and perhaps turned out in hope to run a
keg or so; but they seem to think there's more in these signals now."

"And you feel no alarm yourself, my dear sir?" Helen inquired.

"None, Helen," replied the chaplain. "I may be mistaken, but I do not
expect to see Jeffrey's blunderbuss brought into action; and I have a
trust which never yet proved wanting."

So saying, Polydore rang the bell, a summons which speedily assembled
all the household for family prayer, according to old usage; and when
the rite was over, the members sought their respective resting-places,
and silence reigned in the castle.

But Randolph could not sleep. Throwing a cloak around him, and shading
his lamp with his hand, he proceeded with the stealthy step of one who
dreads he knows not what, along the desolate corridors to the state
apartments. Through their faded grandeur he wandered on, until he
reached the great chamber which was the scene of his father's death. He
placed his light so that only a faint glimmer fell upon the bed, and
leant against one of the pillars, and resumed his reverie of the
afternoon with such vividness of imagination, that he fancied he again
beheld the bright eyes of the dying man, and heard the injunctions which
seemed now to separate him from what he held dearest upon earth. But his
reverie had not terminated with those gloomy forebodings, nor did his
dream. A frail and slender form, veiled in gossamer-like drapery, bent
dimly over the couch for a short space and floated away, beckoning him
to follow. It rested a moment in the doorway, for he had only obeyed the
sign with his eyes. But when he hastily seized the lamp, it flitted fast
before him, fading and fading away, until it disappeared entirely as he
crossed the threshold of his own chamber. He flung himself on his bed,
and closed his eyes for sleep; and as the last gleam of consciousness
vanished, a face which he appeared to have known in days long past, meek
and lovely,--that of a woman, in her morning of beauty,--bent down upon
his, and kissed his lips.

The kiss seemed yet fresh upon them when he woke, and found the sun
shining gaily into the apartment.




CHAPTER II.

    The intelligible forms of ancient poets,
    The fair humanities of old religion,
    The Power, the Beauty, and the Majesty,
    That had their haunts in dale, or piny mountain,
    Or forest by slow stream, or pebbly spring,
    Or chasms and watery depths--all these have vanished.
    They live no longer in the faith of reason.

    Coleridge. _Piccolomini._


The hamlet of Trevethlan nestled snugly under the slope, at the summit
of which stood the castle, and was screened by the rising ground from
the sea breezes. It surrounded a green of limited extent, which was only
separated from the base-court by the gate Michael Sinson opened for Mrs.
Pendarrel's carriage, when that lady was returning from her frustrated
attack. On the right, a small wicket led into the churchyard, so full of
trees that, except at the present season, the church itself could
scarcely be seen. This was a plain edifice, with no pretensions to
beauty, deriving all its picturesqueness from the ivy with which it was
overgrown. Opposite to it, across the green, a beam projecting from the
front of an old-fashioned house, supported the escutcheon of the lords
of the village, and, by its inscription, promised good entertainment to
man and beast. But the inn had shared the fortunes of the castle: the
windows of the wings, which advanced with scalloped gables beyond the
centre, were blocked up with boards, and the middle part only appeared
to be now occupied. But Dame Miniver, the hostess, had inherited the
savings of more prosperous days. She was a trim, bustling widow woman,
tidy and rosy, notable and talkative, whose only sighs were divided
between the good-man who slept on the other side of the green, and the
splendour which had departed from the castle on the cliff. She never
fretted because her stables now held none but a few farm horses, nor
because there were no longer any swaggering lackeys to come and crack a
bottle of the port, some of which might still be slumbering in her
cellars. She would hardly have been a Cornish woman if she did not know
how to exchange a wink with the good fellow who had a keg of hollands or
brandy to dispose of; and it pleased her mightily to treat a revenue man
with a drop of the spirits that had been run under his very nose.

The other habitations surrounding the green were of various sizes, some
with small gardens in front, some neat, and some neglected,--almost all
thatched and whitewashed. A sleepy, listless air hung about the place. A
stranger wandering accidentally into it, would feel at once that it had
known better days; the children might seem to play with less liveliness
than usual, and the very geese to waddle over the grass with a lazy
gait. He would fancy the gossips at the cottage doors to be inanimate in
their chat, and might himself be yielding to a sense of drowsiness, when
the sight of Dame Miniver, in her neat brown silk gown, and snow-white
apron, looking complacently at the visitor, with an inviting smile that
was irresistible, would recall his fleeting spirits, and guide his steps
to the friendly shelter of the Trevethlan Arms.

The late owner of the castle, it has already been said, was extremely
unpopular with his tenantry, for some time both before and after his
marriage. Proud themselves of the family upon which they had depended
beyond the memory of man, they hated to see it stripped, acre by acre,
of its broad lands, and so impoverished as to be unable to afford them
the old advantages. Remembering the current prophecy, they loathed a
match which seemed to harbinger its fulfilment, and at the same time
rendered it next to impossible for Pendarrel to come to Trevethlan,
although the reverse might happen on several contingencies. But after
the death of poor Margaret, and when an infant son and daughter stood in
the way of any such consummation, and their lord came often among them,
haughty indeed, but not unkind; poor, but still generous; and they could
not avoid seeing the melancholy written in his face, and recollected his
reported courtship, years before, of Esther Pendarrel, and thought of
the kinsman who had sold his name; their animosity gradually melted into
compassion, and a deep and sullen hatred grew up among them against the
house of Pendarrel and everything connected with it.

The discontent now pervading the country had not spared Trevethlan. It
was true, that if the sentiment--war to the mansions--were diffused at
all in the village, it had no reference to the castle. There was not a
man on the estate but was ready to die in defence of the towers on the
cliff. But other feelings might be entertained towards some of their
neighbours. Hitherto they had exhausted their animosity in conflicts
arising at wrestling-matches and country fairs, but now there were
symptoms discoverable of more dangerous hostilities.

And the movement was encouraged by the absence of the young master. The
villagers regretted, without blaming, a departure which was intended,
they hoped, in some way or other, to restore prosperity to the family.
But it removed a check which might have soothed their exasperation. And
in like manner the return of the orphans would probably turn aside any
ideas of immediate violence, if such had really gained any footing in
the hamlet.

On the evening of their arrival, some of the notables met to discuss
things in general, around the fire in Dame Miniver's hall. There were
farmer Colan, and Germoe the tailor of the hamlet, and Breage whose wife
kept the shop where everything was sold, and, among divers others,
Edward Owen, Sinson's unsuccessful rival for the affections of pretty
Mercy Page. Owen, formerly one of the best-conducted men in the hamlet,
was now sulky and perverse, and Mercy had obtained no slight odium by
her too great fidelity to one who was regarded as a deserter. She little
thought her old lover had been lately in the neighbourhood, and she was
even now meditating an excursion to inquire after him, in one of those
mysterious modes, which were yet resorted to occasionally by the lovers
of the far-west.

"A health to our squire!" cried Colan, filling a cup of cyder, "and to
our bonny young lady, and welcome back to Trevethlan."

"Faith," said Owen, "they're not come back to do much good to
Trevethlan, I reckon. There's none of the fortune come with 'em as folks
used to talk about, or they'd never ha' gone through the town with a
rubbishy old chay from Helston."

"Small blame to Squire Randolph," observed Germoe, "that he don't throw
away the little he's left, like our poor master before him. And, for my
part, I'd rather have him among us, poor though he may be, than away
nobody knows where.

    'The place is bare, when the lord's not there.'

There'll be more smiles in Trevethlan than there's been this many a
day."

"Then there's not much to smile about," Owen replied; "and the best
maybe the squire could do, were to take back some of that's been stolen
from him. There's many a lad ready to strike a blow for Trevethlan."

"Wild talk, Edward," said Breage; "wild talk, and nothing but it. We
live by the law now-a-days."

"And there's a pleasanter way," observed Dame Miniver. "Miss Mildred of
Pendar'l 's as pretty a lady as ever stepped, and she might bring the
squire all his land again, and fulfil the saying quite agreeable,

    'Pendar'l and Trevethlan will own one name.'"

"There's too much ill blood atween the houses," Colan said. "A deal too
much. Didn't the lady of Pendar'l turn the late squire away? And didn't
our young master send her back from his gate with a flea in her ear?
Don't ye recollect how Jeffrey chuckled about it? The young folks have
ne'er seen one another, Mrs. Miniver."

"How d'ye know?" the hostess asked. "And trust me, if meet they did,
there'd meet a couple predestinated to fall in love. In all the old
tales that ever I read, the true gentleman falls in love with the wrong
lady. But, of course, they must meet, or they haven't the chance, and
somehow they always do meet."

"Well," said Germoe, "I'll wager the day ne'er dawns that sees that
match. The saying'll not hold good in our time--mark my words."

"There's a deal of wisdom in those old sayings," quoth Mistress Miniver.
"Ay, and in others too. Mind ye not how old Maud Basset foretold a
fortune for her child, and the gipsy crossed it, and both came out as
true as gospel? Those sayings are not to be looked down upon, Master
Germoe."

"If ever that saying comes true in my time," muttered Owen, "and not on
our side, there'll be a tale told of Pendar'l--that's all I know."

But the remark excited no attention, and from such predictions the
company slid by degrees into the kindred and fascinating subject of
preternatural visitations, a wide field in that remote district of the
west; and they drew their seats closer round the fire, and dropped their
voices, until they almost frightened one another into a reluctance to
separate on their different ways homeward.

They would, perhaps, have expressed themselves in a more discontented
manner, if they had known the intention with which Randolph sought the
home of his fathers: he has himself obscurely intimated it, in his
soliloquy by the sea. To persuade his sister to remain in those old
halls, under the guardianship of Polydore Riches; to return himself to
London, to obtain, in spite of all obstacles, an interview with Mildred
Pendarrel; to extract from her the confession which he was convinced she
was ready to make; to exchange mutual vows; to look round the world for
the path which he might cut to honour and fortune; to return and claim
his bride, who by that time would be her own mistress--such was the
scheme upon which he was at present resolved. It was a wild outline, and
he did not trouble himself to fill up the details. Young and ardent, he
looked straight to the summit of his ambition, and recked nothing of the
ravines which separated the various intervening ridges.

But with all his determination he hesitated to disclose his idea to
Helen. He felt that to her he was everything. Until quite recently they
had always shared one another's thoughts. He trembled at the anguish he
should inflict by such a separation. And so he deferred the confidence
from time to time, persuading himself that it would best be made on the
very eve of his departure, until this was indefinitely postponed by
intelligence that Pendarrel Hall was being prepared for the immediate
reception of its mistress.

In the meanwhile his sister and he renewed their former acquaintance
with the good folks of the hamlet, and to external appearance resumed
the way in which they had lived before the late Mr. Trevethlan's death.
It was a quiet, dreamy sort of life, of which a faint sketch was given
in the outset of this narrative. They were born in a land of romance;
the whole region was classic ground. From King Arthur's castle of
Tintagel in the north-east, to Merlin's stone in Mount's Bay, respecting
which an old prophecy--

    "There shall land on the stone Merlyn
    Those shall burn Paul's, Penzance, and Newlyn,"

was said to be fulfilled by some stragglers from the Spanish Armada,
every field might be supposed the scene of some chivalrous exploit, or
magical enchantment, or superstitious sacrifice. There dwelt the last of
the British druids: their strange monuments were still standing on the
wild moors and in the cultivated domains, on the desolate carns and
among the crags of the sea-shore. Such was the oracular stone at Castle
Trereen,--at that time not forced from its resting-place by sacrilegious
hands, and requiring no chain to keep it from _logging_ too far. Such
was Lanyon Quoit, a cromlech on the moorland beyond Madron, and not very
far from the battle-field, where the Saxon Athelstan finally defeated
the Britons, and drove them to perish of hunger in the caves of Pendeen.
The curious stranger still marks their strong fortresses, Castle Chun
and Castle Dinas, occupying the highest ground between Mount's Bay and
the Irish Sea; he may read the name of their chieftain, Rialobran, on
his tombstone, Men Skryfa, now prostrate among the herbage; and he may
note the sanguinary nature of the struggle, in the title which it gained
for the Land's End, of Penvonlas, or the Headland of Blood.

And, again, the customs of the country still kept alive some faint
memorials of those heathen times, and of the accommodating spirit of the
earliest Christian missionaries. To such an origin is ascribed the
salutation of the orchards at Christmas, already referred to: the
mistletoe of the apple was not so sacred as that of the oak, but neither
was it despicable. And the bonfires of St. John's Eve were said to tell
of the days when the cromlechs of Cam Brey were surrounded by a mystic
grove, and the officiating priests hurried their human victims through
purifying flames to the blood-stained altar.

Nor was the land less indebted for romantic associations to those
fabulous historians, who peopled Britain with royalty, beauty, chivalry,
and faery, and assigned to Cornwall the honour of producing the renowned
Sir Tristan. Not a few hours were whiled away at Trevethlan Castle in
discoursing of their marvellous adventures, their strange wandering
towns of Camelot and Caerleon, and the general phantasmagoric character
of their narratives. They plotted out the kingdom in an imaginary map,
and whatever scenery they required, they regarded as existing and well
known. Did they want a lake, from whence should issue a hand bearing a
magic sword, they troubled not themselves with any mention of its
landmarks: a forest perilous arose wherever they willed: a bridge to be
defended, and therefore a stream, was always ready in the champion's
path: you were introduced to a fountain as if you had drunk at it all
your life. Undoubting faith in their own story was one of their most
powerful fascinations: it transferred itself to their hearers, and a
tale, which modern exactness would make incoherent and incredible,
became credible from its very indistinctness. The Round Table romances
present us with a fantastic Britain, which we may conceive to be still
in being, like the paradise of Irem in the desert of Aden, and which the
second-sight of imagination may yet conjure up in all its pristine
glory.

Many of those old tomes, quartos and folios, whose florid binding
attested their high estimation by early possessors, enriched the shelves
of the castle library; and few of its proprietors were deterred from
exploring their contents, by the mystic black-letter and antiquated
French in which the stories were told. Under Polydore's guidance,
Randolph and Helen had become acquainted with much of this legendary
lore; and even their father sometimes deigned to take part in a
conversation arising out of it.

But it was in vain now that Helen, in the hope of chasing away the cloud
which hung continually upon her brother's brow, strove to recall his
attention to these studies of the old time. The down had been brushed
from the butterfly's wing. She strolled with him along the beach, and
she sat with him in Merlin's Cave, in spite of the wintry weather; but
it was impossible to bring back the mood in which he listened to
"Trevethlan's farewell," on the eve of their departure for London. He
was fond of roaming through the desolate state rooms, rapt in deep
meditation, and only roused when the wind, rushing through some crevice,
waved the tapestry of the walls with a rustling sound, and made the dim
figures portrayed upon it seem for a moment endued with life. Sometimes
he would be found in the picture-gallery, gazing earnestly on the
portrait of his father, and seeming, by the expression of his
countenance, eager to evoke from the mimic lips an answer to some
question which was struggling in his breast. His old teacher noted his
moodiness with anxiety, but in silence, and made no attempt to forestall
the explanation, which he felt sure must come of itself before long.




CHAPTER III.

    The heart, surrendered to the ruling power
    Of some ungoverned passion every hour,
    Finds, by degrees, the truths that once bore sway
    And all their deep impression wear away:
    So coin grows smooth in traffic current passed,
    Till Caesar's image is effaced at last.

    Cowper.


The mistress of Pendarrel Hall never visited it without experiencing a
renewal of many an ancient spring of grief. There were not a few spots
in the park, sequestered from the more frequented paths, which she could
not look upon without bitter regret, yet which she was always sure to
explore within a few days of her arrival, so much of pensive pleasure
mingled with the pain. But the influence of such reminiscences was of
short duration, and the temporary weakness was soon succeeded by that
permanent animosity to the owners of Trevethlan Castle, which had become
the ruling passion of her life. She would climb an eminence in the
neighbourhood, from which the old gray towers were visible, and think,
with fresh exasperation, of the obstinacy or the pride which still
detained them from her grasp.

But now she came to her home, with a fond belief that the enemy was at
last delivered into her hand. Previously, there seemed no limit to the
contention. Now, a few weeks must decide it. Michael Sinson had returned
to town before the departure of his patroness, had matured his plans,
had obtained her sanction to carrying them out, and had been introduced
by her husband to his highly-respected solicitor, Mr. Truby. That
gentleman could only assure his client, after a careful perusal of
Sinson's statement, that, if it did not break down in court, there could
be no doubt whatever that Mr. Randolph Trevethlan would be held to be an
intruder upon the castle property, and that immediate possession would
be given to him, Mr. Trevethlan Pendarrel. And, as Michael vouched for
the perfect soundness of his evidence, Mr. Truby received directions to
commence proceedings forthwith. "Let the suit be pressed forward," Mrs.
Pendarrel said, "with the utmost possible despatch."

That matter settled, she left London with her daughter; her husband
gladly making his official duties a plea for remaining in May Fair. Yet
Esther was not altogether at her ease. Plain and straightforward as was
Sinson's story, and completely as it destroyed the validity of the late
Mr. Trevethlan's marriage, she still suspected there was some unseen
flaw. She often thought of Mr. Truby's qualification--if the case did
not break down in court. Who was this very important witness that Sinson
had so opportunely discovered? And then, as the notion of fraud stole
into her mind, she asked herself, what would be the motive; with what
object could Sinson have devised his scheme? And again she questioned
herself, with some alarm, as to the extent to which she had authorized
the proceedings of her protege. She had communicated with him once or
twice by letter. And the uneasiness expressed in these reflections was
somewhat increased by Michael's recent demeanour. He wore a look of
intelligence, and assumed an air of importance, seeming to discover a
consciousness of some hidden power. A sense of superiority appeared to
mingle with his fawning subserviency, such as might mark the carriage of
Luke in Massinger's play. But Mrs. Pendarrel soon wrapped herself in her
pride, and forgot all her suspicions.

To be sure, that pride rather revolted from the mode of proceeding. An
action-at-law was but a bad substitute for a raid of the olden time. The
bailiff with a slip of parchment was an indifferent representative of a
"plump of spears." The court was but a poor arena, compared to the
lists. But for this there was no help. The inconvenient civilization of
modern times precluded a resort to that picturesque method of settling
the question. And Mrs. Pendarrel owned to herself that her husband was
but ill-qualified to head a foray. She recollected the pretences by
which he had obtained her hand, and confessed that he would cut a bitter
figure in "Doe on the demise of Pendarrel against Trevethlan," than in a
cartel of mortal defiance.

Yet had she good cause to tremble. She had only discerned one-half of
Sinson's character, his malice against the Trevethlans. She employed him
in a manner which gratified that feeling, and she supposed her pecuniary
favours were sufficient to make him her own. But he was far from being a
slave, like an eastern mute, or a messenger of the Vehm-Gericht, who
would answer in humble submission, "to hear is to obey:" he had his own
game to play beside that of his mistress, and well would it be for her
if she did not lose more than she won by his cunning finesse.

His disposition had been nourished by his whole life. His early years
were spent in the most abject servility. He fawned upon his young
cousin, the heir of Trevethlan, like a spaniel. To obtain his
partiality, and to be admitted to his society, he was ready to lick the
dust under his feet. And at the same time he thought, or was persuaded
by his grandmother, that the ties of blood made such distinction a
matter of right rather than of favour. So very early in life he acquired
ideas much above his real station, and pined for a position for which he
was not born.

When Randolph's father ejected the young rustic from the castle, this
aspiring ambition seemed to be nipped in the bud. The disappointment was
very severe, and his fanatical grandmother changed it into hatred.
Having been urgent in inducing her daughter to accept the offered
elevation, she heard of the treatment portrayed in poor Margaret's
fading cheek with wrath, and regarded her death as a murder to be
avenged. So she trained Michael as the instrument of retribution, and
made his personal spite the basis of a deep-rooted animosity against all
the house of Trevethlan.

With such feelings he presented himself to Mrs. Pendarrel, and was
received into her service. And well pleased he was to find that his
first duties implied more or less of hostility towards his former
playmate. He entered upon the task with a zeal inspired by hatred. The
departure of the orphans from their home seemed to deprive him of his
occupation, but in fact widened its sphere. The summons to London
extended the bounds of the young peasant's ambition. He had profited
well by the early instructions of Polydore Riches; he was of good
figure, with a handsome, if unprepossessing face; a short residence in
the metropolis changed his rusticity into assurance; and his natural
abilities qualified him to play many parts, and in some degree to seem a
gentleman.

His progress was quickened by the glimpse he caught of Miss Pendarrel at
his first arrival in town. It developed a series of sensations in his
mind, only partially excited before by the rural charms of Mercy Page,
and made him feel the inferiority of his station with tenfold
bitterness. He thought vaguely of Sir Richard Whittington and Sir Ralph
Osborne, and longed for the opportunity of making a rapid fortune. With
this idea, he bought a ticket in the lottery.

And as he advanced in the confidence of his patroness, a new prospect
opened before him. He fancied he saw the means of obtaining a control
over her, by which he could bend her to his will, whenever the time
came. So that he reached his end, he cared not for the road. And in this
case every passion of his heart concurred in urging him forward.
Circumstances favoured his desires even beyond his expectations, and the
period was approaching to strike the final blow.

Sinson's connection with the wretched spendthrift, Everope, has already
been traced. He destined that individual to play an important part in
his plot. The miserable man hung back at every step, and ended by
clearing it. Michael's money supplied him with dissipation, and in
dissipation he drowned remorse. But the trip into the country nearly
rescued him from his betrayer's clutches; it had given him time for
reflection such as he had not had for many a day; and when on their
return, Sinson laid open his further demands, he encountered a
resistance so obstinate that he almost thought his previous labour had
been thrown away. But threats and temptations did their work, and
Everope finally agreed to take the step, which Sinson promised should be
the last required of him. And now Michael remained in town, instead of
at once accompanying his patroness to Pendarrel, in order to furnish Mr.
Truby with information, and to take heed that his reluctant dupe did not
slip through his fingers.

The second week in February had scarcely begun, when Esther arrived in
Cornwall. Well might Gertrude warn Mildred that she underrated the
difficulties of her position. Mrs. Pendarrel treated her with the most
tender consideration, but with great art made her constantly feel that
the marriage was a settled thing, without ever affording her an
opportunity of protesting. Her assent was continually implied, yet in
such a way that she could not contradict the inference. Her situation
became embarrassing and irksome. It was ungenerous, she thought, to take
such an advantage of maidenly scruples. She felt that a web was being
spun round her, reducing her to a sort of chrysalis, from which it was
every day harder to escape, but from which she was resolved a fly should
issue, by no means like what was expected.

For she entertained no fear about the final result. If her mother chose
to go on, wilfully blind, from day to day, without permitting her eyes
to be opened, on her must rest the blame of any eclat. The remembrance
of her cousin was deeply imprinted on her heart, and sustained its
courage. Night after night, before retiring to rest, she drew aside the
curtains of her window to look for the bright planet which he had
associated with his destiny, saddened when it was hidden by clouds or
dimmed by mist, happy when its rays beamed pure and clear into her
chamber.

There were no guests staying at the hall, but numbers of casual visitors
called to pay their respects, and hoped perhaps for an invitation to the
wedding. And notes, of all shapes and sizes, requested the honour ... at
dinner and at dance. And a gay life would Mildred's have been, but that
she was so pre-occupied. For her mother accepted nearly all the
proffered hospitality, and returned it with liberal profusion. And at
every one of these festive meetings, Mildred could see that in the
compliments Mrs. Pendarrel received, and in her furtive and complacent
answers, she had no small portion.

One source of comfort she had, that Melcomb was not in the country. She
had not to endure his odious addresses. But her mother had issued cards
for a grand entertainment at rather a distant date, when she hoped to
crowd her house with everybody who was the least presentable in all West
Kerrier, and to that high festival Mildred feared he would come, an
undesired guest, and be in some way exhibited as her accepted suitor to
the assembled multitude. But the day was yet far off.

And it was with pleasure she learnt that Randolph and his sister had
returned to their ancestral home. Much speculation was afloat concerning
them; and though people generally knew the family disagreement, and
refrained from alluding to them in Mrs. Pendarrel's presence, slight
hints fell inadvertently at times; and some mean minds, little knowing
the nature of her they addressed, uttered a passing sarcasm upon their
poverty, with the notion that it would be agreeable. But to Mildred the
mere mention of their name was a source of interest; and in her rural
walks she would sometimes inquire concerning them of the country folk,
and speculate on the possibility of meeting Randolph on her way.

To her mother their presence was not equally agreeable. She was far from
anxious for any such rencontre. She too well remembered the emotion
displayed by Mildred at Mrs. Winston's. She learnt, with regret, that
the orphans did not lead so absolutely sequestered a life as before
their father's death; but availed themselves of the removal of the
restriction which then confined their walks to the precincts of the
castle and the sea coast, and made themselves in some measure acquainted
with the wild scenery surrounding their native bay. She did not like the
idea of being so near them, just at the time when Sinson's machinations
were about to explode. And with a different interest she heard of the
state of feeling manifested pretty openly by the tenantry of Trevethlan,
and desired her protege to come to Pendarrel as soon as he should be
released from attendance on Mr. Truby. She wished to have more precise
information of what passed in the castle and its dependent hamlet, and
summoned her retainer to resume his original occupation.




CHAPTER IV.

    Tu ne quaesieris, scire nefas, quem mihi, quem tibi
    Finem Di dederint, Leuconoc; nec Babylonios
    Tentaris numeros. Ut melius, quidquid erit, pati!

    Hor.

    Seek not to know, it is not given,
    The end for us ordained by Heaven;
    Nor be by fortune-tellers lured:
    What can't be cured, is best endured.


Madron church-town, the mother of the thriving port of Penzance, is a
small irregular hamlet, situated on an eminence overlooking its
well-grown offspring, and the salt marshes which skirt the coast in the
direction of Marazion. It is approached by a steep and winding road, but
the prospect from the churchyard will well repay the labour of the way.
And many a pilgrim, when he turns from the landscape spread beneath to
the memorials at his feet, and feels the breeze from the sea breathe
lightly over his cheek, will be mournfully reminded how many have sought
a refuge on that genial shore from our English destroyer, beguiling
themselves and those dear to them, with the hope of eluding his pursuit,
but sinking, nevertheless, under his ruthless embrace; for on the
tombstones round him the stranger will read of other strangers, from far
distant places, with names unknown to Cornwall, once graced, he may
imagine, with youth and beauty, of whose history it is there written
that they "came to Penzance for the benefit of their health." Those
simple words, repeated on every side, tell the melancholy end of many a
romance.

Up the hill, on an early day in February, a trim country girl was
climbing with a step that betokened some indecision of purpose. She was
dressed in a dark blue frock, short and full in the skirt, and a red
cloak of scanty dimensions, which hung over one shoulder and under the
other arm. She was hot, and carried her bonnet, decked with some of the
first primroses of the year, in her hand, while her black hair hung
round a pair of bright eyes of the same colour, and cheeks always red,
and now redder than usual. A very pretty rustic was Mercy Page.

It is some four miles from Marazion to Madron, and further still from
Trevethlan; but that is not much for a Cornish maiden. Mercy had walked
all the way. But she had not walked with the free quick step usual to
her, nor did their wonted open smile play round her provoking lips. Her
look was anxious, and her pace uncertain. And now that she was toiling
up the hill, and perhaps approaching her destination, she not
unfrequently stopped, and with her finger in the corner of her mouth,
tried to scrutinize herself, while she seemed to be regarding the
prospect. For Mercy had a kind of idea that she was on her way to do
what was at least foolish, if not wrong, and she had always been a very
good girl.

But with all this hesitation, she still advanced. She crossed Madron
churchyard, and went out of her way to drop a flower on the grave of a
cousin who lay there, making a longer pause on the occasion than any
which had previously interrupted her walk. However, she proceeded at
last, and soon turned aside from the main road by a tiny streamlet. She
followed the rivulet's course, as it wound along beneath a bank covered
in the summer with broom, gorse, and heather, from amidst which, here
and there, a graceful silver birch flung its long tresses on the breeze,
until she arrived at a sort of bay or inlet, where the trees grew more
thickly, and in the very depth of which lay, still, silent, and dark,
encircled by rude stone-work, a well of water, the source of the
streamlet which had guided the maiden's steps--St. Madron's Well.

Mercy cast a sharp glance before her, and was glad to see that there was
no person near the fountain. She went up to it herself, and bent over
the mirror-like surface, and might see her image rising dimly to meet
the salute. Could that limpid water tell a maiden's fortune? Was it
conscious of the reflection of her features? Could it read their gentle
lines, and foreshow by any ripple of its own, the destiny of her who
looked upon it? And was such inquiry sanctioned by the saint who had
blessed the fountain? Was it not profane so to forestall futurity? Such
questions flitted vaguely through Mercy's bosom while she gazed into the
tranquil well. An expression of awe stole over her face; and when, as
she changed her position, a straggling briar which had caught her cloak
twitched it, she started like a guilty thing, and turned suddenly with a
flush on her cheeks and forehead, deeper even than that called forth by
exercise. She did not smile on discovering the source of her alarm, but
began to search among the pebbles of the brook for some smoother and
rounder than common. Having collected two or three of this description,
she returned to the fountain, and from trembling fingers, and with eyes
half afraid to watch the result, dropped one of the stones into the
water. There was a little splash, and then the circling wavelets grew
larger and larger, and broke against the sides of the well, and a new
ripple arose from each point of contact, and the undulations crossed one
another in every direction, and became fainter and fainter, until the
surface once more motionless, again presented the maiden with the
semblance of her own pretty features, just as she saw them before the
disturbance.

Was Mercy any the wiser? She drew a long breath, and murmured to
herself, "he is not----" She had heard that if the well were unruffled,
the oracle pronounced the person inquired of to be dead. The oracle, it
may be presumed, was generally favourable to hope. But Mercy wished to
learn much more than this; and those changing and intermingling ripples
had to her been as hieroglyphics to the eyes of the profane. She dropped
another of her pebbles into the well. Again the same sight, and the same
disappointment. Vainly did Mercy try to shape the little waves into
words, or letters, or symbols. She could not make out even a "yes" or a
"no." Once more she tried the experiment, and becoming more
enthusiastic, pressed the pebble to her lips before she let it fall.

Still it was all the same. The oracle was dumb. Mercy was inclined to
revile St. Madron. She had grown excited; felt reconciled to the
practice of the black art, and ventured on a step, which, when she
started from home, she vowed to herself nothing should induce her to
take.

There was a cottage, or rather a hovel, which the maiden had passed on
her way to the well, and which she had shunned. The bank formed one of
its sides, and it was hard to say where the ground ended and the
dwelling began. The walls were built of rough stones, the interstices
between them being filled with moss, which had accepted the employment
willingly, and grown and flourished. The roof also was of turf, and thus
the abode had a vegetable aspect, and looked like an unusually large
clump of green, such as one sees often on a moist common, tempting one's
foot to press it, or suggesting the idea of an unpleasantly soft pillow.
This was the nest of Dame Gudhan, the self-constituted priestess of St.
Madron's Well. She was a toothless, deformed, ugly old woman, who lived
with her cat, which she had succeeded in training to poach, and bring
the game it killed home to be cooked, instead of wasting it raw in the
open field. Friend she had none but pussy, but she enjoyed a high
reputation as a witch; and many a girl travelled many a mile to
ascertain from Dame Gudhan the colour of her future's hair and eyes, and
all his other good qualities.

Now the sibyl had observed the detour which Mercy made to avoid passing
near her hut, and observed it with due professional pique. To consult
the spirit of the well without the assistance of its minister was to
defraud the latter of her rightful perquisite, and depreciate the
science of witchcraft. So, whenever Dame Gudhan perceived a timid
devotee steal furtively to the well, she would lie in wait for her
return, and favour her with unsought predictions of a nature less
agreeable than strong. Eying Mercy from the door of her den, the old hag
thought her appearance indicated one quite able to afford a fee, and
proportionate to the idea was the sibylline wrath. But in order to
increase her anger to the proper pitch, Dame Gudhan trod hard upon her
cat's tail; and the animal, resenting the affront, inflicted a long
scratch upon its mistress's shin. Thereupon ensued a hideous war; a
yelling as of the evil demons with which the pythoness pretended to be
familiar; unintelligible to vulgar ears; requiring an interpreter from
the oyster-quays. It may be supposed the witch had the best of the
argument, for after a while, pussy issued from the hovel with her tail
trailing behind her, and trotted off in a crest-fallen fashion, stopping
now and then to look round sulkily, and shake her whiskers with impotent
spite.

Dame Gudhan speedily followed grimalkin, tottering along on a stick, and
muttering to herself, chewing her rage as a horse champs the bit. She
encountered Mercy at the opening which led to the well.

"Didst read he would be hung, lass?" she squealed, while all the muscles
of her yellow wrinkled visage twitched frightfully. "Didst read he would
be hung?"

With all her heart Mercy wished herself safe back at Trevethlan.

"Dost tremble?" continued Dame Gudhan. "What wilt do when the day comes?
There's murder in thy face--a red spot on thy brow."

Poor Mercy gasped for breath, and leaned against the bank. She had
thrust her hand into her pocket, but was too much agitated to find what
she wanted. The old crone divined her intention.

"Na," she screamed. "The spirit won't be bought. The cord's about thy
neck, and the gibbet's reared for him. The tree grows no more in the
wood. It is felled, and hewn, and squared. The hemp is reaped, and beat,
and spun. In an evil day came ye to the blessed well, and passed by Dame
Gudhan without seeking her advice. Said is said."

By this time Mercy had succeeded in producing a little purse of red
leather with a steel clasp. Her fingers shook very much as she opened
it, and tendered Dame Gudhan a bright new shilling, its sole contents.
The hag was satisfied with the effect of her fierce prophecy--one she
had often vented on like occasions, and looked at the coin with greedy
eyes, chattering her teeth, and smacking her lips.

"That was his new-year's gift, I reckon," she said.

She was wrong, and the mistake restored Mercy's fleeting courage.

"Take it, dame," said the maiden.

"Ye'll lack a new ribbon at Sithney fair. And what for? Said is said."

It was a fine instance of conscientious scruples, that affected
reluctance of the old woman to receive the maiden's money.

"Take it, dame," Mercy repeated.

"The spirit never lies," said the hag, taking the shilling; "but he
sometimes explains his words. Come ye back to the well. Said is said.
We'll ask him what it means."

So saying, she hobbled on her stick up the little dell. Mercy looked
after her doubtfully, and was more than inclined to walk rapidly away;
but, yielding to the fascination which commonly attends inquiries like
hers, she at last followed the old crone, and overtook her at the well.

"Now, lass," said the enchantress, "an evil rede I read ye but now, and
evil it may be. But forewarned is forearmed. Ye need na be frightened.
And so ye saw nought in the dark water. Ye could na hear his voice. Ye
kenned na whether he laughed or frowned, or promised or threatened.
Smooth and still, deep and dark. Reach me thy hand. Stand by my side,
and when I press thy fingers, then drop the pebble."

Injunctions which the maiden obeyed with tremulous emotion. The old hag
knelt down by the fountain-side, and bent over the water until she
nearly touched it with her lips, mumbling some incantation. Suddenly she
squeezed Mercy's hand in her grasp, and the maiden let fall the pebble
which she held in the other. At the sound of the splash the witch raised
her head a little, and seemed to scan the ripples which circled on the
surface of the well. It was only for a moment, and then she started to
her feet, dashed a handful of water in Mercy's face, and screamed:

"Wash it off, wash it off. The spirit never lies. Said is said. Away,
lass; away."

She waved Mercy off, and the maiden retreated backwards before her, step
by step, until she reached the lower end of the ravine, unable to remove
her eyes from those of the fortune-teller. On the open ground Dame
Gudhan passed her without uttering another word, and hobbled quickly
away to her wretched abode, taking no notice of her cat, which had now
returned home, and appeared disposed to make up the late quarrel by
purring and rubbing against the old woman's wounded shin.

Mercy, exhausted and terrified, watched her until she disappeared within
her dwelling, and then, feeling relieved from her presence, and moved by
a sudden impulse, she dropped on her knees and implored, in her own
homely manner, the forgiveness of Heaven for what she had just done. She
rose somewhat tranquillized, and took her way homeward with a quick
step.

Fortune-tellers, unlike Dame Gudhan, generally give good tidings, and in
the few cases where it is otherwise, they are disbelieved. Were it not
so, the trade would be ruined. People forebode quite sufficient evil for
themselves, and seek a conjuror for comfort, not for aggravation of
their uneasiness. A strange fatuity it is that prompts such attempts to
raise the veil which hides the future! Were the object accomplished life
would be valueless; its interest would be gone; there would be nothing
left to live for, and we should be unable to die; we should be fatalists
by experience. The impatient reader, who peruses the last chapter of the
novel first, has still to learn in what manner the author educes his
catastrophe; but the miserable victim of foresight would be acquainted,
not only with the close, but with all the incidents of his coming
career. And difficult it is to see how human strength could bear up
against such a certainty, where the vision was of ill. So the inquirer
is apt to discredit the information which he came to seek, when it
proves to be unfavourable to his desires.

Mercy Page, already fortified by her silent prayer, soon regained her
ordinary cheerfulness. Her spirits rose as she walked, and she tripped
lightly along, in happy forgetfulness of Dame Gudhan's frightful
denunciations. So she passed under the pretty hamlet of Gulvall, with
its picturesque church-tower peeping forth from the embosoming trees,
and descended to the hard sands of the sea-shore. For the tide was out,
and the beach afforded a short cut to Marazion. Blithely and briskly the
maiden sped over the ribbed plain, until she saw in the distance,
advancing to meet her, a figure which she recognized.

At that moment there was no individual, perhaps, whom Mercy less desired
to see than Edward Owen, her discarded suitor. The woman cannot be worth
winning who takes pleasure in rejecting an honest admirer, and Mercy was
not a village coquette. She sincerely regretted that Owen's attachment
could only be a source of sorrow to himself. She deplored it the more,
because the disappointment seemed to have driven the lover into some
irregular courses. Now Mercy had sought St. Madron's Well with a vague
idea of confirming her belief in the fidelity of a more favoured suitor;
and, passing by the rude shock of her interview with Dame Gudhan, it was
not on her return from such an errand that she was pleased to meet his
rival. Meet him, however, she must, and did.

"A bright evening to you, Mercy," Owen said, as they approached one
another; "though bright there is nothing for me. And where mayst have
been this fine afternoon?"

It was an awkward question for the girl. She answered it with another.

"Where are you going, Edward, with the sun behind St. Paul's, and your
back to Trevethlan? It should not be a long walk ye are starting on.
Better maybe to turn back with me, and walk home together."

"Mercy," said the young man, "there was a time when my heart would have
jumped at the word. It is gone. I have other thoughts now. Where am I
going? By Castle Dinas to St. Ives. There will be some talk in the
country before long."

"What for, Edward?" Mercy asked. "They tell me I have scorned you into
wild ways. I never scorned you, Edward. It is not fair of you to bring
such a saying upon me. I wish to like you, and I thank you for liking
me, but I do not like sulky love."

"My love's anyhow honest," said Owen, "and that's more than you can say
of...."

"Now shame on you," cried the girl, interrupting him. "Will you say
slander of a man behind his back? And to me, too, that know it is
slander? And is that the way to change my mind?"

"I have no hopes of that, Mercy," answered the rustic. "And, for your
sake, I hope Michael's a better man than I think. Remember the evening
under the thorns on the cliff. It is for you and not for me I say it.
And methinks you haven't heard much of Michael since he went away to
London."

"Then I didn't ask your advice, Mr. Edward," said Mercy, "and you may as
well keep it till I do. I dare say I can take care of myself. And very
likely Michael has quite plenty to do in London without the writing of
letters. And I expect he'll be down here before long, for I hear say
that Pendar'l's getting ready for the ladies, if they're not there
already. And then you can tell him what you think, like a man. So I wish
you a good evening."

"Good evening, Mercy," returned the young man, sadly, and they proceeded
on their respective ways.

Ready as the maiden was to defend her lover to another, she could not so
easily excuse him to herself. And the anxiety, for the relief of which
she had made her pilgrimage to St. Madron's Well, had come back before
she reached her mother's cottage at Trevethlan, darkened rather than
alleviated by the result of the expedition.




CHAPTER V.

    Di, majorum umbris tenuem et sine pondere terram,
    Spirantesque crocos, et in urna perpetuum ver,
    Qui praeceptorem sancti voluere parentis
    Esse loco.

    Juvenal.


    Light lie the earth upon the shades of those,
    Flowers deck their graves, Spring dwell with their repose,
    Of old who deemed the teacher should supply
    The parent's holy rule, heart, hand, and eye.


Meantime Michael Sinson's scheme was ripening into action. The plot
matured in the metropolis was about to break on the towers of
Trevethlan. Two gentlemen crossed one another in the hurry of Lincoln's
Inn, and stopped to exchange a cordial greeting and a little chat.

"By the by, Winter," said Mr. Truby, as they were parting, "we're
bringing ejectment against a client of yours."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the second lawyer, "and who may that be?"

"Oh, the parties are old antagonists," answered the first. "It's by no
means the first time we've met. Doc d Pendarrel _v._ Trevethlan. Clerk
gone down to serve declaration and notice. You'll hear of it in a post
or two."

"Good Heaven!" thought Mr. Winter, as he proceeded on his way; "what new
calamity is this? Is not that hapless family even yet sufficiently
broken? Poor Morton! Now I will wager this comes in some way out of that
mad scheme."

And indeed it might well seem that nothing was needed to increase the
gloom that invested Trevethlan Castle. It was lonely and desolate in the
lifetime of its late possessor, but there was then at least the buoyancy
of youth to relieve the dreary monotony; and now, even that had
vanished. So far was Helen from being able to restore anything like
cheerfulness to her brother, that she herself became infected by his
sombre moodiness. Strange was the contrast between those dimly latticed
Gothic apartments, and the light and lively saloons of Pendarrel: the
wanderer in the former almost dreading to break the silence with his
footfall, and the latter ringing with careless laughter and mirthful
conversation. Polydore Riches himself could with difficulty preserve his
ever-hopeful equanimity; and Griffith often reproached himself to his
wife for the facility with which he consented to that ill-omened visit
to the metropolis: while the few domestics began to fear moving about
singly after dusk, and to whisper of mysterious sounds heard, and sights
seen, in the darkening corridors.

Such tales spread outside the castle, and were improved upon in their
progress. It became rumoured that the spirit of the unhappy Margaret
wandered through its halls in the silence of night, and harassed the
children she was not permitted to love in her lifetime. The villagers
began to look upon Randolph as the easterns do upon one possessed of the
evil eye, and rather shunned than courted his familiarity. And some of
the older folk recalled his father's marriage, and began to ask
themselves, was it after all only a mockery? Then, indeed, would poor
Margaret have cause to seek vengeance for the deceit by which she was
beguiled. And so they went on stringing story upon story, until in the
rush of the night wind they heard the wailings and howlings which in
days long gone were said to portend disaster to the house of Trevethlan.

Randolph was entirely unconscious of the popular mysticism, and too much
absorbed in his own feelings to have heeded it in any case. Every day he
went forth to the outskirts of the park of Pendarrel, and roamed round
its circuit, in the hope of meeting Mildred; and every day that he
returned disappointed, made him more restless and reserved. Such an
excursion at last led him by Wilderness Gate, and it happened that Maud
Basset was sunning herself there as he passed.

"Randolph Trevethlan," she cried, as he went by; and he turned, and she
came out to the plot of grass to meet him.

"Randolph Trevethlan," she repeated, "son of a murdered mother, there's
a dark hour at hand for thy house, but not darker than is due. I see it
written on thy brow. I heard it in the screams that came down on the
wind of the night. Say they her spirit is abroad in the towers where her
bliss was made her bane? Ay, he is dead, but he shall answer it in his
son."

The wildness of the old crone's language suited Randolph's humour. She
came quite close to him and looked up in his face.

"Hast seen her?" she asked, lowering her voice to a whisper, "hast seen
her, grandson Randolph? Thou knowest who I mean--thy mother, boy. My
Margaret, my winsome Margaret. They tell me she's been seen in the
castle. 'Tis long, long sin' I saw her myself. They said she grew pale
and pale, but they wouldna let me come nigh. And is it true they say?
Hast seen her, grandson Randolph?"

"Ay, it is true, indeed," he answered, in a bewildered manner. "I have
seen her indeed."

There was the trunk of a large tree lying on the grass close beside
them. The old woman took his hand and drew him to a seat upon it. He had
neither the power nor the wish to resist.

"Now I can see thee," Maud said. "Thou'st grown so tall; but art not
like the gleesome lad that used to sport with my Michael. Woe's me! And
how did she look? Said she aught to thee?"

"She hung over my bed with a sweet smiling face, and she bent down and
kissed my lips."

"A sweet smiling face!" Maud echoed; "that was hers indeed, my own
Margaret. And she smiled on thee, and kissed thee! Then she doth not
hate thee?"

"Why should she, Maud?"

"Art thou not his son? and did he not murder her?" exclaimed the crone,
in her former harsh manner. "Who said there was no marriage? He! he!
Surely thou wilt defend her fame, Randolph Trevethlan?"

"With my life," he answered.

"What's this I'm saying?" again Maud cried, checking herself. "There's a
dark hour at hand for thy house, I tell thee. God give thee the strength
to bear it!"

And she faltered away as quickly as she could, passed through the gate,
and entered the lodge, leaving Randolph still seated, motionless, upon
the timber.

Old Maud Basset was deeply versed in all the wild superstitions which
still lingered among the Cornubians. She knew the presages which
foretold sorrow or death to different old houses. Here, the fall of one
of the trees in the avenue was the harbinger of dole; there, ancient
logs of timber rose to the surface of the pool in the park before a
coming vacancy at the family board. She could tell, too, how drowned
persons broke the stillness of night by hailing their own names; of the
candle borne by unseen hands in the track of a future funeral; of many a
kind of unholy augury; of evil spirits who led wayfarers astray, and
precipitated them from the summit of their carns; and in particular of
Tregagel, condemned for his many ill deeds to empty the fathomless pool
of Dosmary by means of a limpet shell with a hole in it.

The incoherence of the old woman's speech, and her half-uttered
predictions, tallied very exactly with some of the feelings which had of
late been familiar to Randolph. Mildred, indeed, still occupied by far
the greatest portion of them; but his thoughts not unfrequently wandered
from her to the dream which had visited him the first night of his
return to the castle, and the fair face which had been pressed to his
own. That the features so revealed were those of his mother he never
doubted, and he felt a restless desire to learn something of the parent
whom he had lost before he was three years' old. But to whom should he
apply for information? Where could he find the sympathy which such a
topic demanded? The long silence that had been observed respecting it,
within the castle, must, he thought, have been the effect, in part, of a
deficiency of interest, and therefore he was reluctant to open his
wishes, even to the chaplain. And without the walls he knew no one to
confer with on such a subject. So he was at once fascinated by old
Maud's sudden allusion to her child, and answered her questions from the
recollections of his dream.

But what did she mean by her reiterated reference to Margaret's death,
and her dark announcement of coming calamity? The latter, indeed,
harmonized but too well with his own gloomy forebodings--"Who said there
was no marriage?--Thou wilt defend her fame?" What was the meaning of
such ominous insinuations? Randolph mused on them, without quitting the
posture in which Maud had left him, until they became so oppressive,
that he resolved to learn all the story from Polydore, without delay.

In the dusk of the evening, he walked with the chaplain in the
picture-gallery of the castle. The dim light which came through the high
Gothic windows, gave strange and unintended expression to some of the
portraits, and left others in such deep shadow that they could hardly be
discerned, while the vaulted ceiling hung indistinct over head. Randolph
paused at length before the likeness of his father. It was painted when
Henry Trevethlan was in the prime of youth, and presented the aspect of
a man very different indeed from the cold and stern personage with whom
his son was acquainted.

"What changed that countenance, Mr. Riches?" Randolph asked. "What swept
away the ardour and enthusiasm which beam from all those lineaments?
From what he told me himself, in his dying hour, I framed a tale of
hopeless attachment, of love striving to forget itself in ruin. Was it
so? Did Esther Pendarrel indeed break my poor father's heart, after
trifling with its affection? Methinks, he was not a man to be made a
mock of. Yet the mocker has prevailed."

"Randolph," Polydore answered, with a deep sigh, "your speech brings
back days of sorrow, which I would were forgotten. But that was all past
before I became a resident here. From the steward only, and from popular
report, did I learn the intimacy which once subsisted between your
father and Mrs. Pendarrel. It was in a thoughtless hour, if all that's
said be true, that she crushed his last hopes by wedding. And so, by
this time, she knows, perhaps, too well."

"Did she love him, then, Mr. Riches?" Randolph inquired quickly.

"Nay," said the chaplain, "that is a question which I cannot answer. But
sure I am, that if one spark of feeling yet lives in her heart, as I
would fain believe, she must be visited with deep remorse as often as
she looks back upon the ruin wrought by her girlish levity. May you, my
dear Randolph, never know the pangs of affection unrequited, or requited
only to be broken. And, if such sad lot be yours, may Heaven teach you
to bear up against it, nor hide misery in the show of defiance."

"'Tis well for her," Randolph mused aloud, having scarcely heard
Polydore's last words, "'tis very well for her, if indeed she loved. For
so is no account between us. But if it be otherwise, if, out of
wilfulness or vanity, she broke the heart that adored her, then let her
look to her own. Not unscathed shall she go down to the grave. Does not
the vow lie heavy on my soul?"

"Oh, Randolph, Randolph!" Polydore exclaimed; "what words are these?"

But the young man heeded him not, and, taking his arm, led him several
times up and down the long gallery in silence, and at last drew him to
one of the windows, from which they looked forth upon the sea. The white
crests of the waves were still visible in the increasing darkness.

"Pardon me, Mr. Riches," Randolph said, "if I recall days that are gone,
and which are recollected only with pain. But these are topics which
have been forbidden, which I can no longer resist approaching, on which
I must be informed. My father's marriage, my mother.... How came it
about? How did she die? Strange tales have fallen upon my ears----"

The chaplain was much distressed. "What!" thought he, "will they not let
poor Margaret rest even in her grave? Do they bear their foul scandal to
her son? And is it for me to tell him the story of his father's fault?"

"Speak, Mr. Riches," said Randolph, with some impatience; "let me hear
all the truth of the history."

"You know not what you ask," Polydore answered sadly. "Margaret Basset
could not resist the influence which made her the seeming mistress of
this castle. I could not approve--I went away. The marriage was strictly
private. The people were very jealous. Some said--be patient--that it
was not duly performed. I know that it was. I had some slight
acquaintance with Mr. Ashton the clergyman; he was murdered shortly
after the ceremony, and the witness disappeared. The rumours spread; but
they died away when you were born. You can imagine the details."

"How did she die?" Randolph asked again.

"You know your father, Randolph," the chaplain replied. "Cannot you
conceive the position was too much for her? And her kindred were
imprudent. She pined away. But she was an angel. We all loved her. If
the devotion of those around her could have made up for the affection
which should hallow her situation, surely she were living now."

His hearer mused again for some time in silence, thinking of his dream;
and it produced its usual effect of soothing his excitement, and
tranquillizing his spirits.

"Come, Mr. Riches," he said, "let us seek my sister. We must not leave
her desolate too long."

But the chaplain laid his hand on his old pupil's arm, saying:

"One moment, Randolph; let me detain you one moment. Let me play the
master again. What we have been discoursing of will be best forgotten.
And oh! let it not be remembered in one fatal sense! Let not these sad
events be the foundation of evils yet to come! You spoke of a vow. Such
are often wrongly demanded and rashly given. Pride lingers on the bed of
death, and bequeaths itself to its successors. Vengeance, unappeased,
requires satisfaction by the hands of its heir. So hatred is handed down
for ever, and rancour and strife made perpetual. Pray Heaven the vow you
speak of requires none of these things! Pray Heaven, that if haply it
do, it will be revoked and forgotten!"

"A parent's curse," said Randolph in a hollow voice, "is a terrible
thing."

"To him!" the chaplain exclaimed. "To him it is, indeed, a terrible
thing, and to his children, if it impels them into wrong-doing. There is
no power in man to curse, my dear pupil, and surely Heaven is deaf to
all such imprecations."

Alas! Polydore might as well have reasoned with the foaming waves
beneath him. Randolph listened in respectful silence, but entirely
unconvinced. As law is silent amid the din of arms, so is reason in the
conflict of passions. Few sources have been more fruitful of evil than
the pledges extorted by the dying. The giver succumbs absolutely to an
obligation he ought never to have undertaken, allows himself no
discretionary power, yields nothing to the alteration of circumstances,
and acts as if the behest were imposed by certain foreknowlege and
unerring wisdom. There is no absolution from a death-bed promise, and no
chancery to qualify its mischievous engagements.

This conversation was little adapted to restore Polydore Riches to his
old equanimity. Gentle and simple-hearted, he was ill-calculated to
wrestle with the stormy passions which had desolated his late patron's
life, and now threatened shipwreck to the happiness of his pupil. He
mourned for the day when, in pride and confidence, neglecting the
worldly-wisdom of the more prudent steward, he enthusiastically bade the
brother and sister go forth on their way, and foretold for them a
prosperous career, and a joyful return. He almost blamed himself for not
having given them more adequate preparation for the struggle of life,
and attributed their failure to his own deficiency. Yet surely never did
teacher better answer the desire of those ancients, lauded by the Roman
poet in the lines which head this chapter. Polydore had nothing
wherewith to reproach himself.

But the discourse had also revived his own particular griefs, recalling,
as it did, the days when he paid his first vows of love to Rose
Griffith, and won her timid consent, only to see her wither away. A
pensive melancholy was visible upon his countenance when he returned
with Randolph through the gloomy galleries to the apartments over the
little flower-garden.




CHAPTER VI.

    "Guare wheag, yw guare teag."

    _Cornish Proverb._


    "Fair play is good play."

    Polwhele.


Many of the villagers of Trevethlan were desirous of celebrating the
return of their young master by some kind of holiday. They remembered
how in the old time there were several festivals in the course of the
year, kept with high revelry on the green of the hamlet, countenanced by
the presence of the lords, and graced by that of the ladies, of its
ancient castle. But when ruin fell upon the late possessor, and
desolation encompassed his dwelling, the sports diminished in spirit,
and the peasantry sought in the neighbouring villages the merriment
which no longer enlivened their own. The succession of a young heir,
however, seemed to warrant an attempt to revive the much-regretted
pastimes, and the idea, when once started, found a staunch supporter in
the laughter-loving landlady of the "Trevethlan Arms." Indeed she
undertook to roast a sheep, and broach a hogshead of cider, as the
foundation of a free feast; and the liberality being met with similar
offers from other quarters, the hamlet was in a position to offer
tolerably profuse hospitality to all comers.

Valentine's day was fixed upon for the revel; and several evenings
before it came, some of the villagers met at Dame Miniver's, to arrange
the programme of the sports. And it was finally decided to revive the
old game of hurling, by challenging Pendarrel to play them home and home
across the country, as the principal event of the frolic. The
determination, however, was not unopposed.

"Are ye sure, neighbours," said our acquaintance Germoe, the tailor,
"that this challenge will be agreeable on the hill? Ye know what we
spoke of only the other night. There's no love lost between the hall and
the castle."

"The very cause for why to play out the quarrel," said Edward Owen. "And
as to the castle, I warrant the young squire'll be none displeased to
hear we've given Pendar'l a beating. I say play."

"But in such case," urged farmer Colan, "playing often turns to
fighting."

"And what then?" Owen asked again, who took great interest in the
meditated match, from a vague hope of encountering his rival in the
hostile ranks,--"what then, I say? Have we not thrashed them before?
'Tis ill nursing a quarrel."

"Ay, ay, lad," said Mrs. Miniver aside to the last speaker, "I know
where thy cap's set. She's a proud minx, and an' I were thee----. But,
neighbours, how long has Trevethlan been afraid of Pendar'l?"

A true woman's question, and one which settled the matter off-hand.
There was no further hesitation as to despatching the challenge. The
tailor's hint concerning the castle had, however, more foundation than
was supposed; for Randolph much regretted the resolution of his
dependents. But he did not learn it until the invitation had been sent
and accepted, and it was then impossible to retreat.

On the other side, the match received the formal sanction of Mrs.
Pendarrel, who had been at the park a day or two when the proposal
arrived. Remembering that her retainers far outnumbered those of
Trevethlan, she rather rejoiced at the prospect of humiliating her
adversary, and graciously promised to provide the silver-plated ball
with which the game should be played.

The village green was "home" for the players of Trevethlan. Early in the
appointed holiday it was thronged with busy, noisy groups, and presented
an extremely lively aspect, strikingly at variance with its recent
tranquillity, and with the sombre gravity of the castle, where there
were no symptoms of participation in the frolics of the day. Reverend
elders occupied the bench round the old chestnut in front of the inn,
and discoursed of the matches of their youth, before the harmony of
Trevethlan and Pendarrel was interrupted, and when the open doors of the
castle proffered unbounded hospitality. Stalwart youths, girded for the
sport, strolled about in knots, plotting devices for carrying off the
ball, arranging plans for watching the enemy's home, cracking jests with
the maidens who idled in the throng, in their Sunday frocks and smartest
ribbands, and extorting half promises of reward in the evening for
prowess displayed in the day. Dame Miniver had ample cause for
satisfaction with the result of her liberality.

Mrs. Pendarrel permitted her side to make the lawn before her house
their home. Refreshments of all kinds were distributed among the crowd
there collected with a bounteous hand. The lady herself descended among
her tenants, leaning on the arm of her daughter, speaking to old
acquaintance, everywhere bestowing encouragement. Even Mildred was
excited by the liveliness of the scene. It was a fine genial day, with a
warm breeze blowing, which kept the trees in constant motion, and gave
life to the company beneath their leafless branches.

Michael Sinson, only just arrived from London, was to lead the forces of
Pendarrel. So his patroness, aware of his former reputation, desired; so
his vanity, as well as his duty, prompted. He was active in the throng,
assigning their stations to his mates, providing for all the chances of
the struggle, but glancing ever and anon on the fair young form that
glided through the rustic assembly like a being from another sphere.
Little thought he that morning of the rosy-cheeked girl whom he had once
pretended to love, and who now walked among the maidens of Trevethlan,
with a sympathy divided between her sweetheart and her home.

The goals were not much more than two miles apart, a short distance in a
match "to the country;" but this circumstance prevented the interference
of horsemen, diminished the opportunities for artifice, and made the
contest depend more on the personal skill and prowess of the players. In
a longer game the ball might be thrown into the hands of a mounted
partizan, who would trust to the speed of his horse to carry it home in
triumph; or again into the keeping of a rustic, selected for his simple
appearance, who would trudge tranquilly along the high road seemingly
unconscious of his valuable charge, while the hurlers on both sides
sought the prize with great animation; until the news of the crafty
bearer's arrival at his destination told the victory of his friends, and
both parties repaired to the winning quarters to laugh over the trick,
and fight the battle anew, in a high jollification.

There was a meadow situated on an eminence about midway between
Trevethlan and Pendarrel, between which and either goal no obstacle
intervened to turn aside the play. Here it was arranged the ball should
be thrown up, and hither Mrs. Pendarrel and Mildred repaired to behold
the commencement of the game. The players chosen to begin stood in an
irregular ring on the hill, and amongst them Sinson and Owen, the
opposing generals, the latter of whom regarded the former with looks
which indicated more ill-will than befitted the occasion, but which
Michael observed with contemptuous indifference.

And now Mildred has tossed the new apple of discord, a wooden ball, some
three inches in diameter, covered with silver, and bearing the motto
which heads this chapter, as the trophy, to remain in the possession of
the victors of the day, into the middle of the ring, and a dozen men are
on the ground, struggling to obtain a hold of the prize. Rolling over
and over, twisting, tangled like a coil of snakes, they writhe and
struggle in intricate confusion. Where is the ball? Who shall discern it
in so close a conflict? See, a combatant shakes himself clear of
competitors, rises in the midst, springs over them, and bounds away in
the direction of Pendarrel, cheered by the partizans of the hall. Not
long shall the cheering endure: an opponent bars his career: him the
holder of the ball thrusts aside, "butts" with his closed fist. Reprisal
in like fashion is against the rules. But there is another, and another,
one at a time, for so it is ordained. Nor are the holder's friends
inactive: they screen him round, and strive to keep off his adversaries.
And thus he makes some way, but may not even clear the field. His vigour
fails at last under repeated attacks; he has no longer strength to butt;
"hold," he must cry, in token of surrender, and deal the ball to be
seized by fresher hands: a stouter heart, he thinks, 't were hard to
find.

Again the first struggle is renewed, but the crowd is not so great, nor
does it last so long. This time the ball is borne swiftly back in the
direction of Trevethlan. Light of foot is the holder, but his speed
shall not avail him long. At the very hedge of the field he is
encountered; he may not pass the barrier; he tries another point, again
to be defeated; he, too, must shout the word of submission, and recover
breath for a renewed onset.

And thus, with varied fortune, the game proceeds, continually growing
wider in its scene. The ball is borne in succession towards either goal,
far away from the field where the game began. It seems the lady of
Pendarrel reckoned without her host, for there are many volunteers in
the play, and they, with proper heroism, have chosen the weaker side.
She and her daughter have retired to the hall, but the country is still
alive with the excitement of the game, and the woods and the sky are
vocal with the cries of the rival partizans, as they mark the course of
the ball with shouts of "Ware east," "Ware west."

An old writer compares the ball used in this game to an evil demon; for,
says he, no sooner does a player become possessed of it than he acts as
if he were possessed of a devil; flying like a madman over the country,
bursting through hedges, bounding over ditches, rushing furiously
against all opponents, heedless of everything but his progress towards
home. When suddenly, having been obliged at last to surrender, he
becomes once more tranquil and peaceable, as though the evil spirit had
then left him, and entered his successor, who instantly commences a like
impetuous career.

Many a possession of this kind was witnessed in the match between
Pendarrel and Trevethlan. Once the former hamlet seemed almost on the
point of victory. The holder had disencumbered himself of all who had
been active in the field, and was dashing triumphantly homewards, when
he met the reserve especially stationed to prevent a surprise. At the
same moment Owen bounded up to rally his forces. The game was rescued,
and renewed with increased vigour on both hands. Step by step the path
of the holder, now on this side and now on that, was contested in every
way permitted by the laws of the game. Passion grew hotter, and ever and
anon rose cries of "foul." The leaders, who had hitherto rather directed
the fray than engaged in it personally, now rushed into the thick of the
fight. The partizans of Trevethlan gained ground in their turn. The
chestnut on their green was already in sight. Owen himself held the
ball. The road, for the fight had descended from the fields into the
highway, was thronged with the combatants. The maidens of the village,
approached the end of the green, and joined in the animating cries. Owen
had repelled many an antagonist, when Michael Sinson met him face to
face. It was what he had long wished for, and he was delighted when, as
he always affirmed and as was sturdily maintained by all his partizans,
his opponent butted him unfairly. The excitement of the game and
personal exasperation united to give force to the blow which sent his
rival staggering away. The next moment Owen stood on the grass of the
hamlet, and flung the ball high into the air, while loud and reiterated
shouts proclaimed the victory of Trevethlan, and were heard, perhaps not
without some satisfaction, within the walls of the castle.

Whatever ill-blood might have been generated in the heat of the
engagement, rapidly subsided when it was over. It had been gallantly
fought, and discomfiture was only less honourable than success. Victor
and vanquished met in friendly groups on the green, formed parties for
the athletic sports of the country, or sought partners for the dance
which would terminate the amusements of the day, while the landlady of
the Trevethlan Arms was finishing her preparations for the feast, and
the children were continually increasing a pile of combustibles in front
of the inn, destined to blaze after nightfall in celebration of the
holiday.

There was, however, one breast in which disappointed rage still rankled.
Michael Sinson rose after the fall he received from Owen, to hear the
acclamations hailing his conqueror, and to feel an aggravation of his
animosity, not so much against his rival, as against Trevethlan, its
master, and its inhabitants. He looked angrily at the jocund doings on
the green, and then turned to bear the tidings of his defeat to his
patroness. But he had not proceeded many steps, when a light hand was
laid upon his arm, and a sharp glance round showed him the rosy cheeks
and black eyes of Mercy Page.

"Why, Michael," said the maiden, "is this the welcome ye learn to give
in London? Is this the way ye would leave Mercy to seek for a partner at
a village revel? What if we have won the match, is it a cause for
shame?"

"Pish!" Sinson said, sulkily. "Go to your Edward Owen. He is the hero of
the day. Let him be your partner."

"Then it's not heroes, nor none such I care for," pursued the wilful
girl. "I'm no sure I'm glad that our side's won. Come now, Michael,
what's to fret for?"

Sinson cast his sinister eyes upon Mercy's face. It was very pretty,
even in reproach, and besides, he thought she might be of use to him.

"May-be," said he, "I shall be back in the evening. But now I must take
the news to Pendarrel."

With which ungracious saying, Mercy was forced to content herself, and
return, pouting, to her mirthful companions, while Michael pursued his
way to Wilderness Lodge.

His old grandmother asked him concerning the game, and on being surlily
informed of its result, muttered something about a judgment on such
sacrilegious doings, which her dutiful grandson did not hear, and if he
had, would have laughed at. His patroness learned the news with an air
of indifference, which to him appeared at variance with her previous
interest in the match; and as he left her presence, he could not help
saying, that Trevethlan should yet pay dearly for the morning's victory.

Meantime the feast was spread in a low, long barn at the Trevethlan
Arms, and the board was crowded by adherents of both parties with right
west-country appetites. Lads and lasses ate to their heart's content.
Dame Miniver's sheep was declared to make very excellent mutton, and no
one quarrelled with the quality of her cider. The guests from Pendarrel
honoured the health of the squire of Trevethlan, and the company who
were at home paid due respect to the lord and lady of the strangers. So
"all went merry as a marriage bell." The relics of dinner were reserved
to furnish forth a supper, and the company resumed their morning sports,
exhilarating themselves with copious libations of the juice of the
apple, and occasionally with a dram of whisky or Hollands, which was,
probably, still indebted to his Majesty's customs.

On the whole, the frolic proceeded in perfect good-humour; but
occasionally a dispute arose respecting the final contest between Owen
and Sinson, which threatened for a moment or more to interrupt the
general harmony. No serious quarrel had arisen, however, before daylight
died away, and the shadow of night called for the lighting of the
bonfire. But when the crackling logs flung a ruddy glow over the green,
and the white smoke went circling away on the breeze, and the village
musicians, a fiddle and clarionet, who on Sunday led the choir in
church, became more energetic in their strains, then the fun began to
grow fast and furious, and practical jokes continually endangered the
peace of the green. As the boys and girls danced wild country measures
around the blazing pile, a few of their comrades distributed at each end
of a long and stout cord, would single a couple from the throng, catch
them in the snare, and running adroitly round and round in opposite
directions, bind the unlucky pair in a noose to which they would not
have objected, perhaps, in a gentler and quieter assembly, but which
here exposed them to many a shout of rustic laughter. Or, again, running
rapidly along the green with the cord trailing loose between them, the
same confederates would trip up the heels of all in their way--a jest
not always accepted with perfect equanimity.

In the midst of these rough gambols, and when no small portion of the
folks had somewhat exceeded the bounds of sobriety, Michael Sinson made
his appearance on the green, himself flushed with festive doings at
Pendarrel. He spoke and laughed with some of his acquaintance, and
sought his neglected flame, Mercy Page. She sat on a stool at her
mother's cottage-gate, having steadily refused every invitation to take
an active part in the dance, relying on the half-promise she had
received from Michael. As for her rejected lover, the hero of the day,
he seemed to challenge her jealousy by dancing vigorously with half the
girls on the green, and ostentatiously parading his partners in Mercy's
sight; without, however, succeeding in his object, by awaking her
indignation.

Sinson soon discovered his too faithful beauty, and led her, willing
enough, for a romping dance around the bonfire. But they had tripped
together for a very short time, when the rope was swept round them, and
in a twinkling they were fast enveloped in its coils. Michael grew
furious with rage. He recollected having once boasted to Mercy of
rescuing her from a similar disaster. His wrath was far from diminished
when he perceived Owen active in endeavouring to procure his release.
When those efforts succeeded, he fixed a quarrel upon his rescuer, on
the old ground of the foul play at the hurling-match. Mischief was
meant, and mischief came. In a very few minutes the whole green was the
scene of a furious conflict; the parties which had met in the morning in
friendly rivalry, and broken bread together cheerfully in the afternoon,
now proceeding to break one another's heads without the slightest
reserve. The girls ran crying to their homes; the bonfire was trodden
under foot; and so, in confusion and uproar, terminated the sports at
Trevethlan.

The battle might be considered in its end as drawn. But it was said that
individual cries were heard in the fray, to the effect that the heir of
the castle was about to claim his own, and that they would have tidings
of him at Pendarrel before many weeks had gone by. If the bonfire at
Trevethlan was extinguished in tumult, some of the hamlet would dance by
the light of a greater. No one seemed to know what such words meant, but
some folks remembered them when the heat of the struggle was past.




CHAPTER VII.

                             "Whether it be
    Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple
    Of thinking too precisely on the event--
    A thought, which, quartered, hath but one part wisdom,
    And ever three parts coward--I do not know
    Why yet I live to say, _This thing 's to do_."

    Shakspeare.


Randolph had not renewed, on returning to the castle, the instructions
he formerly gave to Jeffrey respecting the non-admission of strangers.
But as yet there had been no visitors. The family had been so long
isolated, that it was a matter of discussion among the neighbouring
gentry to call or not to call; and no sheep had as yet chosen to head
the flock. But the very morning of the sports described in the last
chapter, word was brought that a gentleman wished to see Mr. Trevethlan.
Randolph desired he might be shown into a parlour, and went to meet him.

"Have the honour to address Mr. Trevethlan, I presume," the stranger
said. "My name, Stiles; in the employment of Messrs. Truby and Company,
solicitors, Chancery-lane, London. Have the honour to deliver this
declaration in ejectment. Will take the liberty to read the notice--'Mr.
Randolph Trevethlan'"----

"It is unnecessary, sir," said Randolph, with an external calmness at
which he afterwards marvelled. "I have been a student of the law, and
understand the proceeding."

"Beg pardon, sir," said Mr. Stiles; "more regular to read it. Very
short. 'Mr. Randolph Trevethlan'"----

And the clerk read the notice without further interruption. Randolph
took the paper, rang the bell, desired the servant to provide Mr. Stiles
with some refreshment, wished him good-morning, and withdrew.

He was, as he said, perfectly familiar with the nature of the law-suit
which this visit commenced. And as the reader is doubtless acquainted
with it through the medium of a very clever and popular story, it will
be unnecessary to pursue its details here. As soon as Randolph was
alone, he glanced down the document, and, with a kind of wild glee,
perceived that his real opponent in the action was Philip Trevethlan
Pendarrel. He rubbed his hands together, rumpling the paper between
them, and almost exulting in the strife which was at hand.

"So," said he aloud, "there are two games begun to-day. One will be
played out before night; the other will last sometime longer. But we'll
make it as short as we can. And now to action. Our stake is a little
higher than that of the villagers yonder. They play for broken heads,
and we for broken hearts. Faites vos devoirs, preux chevaliers."

With these hasty words Randolph immediately sought the chaplain and
steward, and begged them to come and assist at a council of war. Nor was
Helen omitted, for after one moment's hesitation, her brother thought
she had better know the worst at once. As soon as the little circle was
completed, Randolph produced the hostile missive, requested that he
might not be interrupted, and read it from end to end with a fierce
gravity of accent. Helen was entirely bewildered, Polydore was rather
perplexed, the steward was thunderstruck.

"What does it mean?" said Helen. "Roe, and Doe, and Mr. Pendarrel! What
does it all mean?"

"It is some kind of law proceeding, is it not?" said the chaplain.

"It is the beginning of an action of ejectment," said Mr. Griffith.
"That is, Mr. Pendarrel claims some portion of our estates. Methinks he
has had enough already."

Randolph was silent.

"I imagined that all litigation had been closed long ago," Polydore
remarked.

"Will it be a source of trouble?" Helen asked, looking anxiously at her
brother.

"I cannot for the life of me understand what it means," said Griffith,
who had been reflecting. "Is it possible that in all those numerous
deeds, some bit of land has been included which has never been
surrendered? But it cannot be--they're too sharp."

"Trouble yourself with no vain questions, Mr. Griffith," Randolph
exclaimed abruptly. "This is brought for the castle, and hamlet, and
_all_ our property."

"To deprive us----," Helen began.

"Ay, Helen, to deprive us of everything," her brother continued. "Some
personal trinkets, a few bits of old furniture, perhaps our wardrobes,
may be spared--that is, if we can pay the expenses of the proceeding.
But our home, and our lands, and our friends, from all those we are to
be parted for ever."

Helen wept; more at her brother's manner than the fate announced in his
words.

"Randolph," said the chaplain, with a sternness, which in him was
extremely rare, "be calm. You are unkind to your sister, and unjust to
us. You know that nothing but your own conduct can deprive you of your
friends, and I apprehend that even the rest does not necessarily
follow."

"Sister, dearest," Randolph whispered, "I did not mean it. Mr. Riches, I
beg pardon. I am, perhaps, scarcely myself. But I feel convinced that
nothing less is intended than an attack on the castle. It is well to
provide against the worst."

"I think Mr. Trevethlan must be right," said the steward very seriously.
"On turning the matter over, I can see no other explanation than an
attempt to upset our title in general. But what can be the alleged flaw
I am wholly at a loss to conceive."

"One cannot learn that till the trial, Mr. Griffith," Randolph observed.

"And is it possible," asked Helen, who had dried her eyes, "that the
attempt can be successful? Can we be obliged to abandon Trevethlan?"

"Not for ever, my sister," answered Randolph. "The word slipped from my
tongue. But they may obtain a temporary victory. We may be surprised at
the first trial. It is for that I wished to prepare you. It is also a
reason why I am resolved the affair shall, on our side, be hurried
forward as fast as possible. We will try at the very next assizes, if it
is feasible, and so, within a month, we shall know our true position. I
shall write to Mr. Winter, and send him this notice immediately; and Mr.
Griffith will have the goodness to communicate with him also. Say
everything you can imagine, my good sir. Suggest the wildest
difficulties. Perhaps Mr. Riches can think of something. We will be
forearmed if we can. But despatch--despatch above everything."

Randolph had recovered both his composure and his energy. Riches and
Griffith were again surprised at the decision with which he spoke. They
now quitted the room, and the brother and sister were left alone.

"Helen," the former said, "this may be a very painful business. From the
nature of the proceeding, we are kept in ignorance of the grounds of the
attack, and when they are disclosed we may be taken by surprise, and
unable to show their weakness. And in that case there would be a verdict
against us, and for a time--note me, my dear sister, only for a time--we
should be deprived of everything that is ours, to our very name. So,
Helen, we must be prepared for a season of calamity."

"They cannot deprive me of you, Randolph," she said, "and the rest they
may take."

"Nay," said the brother, "I hope they may not. There is some deep plot
laid against us, which may prove successful at first. Dark hints,
foreboding threats, have been whispered to me. I seem to see some
shapeless danger. It is now like the smoke which rose from the
fisherman's casket. It may take the form of the Afrite. But trust me, my
sister, we shall find a spell to charm it again into its prison."

"Would, Randolph," Helen exclaimed, "I could find some spell to charm
you into old ways! Why are you not as before we went to London? Whence
has come all the change? Little else should I heed, if you were as you
used to be."

"And all the glories of our race! Fie, Helen! Go to Mrs. Griffith, and
take a lesson in the picture-gallery."

He had smiled as he began; but his last word suggested a host of recent
associations, and his tone was gloomy again, as he said he would go and
write his letters.

Of these, the first was to Mr. Winter. Randolph referred him to the
document which he enclosed, requested him to communicate with Messrs.
Truby, and to take upon himself the whole conduct of the action. And, in
the most urgent terms, he desired the lawyer to bring it to an issue
with the utmost despatch. Some surprise, he said, was evidently
intended. It was just within the sphere of possibility, that by delay
they might find a clue to the plot. Never mind that. It was at least as
possible they might not, and they might as well learn it from their
adversaries. Beaten at first, they would triumph in the end. At the same
time, they would of course go into court prepared, as far as they could
be, to meet every possible objection that could be imagined. He would be
obliged by Mr. Winter retaining Mr. Seymour Rereworth as his junior
counsel.

Randolph had signed his letter, and laid down his pen. He read carefully
over what he had written, caught up the quill again, and added--

"P.S.--It is my father's marriage that is attacked."

With quick and trembling fingers he folded the missive, sealed and
directed it. So much was done.

Then he wrote to Rereworth, who had been called to the bar the preceding
term, and intended to join the western circuit at the coming assizes.
The letter was as follows:--

     "MY DEAR REREWORTH,

     "An action has just been commenced against me, in which I have
     requested Winter to offer you a brief. If you will not object
     to hold it, I shall rejoice; but if, under the circumstances,
     you feel the slightest reluctance, pray decline without
     hesitation. Do not think that a refusal would vex me.

     "It is ejectment, brought by Mr. Pendarrel, and, I have no
     doubt, for all the property which is left me here. There can be
     only three grounds for the claim. First, they may set up some
     will or deed, which would be forged. Secondly, they may impeach
     the marriage of my grandfather (Mr. Pendarrel's half brother),
     which is very unlikely. Thirdly, they may attack my father's;
     which, I write it with shame and sorrow, is what I believe they
     mean to do.

     "Winter is acquainted with all the circumstances of that
     unhappy union. I have written to him; but I could not dwell
     upon the subject. To you I would hint, that it is among my
     maternal relations that a clue to the plot will probably be
     found. They have, perhaps, had reason to complain, and they
     have passion enough to seek revenge.

     "I levy a tax upon your friendship in asking you to engage in a
     cause which, you will at once see, involves many personal
     considerations, and must produce great pain. Do not, I again
     say, consider yourself in any way bound to pay it; and believe
     me, whatever be your decision, to be, my dear Rereworth,

     "Still faithfully yours,

     "RANDOLPH TREVETHLAN."

These letters, together with one from Mr. Griffith, were despatched to
their destination that afternoon. Griffith wrote at much greater length
than his master, refreshing Mr. Winter's memory as to many points in the
family history. In particular, he detailed all the facts relating to the
marriage of Margaret Basset. For it was impossible not to be struck by
the idea that this action might be an attempt to give effect to the
vulgar rumours. And Griffith remembered, with some anxiety, that the
only witness to the ceremony, at present available, was old Maud Basset,
and that it was not quite certain which way her testimony might incline.
On the other hand, the steward found pleasure in thinking that they
could raise so strong a presumption in favour of the marriage, from Mr.
Trevethlan's own conduct, and from the conviction of all his household,
as could only be shaken by evidence of the most peremptory description.

The temporary excitement which had strung Randolph's nerves and restored
his composure while he wrote his letters, died away when they were
finished. The sport with which all the country was alive, precluded him
from his usual excursion. He ascended with Helen to the roof of the
watch-tower, which commanded a very extensive view of the scene of
action, and looked listlessly upon the animated landscape. The shouts of
the contending parties came up to the brother and sister, now near and
now distant, now from the hollow of a dell, now from the ridge of an
upland. Sometimes the holder of the ball led the conflict full in their
sight; sometimes it disappeared in the intricacy of a thicket; sometimes
it approached, and Trevethlan seemed to be winning; then it receded, and
victory appeared to favour Pendarrel. Immediately below them, at the
foot of the base-court was the village-green, gay with the bright
ribands and merry laughter of the country girls. Helen partly forgot the
cares of the new law-suit, in gazing on the jocund landscape.

"I wonder, Randolph," she said, "whether Mercy Page's sweetheart is in
the game to-day. The poor little girl's been quite fretting about him,
ever since he went away to London; and she owned to me, the other day,
she had been to drop a pebble in Madron Well, and that wretched dame
Gudhan frightened her half out of her wits."

"Who is Mercy's sweetheart?" her brother asked.

"Oh, it is Michael Sinson. He is in the service of Mrs. Pendarrel."
Helen had answered before she recollected the morning's communication.

"Ha! indeed!" Randolph exclaimed.

"And Polydore tells me that Edward Owen is just as peevish for her
sake," the sister continued, "as she for her absent swain's. And he goes
much among the discontented, and attends the night meetings, all out of
love. So you see there's quite a little romance in the hamlet; Romeo and
Juliet _en paysan_."

"Of old," Randolph said, mechanically, for his thoughts were otherwise
engaged, "he would have gone on the high road."

Helen, perplexed, looked in her brother's face, and saw the abstraction
in which he was absorbed. She turned her attention on the game, which
was now approaching its close. A dense throng appeared in the lane which
debouched at the further end of the green, shouting, struggling, and
fighting, till at last the victor of the day bounded to the goal, and
threw up the ball in triumph. The acclamations which hailed his success
roused Randolph from his reverie.

"See, brother," said Helen, "we have won. Let it be an omen for us."

"Ah!" he replied, smiling fondly upon her, and reverting to an idea she
had suggested, "I wish we believed such things. I would consult St.
Madron myself. As it is, I have written to consult our friend Rereworth.
But the game is over: let us go down."

Helen was pleased to hear that Randolph was in correspondence with one
whom she had liked in his visits to Hampstead, and also at the
expression of his face, and the cheerful accent with which he spoke. But
it was only one of the fluctuations of the barometer in a storm.

He had exulted at first receiving the notice of action, because it gave
him what he had wished for,--a personal quarrel with the Pendarrels.
Before it he never felt quite satisfied with himself. He had his
misgivings concerning his reception of that first letter of condolence.
He desired a right to make reprisals on his own account. Anything that
would render his union with Esther's daughter a greater triumph over
herself, was acceptable to his perverse temper.

But this froward feeling was short-lived. Randolph remembered Mildred's
position, and reflected that if she loved him, as he believed,
everything that widened the breach between him and her family would be a
source of misery to herself. In the pursuit of his selfish revenge, he
had entirely forgotten the suffering it would inflict upon his mistress.
He was precluded from seeking her as the friend of those who should be
dear to her; and it was not, surely, for him to exult in any
exasperation of their hostility.

And then he thought of the law-suit almost in despair. It seemed that
Esther Pendarrel, not content with breaking his father's heart, and
driving him to ruin, was proceeding after his death to defame his
memory: pretending that, he had imposed upon his family by a fictitious
marriage: seeking to have his children stripped of their name, and made
infamous in the eyes of the world. The mother of her whom Randolph
loved, was trying to degrade him to a position in which his alliance
would be a disgrace.

And his own mother, whom he only knew by that strange dream, yet
regarded with the fondest affection, whose fame he had but recently
declared he would defend with his life,--her good name was also to be
sacrificed to satisfy the vengeance of this haughty woman. What! were
these the things in which he had exulted? That the breach which his
father had provided one means--dubious and remote indeed, but still a
means of healing--should be rendered irremediable for ever! For who
could pardon an attack like this?

Of the action itself, and its consequences, Randolph took little heed.
To think of it would only be to perplex himself concerning the precise
artifice which was to be used at the trial: he was content to wait till
it came. Nevertheless, he noted Helen's chance information respecting
Michael Sinson's employment, but Griffith had already mentioned it to
Mr. Winter.

Late in the evening the steward brought an account of the fray which
terminated the village sports, to the little turret-room where Polydore
was sitting with his old pupils. Jeffrey had been down on the green,
participating in the evening revels; but the careful warder returned to
his post as soon as anger took the place of amusement. And so fitful was
Randolph's mood that he now heard even of this disturbance with regret,
as he fancied it might introduce some fresh element of discord into the
family feud.




CHAPTER VIII.

      "Era gia l'ora che volge 'l disio
    A' naviganti, e'ntenerisce il cuore,
    Lo di ch'han detto a' dolci amici addio,
      E che lo nuovo peregrin d' amore
    Punge, se ode squilla di lontano,
    Che paja 'l giorno pianger che si muore."

    Dante.


Mercy Page was an old acquaintance of Helen's, and was wont to bring her
all the gossip of the village, intermingled with her own little
adventures. And so she told Miss Helen the story of her pilgrimage to
Madron Well, and the fierce denunciations of Dame Gudhan. And the young
lady, after smilingly chiding her for her simple proceeding, taught her
to smile also at the ill words of the pythoness. But now Mercy thought
she had the laugh on her side, for she had heard the twilight tales
about the castle, and availed herself of the familiarity which Helen
allowed her, to inquire concerning them at head-quarters.

"D' ye know, Miss Helen," she asked, "what they're saying about the
green yonder? How there's a pale lady all in white, that walks through
the castle by night, and fleers you and Mr. Randolph sadly?"

"All I can say, Mercy," Helen answered, with a smile, "is that I have
met no lady answering that description, either by night or by day."

"They tell it so in whispers," the fair rustic continued; "I cannot well
say what is the story. It's something about somebody that some one
murdered a very long while ago."

"Ah, Mercy, people are always fond of a ghost story," Helen said. "And
so I hear Michael was in the game the other day. You had a merry dance
at last, I expect."

"Then, Miss Helen," said the girl, "I don't well know what's come over
Michael. He's very different from before he went to London."

Helen sighed, thinking Michael was not the only one who had been so
altered. And in truth, Mercy was quite right. If her old lover pretended
to court her now, it was in a spirit very opposite to that which
animated him before his employment by Mrs. Pendarrel. His object was
twofold; to make use of the unsuspecting maiden as a spy within the
castle, and to achieve one of those conquests which he had heard boasted
of as great exploits in the society he frequented in town. But love is
frequently as blind to the qualities of its object as the attachment of
animals, and Mercy was as ignorant of Michael's intentions, as the
faithful dog in the story, that his master was a murderer.

In truth, Sinson was exceedingly anxious to know what was passing in
Trevethlan Castle. He felt a feverish curiosity to discover what was
there thought of the law-suit which was just commenced. Certain himself,
that the case which he had submitted to Mr. Truby was unassailable, he
was still nervously desirous to learn in what manner his opponents
prepared to resist it. What did they guess? What did they suspect? What
line of investigation did they pursue? The proceedings were like a duel
in the dark. Neither party knew anything of his adversary's moves. A
stab in the back was perfectly legitimate. And so Sinson, naturally
imputing to others the conduct from which he would not shrink himself,
trembled lest he might be over-reached after all, and find his artifices
recoil upon their deviser.

And upon this cast he had set all his desires. Upon the result of this
trial depended the issue of all his weary manoeuvring. It would either
place him in a position to demand his own terms, or it would leave him
unable to obtain any. His victory would be complete, or his ruin total.
But so far, although he was eager for news of his opponents, he
entertained no doubt whatsoever of his own triumph.

Meantime, he trusted chiefly to Mercy for intelligence of what passed at
the castle, and she told him all she knew, with the most innocent
frankness. Trembling at shadows, he had been really alarmed at the tale
of poor Margaret's apparition. Aware of what was in contemplation, and
like all his race prone to superstition, he did not conceive there was
anything so very improbable in such a visitation, and he felt that it
would not be for the orphans that its warning was intended. He was glad
to hear from Mercy that the story was unfounded.

Sinson was also much perturbed by the conduct of his grandmother. She
had not forgotten the hint he threw out respecting her favourite's
marriage. It was true, she only referred to it to excuse what he had
said, but the wild language and fierce predictions in which she
indulged, continually troubled him. And, besides, she was the only
witness now to be found who was present at the wedding; and although her
opposition could in no degree frustrate his scheme, her concurrence
would have gone some way to promote it.

But he now endeavoured to hug himself in his security, and to pass the
interval before the trial as tranquilly as he might. He chose for
himself a pleasanter pastime than espionage upon Trevethlan Castle, and
watched with unwearying diligence the steps of Miss Pendarrel. Little
did Mildred think, as she pursued her meditative way among the
unfrequented thickets of the park, or strolled through the fields and
lanes beyond it, or wandered along the cliffs of the sea-shore, that her
path was always dogged by the stealthy foot, and her form watched by the
sinister eyes of Michael Sinson. Always at a convenient distance, ready
to slip behind a tree, or to skulk under a bank, if she chanced
accidentally to turn her head, the crafty observer lurked around her
course. Many a time he set out with the intention of coming forth at
some sequestered spot, and accosting the object of his chase, but he
always let the opportunity slip by. A kind of awe fettered his limbs,
and restrained his tongue, when he would have advanced and addressed the
unsuspecting maiden. There was a proud security about her which he felt
it impossible to invade, a serene confidence which he dared not ruffle.
He hated his timidity; he said, it should not be so next time; and when
the next time came, he again deferred his intended appearance.

It happened, one fine mild afternoon, that Mildred quitted the park by
Wilderness Gate, and bent her steps to that thorn-shaded portion of the
cliff which was the scene of Michael's interview with Mercy Page,
immediately before his first departure for the metropolis. Here she
paced backwards and forwards, amongst the leafless hawthorns, often
pausing to gaze over the sea, and musing rather sadly of her forlorn
situation at home, where she had no one to confide in, no one to share
her emotion, and where every day seemed to draw her nearer to a
precipice, which she was yet resolved to shun. Thus she was looking over
the water, whose transparency assumed the hue of the weeds growing at
the bottom, pink, blue, and green, and watching the vessels in the bay,
when a step sounded on the turf by her side, and she looked round, and
recognised her cousin, Randolph Trevethlan.

"Mildred," he said, in a voice which trembled with excitement, "do you
know me, Mildred?"

He might read the answer in the hot flush upon her cheeks and forehead.

"Will you acknowledge the impostor who sought you in disguise?" he
continued rapidly; "will you remember him who was shamed in your sight?
Me, the avowed enemy of your house, who should have met any belonging to
it in defiance and hate, yet came masked to your side to seek an
interest in your heart? For it was so. I loved you deeply, devotedly I
loved you, before that evening. So I love you now, and shall love you
for ever. From the first time my eyes met yours, in that echoing scene
of music and of light, I loved you, fervently as when I moved by your
side in those glittering saloons, fervently as I do now, and shall do,
till my heart has ceased to beat. And it was for me, Randolph
Trevethlan, to creep covertly to your presence, and woo you--for I did
woo you--woo you to be mine! And will you remember me now? Will you hear
me--not seek to palliate a deception which I loathe, not ask for
forgiveness which I despise--but will you hear me lay my love at your
feet, and, oh Mildred! at least not trample on it?"

The vehemence with which he had spoken at first softened into tenderness
in his last words. Mildred continued to walk slowly by his side, unable
to speak, scarcely knowing what she did, with her eyes bent down, and
her hands clasped before her.

"Hear me," Randolph said, in tones of passionate supplication. "Do you
know the life I have led? In yon lone castle by the sea, isolated from
the world, ignorant of my race, with nothing to love? Yet discontented,
pining, dreaming of love? Do you know how I came forth, madly
enthusiastic, to seek for fortune and fame? How still I felt my
desolation? Was not the world a blank to me? Was I not alone? Yet how
should you know it? I knew it not myself. Not till my eyes met yours
knew I the yearnings of my heart. The truth flashed upon me in an
instant. To see you and to love you, in your love to find the key to my
life, to vow for you to live and die--it was a moment's work. I knew not
who you were. Did I heed that? What acquaintance is needed for love?
Alas! I knew you too soon. The daughter of my father's destroyer, the
child of her whom I was pledged to hate, she it was I was destined to
love."

Mildred cast an imploring glance into his face.

"It is vain," he said. "It is hopeless. Even now, at this very hour, she
seeks to drive me from my home: from my name: my sister and me to be
outcasts on earth: shunned and despised: children without a father.
Think you there can be anything but hate between her and me?"

"My mother," Mildred faltered.

"It is our curse," said Randolph. "Did not my father imprecate the wrath
of Heaven upon me, if I held communion with her or hers? I love you,
Mildred, and the curse has fallen. And you love me," he cried in wild
rapture, flinging his arm around her, and folding her to his side, "you
love me, let the curse prevail."

She did not shrink from his embrace, and for some distance they
proceeded in silence. He pressed her to a seat on a bank of turf.

"Speak, dearest," he whispered, "let me hear that you love me. I feel it
in the beating of your heart. I read it in your face. Will you not let
me hear it from your lips?"

She hid her face against his breast. There was another long silence.

"Dearest," at length Randolph murmured, "there can be little of joy for
our love except in itself. Shall we not have faith in each other to
support us? Will you not be mine, whatever betide,--will you not be
mine, dearest Mildred?"

"I am yours, Randolph," she said, "yours for ever, and only yours."

He pressed a kiss upon her lips.

"I must go home," she whispered, "I must go home."

"Yes, we must part," the lover answered; "I know it. See," he continued,
"it is my star. Smiling on us, Mildred, as that evening. Believe me,
dearest, we shall not be parted for ever."

And in a calmer mood, with more of hope and less of agitation, Randolph
rose, and supporting Mildred on his arm, accompanied her a short
distance on her way. They parted with a silent pressure of hands.

The lovers were scarcely out of sight when Michael Sinson emerged from a
lair he had made himself near the spot where they rested, glared
fiercely in the direction they had gone, and advanced to the edge of the
cliff. The evening was mild enough for May; twilight was stealing slowly
over the tranquil sea; in the west, the star of love, alone in the sky,
was following the sun to sink behind the waves. It was, indeed, the soft
hour so sweetly described by the poet of the divine drama, reminding the
mariner of his latest farewell, and soothing the pilgrim of love with
the knell of parting day. But none of this tender influence was felt by
the man who stood, panting, on the cliff that overhung the waters. Fury,
envy, and malice, contended within him. Why could not he do this? Why,
in the many times he had followed her steps, had he never dared to
approach her? What spell had been upon him? Had she shrunk at all from
the arm which enfolded her? Had she recoiled from the embrace? Might it
not have been the same with him? The same blood was in his veins as in
Randolph's. Whence came the accursed timidity which held him back? And
what did they say? Why could he not hear as well as see? Was there any
fascination in Trevethlan's tongue?

And it was he, whom he had learned to hate from his boyhood, his
mother's sister's son, whose father cast aside the peasant relatives
with contempt; he it was who, in one moment, in a first interview it
might be, had achieved a triumph which Michael, with all his
opportunities, had never ventured to attempt. But let him look to it.
Ruin and shame were impending over his head. It would soon be seen which
of them was the better born. The emptiness of his rival's happiness
would speedily be discovered. Poverty-stricken and dishonoured, Margaret
Basset's son might not be so successful a suitor as the heir of
Trevethlan.

Successful! Had he been successful? Had she listened to him with favour?
Michael felt that she had. But she would not long exult in her love. She
little thought of the chain that was preparing for her. Melcomb, indeed!
She need not fear the shallow coxcomb. There was another sort of wooer
behind. But for the present her mother must know the liberties taken by
the bird. The door of the cage would probably be fastened.

Some such train of ideas flew rapidly through Sinson's perturbed fancy,
as he stood a few minutes on the verge of the cliff. He soon turned
hastily, and hurried straight across the country to Pendarrel Hall,
where he arrived before the young lady who had excited his emotion. He
sought its mistress without much ceremony.

"Pray, sir," said she, on seeing him, "what rudeness is this? Did I
desire your attendance?"

"No, ma'am," he answered, cringing and trembling. "I beg pardon, ma'am;
but I thought you might like to know that Miss Mildred has just met Mr.
Trevethlan."

"Well, sir!" Esther said, preserving a composure which bewildered the
informant.

"It may be nothing, ma'am, of course," Sinson continued. "But clasping
arms, and hands pressed, and lips meeting...."

"Be silent, sir!" exclaimed Mrs. Pendarrel, "and leave the room. I want
no tales about Mr. Trevethlan."

In increased astonishment, Michael obeyed. Mildred entered the apartment
not very long after.

"My dear Mildred," her mother said, "you should not stay out so late.
These February evenings are damp and unhealthy; and besides, dear, you
take too long walks. I should be glad if you would confine yourself to
the garden. Take a carriage, my love, if you wish for a longer
excursion."

Mildred understood her mother well, and knew that this was a command.
But amid the rapturous, though confused sensations, with which her heart
was thrilling, she did not even notice the coincidence of the injunction
with the scene through which she had passed not an hour before. She
thought she should be happy at last. She had found a stay to uphold her
in the times which she feared were at hand. She had pledged her word,
plighted her troth. There was a home ready for her, if her own were made
desolate--a haven to receive her, if the storm rose higher than she
could bear.




CHAPTER IX.

    Quand on est honnete homme, ou ne veut rien devoir
    A ce que des parens ont sur nous du pouvoir.
    On repugne a se faire immoler ce qu'on aime,
    Et l'on veut n'obtenir un coeur que de lui-meme.
    Ne poussez pas ma mere a vouloir, par son choix,
    Exercer sur mes voeux la rigueur de ses droits.
    Otez-moi votre amour, et portez a quelqu'autre
    Les hommages d'un coeur aussi cher que le votre.

    Moliere.


So the days passed on; and in due course arrived the one fixed by Mrs.
Pendarrel for her great entertainment. March was coming in like a lamb
when the appointed morning dawned, the festival having been postponed to
nearly the time of the county assizes, for the convenience of Mr.
Pendarrel, who was always summoned on the grand jury. Mildred no longer
contemplated it with her old alarm, but rather hoped it might afford her
an opportunity of coming to an explanation with her suitor of Tolpeden,
and so relieve her at once and for ever from his unwelcome addresses. As
for Michael Sinson, he had gone to London again.

A very busy day was that at the Hall. Not only the suite of saloons,
opening by French windows on a terrace, whence a few steps descended to
a lawn diversified by clumps of flowering shrubs, but also, under favour
of the genial season, the lawn itself and the neighbouring alleys were
prepared for the entertainment of the company. Coloured lamps were
dispersed among the bushes, and festoons of the same were hung from
branch to branch of the trees which in summer shaded the gravel walks.
Arrangements were made also for a display of fireworks. In short, the
hostess provided amusement for a very miscellaneous assembly, looking
beyond the gaiety of the evening to the maintenance of political
influence, and having swept with her invitations half the hundred of
West Kerrier.

Her obsequious consort arrived in the course of the day, quitting the
cares of office to show civility to his adherents. Unwillingly, indeed,
he came, for he hated the country, and would gladly have deferred his
visit until the assizes. But his wife required his presence, perhaps,
for ulterior views. There was another guest for whom Mildred might hope
in vain: no Gertrude was there to gladden her with sisterly affection.

Twilight had scarcely deepened into night when the earliest of the
company made their appearance. A worthy civic dignitary from a
neighbouring borough, with his wife, and his sons and his daughters,
walked in dismay through the splendour of the drawing-rooms to pay his
respects to his excellent representative. Alas! that free and
independent elector, if, indeed, he survived the shock, has now wept
long for his dearly-beloved franchise. As Napoleon has been imagined in
shadowy pomp reviewing a spectral army on the plain of Waterloo, may we
not fancy that the latest burgesses of Grampound or Old Sarum are
summoned from their tombs by the dissolution of a Parliament, meet again
in the ruined town-hall, or on the desolate mound, stretch their
skeleton hands for the well-remembered compliment, elect a truly British
member, partake of an unsubstantial feast, and sink again into their
last sleep, in the manner recorded of Bibo, with the honest conviction
that, as men and as Englishmen, they have that day done their duty? The
mockery would be no greater than of old.

Let not the worthy alderman be disconcerted. Some one must be first at a
party, but the intervals between that arrival, and the next, and the
next, are always brief, and they become shorter and shorter, until the
stream is continuous, and the scattered groups which had been
scrutinizing each other are blended together in one great crowd. So it
was now: a host of people speedily followed the Pentreaths. There was
Sir Simon Rogers, portly and pompous, whose history might be read in the
colour of his nose. He was still seeking a successor to the dairy-maid.
There was Mr. Hitchins, who had made his fortune by a lucky boring for
tin, with his scientific daughter, who, having been down her father's
mine, inflicted the descent upon all her partners. To dance with her was
almost literally to fall into a pit. There were the Misses Eildon,
antiquarian and antiquated. There were sea-board parsons of the old
school, who might have called on their congregations to give them a fair
start for the wreck. Tres, Rosses, and Pols, Lans, Caers, and Pens,
abounded. There was plenty of beauty and plenty of sense. And the throng
was illustrated by a few uniforms from the troops on duty in the
neighbourhood, still flushed with the glory of the war.

Music lent its inspiration to the throng, and the crowded saloons were
all animation. Country dances and quadrilles followed each other in
endless succession; and the non-dancing community sauntered to and fro,
seeking friends and acquaintance, exchanging compliments and sarcasms,
making engagements, indulging in scandal, eternally talking and
contributing to the buzz which at a little distance almost overpowered
the orchestra. But the prevailing confusion of tongues was slightly
stilled when an attendant announced "Mr. Melcomb."

Mildred had remained by her mother's side. She thought there had been
something a little peculiar in the observation bestowed upon herself. In
the lull which for a moment followed Melcomb's appearance, she supposed
she detected its origin. She might read it perhaps more plainly in the
faces of two or three worthy dames near her, who, as soon as they heard
the name, looked at her with all their might. She passed through the
ordeal triumphantly.

Meantime, Melcomb made his way through the press with much show of
good-humour and condescension, until he reached the family group. He
shook hands warmly with Mrs. Pendarrel, and inflicted a tender pressure
on the passive fingers which Mildred extended to receive his salute.
Then he fell into what appeared to be a very entertaining conversation
with the mother and daughter, and at last led Mildred away to mix in the
mazes of the dance.

But although she sustained her part with great spirit, there were not a
few quidnuncs, both male and female, who set the young lady down as
having anything but her heart in it. Shrewd matrons, thanking their
stars that none of their daughters were likely to fall in love with a
rake, doubted very much whether Miss Pendarrel was quite pleased with
the parental choice. Knowing fathers, congratulating themselves that
none of their sons were gamblers, speculated on the grounds of
selection.

"They say he's totally ruined," said Mr. Langorel the surgeon, to Mr.
Quitch the lawyer.

"Quite, my dear sir. Never heard of anything so complete in all my
experience. Know nothing about it professionally, of course. Break off
this match, and in a week there would not be a rag left in Tolpeden
House, nor a stick in the park."

"What can make them fix on such a fellow?" asked the man of nostrums.

"Well, there's the land to add to the domain," answered the man of
deeds. "Extraordinary woman, my dear sir. Covets her neighbour's land
like the czar of Russia. The owner goes with it, and diminishes the
value, and therefore the cost. And have you not heard what's even now in
the wind? Trevethlan Castle----" And mysteriously whispering, the
professionals passed on.

"Don't tell me, my dear Mrs. Bonfoy," mumbled the ancient Mrs. Memoirs,
"I am old enough--I never disguise the fact, Mrs. Bonfoy--old enough to
recollect the mother's marriage. She married in spite, and she spites
her children."

"Is he so very bad?" asked Mrs. Bonfoy. "I only believe half what the
world says."

"Believe only a hundredth, my dear madam," answered Mrs. Memoirs, "of
what it says of him, and you will believe enough to--but no matter."

"Then what can be the reason----?"

"Ah, my dear madam! Tolpeden Park."

"Poor Mrs. Melcomb!"

"Ah!"

Such were the comments, and such the sighs, with which the expected
marriage was canvassed in the drawing-rooms of Pendarrel. Its mistress
had taken care that the intelligence should be widely diffused, and in
all Kerrier there was probably no one who was not cognizant that the
match was a settled thing, except the lady whom it chiefly concerned,
and the inmates of Trevethlan Castle. Mildred read the news in the faces
and the demeanour of the company. Experience enabled her to control her
emotion, and she met her destined lord in a manner fully satisfactory
both to him and to her mother. The curious of the guests were surprised
and disappointed. No scene occurred to gratify their love of scandal.
But Mildred's calm deportment concealed a strong resolution. That very
night she would have an explanation with Melcomb, and repeat her
determination never to be his wife.

She danced with him, and walked with him, and answered his lively
badinage with cold civility, continually watching for an opportunity to
explain herself. She long watched in vain. As the rooms grew warm, the
guests gradually resorted to the lawn and shrubberies, now lighted by
the coloured rays of myriad lamps. Thither Melcomb also directed the
steps of his partner, who went with pleasure, in the hope that in those
less crowded scenes she might obtain the chance which she desired. She
even permitted her cavalier to lead her into one of the more sequestered
walks, always with the same design. But still she was always foiled.
Melcomb maintained such an uninterrupted flow of small-talk, that she
could hardly insert a word. It seemed as if he almost divined her
intention. Whenever she began a sentence, he stopped her at the first
word, assenting beforehand to what he chose to assume she was about to
say. And some of the company, observing what seemed the close intimacy
of the unhappy couple, were inclined to throw aside their previous
suspicions, and to conclude that, after all, the marriage might be one
of inclination. Some of the dowagers complimented Mrs. Pendarrel on the
cordial affection of her daughter and intended son-in-law, and the wily
mother stored up those expressions of sympathy for future use.

At length the discharge of a cannon summoned the admirers of pyrotechny
to witness a display of their art. There was a platform and scaffolding
erected for the exhibition at the extremity of the lawn. The company
thronged around the front, and waited for the show. Nor was it long in
commencing. Rockets rushed into the sky, leaving a fiery train behind
them, and flinging showers of coloured stars from the highest point of
their flight. Bengal lights cast a lurid glare on the trees, and the
house, and the faces of the crowd. Wheels of endless variety, and
devices of rare skill, excited the admiration, and demanded the applause
of the gazers. And the former reached its height, and the latter became
loudest, when the final emblem, a true lover's knot surrounded by
similar symbols, became visible in lines of fire, beneath a bouquet of
rockets and a salvo of cannon.

"Happy will be the day, dear Miss Pendarrel," said Melcomb, forgetting
for an instant his prudence, "when that symbol shall become a reality."

"That day," Mildred said, "will never come."

The coxcomb bit his lips, but immediately relapsed into his former
persiflage.

From the fireworks, the company went to supper; and after having duly
honoured the viands and the wines, returned to the enjoyment of the
dance with renewed spirits. Sir Roger de Coverley closed the night's
entertainment; and day was already visible in the east before the latest
of the party, among whom was Melcomb, arrived at their homes.

The fortitude, which had sustained Mildred during the evening, vanished
with the last of the guests. She had designed to come to an explanation
with her mother before she slept; but she now felt quite unequal to the
task. Lassitude of body increased depression of mind. In sad, almost in
solemn accents, she bade her mother and father good night, and retired
to rest.

Mrs. Pendarrel, in her secret self, was by no means so well satisfied
with her daughter's behaviour, as she pretended to her guests. She had
already discovered in Mildred a firmness of character, resembling, if
not equalling, her own; and she was rather afraid that this night's
tranquillity foreboded a stormy morrow. However, she was not a woman to
be easily daunted, and she did not suffer her anxiety to disturb her
slumbers.

The day following a party is always dismal. One may remember the second
scene in Hogarth's Marriage a la Mode. But the revelry of the night had
not disordered the pleasant morning-room, where Mildred presided over
the breakfast equipage. It was again a beautiful day. Light clouds were
moving gently across the sky; the budding trees were waving in a soft
west wind; there was that seeming exuberance of life in the appearance
of nature, which is always so exhilarating.

Little influence, however, did it produce on either of the three
personages who sat at breakfast. Mr. Pendarrel was engaged in a very
prosaic and business-like attack on a dindon aux truffes, a relic of the
past night. And he preferred the metropolitan parks to any country lawns
and groves. As soon as he had appeased his appetite, or his gourmandism,
he went to look to the economy of the establishment. His wife, who
enjoyed a true relish for rural pleasures, noted her daughter's
quivering eyelids, and trembling fingers, with the consciousness that a
scene was coming, in which she might find her part more difficult than
she had flattered herself. She had dismissed the breakfast things, and
was herself about to leave the room, when Mildred, who was leaning
against the side of the window, and gazing wistfully on the garden,
turned and arrested her steps.

"Mother," she said, "I must speak with you."

"And what have you to say, Mildred," asked Mrs. Pendarrel, with a
freezing smile, "which requires so formal an introduction?"

"I did not know, mother," Mildred replied, "that the party, last night,
was to be dedicated, in any way, to my ... my honour. If I had, I would
not have been present."

"You will be present, Miss Pendarrel," Esther said, "wherever your
father and I choose you to be present."

"Indeed, mother, sorry I am to say it," answered the daughter,
mournfully, "I will not, except as a captive. The company shall see my
bondage."

"Mildred, let me hear no more of this folly," exclaimed Mrs. Pendarrel.
"Captive! Bondage! What romance have you been reading lately?"

"No romance, mother, but myself. Scarcely a month has passed since I
told Mr. Melcomb, and you, mother, that I would never be his wife. Do
you fancy that month has changed my mind?"

"Twelve hours have not passed, Mildred," said Esther, in the stern tone
she could so well adopt, "since here, in the face of half Kerrier, you
accepted Mr. Melcomb as your acknowledged suitor. Pshaw, child! Do you
think words are the only way of making an engagement? Are you a baby?
Why, a hundred people complimented me on the affair last night, and
expressed their satisfaction at your evident happiness. And will you
dare to tell me, now, that you were acting a lie all that time?"

"Mother, mother!" cried Mildred, "spare such words. You know they are
undeserved. So does he. I repeated my determination to him last night."

"What!" Mrs. Pendarrel exclaimed; "but it is no matter. Your faith, your
father's, and mine, are alike involved in the fulfilment of this
contract, and nothing can prevent it."

"Yes, mother," Mildred said, "I can, and I will."

"You are mistaken in the extent of your abilities, child," Esther said,
ironically. "Note me,--I have fixed the day. I have written to your
sister. I expect the lawyer here with the writings every day. He has
some other business to do for us at the assizes. You will find nerve to
sign, I expect. Away with this foolish childishness, Mildred."

"May my hand wither if it takes the pen! Mother, you know my
resolution."

With which words Mildred opened the window and passed into the garden.

"So," thought Mrs. Pendarrel, "another check from the house of
Trevethlan! I foresaw it all when she trembled on my arm, when she
called him her 'cousin.' And they have met! They will rue the day.
Beggared and degraded, he might still have maintained his heart, but he
has thrown even that to the winds. And what will become of her?--what
will become of her?"

A question to which there was very little hope of any favourable answer.
The cautious mother had carefully abstained from the least allusion to
Mildred's meeting with Randolph, because she knew that by so doing she
would probably convert resistance into attack. She recognised in her
daughter some of her own spirit, and she trembled to drive her to
extremity. Let them await the issue of the coming trial at Bodmin: let
them see what became of this intrusive "cousin," before taking any steps
which might indicate a suspicion of Mildred's real attachment.

Her daughter strolled sometime listlessly in the garden, in that vacuity
of mind which nearly resembles despair. She was like one walking in her
sleep. But there were pleasant influences around her. The breeze fell
lightly on her cheek, and wafted the dark hair from her forehead. She
bent to meet it, like a bird. It came from the sea. Did it remind
Mildred of the hawthorns on the cliff? She passed from her saunter on
the lawn to her own apartment, and opened her heart in a letter to Mrs.
Winston. For some time her pen coquetted with country trifles, as if the
writer were trying to escape from an unpleasant topic which nevertheless
forced itself into notice, and at last banished every other.

     "It has all come true, my dearest sister," she wrote, "all your
     prediction has come true. Quiet among my flowers and books,
     _our_ books, Gertrude, I was beginning to forget it. All the
     people paid us their visits and their compliments, and we duly
     returned them, and of _him_ I saw and heard nothing. But you
     know all about it, for mamma told me she had written to you. It
     seems he was only to come to our party last night. Everybody we
     know, with many we can hardly be said to know, was here,--he
     among the rest; although I had not heard he was in the country,
     and only learned it from the announcement of his name. I
     believe I bore it like Gertrude's sister; but oh! dearest, how
     shall I tell you of my feelings when I saw that every one
     regarded us as engaged? I hate that _us_. And this morning
     mamma says my character is compromised. And I am in open and
     avowed rebellion.

     "But this is not all, Gertrude, dear, that I have to tell you.
     I wish you to guess a little. I have seen our cousin, Mr.
     Trevethlan, who was at your party, you know. There is the first
     chapter of my romance. You are coming here soon, and then you
     shall know more. Till then, and always, believe me, your most
     affectionate sister,

     "MILDRED PENDARREL."




CHAPTER X.

    Here, a bold, artful, surly, savage race--
    Who, only skilled to take the finny tribe,
    The yearly dinner, or septennial bribe,
    Wait on the shore, and as the waves run high,
    On the lost vessel bend their eager eye,
    Which to their coast directs its venturous way--
    Theirs, or the ocean's, miserable prey.

    Crabbe.


"Did you hear what they're saying in the village yonder, Master
Randolph?" old Jeffrey asked, as Trevethlan was passing through the
gate, on the day after the party. "All the grand doings at Pendar'l?"

Randolph started a little.

"I saw the light in the sky," the warder continued, "and was thinking
whose stacks had been fired this time, only it didn't last long now. And
they tell me 'twas the squibs and things that were let off to entertain
the company like."

"Then there was a party at Pendarrel last night?" Randolph said, in an
inquiring tone.

"A party! Indeed I should say there was," Jeffrey answered. "Why, sir,
all the country was there from far and wide; all but ours from
Trevethlan! And Squire Melcomb of Tolpeden, over the hill yonder, that
the folks say is to marry Miss Mildred."

Randolph smiled. "What," said he; "is that so publicly known?"

"It seems like it," Jeffrey said. "But there's strife on foot between
our people and Pendar'l. There's a deal of grumbling and threatening
down there on the green. They do say as the wedding is fixed for quite
soon."

Randolph asked no more, but proceeded on his way. He had not got far
from the gates when he met the unrequited lover, Edward Owen. The rustic
seemed desirous to say something, for he lingered after making his
salute.

"What is it, Edward?" his master asked, "what is the matter?"

"Why, sir, then the folks are just wanting to know what this law-suit is
about. You see, sir, we think Pendar'l ha' got quite enough as was ours,
and we ought to have some back, rather than give up any more. And the
country's a little unquiet just now, and there's no saying exactly what
may happen."

"And I am sorry to hear, Edward," Randolph said, "that you have been
concerned in the disquiet. It will lead to no good."

"Sir," answered Owen, colouring, "you do not know how I have been urged
on. And, for the others, there's a deal wrong in the country at this
time."

"But this is not the way to right it, Owen," his master observed. "No
good will be done by these night-meetings, and threats, and violence. It
is not the way to set things right. You cannot frighten people into
doing what you wish. And if you are mixed up with these wrong-doers, you
will get into mischief. You will be led further than you meant to go."

Owen muttered some words, either of contrition or of discontent, and
pursued his way. It was true that the ferment in the country had
considerably increased. The labouring population met almost every night
on some point of the moorlands, and although no outrage of much
consequence had yet been perpetrated by these mobs, they yet kept up a
continual feeling of alarm.

Nor was the danger by any means chimerical. If hitherto no greater
mischief had occurred, it was probably rather from the want of
sufficient daring in a leader, than of any good will among the mass. And
this requisite seemed now likely to be supplied, by an event which
happened on the hill-side between Lelant and St. Ives.

A small river there expands into a creek, the shores of which rise
rapidly from the water's edge, sometimes cultivated, and sometimes
waste, frequently chequered with trees, occasionally broken by masses of
rock--always rugged and picturesque. High upon one of the untilled
portions, under the shelter of a ledge of slate, stood a low, straggling
cottage, constructed of _cob_, and thatched with fern, of which the
whitewashed front by day, and a light in the window by night, were
visible far out at sea. On the over-hanging rock was a spot showing
signs of fire, that commonest and simplest of signals, in by-gone years
too often used in these western districts to lure mariners to their
destruction; when the skipper, navigating by the fallacious beacon, was
startled by the cry of "breakers ahead!" confounded by the crash of his
ship's striking, and overpowered by a horde of lawless depredators,
unaccustomed in their thirst for plunder, to respect life. But the
fierceness of the wreckers, if it still tainted the blood of the
peasantry, quailed under the law; and their organ of acquisitiveness now
led them to the milder occupation of smuggling. If, in these days, a
fire ever burned on the rock in question, it was a friendly warning
concerning the fate of some brandy or Hollands, supposed to lurk under
the broad lug-sails which the telescope had detected in the offing, and
coveted with much zest in many a dwelling on the shore.

This cottage was the abode of Gabriel Denis, a man whose stalwart form
and firm step showed that fifty years sat light upon him; while his
swarthy, weather-beaten visage, grizzled hair, and resolute eye, told of
a life, which hardship and peril had familiarised with endurance and
boldness. Some few years before the opening of this narrative, on a dark
and stormy night, when a rich landing of spirits and tobacco repaid the
country-folks about Zennor for the want of sleep, Denis was found in the
morning to have been left behind by the smart schooner which had run
boldly under the cliffs in the gloom, and which was then almost beyond
the range of glasses. His desertion did not, however, seem to be
unexpected by himself, for there were several chests left with him, and
also an olive-complexioned woman, whom it appeared he called wife, and a
girl about ten years old, whom he styled daughter.

Denis knew very well that there was no danger of a smuggler's being
betrayed by the people, yet for some time he lived with great privacy,
and thereby attracted the attention which he wished to avoid. In the
dusk of evening he used to wander far over the country, and was known
not unfrequently to cross the isthmus from St. Ives to Marazion, and
stroll along the beach, or over the cliffs, in the direction of
Trevethlan Castle. He seemed to listen attentively to the gossip of all
the folks about him, and sometimes let fall a remark which indicated a
previous acquaintance with the locality. And at such times he would
glance round the company as if in search of a recognition.

At length, assured perhaps of his situation, he obtained possession of
the cottage we have described, and retired thither with his wife and
child. He was evidently deeply attached to the dark-featured woman, and
watched all who approached her with extreme jealousy. She was still very
handsome, but passionate in temper to excess, and also quick to take
affront, partly, perhaps, because she was but imperfectly acquainted
with the English language. It required all her husband's watchfulness to
avoid perpetual quarrels.

For it was soon discovered that the whitewashed cottage contained a
store of those liquors which seem to lead mankind into temptation,
universal and irresistible. Now a man, known _sub rosa_ to retail
smuggled spirits, was not likely to enjoy a perfectly quiet life; a
drinking-bout often ends in a battle; Bacchus is the herald of Mars. And
whenever such a tumult arose, Gabriel's wife was sure to be vocal in the
fray. But Denis possessed a right powerful arm, and knew how to use it:
and his customers learned to listen patiently to the strange jargon of
Felipa, in wholesome fear of the iron hand of her spouse.

Gabriel's house had become a rendezvous for some of the agitators of the
district, who were wont to assemble there at nightfall, and discuss
their schemes of outrage under the inspiration of Nantz and Schiedam.
Hitherto, these had proved almost wholly abortive; but, as Owen vaguely
intimated to the owner of Trevethlan, they now assumed a more
threatening aspect, and some inhabitants of that hamlet were foremost
among the violent. There had been much question concerning the law-suit
between their master and the squire of Pendarrel. Its existence had
become generally known, not only by the service of numerous summonses to
attend the trial, but also by placards, offering liberal rewards for any
information respecting the supposed murder of Mr. Ashton, and the
disappearance of Wyley, the missing witness to Margaret Basset's
marriage. The rumours regarding that mysterious union, already revived,
were stimulated anew by these demonstrations: and the agitation and
discontent of the surrounding population were quickened by an indistinct
apprehension of some new calamity impending over the family, to which,
in spite of everything, they were still strongly attached.

Denis himself had kept aloof from the deliberations, usually held on the
turf in front of his dwelling. All he desired was to maintain his wife
and child as quietly as he might, on the proceeds of his illicit
traffic. But at last, on the very eve of the assizes which were to
develope the plot against Trevethlan Castle, the smuggler was doomed to
lose his occupation, under circumstances which might have well nigh
maddened any man, and much more, one whose life had been like that of
Gabriel Denis. Long suspicious, the revenue officers had become at
length certain, and swooped upon their prey. The victim blockaded his
abode, as best he could, and opposed a gallant resistance to the
oppressors. But they were sure of their game, and the defence was
fruitless. Yet Denis struggled with them still, when they had effected
an entrance: and then, overpowered by numbers, he had the mortification
to see the officers, acting evidently on some traitor's information,
immediately detect the secret door which led to a natural cave in the
rock behind the cottage, and haul forth from that receptacle divers kegs
of the precious fluids intended to recreate the lieges of the
neighbourhood, but destined for their sovereign's storehouse at Lelant.

Gabriel, in sulky silence, had given up all resistance. But not so his
wife. Enraged beyond control, and heedless of her husband's
remonstrances, she threw herself furiously upon the captors. It is
always difficult to struggle with a woman. Felipa had snatched a pistol
from the belt of one of the officers, and in the effort to disarm her,
the weapon exploded, and laid her lifeless on the ground. A moment's
pause of sorrow and surprise followed, during which Gabriel's little
girl threw herself, with loud cries, upon her mother's body, and he
himself, after one wild look of despair, flew up the hill-side like the
wind.

The officers recovered, and gave chase, but to no effect. The smuggler
got clear off. There was nothing to be done but to secure the seizure,
and remove the body of the unfortunate victim. The little girl
accompanied the train.

The news of the transaction flew far and fast. But it did not prevent
the conspirators--if the word is not above their deserts--from resorting
to their usual haunt the same evening. They lay, six or seven in number,
in various attitudes on the turf in front of the ruined cottage, in the
irresolute and objectless mood of which many a plot has perished.
Agreeing in a desire, either for wanton mischief or for their
neighbours' goods, they could not make up their minds how to begin. The
cowardice, which always attends the doing of wrong, lay heavy on their
hearts, and made their hands powerless.

But Gabriel Denis came down the hill and joined the criminal divan.
Trained in a lawless life, burning with the desire for revenge, heedless
of the manner, he brought into the assembly the passion and energy for
which it had before sought in vain. He listened awhile to the incoherent
gabble of the agitators, and then startled their indecision by a direct
proposition of his own. His speech was cold, and his words were few; yet
there was not a man who heard him, but knew that he meant what he said.
And when the little party dispersed, it was with a confident feeling,
that the next meeting of their adherents at Castle Dinas would not
terminate in the same inoffensive manner as previous musters of the same
nature.




CHAPTER XI.

    Peace, brother, be not over-exquisite
    To cast the fashion of uncertain evils;
    For grant they be so, while they rest unknown,
    What need a man forestall his date of grief,
    And run to meet what he would most avoid?

    Milton.


The summonses referred to in the last chapter had been very widely
distributed among all those of the tenantry of Trevethian, who had been
cotemporaries of poor Margaret Basset. They were, in fact, issued almost
at random, in order that the defendant in the trial might have at hand
every possible means of rebutting his adversary's case. But they were
not confined to the dependents of the castle: old Maud Basset and her
daughter, Cecily, also received subpoenas, and Michael Sinson was
greatly startled by being served with one himself.

Mr. Winter had offered some early opposition to Randolph's desire to
hurry on the matter without delay. His experience taught him to look
with hope to the discovery of a clue to the plaintiff's intentions, and
he would gladly have avoided the risk even of a temporary defeat. There
was, too, ample reason for postponement, in the chance, however slight
it might be, of finding the missing witness, Wyley; and in the short
space, there would otherwise intervene, for ascertaining as much as
possible of the clergyman, Mr. Ashton. All these considerations,
however, gave way to the urgency with which Randolph insisted on
despatch. And as there is a way, even in law, where there is a will, and
the other side were at least as anxious for an issue, the cause was
brought to a condition, for trying at the assizes which were now
commencing.

It may not be uninteresting to the reader, to see the exact position,
stripped of technicalities, in which the parties stood at going into
court. The question between them was one of inheritance merely, and of a
very simple kind. Randolph's great grandfather left two sons by
different marriages, Arthur, the eldest, and Philip, the present
claimant of the property at stake. Arthur was the father of only one
son, Henry. It will be seen, therefore, that in default of any will, and
of Henry's dying without family, the estates would revert to Philip.
There was no will to interfere, for Henry, in his, merely appointed
guardians of his children, and made no bequests. He considered it a
matter of course that the children would inherit. And so they would, if
the marriage of which they were the offspring, were legal. But if this
marriage were not duly performed, or the children supposititious, Philip
would become heir to the property.

It was, therefore, almost self-evident, that the claimant's case would
rest upon the insufficiency of Randolph's father's marriage. So to this
point was directed the main attention of his legal advisers. But every
presumption was in favour of its perfect legality. All the dark
suggestions which subtilty could imagine, vanished one after another, in
the light thrown upon them by Henry Trevethlan's own conduct. If there
were a fraud, it must have been without his cognizance, for it would
have defeated his supposed object. But if he were not privy, what motive
could be ascribed to any other party? It was impossible, for obvious
reasons, to impute anything of the kind to the friends of the bride.
Baffled in every conjecture, Mr. Winter could only take means for
procuring the presence of everybody, who, by any remote contingency,
might be able to contribute to the overthrow of the claimant's case.

For in this sort of action the parties meet at the trial totally
ignorant of each other's intentions. For instance, in this case the
claim might be made, either under an alleged will, or a sale and
conveyance of the property, or on the ground that the holder was not the
legitimate heir. And supposing the first case, the defendant might say,
either that the will was forged, or was made when the testator was of
unsound mind, or was revoked by a later. So wide is the field for
surprise. And consequently it frequently happens, that the title to a
disputed estate is very far from established by a single verdict; but
that in a series of trials, the parties alternately upset one another's
successive positions, until the ground is exhausted, and the matter
finally set at rest.

We have seen that the approach of the contest caused great excitement in
the hamlet of Trevethlan. It was an agitation not unmixed with shadowy
dread. The presentiments and forebodings which had long afforded a theme
for the village guidance, were discussed more anxiously than ever. The
old people recollected every little coincidence attending a death in the
family, or the severance of an estate, and detected something parallel
at the present time. Some aged folks listened at night for the wailing
cries which ought to echo around the old grey towers on the eve of a
calamity; and when none such mingled with the gentle sighing of the west
wind, they interpreted this very softness into a sign, declared the
unnatural warmth of the season was a certain token of ill, and
remembered some similar year when disaster visited the castle. Of
course, this state of feeling reacted within its walls, and revived the
terrors of the domestics. In spite of Helen's contradiction to Mercy
Page, the wiseacres of the hamlet insisted on peopling the gloomy
galleries with visitors from another world, and some of the more eager
occasionally watched the windows at night, in the hope of being
terrified and having a story to tell.

It had been well if these night-fancies were all that disturbed the
people. But not a few of them were speculating already on what should be
done, in case the forebodings were verified by the result. And here, had
it been known, was a veritable cause for alarm. Randolph himself would,
perhaps, have trembled, if he had been aware what his dependents were
meditating, as they supposed for his advantage, but at all events for
their own satisfaction.

For some time after his interview with Mildred, the gloom and moroseness
which beset him previously, had vanished. Strong in the hope and trust
inspired by that meeting, he became frank and unreserved in his
intercourse with the villagers, lively and agreeable in his circle at
home. Helen and Polydore rejoiced at the change, without knowing its
origin. It showed itself in the smile with which he heard Jeffrey's
announcement of Miss Pendarrel's approaching marriage. "Simple people!"
he might think, "how little you know on the subject!" But as the day of
trial came quite near, some of his former agitation naturally returned:
he shunned the conversation of the peasants, and became once more
abstracted and silent at home. Again did the rustics note the gloom upon
his brow, and whisper among their other prognostications that their
master's doom was written in his face; but he should not fall unavenged.

Nor was Michael Sinson more at his ease. He had gone to London before
the party at Pendarrel, to consult Mr. Truby, and to see his bondman,
Everope. It was essential that he should maintain his influence over the
latter unbroken, and keep him well prepared for the part he was to play.
He was greatly startled himself by being summoned as a witness for the
defendant. He had intended, indeed, to go down to the assizes, but he
did not mean to appear. He should remain in the background, while his
creature did his work. He trembled to think of the confessions into
which he might be driven or led by the searching questions of counsel;
but still more he alarmed himself by imagining that his opponents had
obtained some clue to his design, and that some strange exposure awaited
him in court. He was, however, now so deeply involved, that he could
only strengthen himself with his old hopes, and abide the issue in
patience.

His aged grandmother was at least as much perplexed as himself. Ever
since her favourite Michael had dropped his dark hint in her ear
respecting the marriage, she had harped upon the subject in her muttered
soliloquies, and ruminated upon it as she swung to and fro in her
rocking-chair. And in the confusion of her ideas she fancied, on
receiving her summons, that there was a plot on foot by which the
Trevethlans desired to free themselves from the connection with her
family, and willingly transferred to Randolph the passing reproaches
with which at times she upbraided Michael Sinson. It was idle to reason
with her.

"Ay, Squire Trevethlan," she cried to him one day, as he was strolling
in the neighbourhood of her lodge, in the vain hope of quieting his
renewed anxiety by another meeting with Mildred. "The son steps worthily
in the path of the father! And so thou wouldst be quit of the peasant
blood, wouldst thou? Wouldst disown thy kindred? But na, na,--the ties
are too strong. It's none so easy to break a mother's memory. My
Margaret was fit for the wife of a king, and more than fit to be the
mother of such as thee."

"Who has been talking to you now, dame?" Randolph asked. "Who has been
putting these notions in your head? Did I ever wish to disown her? Would
I not give anything to bring her back? Would I not love her and honour
her? And did I not tell you I had seen her, and she smiled upon me? She
has come often since, and always with the same sweet smile."

He fancied the old woman had been tampered with, and wished to know the
particulars.

"I dinna believe thee," Maud answered; "I dinna believe it at all: and
they say she has walked in the castle indeed, but no with a smiling
face. She came to warn thee, grandson Randolph. And well she might. Well
she might wander there, where she was let to pine and pine, and no one
of all her own people let to come nigh her. And most of all now, when
her own son would put her out of her rightful place. Shame upon him!"

"'Tis because I am her son," Randolph expostulated, "that you should not
believe these tales, Dame Basset. What! do you not know that if she were
not my father's wife, the castle and everything we have pass away from
my sister and me? And have we not asked you to come to the trial to
speak for us, and prove the marriage? Who is it has put these stories in
your head?"

"I cannot understand it at all," the old woman answered. "Why should I
speak yon for thy side? Why shouldst thou come to me? Have not thy
people put me and mine out from among them? I cannot understand it at
all."

"But at least, dame," Randolph urged, "you will say it was a good
marriage?"

"Every one knows that," she said. "Let me see the one that denies it.
But go, go. Said I not there was a dark hour at hand for thy house? It
is near, near. I said it was written in thy face. It is clearer and
plainer now. Thou beguiled me with that tale of her smile, but I heard
the rights o't since. There'll never be peace 'twixt thine and mine."

And so saying, she retreated into the lodge, and left Randolph, puzzled,
but not annoyed by her unfounded suspicions. Her words were so far
satisfactory, that they showed how strong was her confidence in the
validity of the marriage.

At the opening of the assizes, Polydore Riches and the steward went to
Bodmin to be in constant communication with Winter and his counsel. The
worthy lawyer had himself already made a flying visit to Trevethlan, for
the purpose of investigating the evidence a little more closely. He was
rather dismayed on finding at every turn that the rumours current at the
time of the marriage were still so fresh in the memory of the people.
"Faith!" said he to himself, "we have wasted our subpoenas pretty
freely! Why, there's scarcely a person out of the castle I shall dare to
call!" Moreover, he had been disheartened somewhat by the intelligence
he had gained respecting Mr. Ashton, as it seemed to show that there
were but few qualities in his character to prevent him from being a
party to a trick, provided it were profitable to himself. The placards
offering a reward for news of Wyley had called forth no information.

Randolph persisted, against the advice of the chaplain, in attending the
trial himself. He was resolved to hear the case against him from the
lips of the witnesses. Polydore was grieved, thinking that if the issue
was favourable the trifling delay in communicating it would be
unimportant, and if it were adverse, its effect might be softened.
Besides which, there might be incidents in the proceedings of a painful
nature, from which the defendant had better be away. But a wilful man
must have his way, and Randolph would not be overruled.

The evening before his departure he sat with Helen, feverish and
excited, in their favourite turret-room, overlooking the sea. The
delightful weather still continued, and they kept the window open long
after dark.

"Do you remember, Helen," the brother asked, "how we were sitting here,
side by side, as we are now, when there came that letter, insulting us
with the offer of alms?"

"Dear Randolph," Helen answered, "you know I would have thought
differently of that letter. But why should I remember it now?"

"Because, my sister, to-morrow's trial may place us in need of alms," he
replied. "I do not know why it is, but from the very first I have
thought we should be beaten in this suit. I have been haunted ever by
the idea that the pittance which I then disdained might become necessary
to us. It seems to me a natural consequence of the refusal. Are they so
proud? it was said--they shall be humbled."

"But we shall not, Randolph," his sister said. She was saddened by the
bitterness with which he spoke. "We shall not be humbled. Not in the
sense you mean. We shall not have to seek assistance. The schemes which
we plotted for the restoration of our house, may they not be revived to
minister to our necessities? See, when that letter came, you asked, why
have we desponded. And shall we despond now? Believe me, my brother, I
am prepared for the worst."

"If that were all," Randolph said, "if poverty and the loss of our dear
home were all, bitter as it would be, it might be borne. But our father
or our mother, the one or the other, will be defamed, and our name
dishonoured. Helen, if this suit goes against us, and I survive the day,
it will only be to brand our opponents with the villany by which they
win, not with any notion of supporting a life I shall abhor."

He disengaged himself from her arm as he finished speaking, and leant
against a division of the open window. But she followed him, and laid
her hand upon his shoulder.

"And me, Randolph," she said; "you are a man; but what will become of
me?"

"Of you, dearest!" he exclaimed. "Did you ever think, my sister, of her
I mentioned but now? She died before you had left your cradle. Scarcely
as a baby even could you know her. But I was nearly three years old. And
the memory has dwelt secretly in my breast, and it has come back to me
of late. I have seen her face in my dreams, sometimes smiling and
sometimes sorrowful, but always full of love. I have thought she came to
implore me to protect what was her only dowry, her good name, or to
console me and make me hopeful under a passing misfortune. And then,
when I remember the attack which is to be made to-morrow, my heart
burns, and I say what I do not mean. But you, dearest! I shall live to
be with you, whatever may befall."

And so saying, he bent down and kissed his sister.

"Do you see that bright planet?" he continued. "I have called it my
star. It has shone on some of the happiest moments of my life. A
childish fancy, sister, but it pleases me. The sight of it, clear and
unclouded as it is now, breathes promise of joy to my heart. Trust me,
sister, whatever may happen in this cause, there is comfort in store for
us yet."




CHAPTER XII.

      _King John_. Our strong possession, and our right, for us.

      _Elinor_. Your strong possession, much more than your right;
    Or else it must go wrong with you, and me:
    So much my conscience whispers in your ear,
    Which none but Heaven, and you, and I, shall hear.

    Shakspeare.


Early the following day, Randolph sprang into the carriage which was to
convey him to Bodmin, where his fate would, for the present at least, be
decided. He bade his sister good-bye in a cheerful voice, but with a
gloomy countenance, and she staid at the hall-door until the gates had
closed upon his way. The carriage rattled down the descent of the
base-court, and round the village green; and the few rustics, who met it
with respectful salutes, shook their heads doubtfully as they looked
after it, and foreboded no joyful return.

But the sun was shining bright and warm; the hedges were bursting
prematurely into leaf; the birds were singing merrily; all the
influences of nature concurred to raise the spirits of the wayfarer, and
inspire him with hope. He became interested in the journey, and his
presentiments of evil vanished away.

In the evening Randolph entered the precincts of the county town, and
was driven to the hotel, where he had appointed to meet Polydore Riches;
and glad he was to escape from the bustle and noise of the busy town to
the parlour engaged by the chaplain. He was also glad to find that
Polydore, anticipating his wishes, had provided against any visits. He
did not even desire to see Rereworth.

The next morning, after a slight and hasty breakfast, he took the
chaplain's arm, and proceeded through the lively and crowded streets to
the court-house. No one knew him, and he passed along entirely unheeded.
But the cause had excited very considerable interest. The story of the
quarrel between Mrs. Pendarrel and her early suitor was by no means
forgotten, and the rumour of her new attack upon Trevethlan Castle had
attracted no little attention. The circumstances of its late owner's
marriage were recalled to mind, and regarded with various kinds of
criticism. The lovers of scandal flocked to the court-house in hope of
gratifying their spleen, and the vague reports that were circulated
respecting the grounds of the plaintiff's claim promised amusement to
the admirers of piquant private history. People in general remembered
how large a portion of the hereditary estates of Trevethlan had passed
under the sway of the rival house, and looked perhaps with trembling
pity on the last relic of the old domain; and even the peasantry might
feel an interest in the fulfilment of the popular prophecy. So all these
feelings combined to swell the assemblage which crowded the court.
Polydore introduced his old pupil to a seat on the bench; from thence
Randolph exchanged a grave bow with Seymour Rereworth, and took his
place with a countenance whose constrained tranquillity was very much at
variance with the emotion which it concealed.

Shortly afterwards the judge made his appearance, and the rumour which
had pervaded the crowd gradually subsided. There were some questions
asked, and points decided, respecting a cause which had been tried the
preceding day; and, as soon as this conversation was finished, the clerk
of assize, in a low methodical tone, read from his cause-list, Doe d
Pendarrel _v._ Trevethlan; counsel on each side nodded; a jury was sworn
well and truly to try the issue between the parties; the plaintiff's
junior briefly described the nature of the action, and amidst perfect
silence, his leader rose to state the case he should lay before the
court.

He began by lamenting the painful duty which devolved upon him on the
present occasion, and begging the jury to forget whatever they might
have heard of previous disputes between the families whose names
appeared in this record. It was too frequently the case, in suits of
this nature, that the parties were nearly connected. Passing from this
introduction, he observed that in such actions they had also frequently
to inquire into a long and tedious pedigree, or to make a fatiguing
investigation of documentary evidence. No task of the kind awaited them
here. The case he had to present was exceedingly short and simple, and
rested mainly on the testimony of a single witness. And however
extraordinary the story which this witness would tell, he was sorry to
say that it was strongly confirmed by the conduct and circumstances of
him whom it impeached. The action was brought to obtain possession of
Trevethlan Castle and the surrounding domain. The jury were probably
aware that the real claimant in the cause, Mr. Philip Trevethlan
Pendarrel, had assumed the last name in addition to his own, on his
marriage with an heiress of large fortune in the county. He now
preferred his claim as the younger son of Hugh Trevethlan, Esquire, of
Trevethlan Castle, from whom the defendant also deduced his title; so
that it would be unnecessary to go any further back. Having established
the claimant's birth, it would, however, become requisite to show that
there were now no lawful descendants of his elder brother, or rather
half brother, Arthur Trevethlan, the alleged grandfather of the
defendant. Now it was admitted that from this Arthur, the estates in
question descended legally to his son Henry; but with the latter, it was
maintained the succession in that line terminated. They would observe
that Henry, the late possessor, only died towards the close of the
previous year, which would account for no steps having been taken
sooner. Now it was well known that, for many years before his death, all
intercourse between him and his uncle, the claimant, had entirely
ceased; and that in fact they were not on those terms of friendship
which should exist between such near relations. It was also known that
for a long time the late Mr. Trevethlan lived a very retired life at his
castle, and never went into society at all. Further, he had fully
attained the age of forty before there was any rumour or pretence that
he had contracted a marriage. But about this time, it is suggested that
if he died without offspring, the estates would either revert to the
relative from whom he was alienated, or he must bequeath them to a
stranger; and the jury would readily perceive the feelings which would
be excited by either alternative. Accordingly, in order to avoid them
both, it would seem that Mr. Trevethlan then contemplated matrimony, and
that a certain ceremony was performed between him and one Margaret
Basset, the daughter of a small farmer upon his estate. The defendant in
this action is the son of this Margaret Basset. "Now, gentlemen,"
continued the counsel, "I need not unpleasantly press upon your
attention the circumstances under which the late Mr. Trevethlan might
have found it convenient to repudiate this pretended marriage. They did
not arise, and the marriage was not repudiated. Neither, so far as we
can learn, was it ever confirmed in a legal manner:--it was never
properly registered. The only mention of it in the parish records occurs
in the account of the christening of the defendant, who is described (I
read from an attested copy) as the 'son of Henry and Margaret
Trevethlan, who were married by special licence, in this parish, by the
Reverend Theodore Ashton, on the 3rd of September, in the previous year,
in the presence of ---- Wyley, and of Maud Basset.' This entry is signed
Henry Trevethlan, Margaret Trevethlan, Maud Basset. The questions
naturally arise,--where is the signature of the officiating
clergyman?--where is that of the witness Wyley? And the answer to these
inquiries is found in the real history of the circumstances attending
this alleged marriage. The ceremony was performed in private, within the
castle, but without the presence even of any of the household; within
twenty-fours afterwards, the clergyman alleged to have performed it
disappeared, and was supposed to be murdered. The only male witness also
vanished; and the only other witness was the mother of the pretended
bride, who is still living, and will probably be called before you by my
learned friend."

Here the speaker was interrupted by a scuffle in the court, and the
shrill voice of Maud Basset. "He lies!" she screamed. "My Margaret _was_
married. Let me see the one who says the contrary." But the old woman
was speedily removed.

"Gentlemen," the counsel resumed, "both you and I can understand and
sympathize with the feeling which prompted that interruption. I was
describing the mysterious privacy with which this pretended marriage
was--I will not say solemnized--but performed. It is perhaps generally
supposed that the poor old woman who interrupted me is the sole survivor
of those who were present at the scene; but it is not so. We shall
to-day produce another. We shall call before you the person who acted
the part of the clergyman:--not Mr. Ashton, gentlemen, nor a clergyman
at all."

There was a great sensation in the court at these words. And if any one
among the audience had then looked at Randolph, he could not fail to
have been struck by the ghastly rigidity of his features. But all were
too deeply interested by the announcement which they had heard to attend
to anything else.

The plaintiff's counsel proceeded to say that he need not anticipate the
details this witness would relate;--they would completely overthrow any
claim founded upon this alleged marriage. It would be for his learned
friends to show any subsequent ground for their title, if such they had.
But unless they did so, he should confidently look for a verdict at the
hands of the jury; and, as he should undoubtedly have another
opportunity of addressing them, he would not now trouble them at greater
length.

A considerable rumour pervaded the court at the close of this speech,
but soon yielded to the low calls for order. There followed some
technical evidence respecting Mr. Pendarrel's descent, and the deaths of
his brother and nephew, of no particular interest, and then the leader
who had addressed the jury, re-awakened attention by desiring the crier
to call Lewis Everope. Rereworth looked at the spendthrift, as he
quietly took the oath, with utter astonishment, not knowing what to
think. The examination began.

"What are you, Mr. Everope?"

"I belong to no profession, but have been nominally a student of the
law."

"You were educated at ---- University, I believe, sir?"

The witness uttered an intimation of assent.

"Were you acquainted, while there, with a gentleman named
Ashton,--Theodore Ashton?"

"I was."

"How long is this ago? To a year or two?"

"Twenty-three or four years. I do not exactly recollect."

"Mr. Ashton was your senior, I believe?"

"Considerably. In fact our acquaintance was very slight."

"What became of him afterwards, do you know?"

"He took orders, and quitted the University."

"Did you ever see him after you had left college?"

"I did."

"Be so good as to tell the jury under what circumstances."

"I was making a pedestrian tour through the western part of this county,
and met him unexpectedly in the neighbourhood of Marazion."

"What year was this? And month? Do you remember?"

The witness mentioned those of Henry Trevethlan's marriage.

"Did you visit Mr. Ashton at his then residence?"

"Yes."

"Well, I believe that was no great distance from Trevethlan Castle. Tell
the jury anything that passed between you and your friend, having
reference to that building or its inhabitants."

"I naturally asked Mr. Ashton some question respecting it, and he told
me there was a strange story on foot about its owner, who wished to play
the trick attempted by Thornhill, in the Vicar of Wakefield. He had
applied to Ashton on the subject, but the latter told him, that if he
performed the ceremony, the result would be the same as in the tale. But
Ashton was to have a considerable fee, and he asked me to personate him,
representing that the affair was only a joke, and that, if there were
any family, Mr. Trevethlan would certainly confirm it legally. And I
being young, and not at the time aware of the consequences, ultimately
consented to what he proposed."

"Well, sir, and what followed?"

"Ashton said he could arrange for the affair to take place the next
day----"

"What day was that?"

"It was the third of September. Ashton instructed me how to present
myself at the castle in his name. No one who would be present, he said,
knew him, except Mr. Trevethlan, who expected something of the kind, and
I looked considerably older than I was. And an intended witness to the
wedding would conduct me."

"And what happened afterwards?"

"I went to the castle with the witness in question, and Mr. Trevethlan
introduced himself to me without any remark, and presented a young woman
as his intended bride. There was also another woman present, who, he
said, was her mother. Mr. Trevethlan produced a document, which he
stated to be a licence for a special marriage, but I did not look at it;
and read the marriage service as fast as I could from a prayer-book
which was given me. When it was over, Mr. Trevethlan handed me a sum of
money, which I delivered to Ashton, and quitted the neighbourhood
without delay, for I did not like my part in the business."

"I should think not," said the counsel. "Pray, sir, do you recollect any
particular incident at this ceremony?"

"Only, that in my confusion I dropped the ring, and the bride's mother
muttered something which I did not hear."

"You have not mentioned the name of the bride?"

"Margaret Basset."

"You were not in holy orders at that time?"

"Neither then nor since."

The plaintiff's counsel here sat down, and Rereworth's leader rose. The
cross-examination was very long and severe.

"So, sir," it began, "do you know that you have just confessed yourself
guilty of felony?"

"I know it now," Everope said, "but I did not know it at the time."

"And you might have been transported for fourteen years?"

"So I am told."

Counsel then ran him hard and fast through all the details of the scene
he had described. Asked for descriptions of the castle, of the room, of
the persons. Turned back upon his own family. Where were they at the
time? How did he correspond with them? Where were they now? He was on
bad terms with them. How was that? He said he was of no profession. Was
he a man of private fortune? How did he live? Who paid his expenses in
coming here? What did he expect beyond? Then suddenly round again. Where
did he sleep the night before the mock-marriage? At Marazion? What was
the name of the inn? Where did he go afterwards? From what place did he
come? Then abruptly, did he know Michael Sinson? How long had he been
acquainted with him? What intercourse had been between them? Had Michael
promised him anything for coming here? Again back to his career at the
university; his subsequent life; his present circumstances. And once
more to Trevethlan Castle; again to describe the almost incredible
proceeding to which he had so distinctly sworn, and all the
circumstances of his intimacy with Ashton.

But this cross-questioning failed in materially shaking Everope's
evidence in chief. He was forced into a considerable exposure of
himself; but, perhaps, even after making the allowance which he claimed
for youth and inexperience, the mere avowal of his participation in so
detestable a plot was sufficiently damning, without any aggravation. It
was evidently not improbable that, at so distant a time, he might not
well remember the details of the scene. Only once did he seem likely to
be overturned.

"Have you ever been in the neighbourhood since?" he was asked.

"Once."

"And when was that?"

"About six weeks ago."

"Were you alone?"

"No, I was with Michael Sinson, whom you have mentioned."

"Indeed! And why did you come? You need not hesitate."

"I came to refresh my memory," Everope answered boldly.

"And to good purpose," counsel said, "for it has been very convenient."

But the leader was on the point of sitting down, when Rereworth gave him
a slip of paper, and he asked one more question.

"Pray, sir, are you personally acquainted with the defendant in this
action?"

"No," Everope said.

"It is I!" Randolph exclaimed, rising from his seat, and fixing the
spendthrift.

"Order, order," was murmured, and the interrupter, who drew the
attention of every one in court, sat down. It was a few moments before
the excitement occasioned by this incident had subsided. There was a
general stir to obtain a second look of the unknown possessor of
Trevethlan Castle.

"Morton!" the witness had meantime exclaimed, showing signs of confusion
for the first time.

"You do know him, then?" said the counsel, and sat down.

But the question did not seem to be advantageous to the defendant's
interest.

"What do you know of Mr. Trevethlan?" Everope's former examiner asked,
having heard his exclamation.

"I knew that gentleman slightly in the Temple by the name of Morton, as
a student for the bar."

The re-examination was short. Some additional formal evidence was given;
and the only other material witness on this side was the coroner, who
proved the circumstances of the supposed murder of Mr. Ashton, and the
disappearance of Wyley. With this evidence, the case for the plaintiff,
of which we have only reported the portion on which the jury would have
eventually to form their judgment, was closed; and the court adjourned
for a short period.




CHAPTER XIII.

    Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind,
    I see thy glory, like a shooting star,
    Fall to the base earth from the firmament.
    Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west,
    Witnessing storms to come, war, and unrest;
    Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes,
    And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.

    Shakspeare.


Randolph Trevethlan never stirred from his seat during the suspension of
the proceedings. When they were resumed, his counsel argued at some
length, that even if the tale which they had heard were true, the
marriage so contracted would be valid, and that therefore the plaintiff
had failed in making out his case. The other side were stopped in their
reply by the judge, who said, that while the court would listen with
patience to any argument intended to save an innocent woman from the
effect of a fraudulent marriage, that could not be considered the point
in question here; the imputed object being to interfere with the rights
of the heir presumptive by securing a family; and that, therefore,
without expressing any opinion upon what might be considered an
undecided point, he should not stop the case. So Rereworth's leader
proceeded to address the jury for the defence.

He began by a skilful and minute analysis of Everope's narrative, in
which he exhibited its incredibility in a strong light, and heightened
it by a continual reference to the worthlessness of the witness's
character as exposed by himself. He pointed out his connection with
Michael Sinson, a person in the employment of the claimant's family, and
a nephew of the late Mrs. Trevethlan. From him, therefore, Everope could
have obtained all the particulars which he pretended to know of his own
experience. He would be called before the court, and the jury would
judge whether the tale had not been concocted between the two. Sinson
had motives of his own for hostility to the family of Trevethlan, which
would be heard from his own lips. He did not impute to the claimant any
cognizance of the fraud, by which he maintained the claim had been
attempted to be established. Departing from this point, he said he
should show, by indisputable evidence, that the late Mr. Trevethlan
never contemplated the baseness which had been attributed to him, could
not possibly have suspected any flaw in his marriage, and always treated
Margaret as his lawful wife, and his children as lawfully born; for,
first, he strongly desired that his own chaplain would perform the
ceremony, as they would hear from that gentleman himself; secondly, if,
as suggested by the plaintiff, his object had been to make sure of
barring the present claim, he would have caused the marriage to be
repeated before the birth of his first child; and thirdly, if he had had
any suspicion that his children would not inherit by descent, he would
have assuredly provided for them by will. But although his estates
belonged to him in fee, he had bequeathed them nothing, dying, as it
might be said, intestate; he had always treated Margaret as his wife,
and had never expressed the slightest doubt of the perfect formality of
his marriage. By his own conduct he had thus defeated the very design
which was imputed to him, and his own alleged proceedings would have
brought about that result which he was said to have sought to avoid, the
succession, namely, of the present claimant. In the face of so much
incoherency, was it possible, for one moment, to entertain so incredible
a tale as that which had been heard from a witness of so very
disreputable a character? If such testimony could prevail, no household
would be safe.

Now, he should produce the licence under which the marriage took place;
he should--despite the incident which Everope had stated as occurring,
and which he had probably learned from Michael Sinson--call before them
Maud Basset, the mother of Margaret, the only known surviving witness of
the ceremony, and she would tell them--they had heard her exclamation in
court--that it was a good marriage; he should also call several members
of the household of Trevethlan Castle, who would swear they always
regarded it as such; and he should show that the children had been
christened as the lawful offspring of Henry and Margaret Trevethlan; and
again he repeated, that if the unsupported and monstrous testimony of a
single individual of bad reputation were permitted to countervail so
strong a chain of presumption no union could be secure, and any of his
hearers would be liable to have his children disinherited and their
names stigmatized by any villain who would forswear himself for hire.

Let the jury consider the story they had heard. That a gentleman of high
character and station, under circumstances entirely different from those
in Goldsmith's famous story, wishing to form a marriage which he might
either affirm or repudiate subsequently, should dare to apply to a
stranger, a clergyman of the church, to assist him in so nefarious a
design,--that this clergyman, far from expressing any indignation,
should merely suggest a little difficulty,--that, by a coincidence
sufficiently remarkable, this Everope, discarded by his family, living
by his wits, should at that very time encounter his old college
acquaintance,--that to him Ashton should immediately relate the
business, and invite his co-operation,--that this precocious villain
should at once accept the mission,--that Mr. Trevethlan should receive
him without question or surprise,--that he should perform the impious
mockery he had described,--that, needy and profligate, he should keep so
valuable a secret for so long a time,--that at length, by another
singular coincidence, he should fall in with a dependent of the family
to whom it was so important; should tell the story apparently as an
excellent joke; should for the first time become aware of its worth, and
should sell himself to give the evidence they had heard to-day--Yes:
indignation had diverted him from the picture he was drawing to the real
motive under which the witness acted.

But let the jurors turn from this view of the subject to the one he
should now present to them. Let them see Mr. Trevethlan, when, for
reasons entirely beside the question at issue, he had decided on
marrying a person of inferior station, applying to his chaplain, as a
matter of course, to perform the ceremony. Let them see him, on that
gentleman's declining, preferring the same desire to this Mr. Ashton,
then resident in the neighbourhood. Let them suppose the ceremony to
have been really and duly performed by him, as it appears recorded in
the register of baptisms. Let them recollect the disappearance of
Ashton, and of Wyley, the witness. Let them see how two children were
borne by Mrs. Trevethlan, and duly christened by the chaplain of the
castle. Let them then turn to the conduct of her relations. Let them
imagine the hopes raised, the desires excited by their great connection.
Let them note one of these relatives permitted to hang about the castle
as a sort of companion to the young heir. Let them suppose certain
presumption to grow up, and to be suddenly checked by the expulsion of
all the race. Let them conceive the consequent exasperation, and
heighten it by an unfounded suspicion that the exalted peasant-woman was
ill-used. Let them consider such feelings as still rankling when Michael
Sinson enters the service of the claimant in this action. Let them think
of him as actuated both by hope of reward and desire of revenge,
devising this subtile scheme, and seeking only an agent to accomplish
it. Let them find him meeting the ruined scoundrel, whom they had heard
that day, and he thought they would have little difficulty in
unravelling the dark plot, which was now, for the first time, publicly
developed against the well-being, the happiness, and the good fame of an
old and distinguished and honourable family.

At the close of this address, Michael Sinson was called into the
witness-box, and examined by Rereworth.

"You are a relation, I believe, of the late Mrs. Trevethlan?"

"A nephew of the late Margaret Basset."

The witness was then led on, by further questions, to describe the hopes
excited in his family by the marriage now in dispute; the manner in
which he was allowed to hang about Trevethlan Castle; the offence which
his demeanour gave to its owner, and the expulsion of his relations from
their farm. Fencing with his examiner, he at first affected to treat
this circumstance with indifference, but was forced by degrees into a
confession of his bitter and rankling mortification.

"And so, sir," Rereworth suddenly asked, "all your family considered
this marriage to be perfectly good?"

"It was for their interest," Sinson said, stammering.

"For their interest, sir!" Seymour exclaimed indignantly. "Why, sir, was
not Mrs. Trevethlan's good name at stake?"

"My poor relative has been dead for a long time," the witness answered.

"And it is her nephew who comes forward to shame her in her grave! You
are now in the service of Mr. Pendarrel, the real claimant in this
action?"

"Of Mrs. Pendarrel."

The answer produced a slight titter in the court.

"What does Mrs. Pendarrel pay you for getting up her case?"

Sinson hesitated for some time, and made no answer.

"Do you hear, sir?" Rereworth continued. "What is to be your hire for
slandering your mother's sister?"

The plaintiff's counsel interposed, and protested against his learned
friend's so discrediting his own witness.

"I consider," the witness said, having recovered himself, "that my
unfortunate relative was deceived in the business. It was no fault of
hers."

Rereworth now turned to Michael's connection with Everope. Asked how the
acquaintance began; how long it had lasted; how the spendthrift came to
communicate the story which he told in court; what Sinson knew of his
habits and associates; whether he provided him with a maintenance? Then
he reverted to the journey into Cornwall, of which Everope had given so
frank an explanation; and concluded by again questioning the witness
respecting any expectation of reward which he entertained or had held
forth as the consequence of success in this action.

"Do you expect any reward at all, sir?" Michael was asked, in
cross-examination. "Have any promises been made to you?"

"No," he answered, "I have been only doing my duty, and expect nothing."

"And have you, in fact, held out any expectations to the witness
Everope?"

"None whatever."

"Well, sir, is it not matter of notoriety that there was great doubt
about this pretended marriage?"

"Certainly. It has been thrown in my teeth a hundred times."

Little profit had this witness brought to the defendant. Maud Basset,
who had been detained out of court since her interruption of the
proceedings, was now summoned into the box.

"You are the mother of the late Mrs. Trevethlan, madam?"

"Sure and I am. Of my own Margaret. But I dinna understand it at all."

"You recollect your daughter's marriage, Mrs. Basset?"

"And a proud day was that for me," the old woman replied, "when the
squire asked for her to be his wife. But my Margaret was fit to be a
queen. Woe's me that he beguiled me, that she should be married only to
be murdered."

"You were present at the marriage, I believe, madam?"

"Of course I was. Where else should her mother be? And he all so cold
and stately like, and she weeping and crying so. I might have known what
would come of it. I saw it all with my own eyes."

"Do you remember the name of the clergyman, Mrs. Basset?"

"Ashton it was--Theodore Ashton. The same as I saw it written at the
christening of her child. Woe's me! 'twas the last time almost I saw
her."

"And you believe it was a good marriage?"

"Where's he that says it was not? My Michael? Na, na; 'tis some of them
that murdered her. But they cannot get quit of the blood. The young
squire would break the connection, would he? Na, na; it was a good
marriage, and the ties are too strong."

"Pray, madam," the plaintiff's leader now asked, "did anything
particular happen on this occasion?"

"I dinna understand it at all."

"Did you not notice something ... about the ring?"

"Well, the minister was nervous-like, and dropped it, and I said it was
no a sign of luck. But I dinna understand it at all."

"Did you know the person whom you call minister, madam?"

"Know him! he was living like at Dame Sennor's, away on the cliff. So
they told me."

"Where is Mrs. Sennor now? Is she here?"

"Why, sir, Dame Sennor's been dead and gone this many a year."

"Had you ever seen the minister before the ceremony?"

"I canna say that I had. But he married my Margaret, and that I am well
certain."

"How long did your daughter survive afterwards, madam?"

"A little better than three years. But it was a long time sin' I had
seen her."

"You used the word 'murdered.' What did you mean, ma'am?"

"Her bliss was made her bane," Maud answered fiercely. "The squire broke
her heart, and none of hers were let to come nigh her."

Neither side, it may be observed, chose to confront the old woman with
Everope, and inquire concerning her recognition of him. But the judge
now desired him to stand forward.

"Look at that person, madam," said his lordship. "Can you say whether
that is the man who performed this marriage?"

"Well, I canna tell at all," was the reply. "It's three-and-twenty years
agone, and my eyes grow dimly like. I canna tell at all."

Polydore Riches was the next witness. He proved Mr. Trevethlan's urgent
request to him to perform the ceremony, and his refusal; that Margaret
had always been treated as the mistress of the castle; and that her
children had been by him duly christened as the offspring of Henry and
Margaret Trevethlan. He also deposed to the behaviour of her relations;
to the anger it produced in Mr. Trevethlan; to their banishment from the
castle, and their undisguised mortification. In cross-examination he
stated, as his reason for refusing to celebrate the union, that he
disapproved both of itself and of its manner.

"I must ask you, Mr. Riches, were there not rumours very prevalent soon
after the alleged marriage, that it had not been duly performed?"

The question was objected to, but allowed, and the chaplain acknowledged
that it was so.

"Did you know this Theodore Ashton, Mr. Riches?"

"Very slightly indeed."

"Are you aware of anything in his character which might make the conduct
imputed to him to-day not improbable?"

This question was also objected to, and not pressed.

"Would you have remained an hour in the castle, Mr. Riches," Rereworth
then asked; "had you suspected there was anything fraudulent in the
marriage?"

"Most certainly I would not."

Griffith and his wife corroborated the evidence of the chaplain, but
were also obliged to admit the popular rumours. The licence for the
marriage, and also Mr. Trevethlan's will were put in evidence, and then
with some other testimony of less consequence, the case for the defence
closed. The plaintiff's counsel rose to reply.

In the first place, he begged the jury to disabuse their minds of the
imputations which his learned friend had dexterously cast upon some of
the evidence in the case. It was rather strange that he should have to
defend a witness on the other side, but he was sure they would agree
with him, that any indignation on the part of young Sinson would be more
than justified, by conduct such as had been vaguely hinted at by his
grandmother; and would be properly uncontrollable if the family
participated in the popular idea, that the marriage was fraudulent.
Their reasons for concealing such suspicions from the pretended bride's
mother were evident enough. Her strong feeling was alone an explanation.
Then as to Everope, not the least portion of his learned friend's
insinuations had been borne out. Whatever might be that person's
circumstances, he maintained that no slur had been thrown upon the
honesty of his testimony. Now let them look at the presumptions raised
for the defence, and see how easily they could be made to tally with the
truth of the plaintiff's case. First, there was Mr. Trevethlan's request
to his chaplain; why, he would know beforehand, from that gentleman's
character, that he would refuse to perform the ceremony. He ran no risk
in making the demand, and had it been acceded to, it might have been
evaded. Then as to the establishment of Margaret as his wife, it was a
mere matter of course, even if it were but temporary. And with regard to
his recognition of her children, that was the object of the entire
scheme. But it was urged, that he had himself defeated this object. So
men often did. Mr. Trevethlan might have feared to expose his conduct at
the pretended marriage; he might suppose that the disappearance of
Ashton and Wyley would prevent the fraud from being discovered; or he
might even, as had been done here to-day, attempt to prove that the
mock-marriage was valid. The penalty which hung over the real performer
of the ceremony would prevent that person from coming forward. As to the
omission in the will, it was probably the effect of long tranquillity
and habit. True, the inmates of the castle declared their positive
belief in the absence of any deceit; but the jury, and he did not mean
it offensively, would recollect their prejudices, and also that even
they were compelled to allow that the same feeling did not exist outside
the castle walls. Admitting everything that had been proved for the
defence, there was nothing inconsistent with the story related by
Everope, and confirmed they would recollect by Maud Basset's statement
with respect to the ring. And he confidently looked to the jury, not to
allow the mere opinions and presumptions of interested parties to
outweigh the clear and positive declaration of an indifferent stranger.

Such is a brief narrative of the arguments and evidence adduced on each
side, in a trial which in fact occupied many hours. The judge now
proceeded to sum up the whole for the consideration of the jury. The
court had been densely crowded all day, and the excitement of the
audience ran very high.

Whatever difficulty, his lordship gravely remarked, there might be in
this case, arose from the deplorable manner in which the late Mr.
Trevethlan had caused his marriage to be solemnised, supposing for a
moment that it was a marriage. He fully agreed with the reverend
witness, Mr. Riches, in entirely condemning such a mode of celebration.
Marriages should be performed in public. But the plaintiff denied that
there had been any marriage at all, and produced an individual, who
swore that not being in holy orders, he took upon himself to read the
matrimonial service from the Prayer-book, and falsely and illegally to
pronounce Henry Trevethlan and Margaret Basset to be man and wife. If
the jury believed that witness, they must return a verdict for the
plaintiff, for it was not pretended that there had been any other
performance of the rite, than that to which this account would apply. On
the other hand, they had heard the evidence adduced to show, that Mr.
Trevethlan had always considered his marriage as valid, and that it had
been likewise so regarded by all who were connected with his family. But
then, again, it would seem that in the neighbourhood a very different
opinion had prevailed. Unquestionably the circumstances were mysterious,
and he could not but imagine that further evidence would be discovered
before very long. With that, however, they had nothing to do. They had
to compare a plain and positive story with a strong presumption, and if
they were unable to disbelieve the former, to return a verdict, as he
had said before, for the plaintiff.

His lordship then went minutely through the evidence on both sides, not
sparing the character of Everope, who, he remarked, would certainly have
been transported if he had been discovered to have really acted as he
confessed, within a certain time now unfortunately elapsed; and,
finally, he desired the jury to consider their verdict.

They requested permission to retire; and while they were absent, the
excitement of the audience rose to the highest pitch. There was a
general buzz of conversation. Every one was speculating on the result.
Bets were offered and taken freely. The bar were discussing the judge's
charge, and its tendency. Not a few people moved from their places to
try to obtain another sight of the defendant. None of the claimant's
family were in court. Randolph, perfectly unconscious of the attention
he attracted, sat like a statue. His leading counsel looked anxious, and
Rereworth lent his forehead on his hands, and seemed to pore over his
brief.

"Silence! order!" proclaimed the return of the jury; and the demand did
not require to be repeated.

"For the plaintiff," the foreman said, in answer to the question of the
clerk of assize.

"May we have immediate possession, my lord?" counsel asked.

The judge shook his head.

There was a rush from the court. It was all over.




CHAPTER XIV.

    Thou hast it now, King, Cawdor, Glamis, all;
    As the weird women promised; and I fear
    Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said,
    It should not stand in thy posterity;
    But that myself should be the root, and father
    Of many kings.

    Shakspeare.


That there was much talk, and not a little difference of opinion in the
various coteries of Bodmin that night, respecting the issue of the day's
proceedings, needs hardly be told. In such cases the crowd can hardly be
said to follow fortune and hate the fallen. The jury comes from among
it; there is plenty of food for vanity in running down the verdict, and
showing how much more rationally matters would have gone if _I_ had been
one of the twelve. The first gush of popular feeling is generally
against the decision in a doubtful case. So here, if there were plenty
of suspicion attaching to Henry Trevethlan's marriage, there were also
good grounds for discrediting the testimony of Everope. If, on the one
hand, scandalized gossips expressed their horror at such clandestine
unions, on the other, there was a general cry of indignation at the
witness's effrontery. If some people dwelt upon Maud Basset's hints that
her daughter was ill-used, others maintained that the mother could not
have been deceived at the wedding. If the popular rumours were cited in
support of the verdict, they were met by the authority of Polydore
Riches. In short, "there was a great deal to be said on both sides."
People had an opportunity of showing their discernment, and the majority
were apt to flatter their own shrewdness by dissenting from the jury.

He whom it most concerned, was already far from their councils. Randolph
left the court immediately on hearing the judgment, with the idea that
what had happened was exactly what he had expected, walked hurriedly to
his hotel, and ordered out his chaise. Polydore came up to him, and took
his hand, and besought him to stay, without extracting a single word in
reply. When the chaise drove up, his old pupil merely ejaculated--"I
must take the news to Helen. This is the last night either of us sleeps
in Trevethlan castle,"--sprang into the vehicle, desired to be driven
very fast, and was whirled away, leaving the good chaplain in a state of
utter dismay.

Mr. Riches had, however, to rouse himself subsequently, to attend a
conference which Winter had arranged for rather a late hour, and at
which the counsel for the defendant and Griffith were to assist. The
result of the meeting was unsatisfactory. The only practical suggestion
was to track Everope's career as closely as possible. It was just within
the bounds of probability that they might be able to overthrow that
remarkable pedestrian tour; or they might light on other facts tending
to elucidate his connection with Michael Sinson; or at least might
further damnify his general character. But it was admitted that to
chance they must look as their best friend. Time or fortune might bring
to knowledge the fate of Mr. Ashton, supposing that he had not been
murdered; or again, the missing Wyley might be discovered. Yet of what
avail could this last contingency prove, since the witness might have
been deceived in the same way as the mother? For the present, there
appeared to be no clue to the maze. If the parties would only quarrel,
there might indeed be an exposure; but they seemed to be too deeply
involved in one another's safety for this event to be at all likely.

Sinson took very good care, in the disquietude of his suspicious temper,
that his bondman should not be left in the way of temptation. He started
with Everope for London, within a few hours of the termination of the
trial. In that wretched man remorse seemed for a time to be dead.
Hitherto, in the midst of his lowest depravity, he had always
experienced compunctious visitings; he had been always haunted by a
sense of forfeited respectability; and had frequently felt a feeble
desire to reform. But now, although startled for a moment by the
identity of Morton with the defendant, he gladly accepted his position
as irremediable, and was looking eagerly for the reward which should
furnish him with the means of forgetting it.

But it behoved Michael to keep a strong hold on him for a short time. A
very short time, Sinson thought, in the first flush of his triumph,
would be sufficient. A few days might put him in possession of all his
desires: after that, what became of Everope, or what disclosures he
might choose to make, would be a matter of second-rate consequence.
Michael felt a kind of admiration for his victim, when he remembered how
successfully he had encountered that searching cross-examination. But he
could not allow so much ability to run too loose, and resolved to hold
him in by drawing his purse-strings very tight, until his own game was
perfectly secure.

That it would soon be so, he did not feel the least doubt. He had been
playing for weeks and weeks; he had kept his eye steadily fixed upon one
event; all his calculations terminated in one result; he had taught
himself completely to ignore all unfavourable chances; supposing he had
any confidants, he would have regarded their suggestion of difficulty as
an insult; he might be thought to fancy that the book of fate lay open
before him, and all he read was his own triumph.

And his patroness, she who, in the halls of Pendarrel, was pursuing a
line of policy totally at variance with that of her protege, little
dreaming that what seemed to be her victory was intended to be his,
utterly unconscious of the price about to be demanded for it--how would
she receive the news? Her husband, engaged all day in hearing the
details of petty felonies, was discharged with the rest of his
colleagues at its close, and retired to recreate himself in their
company at a well-served board. There he received the intelligence of
the verdict, and accepted the felicitations of his friends. Thence,
knowing the penalty which would otherwise await him at home, he withdrew
for a little space to indite a despatch for his wife; and then, having
entrusted the missive to a trusty rider, with injunctions to lose no
time on the road, he was able to rejoin his friends before the decanters
had completed their first round.

So the news was ready for the mistress of Pendarrel by breakfast-time.
In the first flush of exultation she made her daughter a partner in it.

"Mildred, my love, I give you joy. You are heiress of Trevethlan
Castle."

But the young lady regarded her mother with a countenance in which there
were no signs of joy, and the for once imprudent parent bit her lip.

"And my cousins," Mildred said, "are ruined."

"They are no cousins of yours, child," said her mother, not yet having
regained perfect presence of mind; "nor of any one else. Nor are they
ruined. I shall take good care of that."

Mrs. Pendarrel would very gladly have recalled the remark which had
excited her daughter's sympathy, in order to convey the information in a
tone of less unqualified satisfaction. But she forgot her wariness in
the pride occasioned by the success of all her long machinations.

     "Pendar'l and Trevethlan would own one name."

And that name would be Pendarrel. Nay, more; the name of Trevethlan
would vanish from the earth. The family would sink into oblivion. If he
who had slighted her could rise from his grave, and see the ruin which
had followed his scorn; could see how his towers had passed into the
hands of his foe; how his fame was blighted, and his children
dishonoured; were there not ample satisfaction for all the long misery
his contempt had inflicted? "No!" Esther was compelled to answer, as
that eternal spring of bitter waters burst forth amidst the sweet flood
of revenge. "No, nothing can compensate me for the sorrow which
conscience whispers has been due to my own arrogance; nothing can atone
for the wreck of that happiness, which, but for my own presumption,
might have been mine."

Reflections like these, however, were soon crushed, and Mrs. Pendarrel
had quite sufficient employment on her hands. Since the night of her
great party, she had been assiduously pressing forward the preparations
for Mildred's marriage. Perfectly heedless of the attitude assumed by
the young lady, she was arranging all the details of the affair with
maternal diligence, and had gone so far as to select the persons who
were to be present at the ceremony. Mr. Truby had been himself to the
Hall to receive final instructions respecting the settlements. Melcomb
was an assiduous visitor, but by no means solicitous for _tete-a-tetes_
with his intended bride. To him the marriage was become nearly a matter
of life and death. It was true the gossips at Mrs. Pendarrel's party had
somewhat exaggerated his embarrassments; but his creditors were growing
very importunate, and impatiently awaiting the day when the possession
of his wife's fortune would enable him to satisfy their most pressing
demands: a purpose to which he had undertaken it should be devoted. Let
it be rumoured that the match was broken off, and it might not be very
long before Tolpeden Park suffered the outrages alluded to by Mr.
Quitch. So Melcomb disguised whatever inward anxiety he might feel,
under a smooth brow and a smiling face, and evaded his mistress's
repugnance as best he might.

Mildred's remonstrances had subsided into passive resistance. She was
generally silent and calm. The irksomeness of her situation was greatly
aggravated; but, at the same time, her spirit was sustained by the
memory which she cherished in her heart of the scene under the hawthorns
of the cliff. Trusting that some accident might even yet frustrate her
mother's intentions, she allowed her to proceed without protest, acting
on her sister's advice, to postpone eclat to the latest possible period.
She felt that she had deceived no one, and, if scandal came, it would be
no fault of hers.

But had Esther been fully aware of all that was fermenting in the young
lady's mind, she would, indeed, have bit her lips hard, rather than let
slip that intimation respecting Trevethlan Castle. The idea of flight
had occurred to the reluctant maiden more than once; coming, however,
only to be dismissed. But if her lover were really ruined, if he to whom
she had plighted herself were an exile from house and home, forlorn and
outcast, then it was not unlikely Mildred might think that her vow as
well as her affection bade her seek him, at once to share and to console
his sorrow.

So Mrs. Pendarrel's hasty exclamation brought distress and anxiety to
her daughter, and imparted a certain consistency to a notion which had
previously been shadowy as a dream. Mildred wrote a long letter to her
sister, partly lifting the veil from the emotions which agitated her,
and dwelling more strongly than she had ever done before, upon the
disquietude she felt at the mode in which the match was being hurried
forward.

But it was not from this communication that Mrs. Winston would learn the
result of the law-suit. She was at a party, when she overheard an
allusion to it from a bystander. He was a barrister, who had been
present at the trial, and who, having finished his business at the
assizes, had returned with speed to London. She knew the person he was
conversing with, joined them, and learned all the particulars. She had
before talked the affair over, and was fully aware of the consequences
to the orphans of Trevethlan. She immediately quitted the assembly, went
home, and interrupted her husband in his studies. A brilliant creature
she was, glowing in all the lustre and maturity of thirty summers, and
now adorned with everything that could be imagined to enhance her
beauty. So she swept to Mr. Winston's side, and laid her hand lightly
upon his shoulder. And, with all his love of ease and philosophy, his
indolence and affected apathy, he was really proud of his wife, and
gratified whenever she came to him with a request. So, if there were a
little impatience in his mind, when he looked up from his book into her
face, it vanished immediately in admiration, and was succeeded by
pleasure when he found she had come to consult him.

"So soon home, Gertrude," he said. "And why? I trust nothing is the
matter."

She related what she had heard respecting the law-suit.

"And now," she concluded, "what will become of my unhappy cousins?"

"I think, my dear," her husband said, after some reflection,--"I think
there could be no harm, considering all the circumstances, there could
be no harm, I imagine, in begging Miss Trevethlan to make our house her
home. I do not believe this verdict will stand. But, at all events, we
might invite Miss Trevethlan to stay with us; at any rate for a time.
She might be as private as she pleased. What do you say, my dear? You
might write to her...."

He had laid his open volume upon his knee. What he suggested was
precisely what Mrs. Winston desired. So much coldness had attended all
her intercourse with her mother, since their last discussion about
Mildred's marriage, that she took no heed of any objection from that
quarter. She answered her husband by bending down and touching his cheek
with her lips. He thought she had never looked so beautiful before, and
threw away his book.

That evening was the beginning of a new era in Gertrude's life.




CHAPTER XV.

    Desdichada fue la hora,
    Desdichado fue aquel dia
    En que naci y herede
    La tau grande senoria;
    Pues lo habia de perder
    Todo junto y en un dia.

    Roman. Espan.


Late in the night, or early in the morning that followed the trial at
Bodmin, any watcher at Trevethlan would be startled by the gallop of
horses and the rattle of wheels, as the chaise which bore Randolph to
his lost home dashed round the green of the hamlet. The bell rung loud
at the castle-gate, and old Jeffrey roused himself from his slumbers,
and having looked to the state of his blunderbus, descended leisurely to
learn who sought admission at that untimely hour. His master's voice
impatiently ordered him to open the gate; and, with a wonder that
impeded his duty, he obeyed. Delay again occurred before Randolph
obtained entrance to the great hall; and when he did, the white face
upon which fell the glare of the trembling handmaiden's lamp, might
remind her of those sheeted spectres which were said to glide at that
hour through the desolate corridors. He bade her leave him a light, and
she fled, scared, back to the couch from which she had unwillingly
risen.

Randolph strode with irregular steps up and down the vaulted hall.
Perhaps, had Griffith been there, the worthy steward would have
remembered the day when his late master paced it in the like manner,
after his furious ride from Pendarrel. He might recollect the same
fierce passion in his eye--the same dark scowl upon his forehead, as
those which now burnt and loured in the face of his son. Nor were it
very easy to say which had sustained the greatest provocation: the
father, led on and enchained in a deep attachment, only to feel himself
the sport of a wayward girl's vanity; or the son, who found the same
girl, now a woman, triumphing in that father's dishonour, and exulting
over the ruin of his house. And that was not all, for the disgrace
descended: the good name, which had been handed down from generation to
generation, almost from beyond the memory of man, with him,
Randolph--what?--was changed into an inheritance of shame. And he too
loved. He loved the child of his destroyer. He had sometimes rejoiced in
the idea of wreaking the vengeance bequeathed to him, by stealing her
from her mother. For she also loved him, and had vowed to be his. And
now;--what was to happen now? Ruin, privation, poverty, he might have
invited her to share, while honour was unstained. But could he ask her
to join the fortunes of one who had not even a name to offer her? The
reputed offspring of fraud and sin? Never, while there remained a shadow
in which calumny might wrap itself--never, while there was a suspicion
upon which envy might pretend to believe the tale related that
day--could he accept the fulfilment of his beloved one's promise.

And what hope was there? Had he not swept the dark horizon again and
again in search of the faintest ray of light, and failed to discover
any? And if his vision, sharpened by despair, could discover none, whose
could? Had he not listened to every syllable of the foul tale, with the
ears of one who sought a flaw in his death-warrant? And had he been able
to discover any? Then if he were deaf, who could hear?

And this was the story with which he must greet his sister in the
morning. For delay, dalliance with chance was out of the question. As he
had told Polydore Riches, not another night should the castle find him
beneath its roof. Speedy possession! It had been refused, but they might
take it. He would not remain where his very name seemed to mock him.

Therefore he and Helen were in fact houseless. Well, they would again
seek their old quarters near the metropolis. They still possessed a few
months' maintenance. Afterwards, let what would happen, it would not
much matter.

These bitter thoughts occupied Randolph when the grey light of day-break
stole through the lofty casements, and reminded him of the necessity of
repose. He sought his own chamber. The sea lay beneath him, calm and
still, but without its usual tranquillising influence. Dressed as he was
he flung himself upon his bed, and sheer exhaustion brought some fitful
slumber.

The sun was shining bright into the room, when he finally awoke. His
morning orisons, never neglected, inspired him with something like
resignation. He would not, indeed, remain a day at the castle, but he
would only go to London to be near head-quarters, and avail himself of
the best assistance in unveiling the iniquity by which for a season he
had been defeated. And, animated by this determination, he met his
sister at breakfast with a countenance which told plainly enough what
had happened, but at the same time was not utterly devoid of hope; one,
"wherein appeared, obscure, some glimpse of joy."

"It is against us, my brother," Helen said, when the repast was over.

"Ay, Helen," he answered. "We are outcasts upon earth, from our home,
and from our name. There is nothing left us but to say farewell. We may
as well say it immediately. Can you be ready to depart this very day?"

He saw that his sister's eyes were filled with tears.

"It is sudden, dearest," he said; "but it is better so. I cannot stay
here, while a taint rests upon my name. We can travel to-day, and what
we want may follow us. And it will not be 'a farewell for ever.'"

He smiled as he spoke, but he could win no corresponding glance from
Helen. They separated to make the necessary preparations for departure.

It was not much past noon, when the friends arrived whom Randolph had
left at Bodmin. They united in protesting against the projected journey.
But argument was vain. Randolph had completed his plan. He should go
straight to his old quarters at Hampstead; that is, if he found them
unoccupied; should put himself in close communication with Winter and
his friend Rereworth; and follow up an inquiry into the evidence given
at the trial with untiring energy. If such investigation were
fruitless--but he was not inclined to accept that alternative--he need
hardly say, that not for an hour would he waive his claim to the name of
Trevethlan, and that therefore he had no notion of resuming his old
disguise. He had no objection to Griffith remaining at the castle as
long as the law would permit, but he earnestly pressed the chaplain to
follow him to the metropolis.

"You will be such a support to my sister, Mr. Riches," he urged. "I
shall be much away from her. Engaged in business; unable to sustain her
in this great change. Do come, my dear sir, and help your old pupils in
their extremity."

Polydore was not one to resist such an entreaty, and assented. Yet,
perhaps, Randolph might have been prevailed upon at least to defer his
departure, but for an invitation to do so from another quarter. A note
reached the castle from Mrs. Pendarrel, in which that lady expressed her
hope that its present occupants would put themselves to no
inconvenience; that the demand for immediate possession was
unauthorized, and that every accommodation would be granted with
pleasure. This polite missive, it may be presumed, was in partial
fulfilment of the intention Esther expressed to her daughter, of
assisting her adversaries in their fall. But it was too much like that
which she caused her husband to write in the opening of this narrative,
to be received as a favour, and only served to provoke Randolph into a
fresh burst of rage, and make him eager for the vehicle which should
bear them away from all such insults.

Before it came, however, he could not resist guiding his sister to a
last visit to the haunt of their childhood, Merlin's Cave. And there for
no little space they sat in silence, thinking over the happiness of
by-gone days. The day was even warmer than those which had preceded it,
but it was close and heavy. The sea lay before the orphans, perfectly
smooth, sleeping in its might; and there was no breath of air to waft
aside the lightest bubble it might leave upon the rock; but some round
massive clouds were rising one behind another in the south-western
horizon, which might indicate the coming of a storm.

"Farewell to Trevethlan!" Randolph said. "Let me hear our old song once
more."

And Helen sang the ancestral ditty, but with an accent very different
from that she gave it on the eve of their previous journey to the
metropolis.

    "Farewell to Trevethlan! A farewell for ever!
      Farewell to the towers that stand by the sea!"

"Remember, Helen," her brother said, "how you checked me when I told you
your song was of ill omen. And believe me now, when I say that, like
Reginald, we shall live to see a joyful revolution."

Ill news flies fast. The intelligence of the verdict had spread in the
hamlet, and its immediate effect was exaggerated by the villagers. The
coming departure of their young master and mistress also travelled from
the castle to the green, and added to the excitement. Groups collected
both of sorrowing women and of threatening men. The lapse of time only
increased the numbers and the exasperation of the tenantry. The people
speedily forgot all those rumours concerning their late lord's marriage,
which of old gratified their envy, and which had probably contributed in
no small degree to the result of the trial. They only considered the
event of the day; that the last representative of the family with which
they had been connected for centuries was now to be driven from his
home, by a deserter who had sold himself to a rival house; and many
among them resolved, that if they could prevent it, by right or wrong,
it should not be so that "Pendar'l and Trevethlan should own one name."

"And so ye were right after all, dame," said farmer Colan to the
landlady of the Trevethlan Arms. "The old saying's come true with a
vengeance. But there's no Miss Mildred in the case."

"And Madam Pendarrel's not come to Trevethlan yet, farmer," was the
answer. "And there's many a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip."

"There's like to be a slip here," cried a voice in the crowd, "such as
she little knows."

"It's a curious sort of day for the season," said Breage. "So warm and
heavy. I should say there was some prognostication in the air."

"Ay, there'll be a storm before long, I reckon, neighbours," said
Germoe.

"Faith, then, there will," muttered another speaker; "and a storm some
people don't expect."

"There always is a storm," observed the general merchant, "along with
misfortune at the castle. It comes as a token."

"Then it comes too late," quoth Mrs. Miniver. "It is after the
misfortune this time. Who knows what came of Michael Sinson?"

A low groan ran through the throng, and filled the eyes of Mercy Page
with tears.

"What'll his old grandame say," asked farmer Colan, "when she
understands the rights of the matter?"

"She never will understand," answered the hostess. "She'll close her
ears, and say it is all along of squire Randolph. Don't ye mind how she
met him at the late master's burying? And how she says that her Margaret
was murdered?"

"'T is a strange thing," remarked the village tailor, "that nothing ever
turned up about the parson's murder."

"He never was murdered," said Breage; "if he had, there'd have been a
sign. I don't believe as he was murdered."

The appearance of an empty carriage, winding its way round the green,
put an end to these gossiping speculations, and concentrated the
scattered groups of rustics into one compact crowd about the gate
leading into the base-court of the castle. A moody silence succeeded to
the previous animation, and all eyes followed the vehicle up the ascent,
until it vanished from sight through the arched portal. Even the
mirthful Mrs. Miniver then became serious for once, and waited among her
neighbours in rueful anxiety for the re-appearance of the carriage.

We pass lightly over the adieux within the inner court. Polydore Riches,
having resigned himself to what was inevitable, made them as brief as
possible. Randolph had steeled his heart against any display of feeling,
and Helen endeavoured to imitate her brother's fortitude. The steward
found comfort in hope; but his wife could not restrain her sorrow at
such a parting, and retired to the picture-gallery to try to forget the
present disaster, in calling to mind the past glories of the family to
which she was so deeply attached. Old Jeffrey flung open the gates, and
dashed a tear surlily from his eye as the carriage passed under the
arch. But when the family flag was seen slowly and lingeringly to
descend from its high place, a wailing cry arose from the crowd upon the
green, which made Randolph's heart swell in his breast, and brought the
tears she had resolved not to shed into Helen's eyes.

The carriage soon reached the bottom of the descent. The people thronged
to the gate, and pressed against it, and loudly declared that it should
not be opened. Not so would they allow their young master and mistress
to be taken from them. There was considerable confusion, and cries were
uttered expressive of the villagers' determination. The driver,
perplexed, looked round for instructions. The situation was becoming
embarrassing.

"We will bid our friends farewell on foot, Helen," her brother
whispered, "and thank them for their good-will."

And, so saying, he threw open his door of the carriage, sprang out,
lowered the steps himself, and assisted his sister to alight. She leant
upon his arm, and they advanced to meet the crowd, which divided before
them with great respect. Shaking hands very cordially with those who
were nearest them, and expressing confident hopes that their absence
would not be long, they made their way across the green, while the
carriage proceeded by the road. But the people soon divined their
intention, and closed upon their path, and endeavoured to delay their
progress, clasping their hands, and pouring benedictions upon their
heads. It was a more trying leave-taking than that within the castle.
But at length, after many and many a salute, they reached the end of the
village, re-ascended their carriage amid renewed effusions of
attachment, and were borne rapidly from the sight of their sorrowing
adherents.

Sorrow, however, was not the only emotion excited by their departure.
Not a few imprecations, fiercely directed against the house that had
disinherited them, arose among their dependents as the carriage finally
disappeared.

END OF VOLUME II.





End of Project Gutenberg's Trevethlan: (Vol 2 of 3), by William Davy Watson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TREVETHLAN: (VOL 2 OF 3) ***

***** This file should be named 36107.txt or 36107.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/1/0/36107/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
