Project Gutenberg's A Letter to Thomas F. Bayard, by Lysander Spooner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Letter to Thomas F. Bayard

Author: Lysander Spooner

Release Date: May 17, 2011 [EBook #36161]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LETTER TO THOMAS F. BAYARD ***




Produced by Katie Hernandez, Susan Goble, Curtis Weyant
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net











    A LETTER

    TO

    THOMAS F. BAYARD

    CHALLENGING HIS RIGHT--AND THAT OF ALL THE
    OTHER SO-CALLED SENATORS AND REPRESENTATIVES
    IN CONGRESS--

    TO EXERCISE ANY LEGISLATIVE POWER WHATEVER
    OVER THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES.


    BY LYSANDER SPOONER.


    BOSTON, MASS.:
    PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR.
    1882.




A Letter to Thomas F. Bayard

    "_Challenging his right--and that of all the other so-called senators
    and representatives in Congress--to exercise any legislative power
    whatever over the people of the United States._"

    by Lysander Spooner


To Thomas F. Bayard, of Delaware:

Sir--I have read your letter to Rev. Lyman Abbott, in which you express
the opinion that it is at least possible for a man to be a legislator
(under the Constitution of the United States) and yet be an honest man.

This proposition implies that you hold it to be at least possible that
some four hundred men should, by some process or other, become invested
with the right to make laws of their own--that is, _laws wholly of their
own device_, and therefore necessarily distinct from the law of nature,
or the principles of natural justice; and that these laws of their own
making shall be really and truly obligatory upon the people of the
United States; and that, therefore, the people may rightfully be
compelled to obey them.

All this implies that you are of the opinion that the Congress of the
United States, of which you are a member, has, by some process or other,
become possessed of some right _of arbitrary dominion_ over the people
of the United States; which right of arbitrary dominion is not given by,
and is, therefore, necessarily in conflict with, the law of nature, the
principles of natural justice, and the natural rights of men, as
individuals. All this is necessarily implied in the idea that the
Congress now possesses any right whatever to make any laws whatever, _of
its own device_--that is, any laws that shall be either more, less, or
other than that natural law, which it can neither make, unmake, nor
alter--and cause them to be enforced upon the people of the United
States, or any of them, against their will.

You assume that the right of arbitrary dominion--that is, the right of
making laws of their own device, and compelling obedience to them--is a
"trust" that has been delegated to those who now exercise that power.
You call it "the trust of public power."

But, Sir, you are mistaken in supposing that any such power has ever
been delegated, or ever can be delegated, by any body, to any body.

Any such delegation of power is naturally impossible, for these reasons,
viz:

1. No man can delegate, or give to another, any right of arbitrary
dominion over himself; for that would be giving himself away as a slave.
And this no one can do. Any contract to do so is necessarily an absurd
one, and has no validity. To call such a contract a "constitution," or
by any other high-sounding name, does not alter its character as an
absurd and void contract.

2. No man can delegate, or give to another, any right of arbitrary
dominion over a third person; for that would imply a right in the first
person, not only to make the third person his slave, but also a right to
dispose of him as a slave to still other persons. Any contract to do
this is necessarily a criminal one, and therefore invalid. To call such
a contract a "constitution" does not at all lessen its criminality, or
add to its validity.

These facts, that no man can delegate, or give away, his own natural
right to liberty, nor any other man's natural right to liberty, prove
that he can delegate no right of arbitrary dominion whatever--or, what
is the same thing, no legislative power whatever--over himself or
anybody else, to any man, or body of men.

This impossibility of any man's delegating any legislative power
whatever, necessarily results from the fact that the law of nature has
drawn the line, and the only line--and that, too, a line that can never
be effaced nor removed--between each man's own interest and inalienable
rights of person and property, and each and every other man's inherent
and inalienable rights of person and property. It, therefore,
necessarily fixes the unalterable limits, within which every man may
rightfully seek his own happiness, in his own way, free from all
responsibility to, or interference by, his fellow men, or any of them.

All this pretended delegation of legislative power--that is, of a power,
on the part of the legislators, so-called, to make any laws of their own
device, distinct from the law of nature--is therefore an entire
falsehood; a falsehood whose only purpose is to cover and hide a pure
usurpation, by one body of men, of arbitrary dominion over other men.

That this legislative power, or power of arbitrary dominion, is a pure
usurpation, on the part of those who now exercise it, and not a "trust"
delegated to them, is still further proved by the fact that the only
delegation of power, that is even professed or pretended to be made, is
made _secretly_--that is, by _secret ballot_--and not in any open and
authentic manner; and therefore not by any men, or body of men, who make
themselves personally responsible, as principals, for the acts of those
to whom they profess to delegate the power.

All this pretended delegation of power having been made secretly--that
is, only by secret ballot--not a single one of all the legislators,
so-called, who profess to be exercising only a delegated power, has
himself any legal knowledge, or can offer any legal proof, as to who the
particular individuals were who delegated it to him. And having no power
to identify the individuals who professed to delegate the power to him,
he cannot show any legal proof that anybody ever even attempted or
pretended to delegate it to him.

Plainly, a man who exercises any arbitrary dominion over other men and
who claims to be exercising only a delegated power, but cannot show who
his principals are, nor, consequently, prove that he has any principals,
must be presumed, both in law and reason, to have no principals; and
therefore to be exercising no power but his own. And having, of right,
no such power of his own, he is, both in law and reason, a naked
usurper.

Sir, a secret ballot makes a secret government; and a secret government
is a government by conspiracy; in which the people at large can have no
rights. And that is the only government we now have. It is the
government of which you are a voluntary member and supporter, and yet
you claim to be an honest man. If you are an honest man, is not your
honesty that of a thoughtless, ignorant man, who merely drifts with the
current, instead of exercising any judgment of his own?

For still another reason, all legislators, so-called, under the
Constitution of the United States, are exercising simply an arbitrary
and irresponsible dominion of their own; and not any authority that has
been delegated, or pretended to have been delegated, to them. And that
reason is that the Constitution itself (Art. I, Sec. 6) prescribes that:

     "For any speech or debate (or vote) in either house, they (the
     Senators and Representatives) shall not be questioned (held to
     any legal responsibility) in any other place."

This provision makes the legislators constitutionally irresponsible to
anybody; either to those on whom they exercise their power, or to those
who may have, either openly or secretly, attempted or pretended to
delegate power to them. And men who are legally responsible to nobody
for their acts, cannot truly be said to be the agents of any body, or to
be exercising any power but their own; for all real agents are
necessarily responsible both to those _on_ whom they act, and to those
_for_ whom they act.

To say that the people of this country ever have bound, or ever could
bind, themselves by any contract whatever--the Constitution, or any
other--to thus give away all their natural rights of property, liberty,
and life, into the hands of a few men--a mere conclave--and that they
should make it a part of the contract itself that these few men should
be held legally irresponsible for the disposal they should make of those
rights, is an utter absurdity. It is to say that they have bound
themselves, and that they could bind themselves, by an utterly idiotic
and suicidal contract.

If such a contract had ever been made by one private individual to
another, and had been signed, sealed, witnessed, acknowledged, and
delivered, with all possible legal formalities, no decent court on
earth--certainly none in this country--would have regarded it, for a
moment, as conveying any right, or delegating any power, or as having
the slightest legal validity, or obligation.

For all the reasons now given, and for still others that might be given,
the legislative power now exercised by Congress is, in both law and
reason, a purely personal, arbitrary, irresponsible, usurped dominion on
the part of the legislators themselves, and not a power delegated to
them by anybody.

Yet under the pretense that this instrument gives them the right of an
arbitrary and irresponsible dominion over the whole people of the United
States, Congress has now gone on, for ninety years and more, filling
great volumes with laws of their own device, which the people at large
have never read, nor even seen, nor ever will read or see; and of whose
legal meanings it is morally impossible that they should ever know
anything. Congress has never dared to require the people even to read
these laws. Had it done so, the oppression would have been an
intolerable one; and the people, rather than endure it, would have
either rebelled, and overthrown the government, or would have fled the
country. Yet these laws, which Congress has not dared to require the
people even to read, it has compelled them, at the point of the bayonet,
to obey.

And this moral, and legal, and political monstrosity is the kind of
government which Congress claims that the Constitution authorizes it to
impose upon the people.

Sir, can you say that such an arbitrary and irresponsible dominion as
this, over the properties, liberties, and lives of fifty millions of
people--or even over the property, liberty, or life of any one of those
fifty millions--can be justified on any reason whatever? If not, with
what color of truth can you say that you yourself, or anybody else, can
act as a legislator, under the Constitution of the United States, and
yet be an honest man?

To say that the arbitrary and irresponsible dominion, that is exercised
by Congress, has been delegated to it by the Constitution, _and not
solely by the secret ballots of the voters for the time being_, is the
height of absurdity; for what is the Constitution? It is, at best, a
writing that was drawn up more than ninety years ago; was assented to at
the time only by a small number of men; generally those few white male
adults who had prescribed amounts of property; probably not more than
two hundred thousand in all; or one in twenty of the whole population.

Those men have been long since dead. They never had any right of
arbitrary dominion over even their contemporaries; and they never had
any over us. Their wills or wishes have no more rightful authority over
us, than have the wills or wishes of men who lived before the flood.
They never personally signed, sealed, acknowledged, or delivered, or
dared to sign, seal, acknowledge, or deliver, the instrument which they
imposed upon the country as law. They never, in any open and authentic
manner, bound even themselves to obey it, or made themselves personally
responsible for the acts of their so-called agents under it. They had no
natural right to impose it, as law, upon a single human being. The whole
proceeding was a pure usurpation.

In practice, the Constitution has been an utter fraud from the
beginning. Professing to have been "ordained and established" by "_we,
the people of the United States_," it has never been submitted to them,
as individuals, for their voluntary acceptance or rejection. They have
never been asked to sign, seal, acknowledge, or deliver it, as their
free act and deed. They have never signed, sealed, acknowledged, or
delivered it, or promised, or laid themselves under any kind of
obligation, to obey it. Very few of them have ever read, or even seen
it; or ever will read or see it. Of its legal meaning (if it can be said
to have any) they really know nothing; and never did, nor ever will,
know anything.

Why is it, Sir, that such an instrument as the Constitution, for which
nobody has been responsible, and of which few persons have ever known
anything, has been suffered to stand, for the last ninety years, and to
be used for such audacious and criminal purposes? It is solely because
it has been sustained by the same kind of conspiracy as that by which it
was established; that is, by the wealth and the power of those few who
were to profit by the arbitrary dominion it was assumed to give them
over others. While the poor, the weak, and the ignorant, who were to be
cheated, plundered, and enslaved by it, have been told, and some of them
doubtless made to believe, that it is a sacred instrument, designed for
the preservation of their rights.

These cheated, plundered, and enslaved persons have been made to feel,
if not to believe, that the Constitution had such miraculous power, that
it could authorize the majority (or even a plurality) of the male
adults, for the time being--a majority numbering at this time, say, five
millions in all--to exercise, through their agents, secretly appointed,
an arbitrary and irresponsible dominion over the properties, liberties,
and lives of the whole fifty millions; and that these fifty millions
have no rightful alternative but to submit all their rights to this
arbitrary dominion, or suffer such confiscation, imprisonment, or death
as this secretly appointed, irresponsible cabal, of so-called
legislators, should see fit to resort to for the maintenance of its
power.

As might have been expected, and as was, to a large degree, at least,
intended, this Constitution has been used from the beginning by
ambitious, rapacious, and unprincipled men, to enable them to maintain,
at the point of the bayonet, an arbitrary and irresponsible dominion
over those who were too ignorant and too weak to protect themselves
against the conspirators who had thus combined to deceive, plunder, and
enslave them.

Do you really think, Sir, that such a constitution as this can avail to
justify those who, like yourself, are engaged in enforcing it? Is it not
plain, rather, that the members of Congress, as a legislative body,
whether they are conscious of it or not, are, in reality, a mere cabal
of swindlers, usurpers, tyrants and robbers? Is it not plain that they
are stupendous blockheads, if they imagine that they are anything else
than such a cabal? or that their so-called laws impose the least
obligation upon anybody?

If you have never before looked at this matter in this light, I ask you
to do so now. And in the hope to aid you in doing so candidly, and to
some useful purpose, I take the liberty to mail for you a pamphlet
entitled:

     "NATURAL LAW; OR THE SCIENCE OF JUSTICE; a Treatise on Natural
     Law, Natural Justice, Natural Rights, Natural Liberty, and
     Natural Society; Showing That All Legislation Whatsoever Is an
     Absurdity, a Usurpation, and a Crime. Part I."

In this pamphlet, I have endeavored to controvert distinctly the
proposition that, by any possible process whatever, any man, or body of
men, can become possessed of any right of arbitrary dominion over other
men, or other men's property; or, consequently, any right whatever to
make any law whatever, of their own--distinct from the law of
nature--and compel any other men to obey it.

I trust I need not suspect you, as a legislator under the Constitution,
and claiming to be an honest man, of any desire to evade the issue
presented in this pamphlet. If you shall see fit to meet it, I hope you
will excuse me for suggesting that--to avoid verbiage, and everything
indefinite--you give at least a single specimen of a law that either
heretofore has been made, or that you conceive it possible for
legislators to make--that is, some law of their own device--that either
has been, or shall be, really and truly obligatory upon other persons,
and which such other persons have been, or may be, rightfully compelled
to obey.

If you can either find or devise any such law, I trust you will make it
known, that it may be examined, and the question of its obligation be
fairly settled in the popular mind.

But if it should happen that you can neither find such a law in the
existing statute books of the United States, nor, in your own mind,
conceive of such a law as possible under the Constitution, I give you
leave to find it, if that be possible, in the constitution or statute
book of any other people that now exist, or ever have existed, on the
earth.

If, finally, you shall find no such law, anywhere, nor be able to
conceive of any such law yourself, I take the liberty to suggest that it
is your imperative duty to submit the question to your associate
legislators; and, if they can give no light on the subject, that you
call upon them to burn all the existing statute books of the United
States, and then to go home and content themselves with the exercise of
only such rights and powers as nature has given to them in common with
the rest of mankind.





End of Project Gutenberg's A Letter to Thomas F. Bayard, by Lysander Spooner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LETTER TO THOMAS F. BAYARD ***

***** This file should be named 36161.txt or 36161.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/1/6/36161/

Produced by Katie Hernandez, Susan Goble, Curtis Weyant
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
