The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Dog Trusty; The Orange Man; and
the Cherry Orchard; Being the Tenth Part of Early Lessons (1801), by Maria  Edgeworth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Little Dog Trusty; The Orange Man; and the Cherry Orchard; Being the Tenth Part of Early Lessons (1801)

Author: Maria  Edgeworth

Release Date: May 21, 2011 [EBook #36178]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE DOG TRUSTY; THE ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Joseph Cooper, David E. Brown,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









  EARLY LESSONS.

  PART X.

  PRICE SIX-PENCE.




  THE
  LITTLE DOG TRUSTY;

  THE
  ORANGE MAN;

  AND THE
  CHERRY ORCHARD:

  BEING THE TENTH PART OF
  EARLY LESSONS.

  BY THE AUTHOR OF THE PARENT'S
  ASSISTANT, SIX VOLUMES.

  _LONDON:_
  PRINTED FOR J. JOHNSON,
  NO. 72, ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD,
  _By H. Bryer, Bridewell-Hospital, Bridge-Street._

  1801.




THE
LITTLE DOG TRUSTY;

OR,

THE LIAR AND THE BOY OF TRUTH.


Very, very little children must not read this story; for they cannot
understand it: they will not know what is meant by a liar and a boy of
truth.

Very little children, when they are asked a question, say "yes," and
"no," without knowing the meaning of the words; but you, children, who
can speak quite plain, and who can tell, by words, what you wish for,
and what you want, and what you have seen, and what you have done; you
who understand what is meant by the words "I have done it," or "I have
not," you may read this story; for--you can understand it.

Frank and Robert were two little boys, about eight years old.

Whenever Frank did any thing wrong, he always told his father and mother
of it; and when any body asked him about any thing which he had done or
said, he always told the truth; so that every body who knew him,
believed him: but nobody who knew his brother Robert, believed a word
which he said, because he used to tell lies.

Whenever he did any thing wrong, he never ran to his father and mother
to tell them of it; but when they asked him about it, he denied it, and
said he had not done the things which he had done.

The reason that Robert told lies was, because he was afraid of being
punished for his faults, if he confessed them. He was a coward, and
could not bear the least pain; but Frank was a brave boy, and could bear
to be punished for little faults: his mother never punished him so much
for such little faults, as she did Robert for the lies which he told,
and which she found out afterward.

One evening, these two little boys were playing together, in a room by
themselves; their mother was ironing in a room next to them, and their
father was out at work in the fields, so there was nobody in the room
with Robert and Frank; but there was a little dog, Trusty, lying by the
fire-side.

Trusty was a pretty playful little dog, and the children were very fond
of him.

"Come," said Robert to Frank, "there is Trusty lying beside the fire
asleep; let us go and waken him, and he will play with us."

"O yes, do, let us," said Frank. So they both ran together, towards the
hearth, to waken the dog.

Now there was a basin of milk standing upon the hearth; and the little
boys did not see where-abouts it stood; for it was behind them: as they
were both playing with the dog, they kicked it with their feet, and
threw it down; and the basin broke, and all the milk ran out of it over
the hearth, and about the floor; and when the little boys saw what they
had done, they were very sorry, and frightened; but they did not know
what to do: they stood for some time, looking at the broken basin and
the milk, without speaking.

Robert spoke first.

"So, we shall have no milk for supper to-night," said he; and he
sighed----

"No milk for supper!----why not?" said Frank; "is there no more milk in
the house?"

"Yes, but we shall have none of it; for, do not you remember, last
Monday, when we threw down the milk, my mother said we were very
careless, and that the next time we did so, we should have no more; and
this is the next time; so we shall have no milk for supper to-night."

"Well, then," said Frank, "we must do without it, that's all: we will
take more care another time; there's no great harm done; come, let us
run and tell my mother. You know she bid us always tell her directly
when we broke any thing; so come," said he, taking hold of his brother's
hand.

"I will come, just now," said Robert; "don't be in such a hurry,
Frank--Can't you stay a minute?" So Frank staid; and then he said, "Come
now, Robert." But Robert answered, "Stay a little longer; for I dare not
go yet--I am afraid."

Little boys, I advise you, never be afraid to tell the truth; never say,
"_Stay a minute_," and, "_Stay a little longer_," but run directly, and
tell of what you have done that is wrong. The longer you stay, the more
afraid you will grow, till at last, perhaps, you will not dare to tell
the truth at all.--Hear what happened to Robert.

The longer he staid, the more unwilling he was to go to tell his mother
that he had thrown the milk down; and at last he pulled his hand away
from his brother, and cried, "I won't go at all; Frank, can't you go by
yourself?"

"Yes," said Frank, "so I will; I am not afraid to go by myself: I only
waited for you out of good-nature, because I thought you would like to
tell the truth too."

"Yes, so I will; I mean to tell the truth when I am asked; but I need
not go now, when I do not choose it:--and why need you go either?--Can't
you wait here?--Surely my mother can see the milk when she comes in."

Frank said no more; but, as his brother would not come, he went without
him. He opened the door of the next room, where he thought his mother
was ironing; but when he went in, he saw that she was gone; and he
thought she was gone to fetch some more clothes to iron. The clothes, he
knew, were hanging on the bushes in the garden; so he thought his mother
was gone there; and he ran after her, to tell what had happened.

Now whilst Frank was gone, Robert was left in the room by himself; and
all the while he was alone, he was thinking of some excuses to make to
his mother; and he was sorry that Frank was gone to tell her the truth.
He said to himself, "If Frank and I both were to say, that we did not
throw down the basin, she would believe us, and we should have milk for
supper. I am very sorry Frank would go to tell her about it."

Just as he said this to himself, he heard his mother coming down
stairs--"Oh ho!" said he to himself, "then my mother has not been out in
the garden, and so Frank has not met her, and cannot have told her; so
now I may say what I please."

Then this naughty, cowardly boy, determined to tell his mother a lie.

She came into the room; but when she saw the broken basin, and the milk
spilled, she stopped short, and cried; "So, so!--What a piece of work is
here!--Who did this, Robert?"

"I don't know, ma'am," said Robert, in a very low voice.

"You don't know, Robert!--tell me the truth--I shall not be angry with
you, child--You will only lose the milk at supper; and as for the basin,
I would rather have you break all the basins I have, than tell me one
lie.--So don't tell me a lie.--I ask you, Robert, did you break the
basin?"

"_No, ma'am_, I did not," said Robert; and he coloured as red as fire.

"Then, where's Frank?--did he do it?"

"No mother, he did not," said Robert; for he was in hopes, that when
Frank came in, he should persuade him to say that he did not do it.

"How do you know," said his mother, "that Frank did not do it?"

"Because--because--because, ma'am," said Robert, hesitating, as liars do
for an excuse--"because I was in the room all the time, and I did not
see him do it."

"Then how was the basin thrown down? If you have been in the room all
the time, you can tell."

Then Robert, going on from one lie to another, answered,

"I suppose the dog must have done it."--

"Did you see him do it?" says his mother.

"Yes," said this wicked boy.

"Trusty, Trusty," said his mother, turning round; and Trusty, who was
lying before the fire, drying his legs, which were wet with the milk,
jumped up, and came to her. Then she said, "Fie! fie! Trusty!" and she
pointed to the milk.--"Get me a switch out of the garden, Robert;
Trusty must be beat for this."

Robert ran for the switch, and in the garden he met his brother: he
stopped him, and told him, in a great hurry, all that he had said to his
mother; and he begged of him not to tell the truth, but to say the same
as he had done.

"No, I will not tell a lie," said Frank.--"What! and is Trusty to be
beat!--He did not throw down the milk, and he shan't be beat for
it--Let me go to my mother."

They both ran toward the house--Robert got first home, and he locked the
house-door, that Frank might not come in. He gave the switch to his
mother.

Poor Trusty! he looked up as the switch was lifted over his head; but
_he_ could not speak, to tell the truth. Just as the blow was falling
upon him, Frank's voice was heard at the window.

"Stop, stop! dear mother, stop!" cried he, as loud as ever he could
call; "Trusty did not do it--let me in--I and Robert did it--but do not
beat Robert."

"Let us in, let us in," cried another voice, which Robert knew to be his
father's; "I am just come from work, and here's the door locked."

Robert turned as pale as ashes when he heard his father's voice; for
his father always whipped him when he told a lie.

His mother went to the door, and unlocked it.

"What's all this?" cried his father, as he came in; so his mother told
him all that had happened;--how the milk had been thrown down; how she
had asked Robert whether he had done it; and he said that he had not,
nor that Frank had not done it, but that Trusty, the dog, had done it;
how she was just going to beat Trusty, when Frank came to the window and
told the truth.

"Where is the switch with which you were going to beat Trusty?" said the
father.

Then Robert, who saw, by his father's look, that he was going to beat
him, fell upon his knees, and cried for mercy, saying, "Forgive me this
time, and I will never tell a lie again."

But his father caught hold of him by the arm--"I will whip you now,"
said he, "and then, I hope, you will not." So Robert was whipped, till
he cried so loud with the pain, that the whole neighbourhood could hear
him.

"There," said his father, when he had done, "now go to supper; you are
to have no milk to-night, and you have been whipped. See how liars are
served!" Then, turning to Frank, "Come here, and shake hands with me,
Frank; you will have no milk for supper; but that does not signify; you
have told the truth, and have not been whipped, and every body is
pleased with you. And now I'll tell you what I will do for you--I will
give you the little dog Trusty, to be your own dog. You shall feed him,
and take care of him, and he shall be your dog; you have saved him a
beating; and, I'll answer for it, you'll be a good master to him.
Trusty, Trusty, come here."

Trusty came; then Frank's father took off Trusty's collar--"To-morrow
I'll go to the brazier's," added he, "and get a new collar made for your
dog: from this day forward he shall always be called after you,
_Frank_!----And, wife, whenever any of the neighbours' children ask you
why the dog _Trusty_ is to be called _Frank_, tell them this story of
our two boys: let them know the difference between a liar and a boy of
truth."




THE
ORANGE MAN;

OR,

THE HONEST BOY AND THE THIEF.


Charles was the name of the honest boy; and Ned was the name of the
thief.

Charles never touched what was not his own: _this_ is being an honest
boy.

Ned often took what was not his own: this is being a thief.

Charles's father and mother, when he was a very little boy, had taught
him to be honest, by always punishing him when he meddled with what was
not his own: but when Ned took what was not his own, his father and
mother did not punish him; so he grew up to be a thief.

Early one summer's morning, as Charles was going along the road to
school, he met a man leading a horse, which was laden with panniers.

The man stopped at the door of a public-house which was by the road
side; and he said to the landlord, who came to the door, "I won't have
my horse unloaded; I shall only stop with you whilst I eat my
breakfast.--Give my horse to some one to hold here on the road, and let
the horse have a little hay to eat."

The landlord called; but there was no one in the way; so he beckoned to
Charles, who was going by, and begged him to hold the horse.

"Oh," said the man, "but can you engage him to be an honest boy? for
these are oranges in my baskets; and it is not every little boy one can
leave with oranges."

"Yes," said the landlord, "I have known Charles from the cradle upwards,
and I never caught him in a lie or a theft; all the parish knows him to
be an honest boy; I'll engage your oranges will be as safe with him as
if you were by yourself."

"Can you so?" said the orange man; "then I'll engage, my lad, to give
you the finest orange in my basket, when I come from breakfast, if
you'll watch the rest whilst I am away."--

"Yes," said Charles, "I _will_ take care of your oranges."

So the man put the bridle into his hand, and he went into the house to
eat his breakfast.

Charles had watched the horse and the oranges about five minutes, when
he saw one of his school-fellows coming towards him. As he came nearer,
Charles saw that it was Ned.

Ned stopped as he passed, and said, "Good-morrow to you, Charles; what
are you doing there? whose horse is that? and what have you got in the
baskets?"

"There are oranges in the baskets," said Charles; "and a man, who has
just gone into the inn, here, to eat his breakfast, bid me take care of
them, and so I did; because he said he would give me an orange when he
came back again."

"An orange!" cried Ned; "are you to have a whole orange?--I wish I was
to have one! However, let me look how large they are." Saying this, Ned
went towards the pannier, and lifted up the cloth that covered it. "La!
what fine oranges!" he exclaimed, the moment he saw them: "Let me touch
them, to feel if they are ripe."

"No," said Charles, "you had better not; what signifies it to you
whether they are ripe, you know, since you are not to eat them. You
should not meddle with them; they are not yours--You must not touch
them."

"Not touch them! surely," said Ned, "there's no harm in _touching_ them.
You don't think I mean to steal them, I suppose." So Ned put his hand
into the orange-man's basket, and he took up an orange, and he felt it;
and when he had felt it, he smelled it. "It smells very sweet," said he,
"and it feels very ripe; I long to taste it; I will only just suck one
drop of juice at the top." Saying these words, he put the orange to his
mouth.

Little boys, who wish to be honest, beware of temptation; do not depend
too much upon yourselves; and remember, that it is easier to resolve to
do right at first, than at last. People are led on, by little and
little, to do wrong.

The _sight_ of the oranges tempted Ned to _touch_ them; the touch
tempted him to _smell_ them; and the smell tempted him to _taste_ them.

"What are you about, Ned?" cried Charles, taking hold of his arm. "You
said, you only wanted to smell the orange; do, put it down, for shame!"

"Don't say _for shame_ to me," cried Ned, in a surly tone; "the oranges
are not yours, Charles!"

"No, they are not mine; but I promised to take care of them, and so I
will:--so put down that orange!"

"Oh, if it comes to that, I won't," said Ned, "and let us see who can
make me, if I don't choose it;--I'm stronger than you."

"I am not afraid of you for all that," replied Charles, "for I am in
the right." Then he snatched the orange out of Ned's hand, and he pushed
him with all his force from the basket.

Ned, immediately returning, hit him a violent blow, which almost stunned
him.

Still, however, this good boy, without minding the pain, persevered in
defending what was left in his care; he still held the bridle with one
hand, and covered the basket with his other arm, as well as he could.

Ned struggled in vain, to get his hands into the pannier again; he could
not; and, finding that he could not win by strength, he had recourse to
cunning. So he pretended to be out of breath and to desist; but he
meant, as soon as Charles looked away, to creep softly round to the
basket, on the other side.

Cunning people, though they think themselves very wise, are almost
always very silly.

Ned, intent upon one thing, the getting round to steal the oranges,
forgot that if he went too close to the horse's heels, he should startle
him. The horse indeed, disturbed by the bustle near him, had already
left off eating his hay, and began to put down his ears; but when he
felt something touch his hind legs, he gave a sudden kick, and Ned fell
backwards, just as he had seized the orange.

Ned screamed with the pain; and at the scream all the people came out
of the public house to see what was the matter; and amongst them came
the orange-man.

Ned was now so much ashamed, that he almost forgot the pain, and wished
to run away; but he was so much hurt, that he was obliged to sit down
again.

The truth of the matter was soon told by Charles, and as soon believed
by all the people present who knew him: for he had the character of
being an honest boy; and Ned was known to be a thief and a liar.

So nobody pitied Ned for the pain he felt. "He deserves it," says one.
"Why did he meddle with what was not his own?"--"Pugh! he is not much
hurt, I'll answer for it," said another. "And if he was, it's a lucky
kick for him, if it keeps him from the gallows," says a third. Charles
was the only person who said nothing; he helped Ned away to a bank: for
brave boys are always good-natured.

"Oh, come here," said the orange-man, calling him; "come here, my honest
lad! what! you got that black eye in keeping my oranges, did
you?--that's a stout little fellow," said he, taking him by the hand,
and leading him into the midst of the people.

Men, women, and children, had gathered around, and all the children
fixed their eyes upon Charles, and wished to be in his place.

In the mean time, the orange-man took Charles's hat off his head, and
filled it with fine China oranges. "There, my little friend," said he,
"take them, and God bless you with them! If I could but afford it, you
should have all that is in my basket."

Then the people, and especially the children, shouted for joy; but as
soon as there was silence, Charles said to the orange-man, "Thank'e,
master, with all my heart; but I can't take your oranges, only that one
I earned; take the rest back again: as for a black eye, that's nothing!
but I won't be paid for it; no more than for doing what's honest. So I
can't take your oranges, master; but I thank you as much as if I had
them." Saying these words, Charles offered to pour the oranges back
into the basket; but the man would not let him.

"Then," said Charles, "if they are honestly mine, I may give them away;"
so he emptied the hat amongst the children, his companions. "Divide them
amongst you," said he; and without waiting for their thanks, he pressed
through the crowd, and ran towards home. The children all followed him,
clapping their hands, and thanking him.

The little thief came limping after. Nobody praised him, nobody thanked
him; he had no oranges to eat, nor had he any to give away. _People must
be honest, before they can be generous._ Ned sighed as he went towards
home; "And all this," said he to himself, "was for one orange; it was
not worth while."

No: it is never worth while to do wrong.

Little boys who read this story, consider which would you rather have
been, _the honest boy_, or _the thief_.




THE CHERRY ORCHARD.


Marianne was a little girl of about eight years old; she was remarkably
good-tempered; she could bear to be disappointed, or to be contradicted,
or to be blamed, without looking or feeling peevish, or sullen, or
angry.--Her parents, and her school-mistress and companions, all loved
her, because she was obedient and obliging.

Marianne had a cousin, a year younger than herself, named Owen, who was
an ill-tempered boy; almost every day he was crying, or pouting, or in a
passion, about some trifle or other; he was neither obedient nor
obliging.--His playfellows could not love him; for he was continually
quarrelling with them; he would never, either when he was at play or at
work, do what they wished; but he always tried to force them to yield to
his will and his humour.

One fine summer's evening, Marianne and Owen were setting out, with
several of their little companions, to school. It was a walk of about a
mile from the town in which their fathers and mothers lived to the
school-house, if they went by the high-road; but there was another way,
through a lane, which was a quarter of a mile shorter.

Marianne, and most of the children, liked to go by the lane, because
they could gather the pretty flowers which grew on the banks, and in the
hedges; but Owen preferred going by the high-road, because he liked to
see the carts and carriages, and horsemen, which usually were seen upon
this road.

Just when they were setting out, Owen called to Marianne, who was
turning into the lane.

"Marianne," said he, "you _must_ not go by the lane to-day; you must go
by the road."

"Why must not I go by the lane to-day?" said Marianne; "you know,
yesterday, and the day before, and the day before that, we all went by
the high-road, only to please you; and now let us go by the lane,
because we want to gather some honey-suckles and dog-roses, to fill our
dame's flower-pots."

"I don't care for that; I don't want to fill our dame's flower-pots; I
don't want to gather honey-suckles and dog-roses; I want to see the
coaches and chaises on the road; and you _must_ go my way, Marianne."

"_Must!_ Oh, you should not say _must_," replied Marianne, in a gentle
tone.

"No, indeed!" cried one of her companions, "you should not; nor should
you look so cross: that is not the way to make us do what you like."

"And, besides," said another, "what right has he always to make us do as
he pleases?--He never will do any thing that we wish."

Owen grew quite angry when he heard this; and he was just going to make
some sharp answer, when Marianne, who was good-natured, and always
endeavoured to prevent quarrels, said, "Let us do what he asks, this
once; and I dare say he will do what we please the next time--We will go
by the high-road to school, and we can come back by the lane, in the
cool of the evening."

To please Marianne, whom they all loved, they agreed to this proposal.
They went by the high-road; but Owen was not satisfied, because he saw
that his companions did not comply for his sake; and as he walked on,
he began to kick up the dust with his feet, saying, "I'm sure it is much
pleasanter here than in the lane; I wish we were to come back this
way--I'm sure it is much pleasanter here than in the lane: is not it,
Marianne?"

Marianne could not say that she thought so.

Owen kicked up the dust more and more.

"Do not make such a dust, dear Owen," said she; "look how you have
covered my shoes and my clean stockings with dust."

"Then, say, it is pleasanter here than in the lane. I shall go on,
making this dust, till you say that."

"I cannot say that, because I do not think so, Owen."

"I'll make you think so, and say so too."

"You are not taking the right way to make me think so: you know that I
cannot think this dust agreeable."

Owen persisted; and he raised continually a fresh cloud of dust, in
spite of all that Marianne or his companions could say to him.--They
left him, and went to the opposite side of the road; but wherever they
went, he pursued--At length they came to a turnpike-gate, on one side of
which there was a turn-stile; Marianne and the rest of the children
passed, one by one, through the turn-stile, whilst Owen was emptying his
shoes of dust. When this was done, he looked up, and saw all his
companions on the other side of the gate, holding the turn-stile, to
prevent him from coming through.

"Let me through, let me through," cried he, "I must and will come
through."

"No, no, Owen," said they, "_must_ will not do now; we have you safe;
here are ten of us; and we will not let you come through till you have
promised that you will not make any more dust."

Owen, without making any answer, began to kick, and push, and pull, and
struggle, with all his might; but in vain he struggled, pulled, pushed
and kicked; he found that ten people are stronger than one.--When he
felt that he could not conquer them by force, he began to cry; and he
roared as loud as he possibly could.

No one but the turnpike-man was within hearing; and he stood laughing at
Owen.

Owen tried to climb the gate; but he could not get over it, because
there were iron spikes at the top.

"Only promise that you will not kick up the dust, and they will let you
through," said Marianne.

Owen made no answer, but continued to struggle till his whole face was
scarlet, and till both his wrists ached: he could not move the
turn-stile an inch.

"Well," said he, stopping short, "now you are all of you joined
together; you are stronger than I; but I am as cunning as you."

He left the stile, and began to walk homewards.

"Where are you going? You will be too late at school, if you turn back
and go by the lane," said Marianne.

"I know that, very well; but that will be your fault, and not mine--I
shall tell our dame, that you all of you held the turn-stile against
me, and would not let me through."

"And we shall tell our dame why we held the turn-stile against you,"
replied one of the children; "and then it will be plain that it was your
fault."

Perhaps Owen did not hear this; for he was now at some distance from the
gate. Presently he heard some one running after him--It was Marianne.

"Oh, I am so much out of breath with running after you!--I can hardly
speak!--But I am come back," said this good-natured girl, "to tell you
that you will be sorry if you do not come with us; for there is
something that you like very much, just at the turn of the road, a
little beyond the turnpike-gate."

"Something that I like very much!--What can that be?"

"Come with _me_, and you shall _see_," said Marianne; "that is both
rhyme and reason--Come with _me_, and you shall _see_."

She looked so good-humoured, as she smiled and nodded at him, that he
could not be sullen any longer.

"I don't know how it is, cousin Marianne," said he; "but when I am
cross, you are never cross; and you can always bring me back to
good-humour again, you are so good-humoured yourself--I wish I was like
you--But we need not talk any more of that now--What is it that I shall
see on the other side of the turnpike-gate?--What is it that I like very
much?"

"Don't you like ripe cherries very much?"

"Yes; but they do not grow in these hedges."

"No; but there is an old woman sitting by the road-side, with a board
before her, which is covered with red ripe cherries."

"Red ripe cherries! Let us make haste then," cried Owen. He ran on, as
fast as he could; but as soon as the children saw him running, they also
began to run back to the turn-stile; and they reached it before he did;
and they held it fast as before, saying, "Promise you will not kick up
the dust, or we will not let you through."

"The cherries are very ripe," said Marianne.

"Well, well, I will not kick up the dust--Let me through," said Owen.

They did so, and he kept his word; for though he was ill-humoured, he
was a boy of truth; and he always kept his promises--He found the
cherries looked red and ripe, as Marianne had described them.

The old woman took up a long stick, which lay on the board before her.
Bunches of cherries were tied with white thread to this stick; and as
she shook it in the air, over the heads of the children, they all
looked up with longing eyes.

"A halfpenny a bunch!--Who will buy? Who will buy? Who will buy?--Nice
ripe cherries!" cried the old woman.

The children held out their halfpence; and "Give me a bunch," and "give
me a bunch!" was heard on all sides.

"Here are eleven of you," said the old woman, "and there are just
eleven bunches on this stick." She put the stick into Marianne's hand,
as she spoke.

Marianne began to untie the bunches; and her companions pressed closer
and closer to her, each eager to have the particular bunches which they
thought the largest and the ripest.

Several fixed upon the uppermost, which looked indeed extremely ripe.

"You cannot all have this bunch," said Marianne; "to which of you must
I give it? You all wish for it."

"Give it to me, give it to _me_," was the first cry of each; but the
second was, "Keep it yourself, Marianne; keep it yourself."

"Now, Owen, see what it is to be good-natured, and good-humoured, like
Marianne," said Cymon, the eldest of the boys, who stood near him--"We
all are ready to give up the ripest cherries to Marianne; but we should
never think of doing so for you, because you are so cross and
disagreeable."

"I am not cross _now_; I am not disagreeable _now_," replied Owen; "and
I do not intend to be cross and disagreeable any more."

This was a good resolution; but Owen did not keep it many minutes.--In
the bunch of cherries which Marianne gave to him for his share, there
was one which, though red on one side, was entirely white and hard on
the other.

"This cherry is not ripe; and here's another that has been half eaten
away by the birds.--Oh, Marianne, you gave me this bad bunch on
purpose--I will not have this bunch."

"Somebody must have it," said Cymon; "and I do not see that it is worse
than the others; we shall all have some cherries that are not so good as
the rest; but we shall not grumble and look so cross about it as you
do."

"Give me your bad cherries, and I will give you two out of my fine
bunch, instead of them," said the good-natured Marianne.

"No, no, no!" cried the children; "Marianne, keep your own cherries."

"Are not you ashamed, Owen?" said Cymon--"How can you be so greedy?"

"Greedy!--I am not greedy," cried Owen, angrily; "but I will not have
the worst cherries; I will have another bunch."

He tried to snatch another bunch from the stick.--Cymon held it above
his head.--Owen leaped up, reached it, and when his companions closed
round him, exclaiming against his violence, he grew still more angry; he
threw the stick down upon the ground, and trampled upon every bunch of
the cherries in his fury, scarcely knowing what he did, or what he
said.

When his companions saw the ground stained with the red juice of their
cherries, which he had trampled under his feet, they were both sorry and
angry.

The children had not any more halfpence; they could not buy any more
cherries; and the old woman said that she could not _give_ them any.

As they went away sorrowfully, they said, "Owen is so ill-tempered, that
we will not play with him, or speak to him, or have any thing to do
with him."

Owen thought that he could make himself happy without his companions;
and he told them so.--But he soon found that he was mistaken.

When they arrived at the school-house, their dame was sitting in the
thatched porch before her own door, reading a paper that was printed in
large letters--"My dears," said she to her little scholars, "here is
something that you will be glad to see; but say your lessons first--One
thing at a time--Duty first, and pleasure afterwards----Which ever of
you says your lesson best, shall know first what is in this paper, and
shall have the pleasure of telling the good news."

Owen always learned his lessons very well, and quickly: he now said his
lesson better than any of his companions said theirs; and he looked
round him with joy and triumph; but no eye met his with pleasure; nobody
smiled upon him, no one was glad that he had succeeded: on the contrary,
he heard those near him whisper, "I should have been very glad if it had
been Marianne who had said her lesson, because she is so good-natured."

The printed paper, which Owen read aloud, was as follows:

"On Thursday evening next, the gate of the cherry-orchard will be
opened; and all who have tickets will be let in, from six o'clock till
eight.--Price of tickets, six-pence."

The children wished extremely to go to this cherry orchard, where they
knew that they might gather as many cherries as they liked, and where
they thought that they should be very happy, sitting down under the
trees, and eating fruit--But none of these children had any money; for
they had spent their last halfpence in paying for those cherries which
they never tasted--those cherries which Owen, in the fury of his
passion, trampled in the dust.

The children asked their dame what they could do to earn six-pence a
piece; and she told them, that they might perhaps be able to earn this
money by plaiting straw for hats, which they had all been taught to
make by their good dame.

Immediately the children desired to set to work.

Owen, who was very eager to go to the cherry orchard, was the most
anxious to get forward with the business: he found, however, that nobody
liked to work along with him; his companions said, "We are afraid that
you should quarrel with us--We are afraid that you should fly into a
passion about the straws, as you did about the cherries; therefore we
will not work with you."

"Will not you? then I will work by myself," said Owen; "and I dare say
that I shall have done my work long before you have any of you finished
yours; for I can plait quicker and better than any of you."

It was true that Owen could plait quicker and better than any of his
companions; but he was soon surprised to find that his work did not go
on so fast as theirs.

After they had been employed all the remainder of this evening, and all
the next day, Owen went to his companions, and compared his work with
theirs.

"How is this?" said he; "how comes it, that you have all done so much,
and I have not done nearly so much, though I work quicker than any one
of you, and I have worked as hard as I possibly could?--What is the
reason that you have done so much more than I have?"

"Because we have all been helping one another, and you have had no one
to help you: you have been obliged to do every thing for yourself."

"But still, I do not understand how your helping one another can make
such a difference," said Owen: "I plait faster than any of you."

His companions were so busy at their work, that they did not listen to
what he was saying--He stood behind Marianne, in a melancholy posture,
looking at them, and trying to find out why they went on so much faster
than he could--He observed that one picked the outside off the straws;
another cut them to the proper length; another sorted them, and laid
them in bundles; another flattened them; another (the youngest of the
little girls, who was not able to do any thing else) held the straws
ready for those who were plaiting; another cut off the rough ends of
the straws when the plaits were finished; another ironed the plaits with
a hot smoothing-iron; others sewed the plaits together. Each did what he
could do best, and quickest; and none of them lost any time in going
from one work to another, or in looking for what they wanted.

On the contrary, Owen had lost a great deal of time in looking for all
the things that he wanted; he had nobody to hold the straws ready for
him as he plaited; therefore he was forced to go for them himself, every
time he wanted them; and his straws were not sorted in nice bundles for
him; the wind blew them about; and he wasted half an hour, at least, in
running after them. Besides this, he had no friend to cut off the rough
ends for him; nor had he any one to sew the plaits together; and though
he could plait quickly, he could not sew quickly; for he was not used
to this kind of work. He wished extremely for Marianne to do it for him.
He was once a full quarter of an hour in threading his needle, of which
the eye was too small--Then he spent another quarter of an hour in
looking for one with a larger eye; and he could not find it at last, and
nobody would lend him another--When he had done sewing, he found that
_his hand was out for plaiting_; that is, he could not plait so quickly
after his fingers had just been used to another kind of work; and when
he had been smoothing the straws with a heavy iron, his hand trembled
afterwards for some minutes, during which time he was forced to be idle;
thus it was that he lost time by doing every thing for himself; and
though he lost but few minutes or seconds in each particular, yet, when
all these minutes and seconds were added together, they made a great
difference.

"How fast, how very fast, they go on! and how merrily!" said Owen; as he
looked at his former companions--"I am sure I shall never earn sixpence
for myself before Thursday; and I shall not be able to go to the
cherry-orchard--I am very sorry that I trampled on your cherries; I am
very sorry that I was so ill-humoured--I will never be cross any more."

"He is very sorry, that he was so ill-humoured; he is very sorry that he
trampled on our cherries," cried Marianne; "do you hear what he says; he
will never be cross any more."

"Yes, we hear what he says," answered Cymon; "but how can we be sure
that he will do as he says."

"Oh," cried another of his companions, "he has found out at last that
he must do as he would be done by."

"Aye," said another; "and he finds that we who are good-humoured and
good-natured to one another, do better even than he who is so quick and
so clever."

"But if, besides being so quick and so clever, he was good-humoured and
good-natured," said Marianne, "he would be of great use to us; he plaits
a vast deal faster than Mary does, and Mary plaits faster than any of
us--Come, let us try him, let him come in amongst us."

"No, No, No," cried many voices; "he will quarrel with us; and we have
no time for quarrelling--We are all so quiet and happy without him!--Let
him work by himself, as he said he would."

Owen went on, working by himself; he made all the haste that he
possibly could; but Thursday came, and his work was not nearly
finished--His companions passed by him with their finished work in their
hands--Each, as they passed, said, "What, have not you done yet, Owen?"
and then they walked on to the table where their Dame was sitting ready
to pay them their sixpences.

She measured their work, and examined it; and when she saw that it was
well done, she gave to each of her little workmen and workwomen the
sixpence which they had earned, and she said, "I hope, my dears, that
you will be happy this evening."

They all looked joyful; and as they held their sixpences in their hands
they said, "If we had not helped one another, we should not have earned
this money; and we should not be able to go to the cherry-orchard."

"Poor Owen!" whispered Marianne to her companions, "look how melancholy
he is, sitting there alone at his work!--See! his hands tremble, so that
he can scarcely hold the straws; he will not have nearly finished his
work in time, he cannot go with us."

"He should not have trampled upon our cherries; and then perhaps we
might have helped him," said Cymon.

"Let us help him, though he did trample on our cherries," said the
good-natured Marianne,--"He is sorry for what he did, and he will never
be so ill-humoured or ill-natured again--Come, let us go and help
him--If we all help, we shall have his work finished in time, and then
we shall all be happy together."

As Marianne spoke, she drew Cymon near to the corner where Owen was
sitting; and all her companions followed.

"Before we offer to help him, let us try whether he is now inclined to
be good-humoured, and good-natured."

"Yes, yes, let us try that first," said his companions.

"Owen, you will not have done time enough to go with us,"--said Cymon.

"No, indeed," said Owen, "I shall not; therefore I may as well give up
all thoughts of it--It is my own fault, I know."

"Well, but as you cannot go yourself, you will not want your pretty
little basket; will you lend it to us to hold our cherries?"

"Yes, I will with pleasure," cried Owen, jumping up to fetch it:

"Now he is good-natured, I am sure," said Marianne.

"This plaiting of yours is not nearly so well done as ours," said
Cymon, "look how uneven it is."

"Yes, it is rather uneven, indeed," replied Owen.

Cymon began to untwist some of Owen's work; and Owen bore this trial of
his patience with good temper.

"Oh, you are pulling it all to pieces, Cymon," said Marianne; "this is
not fair."

"Yes, it is fair," said Cymon; "for I have undone only an inch; and I
will do as many inches for Owen as he pleases, now that I see he is
good-humoured."

Marianne immediately sat down to work for Owen; and Cymon and all his
companions followed her example--It was now two hours before the time
when the cherry-orchard was to be opened; and during these two hours,
they went on so expeditiously, that they completed the work.

Owen went with them to the cherry-orchard, where they spent the evening
all together very happily--As he was sitting under a tree with his
companions eating the ripe cherries, he said to them,--"Thank you all,
for helping me; I should not have been here now eating these ripe
cherries, if you had not been so good-natured to me--I hope I shall
never be cross to any of you again, whenever I feel inclined to be
cross, I will think of your good-nature to me, and of THE
CHERRY-ORCHARD."




_Printed by H. Bryer, Bridewell-Hospital, Bridge-Street._




Transcriber's Notes:


  Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected as follows:

    Page  36: "your's" changed to "yours"
    Page  39: "your's" changed to "yours"
    Page  61: "childen" changed to "children"
    Page  96: "good natured" changed to "good-natured"
    Page 103: "your's" changed to "yours" and "in" changed to "is"

  Punctuation has been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Dog Trusty; The Orange Man;
and the Cherry Orchard; Being the Tenth Part of Early Lessons (1801), by Maria  Edgeworth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE DOG TRUSTY; THE ***

***** This file should be named 36178.txt or 36178.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/1/7/36178/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Joseph Cooper, David E. Brown,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
