Project Gutenberg's Dr. Hardhack's Prescription, by Katharine McDowell Rice

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Dr. Hardhack's Prescription
       A Play for Children in Four Acts

Author: Katharine McDowell Rice

Release Date: May 22, 2011 [EBook #36195]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DR. HARDHACK'S PRESCRIPTION ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, Erica Pfister-Altschul, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)









_Dr. Hardhack's Prescription_

_A Play for Children
in Four Acts ..._

BY

_K. McDOWELL RICE_


"=Dr. Hardhack's Prescription.=" Typewritten suggestions for amateurs
will be loaned on receipt of above price (six cents).


Terms for the plays are as follows:--When used to make money for any
object, the royalty is one-tenth of whatever the play brings in (sale of
tickets, entrance money, gifts at door, etc.), before any expenses are
deducted.

When no admission is charged and no money made by the play, the royalty
(each representation) is from $5.00 up according to length of play and
character of your entertainment.

Should you decide to produce any of the plays, kindly notify me at once,
that no conflicting permissions may be issued. Send name of church,
hall, school or private house where play will be given, also approximate
date of performance. If play is later postponed or abandoned, please
send such information promptly, that all may be properly entered on
permission books.

                                            KATHARINE McDOWELL RICE,
                                      AUTHOR AND PUBLISHER OF PLAYS,
                                                  WORTHINGTON, MASS.


_BY KATHARINE MCDOWELL RICE, WORTHINGTON, MASS._

DR. HARDHACK'S PRESCRIPTION

A PLAY FOR CHILDREN IN FOUR SHORT ACTS

A Dramatization of the story, "Little Pussy Willow," by Harriet Beecher
Stowe

    GRANDMA PROUDIE
    MAMMA PROUDIE
    EMILY PROUDIE
    AUNT FLIGHTY
    AUNT HIGHTY-TIGHTY
    PUSSY WILLOW
    MARY, the maid
    DR. HARDHACK

PERMISSION TO ACT MUST BE OBTAINED OF THE AUTHOR


     "A delightful little play, 'Dr. Hardhack's Prescription,' was given
     by the Junior Endeavor Society at Lyceum Hall, Worthington, Tuesday
     afternoon and evening. The audience was composed largely of
     children at the matinee, who were highly entertained, but no more
     so than the grown-ups in the evening. Dr. Hardhack was played by a
     lad of ten, who did an excellent piece of work. The other parts
     were all finely acted by children not much older. The play was
     directed by the author and made an entertainment long to be
     remembered and one too that netted a nice little sum for the
     Juniors' work."--_Hampshire Gazette._

     "One of the most charming little plays for children I ever have
     seen."--_Mrs. G. J. Thomas, Chattanooga, Tenn._

     "We used 'Dr. Hardhack's Prescription' for the Nature Study number
     in our annual program. It was given by the youngest pupils and was
     a delight to our audience. The play is complete in itself and
     perfectly charming, nevertheless I ventured to add an epilog.
     Knowing the story of 'Little Pussy Willow,' I adapted the gifts of
     the fairies ending with: 'Good night, dearie.' We wish to thank the
     author for all her helpful suggestions and for such a sweet
     play."--_Caroline Reed Thompson, Head of Department of Expression,
     Arizona School of Music, Phenix, Ariz._

     "A dear little play and we greatly enjoyed working it up. Our
     audience was very enthusiastic and we are being urged to
     repeat."--_Miss A. H. Young, Wilton, N. H._

     "We gave 'Dr. Hardhack's Prescription' as a Thanksgiving
     entertainment by our younger pupils, and everyone was charmed with
     it."--_Emma Willard School, Troy, N. Y._

=Price 25 cents=


ALL ENDORSEMENTS UNSOLICITED    ALL USED BY PERMISSION




DR. HARDHACK'S PRESCRIPTION


A Play for Children

IN FOUR ACTS


BY
K. McDOWELL RICE

Author of "Mrs. Tubbs's Telegram," "Good King Wenceslas,"
"Mrs. Bagg's Bargain Day," etc., etc.


PUBLISHED BY
K. McDOWELL RICE
Worthington, Mass.


Copyright 1908
by
K. McDowell Rice
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


Price 25 cents
Order of K. McDowell Rice
Worthington, Mass.

Printed by Gazette Printing Co.
Northampton, Mass.




In bringing out the play, DR. HARDHACK'S PRESCRIPTION, the author wishes
to acknowledge the kindness of Houghton, Mifflin Company of Boston,
which allows her to publish it. This Company holds the copyright of
"Little Pussy Willow" by Harriet Beecher Stowe, on which the play is
founded. The author of the play has taken much of the conversation
verbatim from the book, as will be seen by reference to "Little Pussy
Willow," which charming story it is hoped may become better known to the
public of to-day through this dramatization. The publishers Houghton,
Mifflin Co., will send the book to any address by mail post-paid for
$1.25.




DRAMATIS PERSONAE


    GRANDMA PROUDIE.
    MAMMA PROUDIE.
    EMILY PROUDIE.
    AUNT FLIGHTY.
    AUNT HIGHTY-TIGHTY.
    PUSSY WILLOW.
    MARY, the maid.
    DR. HARDHACK.


This is a Royalty Play and terms must be made with the author for its
use.

Permission to act or make any use of this play must be obtained of K.
McDowell Rice, Worthington, Massachusetts.




DR. HARDHACK'S PRESCRIPTION.


_DR. HARDHACK makes a professional visit to the _Proudie_ mansion, New
York City. In the sitting-room are gathered GRANDMA PROUDIE (L), MAMMA
PROUDIE (C), AUNT FLIGHTY (R)._

MAMMA PROUDIE. I greatly fear our dear Emily will never be restored to
health.

AUNT FLIGHTY. Oh, don't say that. I've known people to look terribly
white and a great deal thinner than Emily, and not die of it.

GRANDMA PROUDIE. [_To MAMMA P._] I thought you were going to send for
Dr. Hardhack.

MAMMA P. I have sent for him. [_Sighs, rises and comes forward, taking
chair_] [_R_] But what can he do? Someway it doesn't seem as if he could
help. He's such a small man.

GRANDMA P. Size doesn't matter if one has brains. It's brains that
count, my dear. Napoleon was small, but he will live forever. And look
at Alexander Pope. [_Waves hand_]

AUNT F. [_Runs to window_] What! Where is he? Whom did you say to look
at?

GRANDMA P. [_Witheringly_] Alexander Pope, who has been dead one hundred
and fifty years.

AUNT F. [_Simpering_] Oh, I thought you said to look at somebody going
by.

GRANDMA P. I said "Look at Alexander Pope," by which I meant "Consider
Alexander Pope"--a small man, not ever growing to be much larger than a
child. But what a poet! Brains, my dear, brains. In my day it was brains
that decided a person's value. Sometimes I think they have gone out of
fashion.

MAMMA P. But they will come in again, mother. All the old fashions come
round in about so many years, they say.

GRANDMA P. [_Who has returned to her knitting_] Perhaps the time has
come then for brains, for every one speaks so highly of Dr. Hardhack.

_Enter MAID_

MARY. Dr. Hardhack, madam.

MAMMA P. You may bring him in, Mary. [_Maid turns to go, but finds DR.
HARDHACK at her heels_]

MAMMA and GRANDMA P. [_Gasp_] Oh, Dr. Hardhack!

AUNT F. Oh, oh! We did not know you really had come!

DR. HARDHACK. Good morning, ladies. Couldn't stop to be formally
announced. [_Puts his hat absently in AUNT F's sewing-basket. Basket
falls and all the things go tumbling out. DR. H. does not notice_]

AUNT F. [_Simpers_] Oh, oh! [_MAID comes forward and assists AUNT F. in
picking up things_]

DR. H. [_Looks about circle_] Which is my patient, please?

MAMMA P. It is my daughter Emily. I will send for her. [_To MAID_] Mary,
will you ask Miss Emily to come? [_Exit MAID_] Oh, Dr. Hardhack, before
she comes I must say a word to you. [_DR. H. takes chair_] We would be
willing to found a water-cure, to hire a doctor on purpose, to try
homeopathy or hydropathy or allopathy or any other pathy that ever was
heard of if our dear elegant Emily could only be restored. It is her
sensitive nature that wears upon her. She was never made for this world.
She has an exquisiteness of perception that makes her feel even the
creases in a rose leaf.

DR. H. Stuff and folderol, my dear madam! [_ALL start. AUNT F. gasps and
simpers_]

MAMMA P. You are the nineteenth physician that has been called in to
dear Emily.

DR. H. Well, I hope that I may cut out number twenty! [_Enter EMILY very
pale and listless_] Oh, here comes the young lady herself. [_Bows to
EMILY, which greeting E. very languidly returns_] Humph! Let me look at
her. [_Puts up his glasses and looks through them_] [_E. stands
supporting herself by table as though very weak_] Humph! A fashionable
potato sprout! Grown in a cellar! Not a drop of red blood in her veins!

GRANDMA P. [_Aside to MAMMA P._] What odd ways he has, to be sure. But
then they say that's the way he talks to everybody.

DR. H. My dear madam, you have tried to make a girl out of sugar and
almond paste, and now you are distressed that she has not red blood in
her veins and that her lungs gasp and flutter as she goes up-stairs.
Turn her out to grass, my dear madam, turn her out to grass!

AUNT F. [_With hands over ears_] Oh, oh!

DR. H. Yes, I mean what I say. Send her to old Mother Nature to nurse.

MAMMA P. [_Exultantly_] I have said all along, Doctor, that I thought we
ought to have a trained nurse for Emily.

DR. H. Trained fiddlesticks! [_ALL start_] Send her somewhere to a good
honest farmhouse in the hills, and let her run barefoot in the morning
dew, drink new milk from the cow--

MAMMA P. [_Interrupts_] Oh, Doctor, not new milk! Not unsterilized milk!
[_AUNT F. holds up hands in horror_]

DR. H. I mean what I say, madam. Let her drink new milk from the cow,
romp in a good wide barn, learn to hunt hens' eggs, a few things like
this, and I warrant me you'll see another pair of cheeks in a year. Take
off all whalebones and strings around her lungs. Give her a chance,
madam, give her a chance!

MAMMA P. But what medicine shall she take, Doctor?

DR. H. [_Roars his disapproval_] Medicine? No medicine. Medicine won't
do her any good. You may make an apothecary's shop of her stomach--

AUNT F. Oh, oh!

DR. H. [_Turns toward AUNT F._] Yes, _stomach_,--make an apothecary's
shop of her stomach, and matters will be only the worse. Why, there
isn't enough iron in her blood to make a needle. [_Points to needle in
AUNT F'S hand_]

AUNT F. [_Simpers_] Oh, oh!

MAMMA P. Iron in her blood! I never heard the like!

DR. H. Yes, iron, red particles, globules or whatever you please to call
them. Her blood is all water and lymph, and that is the reason that her
cheeks and lips look so like a cambric handkerchief, why she pants and
puffs if she goes up-stairs. [_Motions to E. to come forward, puts head
to examine heart_] Her heart is all right if there were only blood to
work it in, but it sucks and wheezes like a dry pump for want of vital
fluid. [_Emphatically_] She must have more blood, madam, and Nature must
make it for her.

GRANDMA P. We were thinking of going to Newport, Doctor.

DR. H. [_Derisively_] Yes, to Newport! To a ball every night and a
flurry of dressing and flirtation every morning! No such thing! Send her
to an unfashionable old farmhouse where there was never a more exciting
party than a quilting frolic heard of. Let her learn the difference
between huckleberries and blackberries, learn where checkerberries grow
thickest and dig up sweet flag root with her own hands as country
children do. It would do her good to plant a few hills of potatoes--

AUNT F. _Our_ Emily! Potatoes! Oh, dreadful, dreadful!

DR. H. Yes, potatoes. Plant a few hills of potatoes and hoe them herself
as I once heard of a royal princess doing, because [_With emphasis_]
_queens_ can afford to be sensible in the bringing up of _their_
daughters!

MAMMA P. What you say is all very new, Dr. Hardhack. Indeed, we had
never thought of such a thing as sending Emily into the _real_ country.
But I will talk it over with Mr. Proudie, and see what he thinks of it.

DR. H. Well, ladies, I must be going. Good-morning to you all. [_Takes
up hat and medicine case and makes exit in haste_]

MAMMA P. What strange ways he has!

AUNT F. But then you know he's all the fashion.

MAMMA P. People talk of his being small. I never once thought of it.

GRANDMA P. Brains, my dear, brains, or in other words;--good common
sense.


CURTAIN.




ACT II.

_DR. HARDHACK ready to give his last directions. MAMMA PROUDIE, AUNT
FLIGHTY, AUNT HIGHTY-TIGHTY, EMILY and DR. HARDHACK are all seated; E.
reclining languidly in easy chair._


MAMMA P. Well, Doctor, we have decided to let Emily go and stay in the
country as you have directed. I have arranged everything and found a
pleasant place for her with a companion of her own age who is called
Pussy Willow.

DR. H. H'm. Pussy Willow. Well, that begins to sound right. Wouldn't
have found any girl named Pussy Willow at Newport, I'll warrant you.

AUNT HIGHTY-TIGHTY. Do, pray, dear Dr. Hardhack, tell us just how she
must be dressed for that cold mountain region.

AUNT F. It makes me shiver to think of it.

AUNT H.-T. Must she have high-necked, long-sleeved flannels?

AUNT F. I will go right down and buy her half-a-dozen at once. [_Starts
to go, but is waved back by DR. H., and resumes seat_]

DR. H. Not so fast. Let's see about this young lady. [_Endeavors to
introduce his forefinger under the belt of E'S dress. Belt snaps. DR. H.
draws out his finger with a jerk_] I thought so. I supposed that there
wasn't much breathing allowed behind there.

MAMMA P. Oh, I do assure you, Doctor, Emily never dresses tightly.

EMILY. No, indeed! I despise tight lacing. I never wear my clothes any
more than just comfortable.

DR. H. Never saw a woman that did! The courage and constancy of the
female sex in bearing inconveniences is so great, however, that that
will be no test at all. Give me that thing. [_Motions for E.'S belt_]
[_E. hands him same_] You wouldn't catch a man saying he felt
comfortable under such circumstances. [_Holds up the tiny circle_] But
only persuade a girl that she looks stylish and pretty with her waist
drawn in, and you may lace her up till the very life leaves her, and
with her dying breath she will tell you she is nothing more than
"comfortable". So, my young lady, you don't catch me in that way! You
must leave off belts and tight waists of all sorts for six months at
least, and wear only loose sacques so that your lungs may have some
chance to play and fill with the vital air that I am going to send you
to breathe up in the hills.

E. But, Doctor, I don't believe I could hold myself up. [_Droops as
without any strength_] When I sit up in a loose dress I feel so weak I
hardly know what to do. I need the support of something stiff around me.

DR. H. That is because all those nice, strong muscles around your waist
[_Slapping his sides and holding himself very erect with his hands on
his ribs_] which Nature gave you to hold you up, have been bound down
and bandaged and flattened [_Emphasizes the words by each time striking
his right fist in palm of left hand_] until they have no strength in
them.

E. Do you suppose, Doctor, if I should dress as you tell me for six
months, that I would get my health again?

DR. H. It would go a long way towards it. You fashionable girls are not
good for much, to be sure, but if a doctor gets a chance to save one of
you in the way of business, he can't help wishing to do it. So I just
give you your choice.

E. Of course I would like to be well, and in the country up there nobody
will see me, so it's no matter how I look.

MAMMA P. [_Comes forward and puts arm about E._] To be sure it's no
matter. [_Kisses her_] Only get your health, my dear, and then we'll
see.


CURTAIN.




ACT III.

_MAMMA PROUDIE, fearing EMILY is exerting herself too much up in the
country, calls in DR. HARDHACK to have him send her some word of
caution. In room are GRANDMA P. [Knitting] MAMMA P., AUNT FLIGHTY and
DR. H._


MAMMA P. I wish you would caution Emily, Doctor. I'm sure she's
over-exerting herself, for she has sent home seven pats of butter of her
own churning!

DR. H. Never fear, my dear madam. It's only that there is more iron
getting into her blood, that's all. Let her alone, or tell her to do it
more yet!

MAMMA P. But, Doctor, may not the thing be carried too far?

DR. H. For gentility, you mean? Don't you remember Marie Antoinette made
butter and King Louis was a miller at Marly?

AUNT F. But just read the Doctor from Emily's last letter.

MAMMA P. Yes, just hear what she has written, Doctor. [_Finds letter and
reads_] "You have no idea how different life looks to me now that I live
a little for somebody besides myself. Why have I been so foolish as to
suppose I was happy in living such a lazy, useless life as I have
lived?" [_Looks at DR. H. as she folds letter and shakes head_]

DR. H. Iron in her blood, my dear madam, iron in her blood! [_Pounds
table_] She'll come home a strong, bouncing girl.

AUNT F. Oh, shocking!

DR. H. [_Turns to AUNT F._] Yes, _bouncing_! Why shouldn't she bounce? I
shall give you back a live niece in the fall instead of a half dead one,
and you [_Turns to MAMMA P._] a live daughter, madam, and I expect you
will all scream and stop your ears and run under beds because you never
saw a live girl before.

MAMMA P. But, Doctor, I can't see as we shall ever get her home again. I
keep writing and writing, and still she says she isn't ready. There is
always something ahead.

DR. H. Let her alone, madam, let her alone. Give Nature a good chance.
You will all undo all the good she's getting as soon as you get her
home. I insist upon it [_Pounds table_] that she shall keep away from
you all as long as she likes.

_Exit DR. HARDHACK._

MAMMA P. [_To GRANDMA P._] Did you ever see such a queer old dear as Dr.
Hardhack? He does say the oddest things! Isn't he _so_ original?

GRANDMA P. I haven't heard such good sense talked by any doctor in a
long time.

AUNT F. And then you know, he's all the fashion now.


CURTAIN.




ACT IV.

_Six months later than when EMILY went away. She has returned home,
bringing her friend, PUSSY WILLOW. In the room are gathered GRANDMA P.,
MAMMA P., the two aunts, also EMILY and PUSSY and DR. HARDHACK._


MAMMA P. Well, now, Dr. Hardhack, doesn't our Emily look beautiful?

AUNT F. So healthy!

AUNT H.-T. Such a splendid color!

DR. H. Pretty fair, pretty fair. A good summer's work, that. [_Looks at
E. much pleased_]

AUNT F. And now, Doctor, we want you to tell us just what she may do,
just how much.

AUNT H.-T. Of course you know now she's got into a city, she can't dress
exactly as she did up in the country.

DR. H. I see, I see.

AUNT F. There isn't a thing of all her clothes she can wear. Having been
all summer in those loose sacques, she's sort o' _spread out_. [_Motions
with her hands_]

DR. H. Well, my advice is that you begin gradually screwing her up. Get
something with plenty of whalebones ready and a good tough lacer. But
don't begin too hard, just tighten a little every day, and by and by she
will get back to where her clothes will fit her exactly.

AUNT F. [_Clapping her hands_] That's just what I said we would have to
do.

MAMMA P. But, Doctor, won't that injure her health?

DR. H. Of course it will, but I fancy she will stand it for one winter.
It won't quite kill her, and that is all we doctors want.

EMILY. [_Comes forward_] Well, I have something to say on this point. I
wouldn't lose my health again for anything that can be named.

DR. H. Oh, pooh, pooh! [_Waves his hand incredulously at E._] When
patients are first up from a sickness, how prudent they mean to be!

AUNT H.-T. But seriously, Doctor, you must tell us how much it will be
well to have Emily do.

AUNT F. One doesn't want to give up the world entirely, and yet one
doesn't want to lose one's health.

DR. H. I appreciate the case fully. [_Walks up and down considering_]
Let her begin with the opera twice a week and one dance kept up till
daylight. In a week she will feel stronger than ever she did and declare
nothing hurts her, then she can take two dances, then three, and so on.

EMILY. But, Doctor, I'm not going to dances at all. I know now what life
is, and what health is worth, and I'm not going to waste it in that way.

DR. H. Oh, it's all very well to talk! I knew a rich girl once right in
this city of New York who _would_ go round visiting the poor and sitting
up with sick people, and there was no end to the remarks made about her.
No, you mustn't breathe bad air, nor over-exert yourself unless you do
so from a purely selfish motive. Then, it's all right and proper. [_To
PUSSY_] Oh, you needn't sit over there, looking mischievous, miss! What
do you know of life? You will soon learn to be ashamed of your rosy
cheeks, and think it's pretty to have bad health. I'll bet a copper
[_Slaps his knee_] that by spring, if we manage right, we can send you
back as white and withered as Miss Emily was.

E. Now, Dr. Hardhack, you dreadful man! You must stop this talk. I
brought Pussy down here on purpose to help me live better than I have
lived. It's so interesting now in New York that Pussy is here with me. I
never knew what wonderful things there were here. Pussy taught me to
know the birds this summer at her home, and now we have been this
morning to see a most wonderful collection at the museum.

MAMMA P. [_Anxiously_] Is it wise, Doctor, for them to go and look at
those stuffed birds? To be sure the birds are under glass, but I'm so
afraid they will breathe poison.

DR. H. Not nearly as much as they would breathe if they went to a
crowded theatre, madam.

E. It makes me shudder to think of all the hours I've spent at the
theatre. As I think of it now, the rooms were so hot and overcrowded I
wonder I ever lived through it. Since I've been away, I have learned to
love everything that is connected with out-door life. Pussy has taught
me. So now we have arranged that Pussy shall spend the winter with me.
She is to take singing and music lessons and have all the advantages of
the city, and I shall go to her for the summer. Of course, we shall take
a peep or two at New York sights, but we are not going into the gay
world, Doctor, really, we're not!

DR. H. Ta, ta, ta! Don't tell me. [_Shakes finger warningly_] I shall
hear of you yet. You'll see!

_Exit DR. H._

PUSSY. What a droll man he is! But I think he's just as nice as he can
be. I hope he will come again while I'm here. I like to hear him talk.

AUNT F. It's his way to always run on in this strange style about
everything.

AUNT H.-T. For my part, I never half know what he means.

E. It is plain what he means. You must do exactly contrary to what he
tells you, as I shall. So, Auntie, don't trouble yourself to alter my
things unless it be to let them out, for I'm going to keep all the
breathing room I've got whether I have what's called "a pretty waist" or
not. I'd rather have color in my cheeks and a cheerful heart than the
smallest waist that was ever squeezed together.

AUNT H.-T. Such a pity, one couldn't have both.

AUNT F. Your cousin Jane was in here last week with her new Bismarck
silk, and it fits her so beautifully! Somebody said she looked as if
she'd been melted and poured into it. There wasn't a crease or wrinkle.
It did look lovely!

E. Well, Auntie dear, I must try some other way of looking lovely. May
be, if I'm cheerful and happy and always in good spirits and have a
fresh, bright face as Pussy always has, [_Puts her arm affectionately
about P._] it may make up for my not looking as if I had been melted and
poured into my clothes.

GRANDMA P. [_Delightedly as she comes forward and joins others who are
now all standing_] This is just the way I thought things would turn out
if we followed Dr. Hardhack's Prescription.


CURTAIN.




_BY KATHARINE MCDOWELL RICE, WORTHINGTON, MASS._

CHARLEY'S COUNTRY COUSIN

A COMEDY IN FOUR ACTS

    MRS. CHARLES COURTNEY CARLETON
    MISS MARGARET MOFFAT
    BRIDGET
    MR. CHARLES COURTNEY CARLETON

Time--The present. Place--Home of Mr. and Mrs. Carleton.

Cast may be enlarged by having the "At Home" take place on the stage.
This gives opportunity for individual talent in musical and other lines.

PERMISSION TO ACT MUST BE OBTAINED OF THE AUTHOR


     "One of the most interesting occurrences of the season at
     Worthington, Mass., was the initial presentation last week of
     'Charley's Country Cousin,' the author's latest comedy. The play
     was enthusiastically received. There were some charming scenes
     between 'Charley' and his 'Country Cousin,' especially that over
     the telephone, and some very natural and spicy dialogue between Mr.
     and Mrs. Carleton over the arrangements for an afternoon 'At Home.'
     Bridget's various surprises and deductions kept the audience
     constantly laughing whenever she appeared."--_Hampshire Gazette._

     "'Charley's Country Cousin' was a great success here and we did not
     consider it at all hard to give. We had two persons for Topsy and
     counterpart and each did a monologue in the place where she was
     supposed to be rehearsing. Topsy also did a colored song very well.
     All who heard the play said it was the best we had had of the short
     ones and remarkably well suited to any entertainment given under
     the auspices of the church."--_Miss Elisabeth G. Day, Colchester,
     Conn._

     "The Geneva Club of the Y. W. C. A. gave 'Charley's Country Cousin'
     with great success. The play proved very entertaining indeed, and
     the Club was most pleased with the result."--_Miss Daisy D. Brown,
     Detroit, Mich._

     "We gave the play 'Charley's Country Cousin' as a D. A. R.
     entertainment. Many thought it one of the best that had ever been
     given in the town."--_Miss Clara Davis, Framingham, Mass._

     "It is with genuine pleasure and satisfaction that I enclose the
     royalty and report our great success with 'Charley's Country
     Cousin,' given at our High School Midwinter Reunion. It was most
     enthusiastically received. I was increasingly impressed with its
     dignity and charm, sparkling humor and cleverly wrought out
     situations. Nothing but the highest praise was accorded it."--_Anna
     L. Smith, Bellevue, Ohio._

=Recommended by Drama League of America, Chicago, in two of its annual
bulletins. By Ladies' Home Journal in articles entitled, "Entertainments
for Teachers," and "Best Plays for Amateurs."=

Price 25 cents


ALL ENDORSEMENTS UNSOLICITED    ALL USED BY PERMISSION




CHARLEY'S COUNTRY COUSIN

A COMEDY IN FOUR ACTS


Dramatis Personae

    MRS. CHARLES COURTNEY CARLETON
    MISS MARGARET MOFFAT
    BRIDGET
    MR. CHARLES COURTNEY CARLETON

Time--The present. Place--Home of Mr. and Mrs. Carleton.


     "One of the most interesting occurrences of the season at
     Worthington, Mass., was the initial presentation last week of
     'Charley's Country Cousin,' the author's latest comedy. The play
     was enthusiastically received. There were some charming scenes
     between 'Charley' and his 'Country Cousin,' especially that over
     the telephone, and some very natural and spicy dialogue between Mr.
     and Mrs. Carleton over the arrangements for an afternoon 'At Home.'
     Bridget's various deductions and surprises kept the audience
     constantly laughing whenever she appeared."--_Hampshire Gazette._

     "Miss Rice has in the comedy, 'Charley's Country Cousin,' added
     another to her list of delightful plays. The author is not only
     very well known in this city socially, but also as a writer of
     clever and original comedies, her 'Mrs. Bagg's Bargain Day,' which
     was presented several times last season, meeting with the greatest
     favor. This latest play met a most appreciative audience at every
     production. There were enthusiastic calls for the author both
     evenings."--_Albany Argus._

     "'Charley's Country Cousin' was a great success here and we did not
     consider it at all hard to give. We had two persons for Topsy and
     counterpart and each did a monologue in the place where she was
     supposed to be rehearsing. Topsy also did a colored song very well.
     All who heard the play said it was the best we had had of the short
     ones and remarkably well suited to any entertainment given under
     the auspices of the church."--_Miss Elisabeth G. Day, Colchester,
     Conn._

     "In view of other amateur plays which I have seen, there is not
     anything that so perfectly meets the need as your plays. In the
     matter of adaptibility to amateur talent, in action, in humor (at
     once emphatic and fresh and clean) and in simple natural literary
     style your writings cannot be excelled."--_Rev. W. H. Garth, St.
     Michael's Rectory, Naugatuck, Conn._

Price 25 cents.




GOOD KING WENCESLAS

A CHRISTMAS PLAY FOR CHILDREN IN TWO ACTS


This play was written to meet a request of church workers for a
Christmas entertainment of dramatic character to be given within one
hour and with no change of scene. The author, therefore, has arranged
Act I to be read aloud to an audience with no acting, which reading
shall be followed by the rise of curtain and the presentation of the two
scenes of Act II. The dramatic parts for the play, as thus arranged, are
those only that are found in Act II, and are given below. All may be
readily taken by children.

    DAME GOODY (Hedwig)
    GRETCHEN
    VIOLET   }
    ALFRED   }    Children of Mrs. Collingwood
    BERNICE  }
    KENNETH  }

    PAULINE  }
    LOUISE   }
    ESTHER   }
    OLIVE    }
    DOROTHY  }    Friends of the Collingwood children
    LAURENCE }
    RALPH    }
    DAVID    }

Other children may be added, if desired, or the above number lessened.
(See notes.)


     "We had a most successful Christmas entertainment. The applause was
     so loud we feared the children would forget to finish their
     parts."--_Miss Alice F. Danforth, Springfield, Mass._

     "A great success for a Christmas entertainment, there is so much
     life and color in it, so much song and emotion. It is well and
     carefully done with both the proportion of moderation and the charm
     of deep sentiment."--_David S. Muzzey, Ph.D., Yonkers, N. Y._

     "It is difficult to find words to express my admiration for the
     play 'Good King Wenceslas.' I believe it will be far-reaching in
     its influence."--_Miss N. H. Cottrell, Albany, N. Y._

     "It is splendid."--_Rev. Wm. H. Garth, St. Michael's Rectory,
     Naugatuck, Conn._

Price 25 cents.


GOOD KING WENCESLAS

(See foregoing page.)


This play may be given more elaborately by the representing on the stage
of Act I. This arrangement will call for the addition of the following
characters:

    HELEN ARMSTRONG, a girl of 15, afterward Mrs. Collingwood
    FOUR SCHOOL GIRLS
    EDWIN, a footman
    MAN, a thief
    WOMAN, a thief
    BOY
    TRAIN ANNOUNCER
    GATEMAN, who inspects tickets

Other R. R. officials, passengers, etc., etc.

Scene laid at New York R. R. Station


     "Simple and picturesque, bright and pathetic in turn."--_Rt. Rev.
     Alexander H. Vinton, D. D., Bishop, Springfield, Mass._

     "It breathes the Christmas spirit and has a true dramatic interest
     that holds one to the end."--_Miss Eleanor Meneely, Albany, N. Y._

     "I have greatly enjoyed 'Good King Wenceslas.' The introduction of
     the carols is a beautiful feature of the play. Your work along
     these lines is a work that has long been needed."--_Rev. Fredk. J.
     Sawers, Christ Church Cathedral, Montreal, Canada._

     "The play is splendid and the first act is great. I hope we can
     give 'Good King Wenceslas,' for your plays are so 'playable,' it is
     a joy to work over them."--_Miss Marion H. Sterns, Instructor in
     Elocution and Physical Culture, Staten Island Academy, Staten
     Island, N. Y._

Price 25 cents.




MRS. TUBBS'S TELEGRAM

A COMEDY IN ONE ACT


Dramatis Personae

    MRS. TUBBS
    ROWENA               }
    AMELIA               }
    TOMMY                }  Children of Mrs. Tubbs
    TEDDY                }
      and                }
    OTHER LITTLE TUBBS   }
    MRS. RAVEN      }
    MRS. DONNELL    }      Neighbors of Mrs. Tubbs
    MISS SIMPKINS   }
      and others    }
      As few or many neighbors as desired
    TELEGRAPH MESSENGER

Place--Kitchen of Mrs. Tubbs at Cinder Corner. If given as an out-door
play, action takes place on Mrs. Tubbs's back piazza.

Time in representation 45 minutes to 1 hour.

Given by all ages with equal success as following endorsements will
show. The parts of "Teddy" and "Tommy" may be taken by girls dressed as
boys or names may be changed to those of girls.


     "A little comedy designed to supply a real demand--that of a
     wholesome, amusing play to be used in school or home
     theatricals."--_The Outlook._

     "We heartily commend the capital little play, 'Mrs. Tubbs's
     Telegram,' as a very natural and amusing comedietta, which is quite
     within the acting capacities of every-day boys and
     girls."--_Editorial Notes St. Nicholas._

     "Our club presented your very clever little play, 'Mrs. Tubbs's
     Telegram,' last evening before an audience of 400 persons who were
     most enthusiastic."--_Mrs. Richard Farmer Wood, Concord, Mass._

     "The best chapter play ever given at Vassar to my knowledge."--_An
     Instructor for many years at the college. Quoted by Mabel H.
     Baldwin, Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, N. Y._

     "The play was just what we wanted and proved the greatest kind of a
     success."--_Charlotte W. Passmore, Morris House, Smith College,
     Northampton, Mass._

     "The little chapel was filled and 'Mrs. Tubbs' was greatly enjoyed.
     It was a genuine satisfaction to give such a pure, clean little
     play with life and fun from beginning to end."--_Miss Georgiana
     Clinton, South Norwalk, Conn._

     "Everyone spoke of it as a very bright little play and just the
     thing for a church. We got along nicely without a curtain."--_Mrs.
     F. S. Field, Shattuckville, Mass._

     "We gave the comedy to a very large audience in the town hall, who
     received it with the wildest enthusiasm."--_Principal High School,
     Windsor, Conn._

     "Given five times for five different charities by Y. W. C. A. of
     Poughkeepsie, N. Y. Our last audience was larger and if possible
     even more enthusiastic than our first."--_Miss Emma Mott, General
     Secretary Y. W. C. A._

     "A crowded house and everyone highly entertained. It is just the
     thing for home entertainments where children are to take
     part."--_Miss Lillian Fischer, Fulton, Missouri._

     "Just the right sort of play for boys and girls to give."--_Mrs. F.
     W. Davis, Cumberland, Maine._

Price, 25 cents.




MRS. BAGG'S BARGAIN DAY

A COMEDY IN TWO ACTS


Dramatis Personae

    MRS. BAGG
    MADELAINE BAGG
    BENNY BAGG
    YOUNGER BAGGS
    MRS. TAGG
    MRS. RAGG
    MRS. FAGG
    MRS. LAGG
    MRS. PETTIT
    MRS. SHORT
    MRS. GRAND
    MR. BAGG
    MR. TALKHARD

Cash boys, clerks, shoppers, maid, workmen, etc., etc.

Act. I.--Interior of a department store.

Act II.--Mrs. Bagg's home.

Time in representation 1 to 1-1/2 hours, as preferred.


     "The charming little comedy 'Mrs. Bagg's Bargain Day,' was given
     most successfully last night before the Fortnightly Club of this
     place, and all were in hearty appreciation of its delightful merit.
     The play was in the hands of gifted amateurs, so the humor and
     pertinence of the text were in no way impaired."--_Eleanor Havens
     Grant, Jamestown, N. Y._

     "Given by Unity Dramatic Club, Springfield, Mass. The chapel was
     packed full of people and so many turned away that the performance
     will be again presented. A remarkably bright little
     play."--_Springfield Republican._

     Given by Alumnae of Albany Academy for Girls, benefit of Endowment
     Fund, $250 realized. Later repeated by same amateurs for various
     charities, seven performances in all being given. "A tremendous
     success from start to finish. Large and enthusiastic audiences at
     every representation."--_Albany Argus._

     "I am delighted with 'Mrs. Bagg's Bargain Day' and know it will
     meet with success wherever presented."--_Miss Adele Ripont,
     Instructor in Elocution and Physical Culture, Central High School,
     Buffalo, N. Y._

     "'Mrs. Bagg's Bargain Day' was by far the greatest hit of anything
     ever tried here. We found the parts very easy to take."--_Miss
     Edith Irwin, President Y. W. C. A., Iberia Academy, Iberia,
     Missouri._

     "The young people are carried away with 'Mrs. Bagg's Bargain Day,'
     and want to commence work right away."--_Miss Lois B. Warner,
     Salisbury, Conn._

     "Given by the young people of St. Paul's Church, Poughkeepsie, N.
     Y. Not a dull line in it."--_Rev. Francis Whitcome, Rector._

     "We presented 'Mrs. Bagg's Bargain Day' last Friday night at the
     schoolhouse to a very appreciative audience. We were so well
     pleased that we shall probably want to give another of your plays
     in the autumn."--_Harry McCulloch, Class President, Freeport High
     School, Freeport, Ill._

     "The play succeeded excellently. We received considerable applause
     and what we most wanted, lots of laughter."--_Kennebunk Festival
     Chorus, Kennebunk, Maine._

Price 25 cents.




GOOD AS GOLD

(Second Edition with Notes)

A COMEDY IN FOUR ACTS

The title, "Their Rich Relative," may be substituted if preferred.


Dramatis Personae

    MRS. ROGERS
    MARIE      }
    HESTER     }
    DOROTHY    }                  daughters of Mrs. Rogers
    THEODORA   }
    MRS. LAURA VOSE                  sister of Mrs. Rogers
    MISS LUCINDA PHELPS      distant cousin of Mrs. Rogers
    ROSA                                          the maid
    JANET      }
    ISABEL     }                       little school girls
    BAGGAGE-MAN
    MUSICIANS

As many male characters as desired may be introduced in Act II as
travelers, newsboys, ticket agent, boot black, etc., etc. (See notes).

Play may be given by female characters only if preferred. A stewardess
may be substituted for the baggage-man or baggage-man eliminated. (See
notes).

Time--The present. Place--New England village.

Time in representation, longer form 2 hours; shorter form 1-1/2 hours.

Given with equal success by girls' schools and women's clubs.


     "Original and clever with interest sustained to the very
     end."--_Rt. Rev. Wm. Croswell Doane, D. D., LL. D., Bishop, Albany,
     N. Y._

     "The best play I have yet seen for girls."--_Miss Tebbetts,
     Principal of St. Margaret's School, San Mateo, California._

     "Every one pronounced it one of the prettiest plays ever
     seen."--_Miss Josephine M. Taft, Greenville, N. H._

     "Thank you for a play which is so bright and charming and so full
     of good wholesome fun."--_Miss Susan E. Borthwick, Portsmouth, N.
     H._

     "Enclosed find our program of 'Gentlemen's Night,' which passed off
     very pleasantly. All evidently appreciated the comical situations
     in 'Good as Gold,' and the ladies certainly made the most of them.
     The gentlemen seemed greatly to enjoy the play, and we were all
     agreed that it was a bright, clean comedy, very suitable for
     occasions like ours."--_Amherst Woman's Club, Amherst, Mass._

     "We presented the play, 'Good as Gold,' at our summer residence
     before an audience of a hundred and fifty people. The tickets were
     sold at seventy-five cents apiece and the proceeds given to a local
     charity. The parts were taken by ten girls from twelve to fourteen
     years of age and they did themselves, as well as those who had
     instructed them, great credit. Many pronounced it the best piece of
     amateur acting they ever had seen. The play, itself, was highly
     commended by all as being extremely refined, free from all foolish
     ideas, bright and interesting from beginning to end."--_Mrs. Eugene
     N. Foss, Cohasset, Mass._

Price 25 cents.




A SUCCESSFUL STRATAGEM

A COMEDY IN ONE ACT


Dramatis Personae

    COLONEL WENTWORTH       Retired army officer
    COLONEL ASHMORE         In active service
    CAROLINE WENTWORTH      An only daughter, aged 18
    NORA                    A maid

Time 1 hour


     "A charming, brilliant little comedy."--_Charles Eliot Norton._

     "Bright and entertaining, compact and manageable, lending itself to
     the conditions of almost any home in our land."--_Mrs. L. F.
     Selfridge, Foot's Cray, Kent, London, England._

     "If you happen to need a little play that may be easily acted by
     amateurs in a home evening, send to K. McDowell Rice, Worthington,
     Mass., and procure her list of original plays. They are clever and
     droll, and the stage properties and setting come within the means
     of a little company of high school girls, or of a charitable
     association or guild. They have not one objectionable feature and
     have many good ones."--_Mrs. Margaret E. Sangster, in Sunshine
     Bulletin._

     "I have seen your booklet containing the comedy, 'A Successful
     Stratagem,' which I find wonderfully clever, and as I am thinking
     of giving a little dramatic entertainment in my home for the
     Woman's Club, I think this play will be most entertaining."--_Mrs.
     Myron Dickson, Martinsville, Indiana._

     "The choicest comedy in your collection."--_Miss Isadelle C. Couch,
     Instructor of Vocal Training, Mt. Holyoke College, Mass._

     "Any Sunshiner seeking a clean, bright play for college, school or
     home theatricals, will not do better than to try 'Good as Gold' and
     'A Successful Stratagem.'"--_Mary D. Beattie in Sunshine Bulletin._

     "I need always some bit of humor in my programs, and it is
     difficult to find pure light humor that is not plebeian. Your plays
     are most excellent in this very particular, that they are entirely
     above coarseness."--_Miss M. M. Davis, Instructor in Expression and
     Oratory, Hillsdale College, Hillsdale, Michigan._

     "Your plays are most attractive. The best thing of the kind I have
     seen. You have my permission, most heartily granted, to use my
     endorsement, as it is such a pleasure to find plays that are fresh,
     interesting and 'playable,' after looking over quantities of the
     silly, inane trash that is published to-day."--_E. B. Merrill,
     Walla Walla, Washington._

     "I regard your comedies as admirably adapted to school and church
     entertainments and hope to use another at some future date."--_Rev.
     C. F. Porter, Corinth, N. Y._

     "I am delighted with 'A Successful Stratagem,' and with all your
     plays."--_Mrs. Salome Cutler Fairchild, Vice-Director Library
     School, Albany, N. Y._

     "A Successful Stratagem" has been given by Smith College students
     at Morris House and Belmont House, Northampton, Mass.; also by the
     pupils of Miss Liggett's Home and Day School, Detroit, Mich., and
     by many others.

Price 25 cents.




UNCLE JOE'S JEWEL

A COMEDY IN THREE ACTS

COMEDY GIVEN AT WORTHINGTON.

Initial Performance of Miss Rice's "Uncle Joe's Jewel" a Success.


The initial performance of a three-act comedy at Worthington, "Uncle
Joe's Jewel," the latest play of Miss Katharine McDowell Rice, took
place Friday. The parts were all excellently taken as follows:

    Molly Armstrong                   Mrs. O. B. Ireland
    Grace Horton                      The author
    Nora, the janitor's daughter      Miss Rachel Ely
    Mr. Winthrop ("Uncle Joe")        W. G. Rice, Jr.
    Jack Wetherbee                    Raymond Buck
    Karl Pfeffer                      Donald Stevens
    Postman                           Raymond Laird

    Stage Manager--Miss Susan Rice.

The audience was a most appreciative one, the play being received with
constant laughter and applause. Among those from out of town who came
especially for the play were Mr. and Mrs. Goddard of New York, Mrs. and
Miss Gardner and Mr. Henry Carter of Albany, Mr. and Mrs. Mellor of
Philadelphia, Mrs. William Bryant of Montclair, N. J., Mrs. Lyman James
of Williamsburg, Mrs. Harry Williams and Mrs. H. R. Hinckley of
Northampton, Mrs. and Miss Merritt and Mr. Merritt of Brooklyn, Mrs.
Gillette of Hudson, Prof. Wellington of Amherst, and Dr. and Mrs. Gibbs
of Huntington. Word was received from Senator and Mrs. Crane that they
had hoped to be present, but were unavoidably detained. There were also
large parties from Middlefield, South Worthington, Littleville and
Chesterfield. Between Acts I and II some charming novelties from Paris
were sold by Mrs. W. G. Rice for benefit of new scenery and curtains,
about $25 being realized. Between Acts II and III Mrs. Rice delighted
the audience with some French songs, accompanied by Miss Julia Rogers of
Springfield. After the play the audience went largely out of doors to
enjoy the charming afternoon. Here Miss Rice received many
congratulations on the success of the play; $35 was received at the
door, to which was added $17 from friends present, making a total of $52
for the library.

The play was repeated in the evening for the benefit of the woman's
benevolent society and parish work; $36 was taken at the door, to which
was added the money received from sale of candy and refreshments, making
a total of about $60 for this benefit.--_Springfield Republican._




_BY KATHARINE MCDOWELL RICE, WORTHINGTON, MASS._

UNCLE JOE'S JEWEL

A COMEDY IN THREE ACTS


    MOLLY ARMSTRONG
    GRACE HORTON
    NORA, the janitor's daughter
    MR. WINTHROP ("Uncle Joe")
    JACK WETHERBEE
    KARL PFEFFER
    POSTMAN

Place: Apartment of Misses Horton and Armstrong

PERMISSION TO ACT MUST BE OBTAINED OF THE AUTHOR


     "I am delighted to express my appreciation of 'Uncle Joe's Jewel,'
     given by our Woman's Guild of St. Peter's Church. It is a very
     bright, clever little comedy."--_Mrs. H. A. Field, Springfield,
     Mass._

     "We and our audience greatly enjoyed your charming 'Uncle Joe's
     Jewel.' Every one was most enthusiastic. I think you will be
     interested to know that I never had so little trouble in drilling
     girls for a play, which was to me psychological evidence that it
     was so true to girl nature that they did it all naturally and
     spontaneously. Our play was such a success that at request we
     repeated it before the Mothers' Club of Christ Church, who were
     highly entertained, appreciating all the points to the full. Give
     us more plays as clever and wholesome as 'Uncle Joe's
     Jewel.'"--_Clara L. Bostwick, Miss Porter's School, "The Elms,"
     Springfield, Mass._

     "We gave 'Uncle Joe's Jewel' as a church entertainment and believe
     you would have been proud of your work. Every word you write is to
     the point and the actors brought it all out so well."--_M. K.
     Royal, Plymouth, Mass._

     "We have chosen 'Uncle Joe's Jewel' as our Freshman Play."--_All
     Around Club, Jackson College._

     "We gave 'Uncle Joe's Jewel' as our Class Play, and had such
     success that we believe it will inaugurate the giving of a play
     each year as a part of Senior Prom."--_New Bedford, Mass., High
     School._

Price 25 cents


ALL ENDORSEMENTS UNSOLICITED    ALL USED BY PERMISSION




DR. HARDHACK'S PRESCRIPTION

A PLAY FOR CHILDREN
IN
FOUR SHORT ACTS


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

    GRANDMA PROUDIE
    MAMMA PROUDIE
    EMILY PROUDIE
    AUNT FLIGHTY
    AUNT HIGHTY-TIGHTY
    PUSSY WILLOW
    MARY, the maid
    DR. HARDHACK

Price 25 cents.




GOLFER GOOP'S GAUNTLET

FOR CHILDREN

Entertainment to be given with
PUNCH AND JUDY PUPPETS

MANUSCRIPT LOANED


AN ENTERTAINMENT OF

NEW WAX WORKS

With Up-to-Date Figures and Original Speeches

A modern adaptation of the old and well-known Mrs. Jarley's Wax Works

MANUSCRIPT LOANED





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dr. Hardhack's Prescription, by
Katharine McDowell Rice

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DR. HARDHACK'S PRESCRIPTION ***

***** This file should be named 36195.txt or 36195.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/1/9/36195/

Produced by Mark C. Orton, Erica Pfister-Altschul, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
