The Project Gutenberg eBook, Norfolk Annals, by Charles Mackie


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Norfolk Annals
       A Chronological Record of Remarkable Events in the Nineteeth Century, Vol. 2


Author: Charles Mackie



Release Date: May 23, 2011  [eBook #36206]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORFOLK ANNALS***


Credit



Transcribed from the 1901 edition by David Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org.
Many thanks to Norfolk and Norwich Millennium Library, UK, for allowing
their copy to be used for this transcription.





                              NORFOLK ANNALS


             CHRONOLOGICAL RECORD OF REMARKABLE EVENTS IN THE
                            NINETEENTH CENTURY

         (_Compiled from the files of the_ "_Norfolk Chronicle_")

                                    BY
                              CHARLES MACKIE

                                * * * * *

                                VOLUME II.

                                1851-1900

                                * * * * *

    "It is beyond the capacity of the human intellect to discriminate
    beforehand between what is valuable and what is valueless in the
    pursuit of historical research.  What would we give now for
    newspapers and trade circulars illustrating the social habits of many
    bygone times and peoples?"--_The Times_, May 4, 1900.

                                * * * * *

                     [_Entered at Stationers' Hall_]

                                   1901
  Printed at the Office of the "Norfolk Chronicle" Market Place Norwich




PREFACE.


In the terms of the publishers' announcement the two volumes of "Norfolk
Annals" were to have contained 800 pages; the work has really exceeded
that estimate by 255 pages.

Although the period from 1851 to 1900 was marked by many incidents of
great importance in the history of Norfolk and Norwich, the record
thereof in Volume II. of "Norfolk Annals" lacks several of the features
which made Volume I. acceptable to the lover of folk lore and to the
student of local events in the earlier days of the Nineteenth Century.
If, however, the present volume be less interesting than Volume I., it
may yet be useful for the verification of the dates of occurrences
regarding which the public memory is proverbially shortlived and
unreliable.




CORRIGENDA.


Page 40, fourth line of fifth paragraph, _for_ "56 seconds" _read_ "2
minutes 56 seconds."




ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIBERS.


George Cubitt, Tombland, Norwich.

H. R. Ladell, Aylsham Road, North Walsham.

Arnold H. Miller, The Guildhall, Norwich.

H. Newhouse, Bella Vista, Thorpe Road, Norwich.

Colonel H. T. S. Patteson, Beeston St. Andrew Hall.

Simms Reeve, 29, Thorpe Road, Norwich.

The Earl of Rosebery, K.G., K.T., 38, Berkley Square, London, W.

T. O. Springfield, The Rookery, Swainsthorpe.

F. Oddin Taylor, St. Ethelbert, Norwich.

Arthur Wolton, 78, Borough High Street, London, S.E.




NORFOLK ANNALS.
VOLUME II.
1851-1900.


[NOTE.--_Marginal dates distinguished by an asterisk are dates of
publication_, _not of occurrence_.]



1851.


JANUARY.


2.--Died at Shipdham, Mary, widow of Mr. Henry Tash, farmer, in the
hundredth year of her age.

3.--At the Norfolk Court of Quarter Sessions a report was presented upon
the expenditure of the county, into which a committee had inquired in
consequence of representations made at public meetings in various
districts, to the effect that the ratepayers were unable to control the
finances.  The Court passed a resolution affirming that the evidence
given before the committee had tended to prove that the financial affairs
of the county had been conducted by the Court of Quarter Sessions with
proper attention to economy, with just regard to the public interests,
and with the publicity required by law.

18.*--"A few days since the steeple of Drayton church fell to the ground
with a tremendous crash, the lead which covered the falling mass being
completely buried in the _debris_."

20.--A prolonged magisterial inquiry took place at Reepham, into
disturbances at Lenwade arising out of the Wesleyan schism.  Two parish
constables, Samuel Fairman and John Elliott, were fined for refusing to
perform their duty when requested by the Rev. C. Povah.  At Aylsham Petty
Sessions, on February 4th, four persons were charged with disturbing the
Wesleyan congregation at Cawston on January 19th, and three were
committed for trial at the Quarter Sessions.  One of the defendants,
Elizabeth Southgate, was ordered by the Court, on March 13th, to pay a
penalty of 40 pounds; the other two were discharged on their own
recognisances to appear at the next Quarter Sessions.  A singular case
arising from the same disruption came before the Vice-Chancellor, Lord
Cranworth, on May 7th.  The relators and plaintiffs were the Rev. William
Worker and the Rev. George Badcock, and the defendants the trustees of
two deeds dated 1814 and 1837, declaring the trusts of the Methodist
chapel at Holt subject to the trusts of a deed executed in 1784 by John
Wesley, by which the Wesleyan body was organized.  The funds for building
the chapel were advanced in 1814 by Mr. Hardy, who, in 1821, received
from the trustees a mortgage of the chapel to secure his advances, which
amounted to about 700 pounds.  In 1833 the debt was reduced to 350
pounds.  The congregation having increased, it was determined, in 1837,
to build a new chapel, and a site was purchased and conveyed to the
trustees upon the trusts of a deed of another chapel, prepared in 1832,
and known to the Methodist body as the "model deed," to which all
subsequent deeds were conformable.  By the trusts then declared, such
persons only were to be permitted to preach as should be duly approved by
a Methodist body called the Conference.  Mr. Hardy assisted in advancing
money to build the new chapel, and received as security a mortgage on the
chapel.  When the schism occurred it was alleged that the majority of the
trustees of the chapels mortgaged were among the schismatics, who now
called themselves Wesleyan Reformers, and that they had all formed a
scheme of wresting the chapels from the preachers appointed by the
Conference.  The defendant united with the character of mortgagee those
of acting trustee and treasurer of the two chapels, and it was alleged
that he was using his powers as mortgagee, and had publicly recommended
others to do the same--most of the Wesleyan chapels being mortgaged--for
the purpose of carrying the general scheme into effect, and thus to
deprive the Conference of the old body of Methodists of the use of their
chapels.  Mr. Hardy accordingly advertised the chapels for sale, and
actually sold the old chapel, which was then in possession of the
Reformers for their preachers.  Similar proceedings by ejectment were
resorted to by a person named Hill, to whom Mr. Hardy had transferred his
second mortgage, for the recovery of the new chapel, and led to the
filing of this information, which disputed the propriety of the
transactions.  His lordship was of opinion that Mr. Hardy, as mortgagee,
had a right to assert a title adverse to the trust, and to transfer his
mortgage to Hill.  It might be proper to appoint new trustees in the
place of those who had ceased to have any sympathy with the religious
body from which they had seceded, but there was no ground for immediate
interference.  The motion was therefore refused, and there was no order
as to costs.

20.--A great Protestant meeting was held at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich,
under the presidency of Mr. Samuel Bignold, at which were adopted
addresses to the Queen and the Archbishop of Canterbury, protesting
against the aggression of the Pope, and condemning the Tractarian
movement in the Church of England.


FEBRUARY.


1.--Douglas's Theatrical Company, which performed in several of the towns
previously visited by the Norfolk and Suffolk Company of Comedians for so
many years under the management of the Fishers, concluded a successful
season at East Dereham.  "Those who have witnessed the performances have
been agreeably surprised at finding so great an amount of talent in an
itinerant company."

3.--Died at Lynn, Mr. James Smith, many years manager of the Theatre
Royal, Norwich.  He was in his 74th year.

11.--A performance of "Speed the Plough" was given at the Theatre Royal,
Norwich, for the benefit of Mr. George Bennett, the "Father of the
Norwich Stage," and "a member of the company in the palmy days of the
drama in the city."  Mr. Bennett appeared in the character of Farmer
Ashfield.  "The Mayor gave his patronage, and in every part of the dress
circle were to be recognised parties of high respectability, including
the old familiar faces of those who, thirty or forty years ago, were wont
to uphold and maintain the then palmy but now very depressed cause of
legitimate drama."  The night's receipts amounted to upwards of 90
pounds.

--The Norwich Town Council resolved to petition the House of Commons for
the total repeal of the Window-tax.

18.--Mr. Peter Master Yarington was presented with a silver salver and a
purse of 283 sovs., in recognition of his efficient discharge of duty as
Superintendent of the Norwich Police.  He was appointed Governor of the
City Gaol on July 31st, and was succeeded as head of the police force by
Mr. Dunne, formerly of the Kent constabulary.  Mr. Yarington died, in his
41st year, on July 21st, 1852, and on October 19th of that year Mr.
Robert Campling was appointed Governor of the gaol.

19.--Mr. Albert Smith gave his "new literary, pictorial, and musical
entertainment," entitled, "The Overland Mail," at the Assembly Rooms,
Norwich.

22.--A serious riot occurred at Yarmouth.  Samuel Graystone, mate of the
Ant, from Yarmouth to Plymouth, had signed articles to go the voyage, but
was forcibly prevented by seamen from boarding his ship.  Masters of
other vessels complained to the magistrates that they had been subjected
to similar treatment.  The staff of the East Norfolk Militia and the
Coastguard were called out to keep the riotous seamen in check, and two
troops of the 11th Hussars were conveyed by special trains from Norwich
to assist in quelling the disturbance.  The cavalry rode through the
town, and quickly cleared the streets.  "The rioters, frightened by the
mere appearance of the troops, flew in every direction up the narrow rows
of the town, and in a few hours tranquillity was restored."  It was
stated that, but for the timely arrival of the troops, a body of
Gorleston seamen would have made an attack upon the town.  Several of the
rioters were tried at the Quarter Sessions on March 6th, when, to the
surprise of the Court, a verdict of not guilty was returned.

26.--Died at his family seat, Kirby Hall, the Hon. and Rev. Lord Berners.
"He succeeded to the title and estates on the death of his brother
Robert, Lord Berners, better known in the sporting world as Col. Wilson.
He only attended at the House of Lords on a few occasions, one of which
was to vote for the Reform Bill; but though absent in person, his proxy
was always given to the support of the Whigs, of which, through life, he
was a firm and constant supporter."

--An exhibition of hawking was given on Hellesdon Brakes, near Norwich,
by Mr. Barr, the celebrated Scottish falconer.  Many hundreds of persons
were present.  Mr. Barr used four young hawks of the peregrine species.
They were flown at pigeons which were let loose, and in two hours two
dozen were brought to the ground.  "The first two or three were so
frightened, that when pursued by the hawk they took refuge among the
people, and one of them alighted on the back of a horse, and was taken by
hand."  Mr. Barr gave a second exhibition on March 10th, on Mr. George
Gowing's land at Trowse.


MARCH.


9.--A fire occurred at the office of the "Norwich Mercury," Castle
Street, Norwich.  The roof of the building fell in, and the compositors'
room, with most of the cases of type, was destroyed.

13.--Dr. White, the eminent translator of "D'Aubigne's History,"
delivered, in the old Council Chamber at the Guildhall, Norwich, a
lecture on "The Causes and Consequences of the Reformation."

27.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Lord Chief Justice Jervis, the libel
action, Abbott _v._ Bacon and Another, was tried.  The defendants
published a statement in the "Norwich Mercury," to the effect that the
plaintiff, a superintendent of the County Constabulary at East Dereham,
had stolen certain articles from the shop of Mr. Abram, a chemist and
druggist in that town.  The jury assessed the damages at one farthing.
On April 16th a motion was made in the Court of Exchequer for a new
trial, on the ground of misdirection of the jury, and a rule _nisi_ was
granted.  At a meeting held at the Norfolk Hotel, on April 5th, it was
resolved, "That the recent trial offered a most painful illustration of
the gross injustice which may be inflicted upon the editor of a newspaper
who honestly and fearlessly comments on matters of general interest," and
a public subscription was opened to recoup the proprietors of the
"Mercury" the loss they had sustained by their successful vindication of
the liberty of the Press.  In the Court of Exchequer, on June 27th, both
sides agreed to a verdict being entered for one farthing damages.

28.--George Baldry (33) was found guilty, at the Norfolk Assizes, before
Mr. Justice Erle, of murdering Caroline Warnes, at Thurlton, by striking
her on the head with a hammer.  The sentence of death was commuted to
transportation for life.

29.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Erle, John Whitley Cooper
and Edmund Slingsby Drury Long, solicitors, and Frederick Goose, dealer,
were indicted for unlawfully conspiring to obtain, by false pretences,
from Sarah Roberts Tooke, widow, divers goods, furniture, and effects,
with intent to defraud.  Cooper was at the time undergoing sentence of
twelve months' imprisonment, passed upon him at Norwich Quarter Sessions
on December 31st, 1850, for fraud.  He was now sentenced to two years'
imprisonment in the Common Gaol; Long was acquitted, and Goose, who had
absconded, forfeited his recognisances.  The victim of this conspiracy,
said the Judge, had been reduced from a position of respectability to one
of absolute ruin.


APRIL.


12.--Mr. Fred Phillips, while performing the part of Rob Roy at Norwich
Theatre, fell from a "fictitious precipice" and sustained a compound
fracture of the bones of the leg "implicating the ankle joint."  He was
removed to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, and "upon a consultation
among the surgeons it was deemed necessary to amputate the lower
extremity of the bone, an operation which was borne with heroic fortitude
by the poor sufferer."  A performance was given at the Theatre on May 6th
for the benefit of Mr. Phillips, when Mr. George Bennett made his last
appearance on the stage, in the part of Farmer Ashfield, and Mrs.
Phillips sustained the character of Miss Blandford in "The Ladies' Club."
Mr. Phillips received a second benefit on April 20th, 1852, and on July
9th, 1853, announced that he had taken the Boar's Head Inn, Surrey
Street.

23.--The headquarters of the 11th Hussars, commanded by the Earl of
Cardigan, marched from Norwich Barracks for Nottingham, and were
succeeded on the 25th by the 2nd Dragoon Guard's (Queen's Bays).

--Samuel Woodhouse, of Plumstead, and William Pyle, of Holt, were buried
alive in a well 115 feet deep, at Docking, by the falling in of 36 feet
of soil.  "Some of the inhabitants proposed to fill up the well and let
them remain in it, stating that the same thing had been done at
Tittleshall, where an inquest was held at the mouth of the well and the
body or bodies remain there to this day."  Efforts were made, however, to
recover the bodies.  That of Pyle was found on May 14th, and of Woodhouse
on the 15th.  "Though the bodies had been buried exactly three weeks, on
their being brought to the surface and moved about blood flowed freely
from both of them."

30.--Died, aged 78, Mr. Richard Slann, of Southtown, Great Yarmouth,
historical engraver to her Majesty the Queen.


MAY.


3.--The Census returns for the city of Norwich were published.  The
number of inhabited houses was 14,990, of uninhabited 339, and in course
of building 101.  The population was 68,706, of whom 31,213 were males,
and 37,493 females.

4.--A pauper named John Rowland, who had had a remarkable career, died at
Lynn Workhouse.  He was educated at Eton, and was afterwards a Fellow of
King's College, Cambridge.  Ordained deacon and priest by Bishop Horsley,
he officiated at St. James's, Westminster, and went out to St. Petersburg
as chaplain to the Embassy.  Subsequently he either threw off his gown or
had it taken from him, and became a blacksmith and coach-spring maker in
Norfolk Street, Lynn.  He was apprehended, tried, and transported for
stealing iron, the property of Mr. Bottomley, of South Gates, in that
town.  At the expiration of his term of transportation he returned to
Lynn, made a settlement in the town, and was for several years an inmate
of the Workhouse.  He died at the advanced age of 78 years.

12.--Died, at the age of 63, at his residence, the Close, Norwich, Mr.
William Ollett, "who obtained justly-deserved eminence as a carver of
wood for ecclesiastical purposes, and whose skill was called into
requisition in most of the cathedrals of this kingdom."


JUNE.


5.--The "members of Reffley" celebrated the 62nd anniversary of the
building of their temple, "the society having existed before the memory
of the oldest inhabitant" (of Lynn).

21.--The hand of a female was found in Miss Martineau's plantation,
Martineau's Lane, Norwich, by a lad named Charles Johnson.  Other
portions of human remains were discovered between this date and the end
of the month, in various suburbs of the city, namely, at Lakenham,
Hellesdon, Mile Cross, &c.  The remains were deposited at the Guildhall,
where they were examined by Mr. Nichols, Mr. D. Dalrymple, and Mr.
Norgate, surgeons, who pronounced them to be those of an adult female.
(_See_ January, 1869.)


JULY.


12.--The Yarmouth magistrates issued a warrant "to apprehend the bodies
of George Danby Palmer and James Cherry, charged on the oath of William
Norton Burroughes with being about to commit a breach of the peace by
fighting a duel."  The incident arose out of an extraordinary scene at a
public meeting, where "Mr. Palmer gave the lie to Mr. Cherry."

14.--Died at Rackheath Hall, in his 83rd year, Sir Edward Hardinge John
Stracey, second baronet.  He was born in India, came to this country as a
boy, and was educated at Norwich Grammar School and Christ Church,
Oxford.  He was subsequently called to the Bar, was for a time Clerk of
the House of Commons, and succeeded his uncle, Mr. Hardinge Stracey, as
counsel to the Chairmen of Committees of the House of Lords on Mr. Pitt's
appointment to office.  For several years he was Chairman of Quarter
Sessions for Cheshire, and a magistrate for that county as well as for
Norfolk and Suffolk.

26.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Lord Chief Baron Pollock and a
special jury, was tried the action, Baldry _v._ Ellis.  This was an issue
directed to be tried by the late Master of the Rolls, and involved the
disposal of a sum of about 25,000 pounds.  The jury had to decide whether
one Bailey Bird, deceased, who contracted marriage in the year 1818, was
competent to make that contract.  A large number of witnesses deposed
that Bird was of perfectly sound mind at the time of his marriage; an
equally large number, including several medical men, asserted that he was
an idiot.  The jury were of opinion that Bird was not of sound mind at
the time of the celebration of his marriage, and returned a verdict for
the defendant.

28.--Henry Groom (42) was indicted at the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr.
Justice Cresswell, for the murder of John Ayton, by shooting him with a
pistol, at Burnham Thorpe, on July 4th.  He was executed on the Castle
Hill, Norwich, on August 16th.


AUGUST.


8.--The steeple of St. Cuthbert's, Thetford, fell upon the roof of the
church, carrying away one of the arches and destroying the organ.

9.*--"A letter from Philadelphia, of the 16th ult., announces the death
of Mr. Davenport, formerly lessee of the theatres on the Norwich circuit.
He had been making a successful tour in the United States with his
talented daughter.  He died a few days before, at Cincinnati."

16.--On this date was published an extract from the "New York Express,"
giving particulars of a confession of murder by a private named Thomson,
belonging to the 1st Royals, then stationed at Halifax, North America.
He stated that when at Norwich eight years previously he was on terms of
intimacy with a woman.  A quarrel had occurred between them, and he had
thrown her into a canal.  The crime had so preyed upon his mind that he
determined to give himself up to justice and allow the law to take its
course.  On September 13th it was announced that Thomson had been brought
to England and committed to Winchester Gaol, pending inquiries by the
police of that city.  Two police-officers came to Norwich, investigated
the affair, and elicited the following remarkable facts: Thomson was
stationed in Norwich with the Carabineers in 1846, and afterwards
exchanged to the 1st Royals, then in Canada.  A girl named Anna Barber
was in the habit of frequenting the barracks, and became acquainted with
Thomson, whom she appeared to have displeased.  In the month of August,
1846, a tailor named James Taylor was fishing for eels in the river near
Blackfriars Bridge when he heard a scuffle, a shriek, a splash, and the
sound of retreating footsteps.  He immediately rowed to the place and
assisted out of the water a young woman, who refused to give him her
name.  She went away, and no report was made to the police.  In 1850 Anna
Barber was again seen in Norwich.  It was evident, therefore, that the
remorse which impelled Thomson to make his confession was groundless.

28.--The Norwich Corporation adopted the Public Health Act of 1848, and
appointed twenty members as a Local Board of Health.

29.--The church of St. Matthew, Thorpe Hamlet, was consecrated by the
Bishop of Norwich.


SEPTEMBER.


10.--Sir James Brooke, Rajah of Sarawak, then on a visit to England,
attended a dinner given at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, by members of the
Valpeian Club, established in 1847.

25.--A severe gale occurred off the Norfolk coast, and did much damage to
shipping at Yarmouth.

30.--The opening of the Norwich Waterworks was publicly celebrated.  The
band of the Coldstream Guards played selections in the Market Place, 220
guests dined at the Assembly Rooms, under the presidency of Mr. Samuel
Bignold, chairman of the Waterworks Company, and twenty thousand persons
witnessed a display of fireworks in the Market Place.  The works were
commenced by Messrs. Lucas Bros., the contractors, in February.  There
were 20,000 yards of excavations, and 2,500,000 bricks, 15,000 yards of
clay, 5,000 yards of filtering sand, 7,000 yards of filtering stone,
3,000 yards of concrete, and 40 tons of lead were used.  The rising main
was 4,000 yards in length, and 15 inches in diameter.


OCTOBER.


4.--Died at Hampton Court, in his 80th year, George William Stafford
Jerningham, Baron Stafford.  He inherited a baronetcy as Sir George
Jerningham on his father's death in 1809, and established his title to
the barony, under letters patent of Charles I., through his great
grandmother, after a reversal of the attainder of Sir William Howard,
Viscount Stafford, in 1824.  He assumed the additional name of Stafford
in 1826.  He was succeeded by his eldest son, Henry Valentine.

7.--Mr. George Cruikshank presided at the annual temperance festival held
at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, and delivered an address.

16.--Bexfield's oratorio, "Israel Restored," was "brought out" at the
Choral Concert, held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  The principal
vocalists were Miss Birch, Miss Williams, Mr. Benson, and Mr. H.
Phillips.  Dr. Bexfield conducted his work, which "created the greatest
interest throughout the musical world, and hundreds of applications for
reserved places were received from all parts of the kingdom."

26.--Died at Philadelphia, the United States of America, aged 62, Mr.
Richard Cowling Taylor, F.G.S.  He was the author of many valuable works
during his residence in Norwich The most important was his "Index
Monasticus," published in 1821.  Mr. Taylor was a member of several
scientific societies in America.

30.--Mrs. Fanny Kemble gave a reading of "King John," at the Assembly
Room, Norwich, and on the 31st read "Much Ado about Nothing."


NOVEMBER.


4.--A lecture on the "Bloomer costume" was delivered at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich, by a Mrs. Knights.  "The large audience was composed for
the most part of the male sex, shop assistants, and milliners'
apprentices.  The amount of money taken must have been considerable, and
we regret that there should have been so many persons found in this city
ready to be taken in with such nonsense.  Mrs. Knights was attired in
Bloomer costume, an essentially ugly and unfeminine dress.  She was
greeted with derisive laughter, applause, and hisses, and she left the
orchestra amid a storm of groans and disapprobation."

5.--A sculling match from Surlingham to the New Cut at Thorpe took place
between Lett, of London, and R. Buttle, of Norwich, for 25 pounds a side.
Lett's boat was overturned soon after the start, and Buttle rowed over
the course.  A second match, for 10 pounds a side, was rowed on the 10th,
between Bramerton Wood's End and the New Cut, and was won easily by the
Norwich man.

8.*--"Before the Lords Justices of Appeal was heard the case of the
Attorney-General _v._ the Corporation of Norwich.  It arose on the
question whether the Corporation have authority to apply the borough fund
in soliciting a Bill in Parliament to enable them to improve the
navigation of the River Wensum.  The information was filed at the
relation of two of the ratepayers, and it prayed that the Corporation
might be restrained from promoting and prosecuting a Bill in Parliament
for this purpose and at their expense.  The appeal was dismissed, with
costs."

10.--Mr. Charles Winter was elected Mayor, and Mr. Robert Wiffin Blake
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

10.--Mr. S. C. Marsh and Capt. Pearson (the retiring Mayor) were
nominated for the Mayoralty of Yarmouth.  The voting being equal, Capt.
Pearson gave the casting-vote in his own favour, and declared himself
duly elected.

18.--Winter set in with great severity; snow fell to the depth of two or
three feet, and a severe frost commenced.


DECEMBER.


6.--The Eastern Counties Association for obtaining Agricultural Relief
held its first public meeting at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  Its
principal objects were to obtain the repeal of the Malt-tax, a
re-adjustment of the tithe system, security for tenants in making
improvements, a reform in the management of county expenditure, and the
abolition of the Game Laws.

11.--A coarse urn was turned up by a plough at Easton.  The vessel
contained about 4,000 small brass coins of the Lower Empire.  The
earliest amongst them were of the period of Gallienus, and there were
about 2,500 of the Constantines; nearly 600 had the wolf and twins, and
about 800 bore the victory with spear and shield.  Mr. Goddard Johnson
made a descriptive list of the coins.

26.--Died, in his 38th year, at Malvern, Worcestershire, Mr. J. B.
Wigham, son of Mr. Robert Wigham, of Norwich.  "He was a Fellow of the
Royal Geological Society, and was well known as having personally
collected one of the best cabinets of tertiary fossils in the kingdom."

--Macarte's Circus Company performed in a temporary building erected on
the Castle Meadow, Norwich.



1852.


JANUARY.


5.--Died at Letheringsett, Johnson Jex, originally a blacksmith and
afterwards a manufacturer of watches.  He was born at Billingford in or
about the year 1778.  After the death of his mother, in about 1830, he
led a life of complete solitude, and became a scientific anchorite.  "The
first watch ever constructed by Jex was made after he had settled at
Letheringsett, for his friend the Rev. T. Munnings, of Gorgate Hall, near
East Dereham.  Every part of this watch, including the silver face, and
every tool employed in its construction, was of Jex's own making."

10.*--"Dr. Woolley is resigning the head mastership of King Edward VI.
Grammar School (Norwich), on his appointment as principal of the
University College and professor of classical literature in the
University of Sydney."  He was succeeded by Dr. Vincent.

10.--Mr. Justice Patteson retired from the Bench.  With the exception of
Barons Parke and Alderson, he was, in point of official service, the
oldest judge on the Bench.

19.--After many delays, the statue of Lord Nelson, executed by Mr.
Milnes, of London, arrived in Norwich, and was placed in St. Andrew's
Hall for public inspection.  The estimated cost of the statue was 700
pounds.  A public subscription was opened in Norwich in 1847; by 1848 175
pounds had been contributed; in October, 1849, the fund reached 268
pounds, and in October, 1851, 300 pounds.  "At present (1852) the whole
amount subscribed, which is scarcely 400 pounds, will not repay the
sculptor for the purchase of the block and his out-of-pocket expenses."
(_See_ March 24th, 1856.)

21.--Died in London, Lieut.-Col. John Smith, of Ellingham Hall, "a
generous supporter of the trade and interests of the district."  He
served several years in India, in the 2nd Madras Light Cavalry, and
resigned his commission shortly after succeeding to the Ellingham estate.
The funeral took place at Ellingham, on February 27th.


MARCH.


2.--A requisition, signed by one thousand persons, was presented to Mr.
T. O. Springfield, soliciting him to offer himself as a candidate for the
representation of Norwich.  Mr. Springfield declined the request, on the
ground that Parliamentary duties would tend to the shortening of his
life.

6.*--"Died, lately, on the West Coast of Africa, in the 19th year of his
age, Charles, youngest son of Mr. Wood, of Morston.  He was a midshipman
on board H.M.S. Sampson, and was put in charge, under Lieut. Gilbert
Elliott, with twelve of the best seamen and one carpenter, in October
last, of a slave felucca captured by the Sampson, and was last seen off
the island of St. Thomas on the 31st, and departed on that day for
Badajoz, a distance of five or six days' sail; but although anxiously
expected, and notwithstanding several ships of war having since passed
over her track, she has never been heard of since.  Some heavy tornados
are said to have occurred about the time she was missed."

12.--A special meeting of the Norwich Town Council was held, "to take
into consideration the recent gross insult to the citizens of Norwich in
the person of their Chief Magistrate."  The Conservative members, with
one or two exceptions, abstained from attending.  It was resolved, "That
the Mayor of Norwich for the time being is, by prescription and charter,
the first citizen of Norwich, and by custom and courtesy has been always
so esteemed in public and private; that the Council learn with regret
that a gross insult has been offered to the Mayor in a place of public
amusement, and it is the opinion of the Council that the conduct of the
individual who offered the insult is derogatory to him as a magistrate
and a citizen."  The resolution was adopted, and it was further agreed
"That a copy of the resolution with respect to the insult offered to the
Mayor by Capt. Ives, with the seal of the Council affixed, be transmitted
to the Secretary of State, to the Lord Lieutenant of the county, and to
the Mayor."  (No details were published.)

19.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Serjeant Adams (sitting as
Commissioner in place of Mr. Justice Crompton), Hannah Neale was indicted
for the wilful murder of William Neale, her husband, by poisoning him, at
Outwell, in July, 1851.  The jury acquitted the prisoner.

24.--Died at Woolwich, Col. Courtenay Cruttenden, R.A.  He served in the
Army 48 years, and was present at the capture of Guadeloupe, in 1815.
For several years he was inspector of drills in the garrison at Woolwich.

27.*--"The late Edward Lombe, Esq., of Melton Hall, Wymondham, recently
deceased at Florence, has left his personal property, subject to a life
interest to his wife, to University College Hospital.  The property is
estimated at more than 25,000 pounds."


APRIL.


10.--A statement was published as to the proposed disposal of the sum of
1,263 pounds 4s. 5d. realised by the two concerts given by Jenny Lind in
1849.  It was her wish "that the money should be employed in founding and
supporting some new charity, and, if possible, a lasting one, for the
poor of Norwich."  The committee, "feeling that no charity could be
permanent which was not in a great measure self-supporting," resolved to
devote the money to establishing public baths and wash-houses.  A large
malthouse in St. Stephen's, formerly the property of Mr. Crawshay, was to
be purchased for 700 pounds, and plans and specifications for converting
the building into baths had been prepared by a London architect, "but
unfortunately the lowest tenders exceed by a very large amount the sum at
the disposal of the committee.  They find that unless they can raise
1,000 pounds in addition to their present fund, they must entirely give
up the undertaking."  The Mayor was requested to convene a public
meeting, which was held at the Guildhall on April 21st, when Mr. Samuel
Bignold moved a resolution in favour of the adoption of the baths scheme.
Mr. Henry Browne strongly protested against the proposed misappropriation
of the money, and the question was adjourned for a month.  Meanwhile
several local charities made claims for assistance, and on May 27th a
further adjournment was decided upon.  The matter was in abeyance until
February 7th, 1853, when Dr. W. H. Ranking, in a letter to the NORFOLK
CHRONICLE, advocated "the endowment of an additional ward or wards in the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, to be appropriated to the treatment of
diseases of children."  On May 30th, 1853, a public meeting was held at
the Guildhall, under the presidency of the Lord Bishop, "for the purpose
of promoting the establishment of an institution for sick children."  It
was resolved, on the motion of Mr. J. G. Johnson, seconded by the Mayor
(Mr. Coaks), "That an infirmary for the treatment of the diseases of sick
children be established in Norwich, to be called the Jenny Lind Infirmary
for Sick Children."  The first meeting of the supporters of the new
institution was held under the presidency of the Mayor (Mr. Samuel
Bignold), "in the house in Pottergate Street taken for the Charity," on
December 16th, 1853.

17.*--"The premises of the old Waterworks Company have been purchased of
the Corporation by the new company, who have liberally offered to give up
their interest in Chapel Field to the Corporation on condition that the
latter shall undertake to lay out the Field as a park and
pleasure-ground, so as to render it an ornament to the city.  The
Corporation will have a considerable surplus fund in hand when the
company have paid the purchase-money for the Waterworks.  By a plan
submitted by Mr. Lynore, engineer of the Waterworks, the Field will be
enclosed by a dwarf wall and railings, with handsome entrance-gates at
the Theatre Street, Crescent, and St. Giles' corners, and a porter's
lodge at the latter.  The interior is to be laid out in the style of the
London parks, the reservoir to be retained, but altered in shape, and the
present tower to be ornamented and furnished with waiting-rooms, it is
also proposed to place the Nelson statue on an elegant fountain pedestal
in the centre of the reservoir."

18.--Died, Mr. George Bennett, comedian, aged 76.


MAY.


1.--A detachment of the 4th (Queen's Own) Light Dragoons arrived at
Norwich Cavalry Barracks, to relieve the Queen's Bays, who had marched
for Manchester.

--*"We have now had ten weeks' drought, the last wet day being the 18th
of February."

2.--Died, in his 49th year, at his residence, Grosvenor Street, London,
Mr. John Dalrymple, F.R.S.  He was the eldest son of Mr. William
Dalrymple, the distinguished Norwich surgeon.  After studying under his
father and at Edinburgh University, Mr. Dalrymple passed his examination
before the College of Surgeons in 1827, and commenced practice in
Norwich.  In 1832 he was elected an assistant surgeon to the Royal London
Ophthalmic Hospital, of which institution he became, in 1843, full
surgeon.  In 1847 he was appointed consulting surgeon to the North London
Infirmary, and in 1851 became a member of the Council of the College of
Surgeons.  Mr. Dalrymple was one of the founders of the Royal College of
Chemistry.

7.--In the Court of Queen's Bench an important decision was given in the
case of the Queen _v._ Robert Wiffin Blake, who had been required to show
by what authority he had exercised the office of town councillor at
Norwich.  At the previous municipal election Mr. Blake, who was then one
of the six aldermen of the city, became a candidate for the office of
councillor of the Fourth Ward.  Mr. Cundall, a Conservative, was his
opponent.  Mr. Blake having a majority of five votes, the presiding
alderman and assessor returned him as duly elected, notwithstanding that
notice had been given of his ineligibility.  The Court decided that Mr.
Blake could not be elected a councillor while holding the office of
alderman.  The defendant filed a disclaimer of the office of town
councillor, and therefore allowed judgment of ouster to pass against him,
with costs.  (_See_ November 23rd.)

8.--Died at Nice, in his 85th year, General Auguste De Bardelin.  For
many years the deceased was a highly respected resident in Norwich.  A
native of Aix, in Provence, and born of a noble family, he was appointed
one of the _garde du corps_ of Louis XVI., and was on duty at Versailles
on October 6th, 1789, when the Royal palace was assailed by the
insurrectionary mob of Paris, and the King and Queen were defended from
assassination through the heroic sacrifice of life by many gentlemen of
their bodyguard.  M. De Bardelin accompanied the French princes in their
exile, and afterwards came to England and settled in Norwich.  There he
remained about twenty-two years, supporting himself by teaching the
French and Italian languages.  In 1814 he accompanied Louis XVIII. to
Paris, and the Government of the Restoration being established, he
resumed his military occupation.  After Bonaparte's second abdication, he
returned with has lawful Sovereign.  For ten years from that time M. De
Bardelin continued to reside at the Royal chateau at St. Germains, in
which a handsome suite of apartments was appropriated to his use, where
he always delighted in welcoming the visits of his Norwich friends.  In
1830 he was promoted to be General Marechal de Camp.  In 1815 or 1816 the
Chevalier married Miss Sutton, a lady well-known to Roman Catholic
families of distinction in Norfolk and Suffolk.  Madame De Bardelin died
in 1826.  In 1830 General De Bardelin resigned has command and resided in
Paris till 1848, when the Republic being proclaimed, he went to his
native province, and in the winter of 1851 sojourned at Nice.  "He always
referred to his residence at Norwich as the best period of his life.  His
pupils at Thurgar's school were enquired after with affectionate
interest; he remembered the hospitalities at Crown Point, where General
Money gave him a second home, and he never could forget the day when he
quitted Norwich by the mail coach from the Angel Inn, on the restoration
of the Bourbons;--passengers, horses, and all were decorated with white
cockades, and a host of friends assembled to cheer and bid him farewell
in true old English style."  The daughter of General De Bardelin became
the Baroness de Fabry.

14.--St. Martin-at-Palace church, Norwich, was re-opened, after being
restored and in great part rebuilt.  In August, 1851, while the church
was undergoing repair, a portion of the roof fell in and brought down
with it the eastern end of the north aisle.

23.--A serious fire took place at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich.  The roof
was entirely consumed, and a number of rooms destroyed.  The Watch
Committee, on May 21st, held an inquiry into certain allegations
regarding a deficiency in the water supply, and the inefficiency of the
fire-engines.

31.--Kensington Gardens, Lakenham, were opened to the public, who "found
amusement in the collections of animals and birds."  During the Assize
week "there was a pyrotechnic and scenic exhibition on the meadow side of
the river, called, 'The Storming of San Sebastian,' being an imitation of
the pyrotechnic display at Cremorne."


JUNE.


5.--Election proceedings commenced in Norwich with the arrival of the
Marquis of Douro and Lieut.-Col. Dickson, who had been adopted
Conservative candidates.  The Whig-Radical candidates, Messrs. Peto and
Warner, arrived at Wymondham on the 9th, and proceeded thence by road to
Norwich.  At Mile End a procession was formed, headed by men carrying
large and small loaves, labelled respectively "Free Trade" and
"Protection."  In the evening the candidates addressed a great meeting at
St. Andrew's Hall.  (_See_ July 7th.)

--*"Through the exertions of several persons interested, the city and
county magistrates have taken steps to put a stop to spring netting in
the Wensum and Yare, and a fund is being raised to defray the expenses of
protecting the rivers and prosecuting offenders."

15.--A cricket match, between 22 of Lynn and 11 of All England, commenced
at Lynn, and concluded on the 16th.  Lynn, 63--58; All England, 41--66.

19.--The Witton estate was purchased by Mr. John Penrice for 18,900
pounds.  "The Cromer Hall estate, the property of the Countess of
Listowel, including the Gothic mansion, several farm-houses, and upwards
of 1,200 acres of land, with several manors, has been purchased by
private contract for 60,000 pounds, by Mr. Benjamin Bond Cabbell, M.P.
for Boston."


JULY.


2.--At the Norfolk Sessions the county justices received the resignation
of Col. Richard Montague Oakes, Chief Constable.  Capt. Black was elected
in his place on October 22nd.  Col. Oakes was presented, on October 23rd,
with a silver vase, subscribed for by the superintendents and constables
of the Norfolk constabulary.

7.--The nomination of candidates for the representation of Norwich took
place at the Guildhall.  The show of hands was in favour of Messrs. Peto
and Warner, and a poll was demanded on behalf of the Marquis of Douro and
Col. Dickson.  The polling-booths were opened at eight o'clock on the
morning of the 8th, and closed at four o'clock in the afternoon, and the
result was officially declared at one o'clock on the 9th: Peto, 2,190;
Warner, 2,145; Douro, 1,592; Dickson, 1,465.  The issues on which the
election was fought were Free Trade and Protection.

--Mr. C. E. Rumbold and Sir E. Lacon, "Moderate Conservatives," and Mr.
W. T. M'Cullagh and Sir C. Napier, Whig-Radicals, were nominated
Parliamentary candidates for Yarmouth.  The polling took place on the
8th: Lacon, 611; Rumbold; 547; M'Cullagh, 521; Napier, 486.

8.--Lynn election: Lord Jocelyn, 627; Lord Stanley, 551; Mr. Robert
Pashley, Q.C., 383.  The two first-named were returned.

9.--The Hon. Francis Baring and the Earl of Euston were returned
unopposed for the borough of Thetford.

12.--Mr. Edmond Wodehouse and Mr. Henry Negus Burroughes were returned
unopposed as members for East Norfolk.

17.--The nomination of candidates for West Norfolk took place at
Swaffham.  Mr. William Bagge and Mr. George Pierrepont Bentinck were the
Conservative nominees, and Mr. Anthony Hamond the Liberal candidate.
"Mr. Hamond was formerly a Protectionist, and opposed Mr. Cobden at the
Free Trade meeting at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, only a week before Sir
Robert Peel proposed to repeal the Corn Laws.  Mr. Hamond now avows
himself a Free Trader."  He was nominated at the last moment to fill the
vacancy occasioned by the retirement of the Hon. E. K. Coke.  The poll
was opened on the 20th and 21st, and on the 23rd the result was declared
as follows: Bagge, 3,421; Bentinck, 3,143; Hamond, 1,973.


AUGUST.


14.--A general meeting of the Deputy Lieutenants of the County was held
at the Shirehall, Norwich, for the purpose of carrying into effect the
provisions of the Act 15 and 16 Vic., for raising a force not exceeding
80,000 men, of which number 50,000 were to be raised in 1852, and 30,000
in 1855.  The Earl of Orford moved, and it was resolved, that the Lord
Lieutenant be requested to apply to the Secretary of State to obtain her
Majesty's Order in Council for the subdivision districts to be made
coterminous with the Superintendent Registrar's districts; and to be
furnished with a list of the number of men liable to serve in each
subdivision and parish.  On September 18th measures were adopted for the
enlistment of two regiments of Militia--612 men to serve in the Western
Regiment, and a like number in the Eastern Regiment.  Sufficient numbers
of men were forthcoming without having recourse to the Ballot Act.
(_See_ April 19th, 1853.)

21.--Bylaugh Hall, the stately home of the Lombe family, was completed at
about this date.  The mansion was erected under the provisions of the
will of Sir John Lombe, Bart., who died in 1817.  The will directed "that
so long as the house remained uncommenced the money should be invested
and allowed to accumulate at compound interest."  The new mansion was
begun in 1849, under the supervision and control of the trustees in whom
the building fund was vested.  It was erected from the designs of Messrs.
Banks and Barry, of London, by Messrs. Piper, of Bishopsgate Street,
whose contract amounted to 29,389 pounds.  The interior was decorated by
Mr. Sang "and his German artists."  (_See_ July 4th, 1857.)


SEPTEMBER.


14.--Intelligence was received at Norwich of the death of the Duke of
Wellington.  The muffled bells of the city churches were tolled for
several hours.  On November 18th, the day of the funeral, the principal
shops were closed, and the Mayor and Corporation and the military forces
stationed in the city attended a special service at the Cathedral.

17.--Mr. S. Chambers, R.N., made a balloon ascent from the Vauxhall
Gardens, Yarmouth, and descended on Mautby marshes.

18.--Died at Saham Toney, John Thurston, labourer, in the 105th year of
his age.

21.--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  The opening concert included selections from the
works of classical composers, and a reading by Mrs. Fanny Kemble from the
"Midsummer Night's Dream," with incidental music.  "Israel Restored" was
performed at the morning concert on the 22nd, and selections by popular
composers were given in the evening.  On the morning of the 23rd,
"Jerusalem" (H. H. Pierson) was performed for the first time, and a
miscellaneous concert took place in the evening.  "The Messiah" was
rendered on the morning of the 24th, and a dress ball was held in the
evening.  The principal vocalists were Madame Viardot Garcia, Madame
Fiorentini, Miss Louisa Pyne, Miss Dolby, Miss Alleyne, Signor Gardoni,
Mr. Sims Reeves, Mr. Lockey, Signor Belletti, Mr. Weiss, and Herr Formes.
Mr. Benedict conducted.  The gross receipts were 4,665 pounds 7s. 2d.;
gross expenses, 4,171 pounds 17s. 1d.; surplus, 493 pounds 10s. 1d.

30.--Died, Rear-Admiral William Fisher, captain superintendent of
Sheerness dockyard, and author of two naval novels, "The Petrel" and "The
Albatross."  He was the second son of Mr. John Fisher, of Yarmouth, and
was born November 18th, 1780.  Admiral Fisher entered the Navy in 1795,
and was engaged in many important services.  He married, in 1810,
Elizabeth, sister of Sir James Rivett Carnac, Bart., Governor of Bombay.


OCTOBER.


5.--A prize-fight took place on St. Andrew's Green, near Bungay, between
James Perowne, of Norwich, and James High, of Ellingham.  "The former was
seconded by a man named Mace," and the other by Smith, of Ditchingham.
The police endeavoured to take possession of the ring, but were put to
flight by the mob; and the men fighting to a finish, High was declared
the victor.  Principals and seconds, with the exception of Mace, were
subsequently committed for trial, and at Beccles Quarter Sessions, on
October 18th, were bound over to keep the peace.  Jim Mace was
apprehended at Litcham, on November 2nd, and at Beccles Quarter Sessions
on January 3rd, 1853, was ordered to enter into his own recognisances to
be of good behaviour.

6.--Died at Quebec, Stephen Codman, for thirty-six years organist of the
cathedral church in that city.  He was a native of Norwich, where he
received his musical education under Dr. Beckwith.

7.--The Priory Schools, Yarmouth, were opened by the Bishop of Norwich.
"The site of the schools originally formed the refectory of the
Benedictine friars.  Many of the walls of the priory still remain, and
the hall has been for many years used for the ignoble purposes of a
stable."

27.--A meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, at which a public
subscription was opened for the erection of a statue to the memory of the
Duke of Wellington.  On October 4th, 1853, it was decided that the statue
should be of bronze, and Mr. G. Adams was commissioned to prepare the
model.  (_See_ November 2nd, 1854.)


NOVEMBER.


6.--Died at Ormesby, near Yarmouth, in his 82nd year, Rear-Admiral Black,
one of the oldest officers in the Navy.  He had seen much active service,
and had been employed on the North-West coast of America.

9.--For the office of Mayor of Norwich two candidates were nominated--Mr.
Samuel Bignold and Mr. Richard Coaks.  The voting was equal, and the
Mayor giving his casting-vote in favour of the latter, Mr. Coaks was
declared duly elected.  Mr. George Womack was appointed Sheriff.  (_See_
November 23rd.)

22.--Election petitions were laid upon the table of the House of Commons,
against the return of Messrs. Peto and Warner, as members for Norwich.
(_See_ February 24th, 1853.)

23.--In the Court of Queen's Bench a rule in the nature of a _quo
warranto_ was applied for, calling upon Mr. Coaks, Mayor of Norwich, to
show by what authority he exercised that office.  The affidavits stated
that on November 9th there were two candidates for the Mayoralty, Mr.
Bignold and Mr. Coaks, and that the retiring Mayor refused to record the
vote of Mr. Cundall in favour of Mr. Bignold.  Consequently the voting
was even, and the retiring Mayor gave his casting-vote in favour of Mr.
Coaks.  The affidavits further stated, in support of Mr. Cundall's right
to vote, that at the election of councillors on November 1st, 1851, Mr.
Cundall was a candidate in opposition to Mr. Robert Wiffin Blake, then
one of the aldermen of Norwich, and therefore ineligible to be elected a
councillor; and that Mr. Cundall had, prior to the election, given notice
of Mr. Blake's disqualification, but that Mr. Blake was elected by a
majority of five votes.  Subsequently, on a _quo warranto_ being filed
against him, judgment of ouster was obtained.  Mr. Cundall therefore made
the required declaration before two councillors, and took his seat as a
councillor at the late election of Mayor, and claimed to have his vote
recorded for Mr. Bignold, which, if received, would have placed him in a
majority of one over Mr. Coaks; but such vote was rejected by the
retiring Mayor.  The Court granted the rule.  The Attorney-General showed
cause against the rule on January 28th, 1853.  The Court was of opinion
that Mr. Cundall had made out a clear _prima facie_ case, and the rule
for the _quo warranto_ was made absolute.  Lord Campbell gave judgment in
the case on January 21st, 1854.  He said it entirely depended on the
right of Cundall to vote.  He held that on November 9th, 1852, Cundall
was a member of the Council, and had a right to vote for Mr. Bignold, and
if he had so voted Mr. Bignold would have been duly elected Mayor.  Mr.
Coaks had usurped that office, and the _quo warranto_ had been properly
issued.  Mr. Justice Crompton was of the same opinion.  Judgment for the
Crown.


DECEMBER.


11.*--"The long-continued rains have increased the floods in the valleys
of the Eastern division of the county.  Throughout the valley of the
Yare, a large extent of land has been for some time under water, on
either side of the river, for a distance of thirty miles."  At Southery
and Feltwell about 8,000 acres were flooded, and upwards of one hundred
poor families were compelled to leave their habitations.  The estimated
loss to the district was between 25,000 pounds and 30,000 pounds, and a
public subscription was opened for the relief of the sufferers.

21.--The Public Library and Museums Act Committee reported to the Norwich
Town Council that it was desirable to hire the Museum for the use of the
public for two days in the week, and to erect a building for the purposes
of a free library, and that, in compliance with the Act, a rate of one
halfpenny in the pound be levied, one-third to be devoted to the former
object, and two-thirds to the latter.  The principle of the rate was
affirmed, and its application postponed for further consideration.
(_See_ September 13th, 1854.)

24.*--"Died at Reedham, a few days since, at the advanced age of 103, Mr.
John Softly.  He retained his faculties and was an active man up to the
time of his death."

26.--One of the most terrific storms of wind and rain ever remembered at
Norwich occurred on this date.  In the rural districts many stacks were
blown down and scattered in all directions.



1853.


JANUARY.


8.--M.  Gompertz's panorama of the invasion of British India by the Sikh
Army of the Punjaub was exhibited at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich.  One of
the scenic attractions was a representation of "the crypt of the Holy
Sepulchre, under three distinct aspects," a dioramic illusion which forms
a popular feature in similar entertainments at the present day.

13.--A miraculous escape was recorded at Swaffham.  A drunken man named
Edward Horsepool went into the yard of the Angel public-house, at three
o'clock in the morning, with the intention of lying down in a shed.  By
mistake he opened the door of the covering of a disused well, and
stepping in, fell to the bottom, a depth of 117 feet.  A tramp sleeping
in the shed was awakened by the man's cries, and gave an alarm.  Mr.
William Laxon, collar maker, procured ropes, and Horsepool was rescued
uninjured, after having been half an hour in 20 feet of water.  He had
kept his head above the surface by clinging to the broken sides of the
well.

22.--In the Prerogative Court, before Sir J. Dodson, was tried the action
Gilbert (administratrix of Woolner) _v._ Hammond.  It had reference to
granting administration, with will annexed, to the goods of Miss Margaret
Creak, of Norwich, who died on June 5th, 1850, possessed of personal
property of about 30,000 pounds and realty of the estimated value of 500
pounds per annum.  The will bore date January 13th, 1844, and its effect
was to leave, with some trifling exceptions, the personal property to Mr.
Woolner, a chemist and druggist, who was also appointed executor.  The
will was originally propounded by Woolner, who afterwards committed
suicide, and his sister, Mrs. Gilbert, now applied for probate, as his
administratrix, which was, in the first instance, opposed by Mrs.
Hammond, a cousin-german and one of the next-of-kin of the deceased, but
she died during the pendency of the suit, and her husband subsequently
took up the case.  When the disposition of the property became known, a
great many rumours were put in circulation, imputing foul play to Mr.
Woolner, which was the cause of his committing suicide.  Judgment was
pronounced, on Feb. 4th, in favour of the will.  The Judge said the
relatives had a right to inquire into the transaction, and had they
confined themselves within due limits would have been entitled to costs
out of the estate; but they had persisted down to the close of the
argument in charges which they had failed to prove, and, therefore, in
decreeing probate of the will to Mrs. Gilbert, he must accompany it with
the condemnation of Mr. Hammond in 100 pounds costs, _nomine expensarum_.


FEBRUARY.


17.--Mr. C. J. Palmer, at a meeting of the Yarmouth Town Council, called
attention to the unsatisfactory condition of the Corporation records, and
stated that many of the documents in existence in Manship's time no
longer existed, whilst several others belonging to the town were in the
hands of private individuals in Norwich.  A committee was appointed to
examine and schedule the charters and rolls, and to avail themselves of
the services of Mr. Henry Harrod, of Norwich, "for their better
elucidation and classification," at an expense not exceeding 20 pounds.

18.--The first snowfall of the season occurred on this date, and was
heavier than had been known for several years.  The mails were delayed,
and great inconvenience occasioned.  The morning train from London was
detained for fourteen hours at Lakenheath.  At Lynn, on the 23rd, the
tide rose to a great height, and the low-lying parts of the town were
under water.  A breach occurred in the river bank near Magdalene, and
occasioned the loss of much live stock and farm property.

21.--Died at Leeds, aged 69, the Rev. Robert Fountaine Elwin, rector of
Wilby-with-Hargham.  He was well known in Norwich for the active part he
had taken in the Musical Festivals from their commencement.  A few years
before his death he retired to Leeds, where he resided with his only
daughter, Mrs. Hyde.  Mr. Elwin not only possessed fine musical taste,
but was skilled in mechanics, and an excellent connoisseur of the fine
arts.  "Whether in the company of the great, presiding at the Choral
Society's meetings, or lecturing to mechanics, it was always delightful
and instructive to listen to him."  Mr. Elwin's paternal grandfather
married a granddaughter of Oliver Cromwell.

24.--In the House of Commons, Capt. Baldero presented a petition from
certain electors at Norwich, who had petitioned the House against the
return of the sitting members, complaining that their petition had been
withdrawn without their consent, and praying that the order discharging
the petition might again be put on the orders of the House.  Mr. T.
Duncombe presented a protest from Col. Dickson, complaining of the
withdrawal of the petition.  It was alleged that Mr. Brown, the
Parliamentary agent, had been guilty of a breach of privilege by
withdrawing the petition.  A motion for printing the petition was agreed
to.  On March 2nd a Select Committee was appointed to inquire into the
matter.  The investigation commenced on March 10th, and concluded on
March 17th, on which day Mr. Duncombe brought up the report of the
Committee.  They were of opinion that Mr. Brown had received no
instructions to withdraw the petition, but as they could find no
precedent as to the proper mode of proceeding under the circumstances,
they left it to the House to determine whether it could comply with the
prayer of the petitioner.  On March 12th a great Liberal meeting was held
at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, under the presidency of the Mayor (Mr.
Coaks), at which resolutions were adopted expressing indignation at the
allegations made before the Select Committee with regard to Messrs. Peto
and Warner.  A duel was to have been fought between Col. Dickson and Col.
Forester (a witness before the Committee) on March 19th, but "at the
eleventh hour the matter was fortunately adjusted by the friendly
interposition of an hon. member who sits on the opposite side of the
House.  Mr. Culpepper represented Col. Dickson, and Mr. Craven Berkeley,
M.P., was the friend of Col. Forester."  It subsequently transpired that
the withdrawal of the petition formed part of an arrangement and
compromise entered into between Mr. Henry Edward Brown and Mr. James
Coppock, solicitor, in pursuance of which eight petitions were
simultaneously withdrawn, as implicating the seats of ten members of the
House, namely, Norwich, 2; Kidderminster, 1; Gloucester, 1; Middlesex, 1;
Youghal, 1; County Down, 2; and West Norfolk, 2.

24.--At Norwich Quarter Sessions, before the Recorder, Mr. Prendergast,
the appeal case, Colman _v._ Clarke, was heard.  Mr. Evans and Mr. Palmer
were for the appellants, and Mr. Hawkins and Mr. Bulwer for the
respondent.  It was proved that in the early part of May, 1852, Messrs.
Colman established at Carrow a business for the manufacture of cake from
refuse rice, and it was alleged that after the process had been carried
on for a short time offensive smells were observed in the neighbourhood.
The firm were summoned before the magistrates for permitting a nuisance,
and were fined.  They now appealed against the conviction, on the ground
of informalities in the original proceedings, and of want of jurisdiction
on the part of the magistrates.  The conviction was quashed.

28.--Hengler's Circus and Roman Amphitheatre, Castle Meadow, Norwich, was
opened with the production of a grand equestrian spectacle, entitled,
"Kenilworth Castle."


MARCH.


9.--Died at his residence, Great Stanhope Street, London, in his 78th
year, General Sir Edward Kerrison, Bart., K.C.B., G.C.H.  He entered the
Army in 1796, as Cornet in the 6th Dragoons, and received the rank of
General in 1851.  He served at the Helder in 1799, and in 1808 took part
in the campaign of Sir John Moore, and was present at the battle of
Corunna.  As Colonel Kerrison, he commanded the 7th Hussars from 1813 to
1815, through various campaigns.  At the battle of Orthes he received a
severe wound, and he was again wounded in the battle of Waterloo, where
his horse was shot under him.  Sir Edward Kerrison received his baronetcy
in 1821, when he was nominated a G.C.H., and in 1840 a K.C.B.  In 1830 he
was appointed to the colonelcy of the 14th Light Dragoons.  For forty
years he was member of Parliament for Eye.  He married a daughter of Mr.
Alexander Ellice, and left a son and three daughters.

12.--Died at Pulham, Mr. Cornelius Whur, the author of several volumes of
poems.  He was known as "the Suffolk Poet."

19.--The Rev. William Beauchamp was driving down the hill into Trowse
when his horse ran away and upset the gig.  In his fall he sustained a
severe fracture of the skull and died instantly.  Mr. Beauchamp, who was
the second son of Sir William Beauchamp Proctor, Bart., of Langley-park,
was 35 years of age, and had been rector of Chedgrave about ten years.
He left a widow and five young children.

21.--Three hundred members of the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows dined at
the Royal Hotel, Norwich, and presented to Mr. Samuel Daynes, Past Grand
Master of the Unity, a purse of 133 sovs., in recognition of his
exertions in promoting the interests and extension of the Order during
his year of office.

29.--A vessel named the Reindeer, belonging to the port of Yarmouth,
owned by Mrs. King, of Gorleston, and commanded by Captain Wilson, was on
her voyage from Valparaiso to Monte Video when the crew mutinied, and
murdered the captain, steward, and two Roman Catholic priests
(passengers).  The mutineers then launched a boat, filled it with the
most valuable portion of the cargo, and scuttled the ship.


APRIL.


4.--A fire occurred at Hunstanton Hall.  The rooms were quickly cleared
of the paintings and furniture, which were safely deposited in the school
house.  There being no possibility of saving the south and west sides,
great efforts were made to preserve the north and east sides, with which
object the communicating portions of the building were broken down, and
the flames thus prevented from extending.  In a few hours the roof of the
west side fell in.  "The bed in which it is generally believed Queen
Elizabeth slept was not injured in the slightest degree."  The damage to
the hall was estimated at 10,000 pounds.

7.--Intelligence was received at Norwich of the birth of a Prince (Prince
Leopold), at Buckingham Palace.  Flags were hoisted on the public
buildings, and peals rung upon the bells of St. Peter Mancroft.

19.--The men enrolled to serve in the First or West Norfolk Regiment of
Militia assembled at Norwich for twenty-eight days' training.  The
officers were: Col. the Earl of Orford, Lieut.-Col. Nelthorpe, Major
William E. Lytton Bulwer, Captains Hamilton F. Custance, Charles
Bedingfeld, the Hon. Fred. Walpole, George A. Marsham, Mordaunt Glasse,
H. L. Styleman le Strange; Lieutenants M. Gooda, Gordon Calthrop, Thomas
S. Clarke, H. D. Walff, C. Girling, Chas. E. Bignold, John Edwin Day, A.
W. Smith, Robert G. Hawtayne; Ensign Thomas Edward Baker; Adjutant and
Acting Paymaster and Acting Quartermaster A. W. Smith; Surgeon Thomas W.
Crosse; Assistant Surgeon T. E. Baker.  The mess was at the Swan Hotel.
"The corps consists of 612 men, and notwithstanding the vulgar sneers,
reproaches, ridicule, and even hooting which they experienced from the
rabble on their first appearance in the streets, in no instance was this
conduct resented.  We are glad that the conduct of our Liberals, by
publicly parading disgusting flags, and the Peace Society in circulating
exciting and seditious handbills, with the view to holding up this force
to contempt and ridicule, has signally failed."  The East Norfolk Militia
assembled at Yarmouth on the same date.  "Their appearance was much more
respectable than might have been expected, and many of those who were
prepared to ridicule them acknowledged that they were a much better class
than they expected."  The officers were: Col. the Hon. Berkeley
Wodehouse; Lieut.-Col. William Mason; Major Sir E. K. Lacon; Captains
John Longe, the Hon. Bertram Wodehouse, John Marcon, Henry Cormick,
George Grenville Glover, John Gay; Lieutenants William Robert Freeman,
Richard Hall, Henry Thomas Knapman, William Danby Palmer, Richard Lee
Mayhew, William Reed, Frederick John Reyne, George Chester Wood,
Alexander Robert Chamberlin; Adjutant William P. K. Browne; Surgeon John
Capern Smith; Assistant-Surgeon Spencer Thomas Smyth.  Of the 612 men
enrolled, 571 appeared on parade.  The Earl of Leicester, as Lord
Lieutenant of the county, inspected the East Norfolk Regiment at Yarmouth
on May 12th, and the West Norfolk Regiment at Norwich on the 13th.  The
men of the latter corps were entertained at dinner at St. Andrew's Hall
after the inspection.  The cost of the entertainment was defrayed by
public subscription.

26.--The foundation-stone of the Wayland Hall, Watton, was laid by Lady
Walsingham.  The hall was opened on November 3rd, on the occasion of the
annual meeting of the Wayland Society, at which Lord Walsingham presided.

27.--A fine schooner, named the Ocean Child, was launched from the
ship-yard of Mr. Southgate, at Wells-next-the-Sea.

30.*--"Died lately at Bergh Apton, at an advanced age, Mr. John Dawson,
deputy registrar for the Loddon Union.  He was likewise known as an
active peace officer.  Previous to the establishment of the police force,
the whole business of thief-taking devolved upon petty constables, but as
the requisite tact and intelligence was not found in every parish, what
was called a running constable was usually appointed in each petty
sessional division, who was considered the detective-officer of the
district.  Mr. Dawson was justly considered one of the first of his
profession.  Upon the formation of the new force these hitherto
indispensable functionaries were entirely superseded, and Dawson, among
others, found his occupation gone."


MAY.


20.--There were no prisoners in Lynn gaol.  To celebrate the unique
circumstance the prison doors were thrown open, and the Mayor entertained
the whole of the police force and borough officials to a dinner, served
within the building.


JUNE.


7.--The Norwich Diocesan Training Institution for school-mistresses was
removed to spacious premises in St. George's Colegate.  The Institution
was founded in 1840.

9.--A cricket match between eighteen of Norwich and eleven of All
England, commenced on the new Cricket Ground, Newmarket Road, Norwich,
and concluded on the 11th.  Norwich, 110--46; All England, 58--70.

14.--The City of Norwich Waterworks New Bill received the Royal assent.
"By this Bill power is given to the Corporation of Norwich to convert
Chapel Field into a public pleasure garden."

18.--Announcement was made of the resignation of Superintendent Dunne, of
the Norwich police "on the ground that he had been so much obstructed by
those who ought to have assisted him in the discharge of his duties, that
no alternative had been left him but to resign."  On July 6th Mr. Stephen
English, of Pontefract, was elected to the post.

25.--Died, at Doughty's Hospital, Norwich, in her 81st year, Miss Tubby,
"well-known as box-keeper at our Theatre for many years, and highly
respected."  She possessed a remarkable fund of information upon local
theatrical matters, and for nearly half a century "Miss Tubby's night"
was one of the principal events in the Norwich season.

28.--The new cult of "table-turning" or spiritualism was introduced in
Norwich for the first time at a _seance_ given at St. Andrew's Hall by a
Mr. King.

--The first piles of the Wellington Pier at Yarmouth were driven by the
Mayor (Mr. S. C. Marsh), Mr. D. Waddington, chairman of the United
Norfolk and Eastern Counties' Railway Companies and of the Pier
directors, and by the Mayoress.  A dinner was held at the Victoria Hotel
in celebration of the event.  The Pier was opened by the Mayor on October
31st.


JULY.


1.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions it was reported that the Secretary of
State for the Home Department had ordered the formation of a corps of
Artillery Militia for the county.

9.--A thunderstorm of great severity occurred at Norwich.  The main sewer
in London Street burst from the enormous pressure upon it, and its
contents inundated the adjacent business premises.  Every house at the
bottom of Exchange Street was flooded, and fire-engines were afterwards
employed to pump the water from the cellars.  The weather continued to be
very stormy during the succeeding week.  The newly-completed tower and
spire of Mundham church were wrecked and became a heap of ruins.

23.--Three troops of the 6th Dragoon Guards (Carabineers), under the
command of Capt. Sawyer, marched into Norwich from Chobham Camp.  The
headquarters were stationed at Ipswich.

25.--Miss Fanny Vining appeared at Norwich Theatre as Margaret Elmore in
"Love's Sacrifice."

30.--The NORFOLK CHRONICLE announced the repeal of the advertisement duty
and of the duty upon newspaper supplements.

31.*--Died at Shoreditch Workhouse, London, Benjamin Reeder, of
Helhoughton, who was in many respects a very remarkable character.  He
had served sixteen years as a private in the 2nd Dragoon Guards.  "Altho'
of an obtuse and somewhat forbidding appearance, he possessed an uncommon
faculty for mathematical attainments.  He had Euclid at his finger ends,
while his knowledge of algebra and logarithms enabled him to solve in a
few minutes the most difficult questions.  He once had the management of
a school, but his irregularities reduced him to the level of a common
labourer, and eventually he ended his days in the union house."


SEPTEMBER.


3.*--"The degree of Doctor of Music has been recently conferred on Mr.
Buck, organist of Norwich Cathedral, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, in
the exercise of the privilege possessed by his Grace as Primate of
bestowing that and other degrees in divinity and arts upon persons of
merit in any of those faculties."

4.--An interesting ceremony took place in the tower of the dilapidated
church of Eccles-next-the-Sea.  The Rev. Edward Evans, of St. Stephen's,
Norwich, who had recently been presented to the vicarage, read himself
in, and preached to a congregation of about 200 persons.  "Owing to the
want of the church, which has been destroyed upwards of 200 years by the
encroachments of the ocean, this is a sinecure benefice, and the
inhabitants use the neighbouring church of Hempstead.  The tower of the
church in which the ceremony took place is embedded in sand to the height
of the former walls of the church."

8.--George Borrow performed an intrepid act on Yarmouth beach.  "The sea
raged frantically, and a ship's boat, endeavouring to land for water, was
upset, and the men were engulfed in a wave some 30 feet high, and
struggling with it in vain.  The moment was an awful one, when George
Borrow, the well-known author of 'Lavengro' and 'The Bible in Spain,'
dashed into the surf and saved one life, and through his instrumentality
the others were saved.  We ourselves have known this brave and gifted man
for years, and daring as was his deed, we have known him more than once
risk his life for others."

17*.--"If the rivalry of the different railway companies in this district
has been agreeable to the public it has been attended with fearful loss
to the shareholders.  Excursionists are not expected to object to being
carried from Norwich to London for half a crown, but we should suppose
that the proprietors in the Eastern Union will have a decided objection
to the great increase of their working expenses to 60 per cent. by the
process.  The ruinous competition now going on can only be terminated by
a union of interests, and it appears, from the reports of the Eastern
Counties' and Eastern Union Companies, that an amalgamation is proposed."

--The kitchen floor of a house, occupied by Mr. Bunting, on St. Giles'
Hill (near St. Giles' Gates?), Norwich, suddenly gave way, and Mrs. and
Miss Bunting, who were in the apartment, were precipitated with the
chairs, table, and other furniture, into a funnel-shaped hole 27 feet in
depth.  When rescued they were insensible but uninjured.  "Caves were
some time since cut through the hill in different directions and of
considerable length, and the whole of the hill has been at various
periods excavated for chalk.  Some of the caves were used for wine
vaults, and it appears that one of these caves passed under the back of
Mr. Bunting's house.  A water-pipe had been leaking for a long time, and
it is supposed that the water descending through the soil caused the roof
of the cave to give way, and the whole of the earth above to fall with
it."

24.--A young man named E. Elson completed the task of walking from Lynn
to Dereham and back, a distance of 60 miles, for six successive days.

26.--A violent hurricane of wind and rain did great damage in the county.
"The injury to orchards and gardens has been immense, and the apple crop,
which was an abundant one, has been reduced probably one-half."  On the
coast there were many shipping casualties, attended by loss of life.


OCTOBER.


10.--The hand-loom weavers in Norwich struck for a rise of wages.  A
memorial was presented to the manufacturers, asking for an advance of
twopence per dozen on all finished fabrics.

16.--Died at Liverpool, aged 70, Admiral Bell, C.B., son of Mr. J. Barker
Bell, of Gorleston, Yarmouth.  He entered the Navy in 1796, and
distinguished himself in many actions against the enemy.  He attained to
flag rank in October, 1846.

26.--A public demonstration took place at Lynn in honour of Lieut. S.
Gurney Cresswell, the bearer of the despatches from Commander M'Clure,
relating to the expedition in search of Sir John Franklin.  Lieut.
Cresswell was presented with a congratulatory address at a meeting held
at the Guildhall, and afterwards entertained at dinner at the Assembly
Rooms.  He was third son of Mr. Francis Cresswell, a partner in the
banking firm of Gurney, Cresswell, and Co., King's Lynn, and a native of
the borough, where he was born in 1827.  Not only was he the bearer of
the despatches announcing the discovery of the North-West passage, but he
had taken an active and important part in the expedition.

29.--Died at his residence, Monmouth Road, Bayswater, Dr. Bexfield.  He
was born in Norwich on April 27th, 1824, and at seven years of age became
a chorister at the Cathedral.  At the age of eleven he composed an anthem
in eight parts, which fully satisfied Mr. Buck that he possessed
extraordinary talent.  On the expiration of his articles in his 21st
year, he was elected organist of Boston parish church, and in the same
year graduated Mus. Bac. at Cambridge.  He afterwards published his
Concert Fugues for the organ, which were played during the Great
Exhibition.  In 1847 he composed his "Six Songs," and earned for himself
the popular distinction of "the Poet-Musician."  He was appointed, out of
thirty-five candidates, organist at St. Helen's, Bishopsgate, London.  At
about this time he published a collection of pieces under the title of
"Musica di Camera," and at the age of twenty-four took the degree of Mus.
Doc.  Dr. Bexfield was the author of a volume of "Church Anthems," which
formed part of the repertoire of most English cathedrals.  In 1850 he
married a daughter of Mr. J. B. Millington, solicitor of Boston.  The
work on which his reputation mainly depended was his oratorio "Israel
Restored," which on two occasions he conducted at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, viz., at its first production at the Choral Society's concert in
October, 1851, and at the Musical Festival in 1852.  A benefit concert
was given at St. Andrew's Hall on December 16th for his widow and family.
The sum of 500 pounds, including a donation of 20 guineas from the Queen,
was realised.


NOVEMBER.


6.--Died at St. Leonard's-on-Sea, the Right Hon. Lord Charles Vere
Ferrars Townshend, of Rainham Hall and Tamworth Castle.  He was born in
1783, and in 1812 married his cousin, the eldest daughter of General
William Loftus.  The funeral took place at Rainham on November 24th.  He
was succeeded in his estates by his nephew, Capt. John Townshend, R.N.,
member for Tamworth, who also became heir to the marquisate.

9.--Mr. J. R. Gough, of America, delivered a temperance oration at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  He also addressed meetings on the 10th and 11th.

--Mr. Samuel Bignold was elected Mayor, and Mr. Henry Birkbeck appointed
Sheriff of Norwich.

11.--A new church was opened at Wootton.  It was built on the site of the
old church at the sole expense of the Hon. Mrs. Howard.  It cost nearly
6000 pounds.

13.--The announcement was published that Mr. David Fisher, the actor, who
was so well known and highly respected in Norwich and Norfolk, had made a
successful _debut_ at the Princess's Theatre, London.


DECEMBER.


1.--In the Vice-Chancellor's Court application was made in the suit Jermy
_v._ Jermy for the administration of the estate of the late Mr. Jermy, of
Stanfield Hall.  The only question that arose was about certain timber
growing on the estate and fines of copyholds.  But a difficulty of a
novel character had occurred.  Since the murder the mansion had been
untenanted.  Although many persons were willing to take it they could not
procure servants who would live in the house, so great was the
superstitious feeling which existed.  It was stated that the parties were
willing to allow the house to be occupied for two years for nothing, in
order to overcome the prejudice.  The Vice-Chancellor said that Mrs.
Jermy Jermy was entitled to a third of the timber and fines, and he
expressed surprise that such prejudices existed against the house.

3.--Died, at her residence on the Castle Meadow, Norwich, in her 85th
year, Amelia Opie, widow of John Opie, R.A., and only daughter of Dr.
James Alderson.  After her marriage with Opie in 1798 her numerous
literary productions gained her considerable reputation, and as a
novelist she moved in the highest literary circles.  Her works included
"Father and Daughter," "Simple Tales," 4 vols. (1806); "New Tales," 4
vols. (1818); "Temper, or Domestic Scenes," 3 vols.; "Tales of the
Heart," 4 vols.; "Detraction Displayed" (moral treatise); "Illustrations
of Lying," "Lays of the Dead," and other poems.  Mrs. Opie was a member
of the Society of Friends, and her remains were interred in the Quakers'
Burial Ground, Gildencroft, on December 9th.

17.--The provision of a time-ball connected by electric telegraph with
Greenwich Observatory, and exhibited in a prominent position in Norwich
Market Place, was, in consequence of the irregularities of the public
clocks, advocated in the NORFOLK CHRONICLE on this date.

20.--A meeting of the landowners, farmers, and tradesmen of Harleston and
the district was held at the Corn Hall in that town, to consider the
desirability of promoting the construction of a railway from Tivetshall
station on the Eastern Union line.  In 1851 an Act of Incorporation was
obtained for making a railway from Tivetshall to Bungay, but from various
causes, chiefly from the depression in the railway world, no further
steps were at that time taken.

22.--Died, at the house of his son-in-law at Cambridge, aged 69, Mr. Seth
William Stevenson, F.S.A., one of the proprietors of the NORFOLK
CHRONICLE.  He was elected Sheriff of Norwich in 1828, he became alderman
in the same year, and in 1832 served the office of Mayor.  Literary
pursuits, especially of an antiquarian character, engrossed his leisure.
In early life Mr. Stevenson made several Continental tours.  The year
after the battle of Waterloo, he, in company with Capt. Money, visited
the scene of the struggle, and afterwards published "A Journal of a Tour
through part of France, Flanders and Holland, including a Visit to Paris
and a Walk over the Field of Waterloo in the Summer of 1816."  The work
was dedicated to the Norwich United Friars Society, of which literary
body he was almost the last surviving member.  In 1828 appeared the
account of a second tour in Italy, Switzerland, Germany, and the
Netherlands.  The book to which he devoted no inconsiderable portion of
the last ten years of his life was the complete "Dictionary of Roman
Coins."

24*.--"We have received from Mr. Garthon, one of the district surgeons of
Norwich, a return in a tabular form showing the extraordinary number of
96 cases of small-pox in Heigham and St. Benedict's, during the last
three months.  These arose from the strong prejudice still existing
amongst ignorant and poor people against the only
preventive--vaccination."

--The funeral of the Marchioness of Wellesley took place at Costessey
Hall, whither the remains had been removed from Hampton Court.  "In
accordance with the good old charitable practice a dole of bread was
given to the poor of Costessey on the occasion of the funeral."

26.--Mr. Joseph Clarence produced at Norwich Theatre his grand Christmas
pantomime, entitled, "Harlequin Prince Bluecap and the King of the Silver
Waters, or the Three Kingdoms, Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral."



1854.


JANUARY.


1.--Died at his residence, Thickthorn, near Norwich, in his 71st year,
Mr. Richard Hanbury Gurney.  He was the son of Mr. Richard Gurney, of
Keswick, and in early life was a member of the Society of Friends.  In
1818 Mr. Gurney was elected member for Norwich in conjunction with Mr. W.
Smith; he was re-elected in 1820, in 1830, and in 1831.  At the General
Election in 1832 he and the other Liberal candidate, Mr. Ker, were, after
a very severe contest, defeated by Lord Viscount Stormont and Sir James
Scarlett.  Mr. Gurney was a patron of the Turf and a genuine lover of old
English sports, but he was never known to bet.  His remains were
interred, on January 9th, at the Rosary Burial-ground, Norwich.

3.--A heavy snowstorm, accompanied by a severe gale from the north,
passed over the Eastern district.  The snow was deeper than had been
known for many years previously; all the roads were blocked, and railway
communication between Yarmouth and London was stopped.  The telegraph
poles were blown down, and the wires broken.  A train which left Fakenham
at 6 a.m. did not reach Norwich till 5.15 p.m.  At the Norfolk Quarter
Sessions, at Norwich, on the 4th, it was found impossible to form a grand
jury, in consequence of the non-attendance of those who had been
summoned.  All travelling by road was suspended for some days; the port
of Lynn was frozen up, and several ships were driven ashore at Yarmouth.

5.--A serious collision occurred on the line near Thetford.  A train
conveying sixty navvies, who were employed to clear away the snowdrifts,
ran into the down train from London.  "The engines rose up into the air,
and two men on them were instantly killed; two others in the train from
Norwich were also killed by the tender being driven through the carriage
in which they were seated."  The Rev. Joseph Bell, of Barningham, a
passenger in the London train, died on the 8th from the injuries he
received, and Mr. Thomas Ellison, of Dove Street, Norwich, another
passenger, succumbed on the 14th.  The Coroner's jury, after repeated
adjournments, returned, on February 6th, a verdict of manslaughter
against Mr. Peter Ashcroft, superintendent of the permanent way, and Mr.
John Latham, locomotive superintendent, who, it was alleged, had acted
contrary to the orders of Mr. King, station-master at Harling Road.  At
the Norfolk Assizes, on March 24th, before Lord Chief Baron Pollock, the
jury, without hearing the defence, acquitted the defendants.

15.--Died at Heigham Hall (private lunatic asylum), Norwich, aged 84, Mr.
Cockle, "the original proprietor of the antibilious pill which goes by
his name, and who some years ago sold the recipe for several thousand
pounds."

21.*--"An invention calculated to prove of great national benefit has
been recently patented by Mr. Samuel Rainbird, carpenter, of Norwich.  It
is described in the specifications as an apparatus for grappling and
raising sunken vessels and other submerged bodies."

--A meeting of the Deputy Lieutenants of the county decided, by 25 votes
to three, that Yarmouth was the most suitable place in the district at
which to centre the three regiments of Norfolk Militia.  At another
meeting, held on February 25th, the former resolution was rescinded, and
it was agreed "that the present Committee be empowered to receive
estimates and tenders for building barracks for one regiment of Militia
at Norwich, and for one regiment of Militia and one regiment of artillery
at Yarmouth, on such plans as they may think best suited for the
purpose."

27.--Died near Holston River, in Knox County, East Tennessee, North
America, Mr. William Forster, of Earlham Road, Norwich, in his 70th year.
He was a member of the Society of Friends, and a brother-in-law of Mr.
Fowell Buxton.  He went out in the autumn of 1853 to carry petitions to
the slave States of the Union, on behalf of the oppressed Africans.


MARCH.


8.--At a meeting convened by the Mayor (Mr. Bignold), and held at the
Guildhall, Norwich, petitions to both Houses of Parliament were adopted
in favour of an Act "for the legal prohibition of the sale of
intoxicating drink during the whole of Sunday (except to _bona fide_
travellers)."  A committee was appointed to make arrangements for forming
a Sunday Closing Association.

10.--A troop of the Carabineers marched from Norwich Barracks, to join
the headquarters at Ipswich.  The remaining troop left on May 1st.

--In the Rolls Court, before the Master of the Rolls, was heard the case,
the Attorney-General _v._ Hudson, in _re_ the Grammar School and Hospital
at Norwich.  This was an information filed by the Attorney-General, at
the relation of certain inhabitants of the city, against the trustees
appointed under the Corporation Act, of two charities called the Free
Grammar School and the Great Hospital.  The object of the information was
to show that the Grammar School had not received a fair amount of the
funds of the charity, and that undue preference had been given to the
Hospital in their distribution.  A decree was made, directing a scheme to
be settled in Chambers.  On December 18th it was stated in the Rolls
Court that when the case was in Chambers a deed of covenant,
contemporaneous with the letters patent of King Edward VI., and to which
the Corporation were parties, had been found, by which the whole surplus,
after the stipulated payments, was to be applied to the sustentation of
the poor.  The question then before the Court was how far this varied the
case.  It was contended that the Hospital and the poor were entitled to
the entire surplus.  The Master of the Rolls was of opinion that the deed
did not control the letters patent, that no predominance or priority was
given to one part of the charity over the other, and that the surplus
rents should be equally divided, and in such a way as would be most
consistent with the intentions of the founder.  The case was taken before
the Chief Clerk to the Master of the Rolls on February 6th, 1855.  "The
result is that upwards of 1,000 pounds per annum in addition to the
property comprised in the charter will be secured for the general benefit
of the charity, including, of course, the School.  The matter now stands
over, in order that a scheme may be prepared for the general
administration of the charity under the sanction of the
Attorney-General."  On April 7th, 1855, it was announced that the
following proposal had been made on the part of the "promoters of the new
Grammar School" as to the future division of the funds "hitherto
belonging to the Great Hospital": "That the present salary of the
chaplain of the said Hospital be increased 100 pounds per annum, he
having at present 200 pounds per annum besides his residence; that one
moiety of the net income of the charity be annually applied for the
benefit of the School and the objects thereof, and that the other moiety
be applied for the benefit of the poor in the Hospital; and that no
further election of inmates shall be allowed to take place until the
number shall by death or other causes be reduced to 100, and that until
the numbers shall be so reduced, the expenses occasioned thereby shall be
provided for out of the savings of the trust and now invested in the sum
of 11,500 pounds Consols, or out of any other monies in the hands of the
defendants."  Another meeting was held in Chambers on May 9th, 1855, when
the trustees strongly opposed the heads of the scheme; thereupon it was
proposed that the Chief Clerk should proceed to Norwich and hold an
inquiry.  The trustees claimed the right to appeal against his decision,
if necessary, and the Chief Clerk then declined to accede to the
proposal.  The trustees were invited to carry in the counter claim, but
refused to do so.  (_See_ June 16th, 1857.)

13.--Henry Russell gave his entertainments, "The Far West," and "Negro
Life," in the presence of between 2,000 and 3,000 persons, at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich.

16.--A meeting of the citizens was held at the Guildhall, Norwich,
presided over by the Mayor (Mr. S. Bignold), at which it was agreed "that
the wives and children of the Army of England called at this time on the
service of their country to the seat of war, claim the sympathy of the
British public, and that a subscription be forthwith commenced to relieve
all such women and children as may be left in destitution and want."
Similar funds were raised in other parts of the county.

23.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Lord Chief Baron Parke, William
Thompson, aged 21, was charged with the murder of Lorenzi Beha, at
Tittleshall, on November 18th, 1853.  Mr. Evans prosecuted, and Mr.
Carlos Cooper defended.  The prisoner was found guilty, and sentenced to
death.  The execution took place on the Castle Hill, Norwich, on April
8th.  "The criminal's struggles continued five minutes."  The lowest and
most degraded classes in the city and county assembled on the Hill, "and
more scenes of drunkenness and immorality were exhibited than had been
seen for a long time previously in Norwich."

25.*--"At the Walsingham Quarter Sessions, the Grand Jury, in making
their presentment, called the attention of the Court to the prevailing
nuisance occasioned by carts drawn by dogs, and to the facilities thus
afforded for the commission of felonies.  They recommended that some
decisive steps be taken to procure an extension of the Act providing
against this evil in and around London."  The provisions of the Act in
force in the Metropolitan district were extended to the United Kingdom,
and came into force on January 1st, 1855.

31.--Died at Haddiscoe, Edward Constance, aged 68, "well known for his
sporting tastes, and for a considerable period a pedestrian follower of
the hounds of the late Lord Berners, distinguished for his industrious
habits and his ardent love of the chase."


APRIL.


1.*--"An order has been received from the Home Secretary, calling upon
the churchwardens of every parish in Norwich to discontinue forthwith the
burials in the inside of their respective churches, and to discontinue
those in the churchyards from and after February 1st, 1855.  Burial
Boards are about to be formed for the purpose of providing a suitable
ground for interment in the vicinity."

8.--Mr. G. V. Brooke concluded a week's engagement at Lynn Theatre.  He
appeared in the parts of Othello, Master Walter ("The Hunchback"), Sir
Giles Overreach, Claude Melnot, and Hamlet.

11.--A public meeting, held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, with the view
of promoting the abolition of capital punishment, resolved to petition
the House of Commons in favour of such abolition.

19.--An address to the Queen was adopted at a special meeting of the
Norwich Town Council, assuring her Majesty "that she had their
unqualified support in the prosecution of the war."

22.--That remarkable character, Philip Coots, better known as "Philip the
Pieman," and the "Drum-boy," died at Norwich, aged 49.

--Died at Yarmouth, Eleanor Warrant, aged 102.

25.--The West Norfolk Militia, 1,000 strong, assembled at Norwich for a
month's training.  The East Norfolk Militia and the Norfolk Artillery
Militia commenced their training at Yarmouth on the same date.  The East
Norfolk Regiment was, on May 16th, presented with colours by the Lord
Lieutenant.

26.--This date was observed as a day of humiliation.  In Norwich shops
were closed, all business suspended, and the Mayor and Corporation
attended service at the Cathedral, where "the Almighty's blessing was
implored upon the war."  The day was similarly observed at Lynn and
Yarmouth.

27.--Died at Mount Street, Grosvenor Square, London, Lieut.-Col.
Nelthorpe, of the West Norfolk Militia, in his 83rd year.  He was
succeeded in the lieutenant-colonelcy by Major Custance.


MAY.


3.--At her Majesty's Levee, Mr. Samuel Bignold, Mayor of Norwich, was
presented and received the honour of knighthood.  On the 17th the
portrait of Sir Samuel was placed in St. Andrew's Hall.  It was painted
by J. P. Knight, R.A., in 1850, exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1851,
and afterwards engraved by Jackson.

21.--Died at Bethel Street, Norwich, aged 70, Robert Forster, formerly
bandmaster of the 33rd (Duke of Wellington's Own) Regiment.  "At Waterloo
he received a ball in his knee, which had never been extracted.  He was a
native of Norwich, and the only survivor of the band of the regiment, the
whole having fallen by his side at Waterloo."


JUNE.


30.--The Eastern Counties (Amalgamation of Railways) Bill was read a
third time in the House of Commons and passed.  One of the clauses was to
the following effect: "That it shall not be lawful for the company to
close or discontinue the Victoria Station at Norwich, now belonging to
the Eastern Union Railway Company."


JULY.


3.--Foot-racing was revived on the Old Cricket Ground at Norwich, by Mr.
Thomas Sapey, a local sportsman.  A one mile handicap, open to all
England, brought twenty-four competitors, among whom were Thomas
Horspool, of Sheffield (holder of the one mile champion belt); C. Welton,
of Gateshead; William Newman, of London; Robert Bunn, John Brighton ("The
Milk Boy"), Richard Fromow, Jim Mace (pugilist), William ("Cock") Blyth,
&c.  The meeting was continued on the 4th.

7.--The first meeting of the Norwich Photographic Society (established on
June 23rd) was held at Mr. W. Freeman's, London Street.  The objects of
the society were the reading of original papers, the discussion of
different photographic processes, the collection of pictures, and the
formation of a photographic library.

20.--A dinner was held at the Town Hall, Yarmouth, to celebrate the
inauguration of Lord Sondes as High Steward of that borough.

22.--Norwich Theatre was opened for the Assize week, under the management
of Messrs. C. Gill and William Sidney, lessees of the Theatres Royal,
Leicester, Portsmouth, Leamington, and Jersey.  They also had the
management of Yarmouth Theatre.  The winter season commenced on November
11th.  The new managers endeavoured to restore at Norwich the old style
and prices of the entertainments.  "On each Friday night the prices will
be as they were a few years since, and on these occasions the pieces
selected will consist of standard plays and comedies, concluding with a
really funny farce."  The company was a good one, and "the starring
system, which sacrifices every supposed subordinate character to two or
three leading ones," was "studiously ignored."  Mr. Gill (who was
afterwards for several years manager of Lynn Theatre) withdrew from the
partnership in 1855, and on December 10th in that year the winter season
commenced under the sole management of Mr. Sidney.


AUGUST.


12.--Died at the residence of Lord Palmerston, in Carlton Gardens,
London, Viscount Jocelyn, M.P.  His lordship contracted Asiatic cholera
while performing military duty at the Tower of London as Colonel of the
Essex Rifles.  The eldest son of the Earl of Roden, he was born on
February 20th, 1816, and served on the staff of Lord Saltoun in the China
Expedition in 1842.  He was the author of a work entitled, "Six Months in
China."  In February, 1842, on the appointment of Sir Stratford Canning
as Ambassador at Constantinople, a new writ was issued for King's Lynn,
when Lord Jocelyn was returned for that borough as a
Liberal-Conservative, and continued to represent it until his death.
During the last two years of Sir Robert Peel's Administration he held
office as Secretary to the India Board.

15.--A whale of the "beak" species, measuring 29 feet in length and 21
feet in girth, and weighing nearly nine tons, was captured on Snetttisham
beach.  "When boiled, although the operation was unskilful, it produced
120 gallons of oil."

16.--Lynn Athenaeum, erected at the cost of 4,150 pounds, was inaugurated
by addresses delivered by the President (Mr. H. Edwards) and Lord
Stanley.  The architects were Messrs. Cruso and Maberly and the
contractors Messrs. J. and W. Purdy.

20.--A portion of a building at Lynn, originally a chapel-of-ease to St.
Margaret's church, and utilised as a workhouse, fell, killing a
clockmaker named Andrews, and John Cana, a pauper.  Fissures had been
observed in the walls of the building, and measures had been taken to
remove the inmates to another part of the premises, otherwise the loss of
life would have been appalling.  The first stone of the new Workhouse was
laid on July 16th, 1855, by the Rev. J. Bransley, chairman of the Board
of Guardians.

24.--A shocking accident occurred on the River Yare, near the Alder Car
at Trowse Hythe, Thorpe.  Mrs. Palmer (wife of Mr. T. H. Palmer, chief
clerk at the Norwich County Court), her son, about six years old; Matilda
Hubbard, a nursemaid; and William Plow, a lad, were drowned by the
overturning of a pleasure-boat which had gone foul of a wherry.


SEPTEMBER.


8.--The first harvest thanksgiving festival held in the county took place
at Brooke.  It was the result of an attempt made by the vicar, the Rev.
Dr. Beal, "to put a stop to the disgraceful scenes which too often
characterise the close of harvest, and to the system of _largess_, which
gives rise to cases of the grossest description."  After service at the
church, men, women, and children had dinner on the vicarage lawn.  "The
Times" observed: "The attempt to put an end to the system of public-house
harvest feasts, in which neither wives nor children can join, appears in
this instance to have been eminently successful."  Many other villages in
Norfolk, after the harvest of 1855, followed the example set by Brooke.

10.--The great west window at Norwich Cathedral, designed as a memorial
to Bishop Stanley, was submitted to public inspection.  It cost 1,500
pounds, and was designed and executed by Mr. George Hedgeland, of London.

11.--At the Norwich Police Court, the Rev. Henry Herring, formerly curate
of North Pickenham, was charged with begging, under peculiar
circumstances, on the previous day (Sunday), in the Cathedral Close.  The
prisoner, "with his gown on his back," stationed himself in front of the
great west door and exhibited a placard bearing the following
inscription: "The law ordained that they which preach the Gospel should
live by the Gospel.  The Church of England withholds from me the justice
of that tribunal which the civil law grants to the common murderer.  Such
is the spirit of that Church which professedly invites even a prodigal to
repentance; I have spent 1,800 pounds in her service, and have been
driven to pass three nights in the streets of Norwich, and six nights in
a lock-up (a hole where there is only straw to lie upon on a stone
floor), solely for the want of better and proper accommodation.  The
Mayor and magistrates have encouraged me to apply to everyone that has a
heart to feel for the miseries of a fellow-creature.  I earnestly solicit
the sympathy and charity of an enlightened public to enable me to live
day by day and to defend myself by law from the tyranny and persecution
of the Bishop of Norwich.--Henry Herring, late curate of North Pickenham,
Norfolk.  Norwich Streets, September 9th."  Superintendent English stated
that he had offered to send the defendant to a situation in Yorkshire, or
to Australia, where his brothers resided; but he had declined to avail
himself of either.  Mr. Herring promised not to repeat his behaviour, and
was discharged.

12.--The opening concert of the Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical
Festival took place at St. Andrew's Hall.  The programme included
Rossini's "Stabat Mater," a selection of sacred music, and (for the first
time) "The Ninety-First Psalm."  In the evening there was a miscellaneous
concert, including parts 1 and 2 of "Acis and Galatea."  On Wednesday
morning (13th) Beethoven's "Service in C" and "The Creation" were
performed; at the miscellaneous concert in the evening selections from
the works of Weber and Spohr were rendered.  At Thursday morning's
concert (14th) "Elijah" was given, and at the evening concert
miscellaneous items and selections from the works of Mozart.  "The
Messiah" was performed on Friday morning (15th), and in the evening a
grand dress ball was given at the Assembly Rooms, with music by
Weippert's Royal Quadrille Band.  The Festival _artistes_ were Madame
Angiolina Bosio, Madame Clara Novello, Madame Anaido Castellan, Madame
Weiss, Miss Dolby, Signor Gardoni, Herr Reichardt, Mr. Sims Reeves,
Signor Bolletti, Mr. Weiss, and Signor Lablache.  The instrumental solo
performers were Mons. Sainton, violinist to her Majesty, and Mr. H.
Blagrove, violins; Herr Hausmann, violoncello.  Mr. Benedict was
conductor.  The gross receipts amounted to 4,244 pounds 5s. 2d., and the
gross expenses and liabilities to 4,347 pounds 14s. 7d.; deficit, 103
pounds 9s. 5d.

13.--The foundation-stone of the Norwich Free Library was laid by the
Mayor (Sir Samuel Bignold).  Addresses were delivered by the Duke of
Wellington, the Rev. Edward Sidney, Sir Morton Peto, M.P., Sir John
Boileau, Sir Fitzroy Kelly, Mr. W. J. Utten Browne, and Mr. J. H.
Tillett.  (_See_ March 16th, 1857.)

16.--Mr. J. H. Gurney was elected unopposed to fill the vacancy in the
representation of King's Lynn, created by the death of Lord Jocelyn.

23.*--"An attempt has been made at the Boar's Head Inn, Surrey Street,
Norwich, to originate a place of entertainment of a similar kind to
Evans' or Johnson's, in the Metropolis.  A room capable of seating
upwards of 200 visitors has been very tastefully fitted up by the
proprietor, the walls being adorned by a series of Norwich views
exceedingly well painted by our scenic artist for many years, Mr. Thorne,
and every evening there is a vocal and instrumental concert by parties of
London professionals, who are almost weekly changed, so as to secure as
large an amount of novelty as possible.  Another new feature in this city
is the introduction of the imperial measure for wine at the old rate of
2s. 6d. per pint."  This place, known as "The Shades," was managed by Mr.
Fred Phillips, and was the first music hall or variety entertainment in
the city.  The venture was not of a successful character.

25.--A meeting of the Norwich licensed victuallers was held at the Boar's
Head Inn, to protest against the Bill for "Regulating the Sale of Beer
and other Liquors on the Lord's Day," which sought to prohibit the
opening of public-houses between the hours of 2. 30 and six o'clock, and
after ten o'clock on Sunday.  The meeting decided to petition Parliament
in opposition to the measure.  At this meeting was formed a society
called the Norwich Licensed Victuallers' Association, of which Mr. Fred
Phillips was elected president, Mr. Plane vice-president, Mr. Cushing
treasurer, and Mr. S. Daynes secretary.


OCTOBER.


1.--Intelligence was received at Norwich of the victory of the allied
armies at the Alma on September 20th.  The bells of St. Peter Mancroft
were rung after service in the afternoon.  A fictitious message reached
Norwich on the same day (Sunday), announcing the fall of Sebastopol, and
the tricolour was hoisted on St. Peter's steeple.  Regret was afterwards
expressed that facilities existed "for circulating such hasty and
erroneous despatches."

7.--Died, at Brandon Parva, aged 100, Mary Goward, widow.

17.--A remarkable discussion arose at Norwich Quarter Sessions as to
certain irregularities which were said to have occurred at Heigham Hall
private lunatic asylum.  The minutes of the proceedings of the visiting
justices at an inquiry held by them on June 22nd were read.  Dr. Hull
alleged that the Rev. ---, then acting as chaplain at the Asylum, had
been wrongly admitted as a patient.  In his evidence he stated that in
June, 1852, Mr. Nichols informed him that a country clergyman, a member
of a high county family, had committed a rape, that his family wished to
make him out to be mad, and that, in order to save him from a criminal
prosecution, they desired to get him into a mad-house.  Mr. Nichols
requested Dr. Hull to grant a second medical certificate.  Dr. Hull
refused to comply.  Mr. Nichols emphatically denied that he had used the
expressions attributed to him by Dr. Hull.  The justices came to the
conclusion: "(1) That the Rev. Mr. ---, by being placed in the asylum
under the circumstances disclosed in the inquiry, was rescued from the
grip of the law on a criminal charge; (2) that the order and medical
certificates upon which he was admitted into the asylum were regular and
in the form prescribed by the Act of Parliament; (3) that in the opinion
of the visitors the Rev. Mr. --- is not a proper person to have been
appointed or to continue to officiate as chaplain to the asylum."  A
letter from the office of the Commissioners in Lunacy was read, in which
they stated they were satisfied that when the Rev. Mr. --- was admitted
he was a proper person to be placed under medical care in the asylum.  It
was also asserted that the Commissioners had recognised him as the
chaplain of the asylum.  Mr. Palmer, who had moved that the licence to
Heigham Hall be refused, ultimately withdrew his motion, and the incident
terminated.  At a meeting of the city magistrates in December, a memorial
was addressed to the Secretary of State, asking that a "searching
investigation be made, with power to call before the Commissioners all
parties who may be able to give evidence upon the various points embraced
in the case."  (No further action was taken.)

18.--The new bridge at Yarmouth was opened by the chairman and members of
the Haven and Pier Commission.  The contract price for the work of
construction was 24,500 pounds, but the total cost, including the sums
paid for property in the vicinity of the bridge, was estimated at 60,000
pounds.

19.--In an "extraordinary edition" of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE, published on
this date, was given a "nominal return of the casualties among officers
in the action on the River Alma."  "1st Division--Scots Fusilier Guards:
Captain W. G. Bulwer, wounded severely."

25.--The first detachment of the V Battery Royal Artillery arrived at
Norwich; and the second detachment marched in on the 26th.  "The last
time artillery were stationed in this city was in 1813, and they were
then commanded by General Cockburn, father of Major Cockburn, of
Bracondale."

--At a public meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, a committee was
appointed to carry out the objects of the Patriotic Fund, in accordance
with the terms of the Royal Commission.

--Killed at Balaclava, Lieut. Henry Astley Sparke, 4th Light Dragoons,
eldest son of the Rev. J. H. Sparke, of Gunthorpe Hall, and nephew of
Lord Hastings.


NOVEMBER.


2.--The Wellington statue, erected in Norwich Market Place, was unveiled
by the Mayor (Sir Samuel Bignold) in the presence of 20,000 spectators.
The band of the West Norfolk Militia played the National Anthem, and the
Royal Artillery fired a salute on the Castle Hill.  At the luncheon given
at the Guildhall, speeches were delivered by the Earl of Orford, Lord
Ranelagh, Sir John Boileau, Lord Royston, and Mr. H. J. S. Stracey.  The
statue cost about 1,000 pounds.  "The hero is represented in the
identical boots, cloak, and some other portions of dress actually worn by
him at Waterloo, which were placed at the service of Mr. Adams, the
sculptor, when he was modelling the figure.  Mr. Adams has placed a copy
of last Saturday's NORFOLK CHRONICLE in a small space chiselled for the
purpose under the foot of the statue."

8.--Swaffham Coursing Meeting, which had greatly degenerated, was held,
but owing to the small number of entries, the sport concluded early in
the afternoon.  "Although it does not appear that in other places
coursing meetings have declined, it is clear that the glories of the
Swaffham one have departed.  The loss of Mr. Richard Gurney struck a blow
at it almost fatal.  This was followed by the withdrawal of Mr. Hamond
and others, leaving the club originally consisting of all the letters of
the alphabet reduced to two members.  Although disappointed by the
curtailment of the sports of the field, it was determined that the ladies
should have the assembly as usual.  It was held on Tuesday (the 7th), but
it was known that none of the Club would be there to meet them as
heretofore."  The fortunes of the Club could only be restored, it was
said, by throwing the meeting open to all England.

9.--Mr. Robert Chamberlin was elected Mayor, and Mr. R. J. H. Harvey
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

11.--Mr. J. H. Tillett, it was announced on this date, had resigned his
seat in the Norwich Town Council, in consequence of the Liberal candidate
for the Seventh Ward "being forced upon the reluctant electors by
bribery."  Mr. Tillett wrote: "A due regard to that peace of mind which
is essential to a man's happiness compels me to separate myself at once
and for ever in the most decided and unequivocal manner possible from any
association with those who are not prepared in public matters to adhere
to a right and honest course."

18.--Died at his residence, Pedestal House, Southtown, Yarmouth in his
89th year, Captain Manby, F.R.S., the inventor of the apparatus for
saving the lives of shipwrecked mariners.  "His life for the last fifty
years had been spent in serving his country, and his name will be revered
by thousands who would have been widows and orphans but for the
successful application of science which was perfected by his untiring
industry and perseverance."  His remains were buried at Hilgay on
November 24th.

20.--Mrs. Fanny Kemble commenced a series of Shakesperian readings at the
Assembly Rooms, Norwich.


DECEMBER.


8.--A writ was received at Norwich for the election of a member to supply
the vacancy caused by the resignation of Mr. Peto, M.P., "in consequence
of the opinion of the law officers of the Crown that though he had
consented to construct a railway in the Crimea without profit to himself,
he would be liable to heavy penalties if he continued to sit in the House
of Commons."  (_See_ December 27th.)

9.--A description was published of the new Corn Hall at Diss, erected by
a public-spirited resident, Mr. T. L. Taylor.  The building was designed
by Mr. George Atkins, jun.  "Mr. Taylor intends vesting it in trustees
for the purposes of a corn market at a nominal rental, and he further
intends appropriating a spacious apartment for a reading-room and
library."

16.--Wombwell's Menagerie arrived at Norwich, and was advertised under
its new title, "Edmonds', late Wombwell's."  The exhibition was removed
from its usual quarters on Castle Meadow to the Market Place.

22.--Died at his residence in Berkeley Square, Mr. William Howe Windham,
of Felbrigg Hall.  He was one of the representatives of the Eastern
Division of Norfolk in 1832, when he was returned with the Hon. George
Keppel, their opponents being Lord Henry Cholmondeley and Mr. Nathaniel
Peach.  In 1835 he came forward with Mr. R. H. Gurney, in opposition to
Mr. Edmond Wodehouse and Lord Walpole, when the two last named were
returned.  In 1837 another election occurred, when Lord Walpole having
retired, Mr. H. N. Burroughes was brought forward in conjunction with Mr.
Wodehouse.  Mr. Windham and Mr. Gurney, who opposed them, were again
unsuccessful.  Mr. Windham, who was a staunch Whig, was the oldest son of
Vice-Admiral Windham (formerly Lukin), who took the name and arms in
pursuance of the will of his uncle, the Right Hon. William Windham, in
1824, on succeeding to the estate on the death of Mrs. Windham.  On the
decease of his father, the Admiral, Mr. Windham succeeded to the Felbrigg
property.  He married, in 1835, Lady Sophia Hervey, daughter of the
Marquis of Bristol, by whom he had one son, then in his fourteenth year.
Mr. Windham died at the age of 53.

26.--Mr. J. F. Young, who for many years afterwards was a favourite actor
in Norwich, made his first appearance at the Theatre Royal, in the
character of Sir Edward Mortimer ("The Iron Chest").  The play was
followed by a pantomime, entitled, "Harlequin St. George, or the Geni
Czarnickholdofallhecan and the Fairy of Contentment."

27.--The West Norfolk Militia assembled at Norwich for the annual
training.  The East Norfolk Militia were embodied on the same day, at
Yarmouth.

--Sir Samuel Bignold and Mr. Anthony Hamond, of Westacre, were nominated
candidates at the election at Norwich rendered necessary by the
retirement of Mr. Peto.  A poll, demanded on behalf of Mr. Hamond, took
place on the 28th, and the result was officially declared on the 29th, as
follows: Bignold, 1,901; Hamond, 1,635.  After this election were
published, for the first time, the expenses of the respective candidates.
In Mr. Hamond's accounts, under the heading, "hire of horses and
carriages," was the item, "W. Slaughter, Sedan chair, 15s."

--Died, the Rev. Sir George Stracey, Bart., rector of Rackheath.  "It is
rather a singular circumstance that there has been but one presentation
to the living of Rackheath during a period of 115 years.  The late rector
held the living from 1796, and his predecessor was presented to it in
1739."

30.--A serious railway accident occurred between Thetford and Brandon.
The up mail from Norwich, which left Thetford soon after 11 p.m., was
detained two and a half miles beyond the station by a breakdown of the
engine.  Twenty-three minutes later a cattle train, travelling at full
speed, dashed into the rear of the mail train.  The engine-driver of the
mail, John Burton, who was at work beneath his engine, was killed
instantly, and three passengers in the rear carriage seriously injured.
One, Mr. Meagher, a London undertaker, who had been attending the funeral
of Mr. Windham, afterwards died.  At the inquest, on January 15th, 1855,
the jury found that the accident resulted from the inefficiency of the
railway company's rules in allowing a heavily-laden cattle train to
follow a mail train at unlimited speed without telegraphic communication
from the preceding station.



1855.


JANUARY.


1.--The railways from Reedham to Yarmouth and Lowestoft were flooded,
owing to the high tides in the rivers.  The metals were displaced, and on
the 2nd traffic was stopped.  At Yarmouth the water rose above the
quayhead.

9.--Lynn Corn Exchange was opened for business.  It was built from
designs by Mr. Maberley, at the cost of 2,450 pounds.

--A "farewell festival" was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, "as a
mark of respect and sympathy" to the Right Rev. Dr. Colenso, prior to his
return to the diocese of Natal.  Dr. Colenso, who was present had spent
the greater part of the previous year in organizing means for carrying on
his work in South Africa.

20.--Died in Victoria Street, Norwich, aged 67, William Laws, one of the
proprietors of the Norwich Telegraph coach, which he had driven for
upwards of twenty years.

23.--The Norfolk Artillery Militia were embodied at Yarmouth.  The corps,
on March 7th, proceeded to Eastbourne, for garrison duty, and returned to
Yarmouth on April 25th.  In the following month it was determined to
increase the strength from 200 to 400 men and to appoint a
lieutenant-colonel.

29.--Father Gavazzi, the popular Italian preacher and reformer, gave the
first of a series of "Protestant orations" at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.


FEBRUARY.


10.*--"Died last week, at Lincoln, Mr. Benjamin Whall, Cathedral organist
of that city, in his 75th year.  He was a native of Norwich, and at an
early age was distinguished for his splendid voice.  At 19 he was
appointed master of the choristers of Lincoln Cathedral, and subsequently
organist, and held this situation for 56 years.  He was distinguished as
an organist, and was celebrated for his pure style of playing the old
ecclesiastical compositions."

20.--In consequence of the high price of provisions, the inclemency of
the weather, and the want of employment, it was decided, at a meeting
held at the Guildhall, Norwich, to start a public subscription to aid the
District Visiting Society in the relief of the poor.

24.--The dignity of a baronetcy was conferred on Mr. Peto, in
appreciation of his services, "and more especially of his disinterested
and patriotic conduct in retiring from the representation of Norwich to
carry out the construction of the railway from Balaclava, originated by
the Duke of Newcastle."

26.--Died at Downham Green, Wymondham, Mr. James Neave, aged 68,
"chairman of the market table at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich."  When
hundreds of small farmers in the county were threatened with ruin after
the great hailstorm, in August, 1842, Mr. Neave suggested to his brother
agriculturists the introduction of a voluntary rate, by which about
10,000 pounds was raised for the relief of the sufferers.  Subsequently
was established the Norwich Hailstorm Society, of which Mr. Neave was an
active promoter.


MARCH.


9.--The Norwich police appeared in a new uniform.  "The principal
alteration in the clothing consists in the substitution of a frock-coat
for the unsightly long-tailed coat, which is certainly a most becoming
uniform for a civil force."

21.--This day was observed as one of solemn fasting and humiliation, in
accordance with Royal Proclamation.  The Mayor and Corporation of Norwich
attended service at the Cathedral, and there were numerous congregations
at other places of worship.

22.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Lord Chief Baron Pollock and a
special jury, was tried the libel action, Waldron, clerk, _v._ Bates,
clerk.  The Rev. Frederick William Waldron was a clergyman of the Church
of England, and had been chaplain on board H.M. frigate Amazon, lying off
the East India and China stations.  On his return to England he became
curate to the Rev. William Bates, rector of Burnham.  After two years'
service, plaintiff gave the defendant three months' notice of
resignation.  Mr. Bates supplied plaintiff with testimonials, by which he
obtained the appointment of headmaster of a public school at Wymondham,
in Leicestershire.  In subsequent correspondence with the trustees of the
school, the defendant stated he had "irrefragable proofs of the exceeding
wickedness" of the plaintiff's character, and, he added, "I call upon
you, in the name of all that is holy and good, to dismiss him instantly
from his employment."  After a trial extending over two days, the jury
gave a verdict for the defendant.

26.--The battery of Royal Artillery marched from Norwich Barracks for
Woolwich, whence they proceeded to the Crimea for active service.  They
were replaced, on April 4th, by the D battery, from Chatham, commanded by
Capt. Mountain.

29.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Wightman, Mary Ann
Fisher, aged 28, was indicted for the wilful murder of her husband,
George Wright, at Norwich, on November 28th, by poisoning him.  The jury
acquitted the prisoner.

--Died at Cambridge, James Rattee, who was born at Fundenhall in 1820.
After serving his apprenticeship with Mr. Ollett, carver, of Norwich, he
commenced business for himself at Cambridge, at the age of 22.  He was
associated with Mr. Pugin in restoring the choir of Jesus College Chapel.
Most of the designs were made by Rattee himself, and submitted to Pugin
before execution.  He carried out Mr. G. G. Scott's designs for the
carvings in Ely Cathedral, and by the advice of that gentleman spent part
of the year 1852 on the Continent, where he studied the carved woodwork
and artistic wrought ironwork and sculptured stone of Quintin Matsy and
the other master spirits of Louvain and neighbouring cities.  Returning
to England, he constructed at Ely the reredos composed of choice stone
and alabaster, highly enriched with delicate carving and inlaid with gold
and gems, forming the most glorious piece of art workmanship executed
since the Reformation.  His work is to be found in churches in every
county in England.

31.--Capt. Wodehouse was backed to run one mile in six minutes, on the
Earlham Road, Norwich.  In the presence of a large number of spectators,
he ran the first half mile in less than three minutes, and accomplished
the second half in 2 minutes 56 seconds.  He was attended by Jim Mace.
On the 31st Capt. Wodehouse performed the feat of walking one mile in 8
mins. 16 sees.


APRIL.


1.--The remains of Richard Peck, an agricultural labourer, aged 69, were
buried in Docking churchyard.  "The deceased had worked for forty-two
years on the Choseley Farm, an extra-parochial place, and _cottage
property_, distant from Docking two and a half miles, where he was
obliged to reside, no labourers being permitted to live at Choseley.
Thus he walked to and from his work five miles per day, 30 miles per
week, 1,560 miles per year, and the extraordinary number of 65,520 miles
during his forty-two years' employment.  This circumstance might be
multiplied by numbers in England in general, and West Norfolk in
particular, showing cogent reasons for Mr. Baines' Poor-law Bill being
made the law of the land."

6.--Died at her residence, St. Martin-at-Palace, Norwich, aged 38,
Harriet Gurney Gordon, many years a favourite actress at Norwich and at
different metropolitan and provincial theatres.

16.--Mrs. Fanny Kemble commenced a course of Shakesperian readings at the
Assembly Rooms, Norwich.

28.*--"Mr. Clare Sewell Read, son of Mr. George Read, of Plumstead, near
Norwich, has been awarded by the Royal Agricultural Society the prize for
the best essay on the farming of Buckinghamshire.  Mr. Read obtained last
year the society's prize for his essay on Oxfordshire, and had also been
a successful competitor in a former year for his essay on farming in
South Wales."

29.--Died, aged 86, Mr. J. Watts, of Yarmouth, for many years coachman of
the Telegraph coach running between Norwich and Yarmouth.


MAY.


3.--A dinner to celebrate the freeing of Duke's Palace Bridge, Norwich,
was held at the Duke's Palace Inn, under the presidency of the Mayor (Mr.
Robert Chamberlin).  "Upwards of twelve years have elapsed since the
abolition of the above toll-bridge was first mooted, and the citizens are
to be congratulated on the removal of the toll."

15.--A public meeting was held in the hall of the Bazaar (Victoria Hall),
Norwich, presided over by the Mayor, in furtherance of the movement in
favour of administrative reform.  An address was delivered by Mr. W. S.
Lindsay, M.P., and a resolution was adopted affirming "that, without
wishing to exclude the aristocratic class from the position in the public
service to which their talents and patriotism may entitle them to assert,
merit is the only principle by which appointments to public offices
should be attained."

18.--Among the officers who received the Crimean medal on this date at
the hands of her Majesty were Capt. Bulwer, Capt. Bathurst, Capt.
Micklethwaite, Lieut. Cator, and Lieut. Cresswell.

24.--Yarmouth Waterworks were opened, with great public festivity.

29.--The Norfolk coast was visited by a violent gale, which caused
considerable destruction to life and property.  Off Yarmouth the smack
Ruby was lost, with her crew of nine men and a boy.


JUNE.


6.--An exhibition of the Norfolk and Norwich Fine Arts Association was
opened at Norwich.  The collection included works by O. Short, J. B.
Ladbrooke, C. J. W. Winter, H. B. Willis, Frederick Howes, C. L. Nursey,
F. R. Pickersgill, R.A., John Wilson, Alfred Cooper, D. Hodgson, J.
Stark, M. E. Cotman, J. J. Cotman, Mrs. J. Stannard, &c.

13.--Colours were presented to the West Norfolk Militia, on the Cricket
Ground, Norwich, by the Countess of Albemarle.  Lord Orford, as colonel
of the regiment, received the colours, and the consecration prayers were
read by the Rev. C. W. Madden, "who wore the Waterloo medal on his
breast."  The non-commissioned officers and men were entertained at
dinner, provided by public subscription, at St. Andrew's Hall.  The Mayor
(Mr. Chamberlin) presided, and Lord and Lady Albemarle, Lady Augusta
Keppel, and other distinguished visitors were present.

23.--Notice was given that on and after June 30th the new Newspaper Act
would be in operation, and stamped and unstamped editions of the NORFOLK
CHRONICLE would be published.  "In compliance with the request of the
Postmaster-General, we would remind such of our subscribers as may desire
to send the stamped edition through the post that the paper must be
folded so that the whole stamp denoting the duty shall be distinctly
visible on the outside.  Such papers must be posted within 15 days of
publication."

--The Norton Subcourse and Raveningham estate was sold by Mr. George W.
Salter, at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, for 16,632 pounds.


JULY.


2.--A ten mile match, for 20 pounds a side, was run at the Green Hill
Gardens, between Robert Bunn, of Norwich, and John Lovett, of London.
The first-named won; time, 58 minutes.

3.--The West Norfolk Militia, under the command of Lieut.-Col. Custance,
left Norwich for Aldershot.  In December the regiment was transferred to
Dublin.

--Great festivities took place at Ellingham Hall, in celebration of the
coming of age of Mr. Henry Smith, son and heir of Lieut.-Col. Smith.  A
dinner, at which 160 guests were present, was followed by sports, and in
the evening dancing was opened upon the lawn by Mr. Smith and Miss Foster
in a "Sir Roger de Coverley."

5.--The marriage took place at East Dereham, of Captain William Earle
Gascoyne Bulwer, late Scots Fusilier Guards, eldest son of Mr. William E.
Lytton Bulwer, of Heydon Hall, and Mary Anne Dering, only daughter of Mr.
William Wilson Lee Warner, of Quebec House.  The officiating clergy were
the Rev. G. Dashwood, rector of Stow Bardolph, and the Rev. B. J.
Armstrong, vicar of East Dereham.

7.--Mr. Edmond Wodehouse, M.P., announced that it was his intention to
retire from the representation of East Norfolk, in consequence of his
continued ill-health.  Mr. Henry Josiah Stracey was adopted as the
Conservative candidate, and was returned unopposed on the 17th.

8.--Died at Ems, Sir William Edward Parry, R.N., Lieut.-Governor of
Greenwich Hospital.  He was an LL.D. of Oxford, a F.R.S. of London and
Edinburgh, a member of the Imperial Academy of Sciences at St.
Petersburg, and author of a work entitled, "Thoughts on the Parental
Character of God."  He married first, on October 23rd, 1826, Isabella
Louisa, fourth daughter of Lord Stanley of Alderley, by whom he had issue
two sons and two daughters.  She died on May 13th, 1839.  On June 29th,
1841, he married, secondly, Catherine Edwards, daughter of the Rev. R.
Hankinson, of Walpole, and widow of Mr. Samuel Hoare, jun., of Hampstead,
by whom he had issue two daughters.  Sir William was an honorary freeman
of the city of Norwich.  He had commanded four Arctic expeditions, in all
of which he gained high professional renown.  For these services he
received the honour of knighthood, and was presented by the Government
with 1,000 pounds, his portion of a reward for reaching the meridian of
110 degs. W. within the Arctic circle.

18.--Died, at an advanced age, at Norwich, John Osborne.  "He was a
well-known character, and for many years drove the Yarmouth coach, and
for some time the mail coach between Norwich and Ipswich.  The railway,
however, put an end to his vocation.  Every morning he attended service
at the Cathedral.  Even when he was the driver of the coach to Yarmouth
he stipulated he should have his Sunday, in order that he might be in his
accustomed place at the Cathedral."

26.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Baron Parke and a special jury,
was tried the action, Fisher _v._ Nisbett.  This was a will case, which
excited considerable interest on account of the large amount of property
in dispute and the number of persons concerned.  The plaintiff was Miss
Mary Ann Fisher, and the nominal defendant Mr. Philip Blundell Nisbett.
The actual defendant was Mr. Richard Blundell Nisbett.  The question at
issue was the validity of the will of a lady named Nisbett.  The amount
in dispute was between 20,000 and 30,000 pounds in real property, and a
larger amount in personal property.  The father of Mrs. Nisbett was a Mr.
Fisher, a banker, of Yarmouth.  Mary Ann Fisher, the plaintiff, was one
of his daughters.  All the children were dead in 1854 with the exception
of Mary Ann Fisher.  In the year 1811, when the deceased Mrs. Nisbett
married, her father settled on her the sum of 10,000 pounds, and gave her
during life an annuity of 500 pounds, while all that Mr. Nisbett brought
was the sum of 7,000 pounds.  In 1824 Mr. Nisbett died.  Of the marriage
there were three sons; two had died, and at the time of the trial the
only one living was the eldest, Philip Blundell Nisbett, a confirmed
lunatic.  In the year 1835 Mr. Fisher died, leaving property to the
amount of about 100,000 pounds.  Mrs. Nisbett, after her father's death,
left the bulk of the property to Philip Blundell Nisbett.  There now
appeared on the scene Mr. Richard Blundell Nisbett, a son of Mr.
Nisbett's brother, and nephew by marriage to Mrs. Nesbitt.  He took out a
commission of lunacy against Philip, who was found to be a lunatic and
incapable of managing his own affairs.  Then he endeavoured to get a
commission of lunacy against Mrs. Nisbett, but the Lord Chancellor, on
receiving the report of the medical men who examined her, dismissed the
petition, with costs.  As soon as Mrs. Nisbett discovered the course that
Richard was pursuing, she made a new will, the effect of which was that
the property went to Miss Fisher, the plaintiff, for life, and after her
death to blood relations.  On November 10th, 1854, Mrs. Nisbett died
suddenly, and these legal proceedings commenced.  After evidence had been
given by medical men and others, the Attorney-General (Sir Alexander
Cockburn) who appeared for the defendant, unexpectedly withdrew from the
case, and a verdict was entered for the plaintiff.


AUGUST.


1.--Died at Malta, of wounds received before Sebastopol, on June 18th, in
the attack upon the Redan, Lieut. Charles A. P. Boileau, of the Rifle
Brigade, aged 19, fourth son of Sir John P. Boileau, Bart., and Lady
Catherine Boileau, of Ketteringham Park.

15.--Stalham Corn Hall, erected at the cost of 300 pounds, raised by 82
shares of 5 pounds each, was opened.

16.--A public dinner was held at Fakenham, under the presidency of Sir
Willoughby Jones, Bart., to celebrate the opening of the Corn Hall.  A
capital of 4,000 pounds was raised in 160 shares of 25 pounds each.  The
building was designed by Mr. Brown, architect, of Norwich, and built by
Mr. Pettitt, of Ipswich, for 3,000 pounds.

20.--Mr. Charles Mathews commenced a two nights' engagement at Norwich
Theatre.  His characters were Sir Charles Coldstream ("Used Up"), Mr.
Affable Hawk ("The Game of Speculation"), and Captain Patter ("Patter
_versus_ Clatter").  For these two nights the Theatre was under the
management of Mr. John Coleman, formerly of the Norwich Company.

21.--Died at Thorpe, in his 72nd year, Mr. Edmond Wodehouse.  He was a
son of Mr. Thomas Wodehouse, by a daughter of Mr. Pryce Campbell, of
Stackpole Court, Pembrokeshire.  In 1809 he married his cousin, Lucy,
daughter of the Rev. Philip Wodehouse, by whom he had four children, two
sons and two daughters.  In 1817 he offered himself as candidate for
Norfolk, in opposition to Mr. Pratt; he was returned, and retained his
seat until the General Election in 1830.  At that time the excitement of
the Reform agitation was at its height, which, with other circumstances,
induced him to decline a contest.  In that year Mr. T. W. Coke
(afterwards Earl of Leicester) was returned with Sir W. J. H. B. ffolkes.
In 1832 Mr. Keppel and Mr. Windham were returned.  When the political
excitement of the former period had subsided, Mr. Wodehouse again
appeared before the constituency, and at the General Election in 1835 he
and Lord Walpole were returned, in opposition to Mr. Windham and Mr.
Richard Hanbury Gurney.  Another General Election took place in 1837, and
Mr. Wodehouse was returned with Mr. Henry Negus Burroughes, in opposition
to the same Liberal candidates.  In 1842 Mr. Wodehouse and Mr. Burroughes
were again elected; Sir W. J. H. B. ffolkes, who was abroad at the time,
was nominated without his consent as the Liberal candidate.  Both
Conservative candidates were re-elected without opposition in 1847.  Mr.
Wodehouse sat in Parliament about forty years.  He was a Conservative of
the old school, a Protectionist, and a zealous supporter of Sir Robert
Peel until he introduced his Free Trade measures.  His remains were
interred at Norwich Cathedral on August 28th.

--At the Norwich Police Court, Mr. John Coleman, tragedian, and temporary
manager of the Theatre, preferred a complaint against Inspector Amis, of
the city police.  On the previous evening, he stated, a number of persons
presented themselves at the dress-box entrance and demanded admission
with, silver tickets.  He informed them that the majority of places had
been taken by those who had paid, but the upper circle was open to silver
ticket holders.  Some noise and disturbance ensued.  Sir William Foster
came up and endeavoured to gain an entrance, Mr. Coleman tried to prevent
him, a scuffle ensued, and the police were sent for by both parties.
Inspector Amis came, and Mr. Coleman directed his attention to a notice
on the play-bill that no one would be admitted to the dress circle
without a reserved seat ticket.  Mr. Coleman asked the inspector to
remove the persons who were seeking to gain an entrance; and they, in
turn, requested the inspector to remove Mr. Coleman.  The officer, it was
asserted, made an unprovoked and violent assault upon Mr. Coleman, who
denied that silver ticket holders had the privilege to enter the house,
and told them that they must legally prove their right.  He had taken the
Theatre for two nights only, at a heavy rental, there was no arrangement
in the agreement with the manager as to the proprietors of silver
tickets, and that was why he had put the notice on the bills.  Mr. Hudson
(a magistrate) remarked that the owners of silver tickets were owners of
the Theatre, and had a right to go in when they pleased.  Sir William
Foster attended the Court, and stated that unless Mr. Coleman apologised
he would take proceedings against him.  Mr. Coleman said he was sorry if
Sir William Foster had been injured (his waistcoat was torn to ribbons),
but beyond that he should make no apology.  The case against Amis was
dismissed.  Silver ticket holders were admitted without opposition on the
evening of the 21st.

23.--Died at Norwich, in his 87th year, Mr. John Francis, manufacturer,
who served the office of Sheriff in 1837.

24.--The foundation-stone of a new chapel on Hempton Green, Fakenham, was
laid.  The building was designed by Mr. J. H. Hakewell, architect to the
Church Building Society.  "Hempton has been without a church or clergyman
since the Reformation, when the ancient priory church was demolished."
(_See_ October 6th, 1856.)


SEPTEMBER.


4.--Died at Brighton, Mr. Henry Dover, of Caston, who, in the previous
July, resigned the office he had long held as a chairman of the Court of
Norfolk Quarter Sessions.

10.--A telegraphic message announcing the fall of Sebastopol was
exhibited at the window of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE Office, at six p.m.
Thousands of citizens crowded into the Market Place, and the office was
besieged by persons anxious to obtain copies of the dispatch.  Peals were
rung upon the bells of St. Peter Mancroft, bands paraded the streets, and
the citizens sang in chorus the National Anthem and "Rule, Britannia."  A
bonfire was lighted in the Market Place, followed by a display of
fireworks.  There were great rejoicings in every town and village in the
county.  Sunday, the 29th, was observed as a day of special thanksgiving.

18.--Mr. Walter Montgomery, at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich, "repeated
from memory his recital of 'Othello.'"  "Mr. Montgomery is the son of a
respectable Norwich citizen, and has gained much provincial celebrity for
his impersonation of Shakesperian characters."

23.--A fire occurred at the Steam Flour Mills, Lower Westwick Street,
Norwich.  The large building, much valuable machinery, and 200 sacks of
flour were destroyed.  The loss to the owner (Mr. F. W. Waters) was
estimated at 4,000 pounds.


OCTOBER.


19.--At a meeting of the county magistrates, the following resolution was
adopted, on the motion of Mr. T. J. Birch: "That the magistrates of the
county of Norfolk, in Quarter Sessions assembled, take this, the earliest
opportunity, of conveying to Major-General Charles Ash Windham, their
sincere congratulations on his providential escape from the perils
attendant on the assault of the great Redan of Sebastopol on the 8th of
September, 1855, of expressing to him their sense of admiration of his
long-enduring gallantry, of his courage, constancy, self-devotion, and
self-possession, which may be equalled, but cannot be surpassed, and of
tendering to him their warmest and most cordial thanks for the example he
has thus held out to the British soldier."  A "Windham Testimonial Fund"
was afterwards opened.  (_See_ August 1st, 1856.)


NOVEMBER.


3.--The Norfolk coast was visited by a severe gale, which did enormous
damage to the shipping.

9.--Mr. J. Godwin Johnson was elected Mayor, and Mr. Timothy Steward
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

28.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, the unsatisfactory state
of the railway communication between Norwich and London was considered.
It was stated that an apprehension existed on the part of the public, on
account of delays and obstructions, that the Eastern Counties Railway was
insecure.  A committee was appointed to inquire into and define the
grievances of the citizens.  On December 7th the Committee reported upon
the alleged insecurity of the permanent way; the irregularity and
inconvenience in the working of the line; and the arrangements for the
conveyance of the mails.  The Board of Trade made an inspection of the
line, and in January, 1856, reported upon its insecure and dangerous
state between Norwich and Cambridge.


DECEMBER.


8.*--"The Queen has been pleased to grant unto Joseph Stonehewer Scott,
of Thursford and Pinckney, in the county of Norfolk, eldest son of Mr.
Joseph Scott, of Colney Hall, license and authority that he and his issue
may use the surname of Chad in addition to and after the surname of
Scott, and bear the arms of Chad quarterly with the family arms of
Scott."

--*"Of late years some improvements have been made in various parts of
Norwich by widening the streets, but by far the most important and
expensive has been that in London Street.  The improvement was badly
designed, and has cost almost as much already as the cost would have been
of pulling down one side of the street entirely.  From first to last at
least 20,000 pounds has been expended, and the whole street is a bungle
after all.  The lower part of the street remains as bad as ever, and in
the upper part years have been required to make a fourteen feet passage."

19.--Mr. W. L. Mendham was elected Town Clerk of Norwich, in succession
to Mr. J. R. Staff, who, since 1836, had held that office with the
appointment of Clerk of the Peace.  Mr. A. Dalrymple was elected to the
latter office.

20.--Died at Dorking, Mr. T. Cubitt, who was well known by reason of the
many important building contracts he had undertaken in London.  He was
born at Buxton, near Norwich, on February 25th, 1788.  When working as a
journeyman carpenter, he, in his nineteenth year, made a voyage to India,
as a ship's joiner.  On his return to London two years afterwards, he
commenced as a builder in a small way of business.  Later he erected the
London Institution, Moorfields, and about the year 1824 entered into an
engagement with the Duke of Bedford and Lord Southampton for contracts on
the ground on which Tavistock Square, Gordon Square, Woburn Place, and
the neighbouring streets now stand.  Towards the close of the same year
and the beginning of 1825 he engaged with the Marquis of Westminster and
Mr. Lowndes to cover portions of the Five Fields and grounds adjacent,
and of this engagement Belgrave Square, Lowndes Square, Chatham Place,
and other ranges of houses resulted.  He built upon the vast open
district lying between Eton Square and the Thames, now known as South
Belgravia, and carried out similar extensive operations in Clapham,
Kemp-town, Brighton, and other places.  Mr. Cubitt had two brothers, Mr.
Alderman Cubitt, M.P. for Andover, and Mr. Lewis Cubitt, the architect of
the Great Northern Railway terminus.

26.--The title of the Christmas pantomime produced at Norwich Theatre was
"King Goggle-eyed Greedy Gobble and the Fairy of the Enchanted Lake."
Mr. Sidney was complimented upon the excellence of the production.

27.--Died, in his 80th year, Mr. W. Shalders, who was for many years a
leather merchant in Norwich.  He was the originator and patentee of the
far-famed Norwich invention known as the "fountain pump."



1856.


JANUARY.


21.--Mr. John Coleman, lessee of the Worcester circuit, appeared at
Norwich Theatre, in the character of Claude Melnotte.  His other
impersonations included Evelyn ("Money"), Hamlet, Richelieu, and Ingomar.


FEBRUARY.


5.--Madame Jenny Goldschmidt-Lind sang at a performance of "The Messiah,"
at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich and on the 7th took part in a concert at
which a miscellaneous programme was presented.  The other performers
included Mr. Lockey, Mr. Weiss, Miss Bassano.  M. Otto Goldschmidt, and
Mr. Swift.  The total receipts amounted to 2,400 pounds, of which 351
pounds was paid to the account of the Jenny Lind Infirmary.

11.--The first performance of modern burlesque, "The Yellow Gnome," by J.
R. Planche, was given at Norwich Theatre on this date.

19.--Mr. Henry Russell appeared at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, in his
entertainment, entitled, "The Far West, or life in America," illustrated
by a series of views "showing the different scenes of a transit from
Liverpool to the American Continent."

23.*--"At the present time there are about forty manufacturers in
Norwich, ten of them being producers of textile fabrics of various kinds.
Altogether they now employ several thousand operatives in spinning yarns
or in the production of immense quantities of goods composed of materials
of that description."

27.--The Lord Bishop of the Diocese consecrated the new Cemetery at
Norwich.  Thirty-five acres of land were purchased by the Board of Health
of Mr. John Cater, but only twenty-three acres were at first utilised.
The buildings were erected by Messrs. Ling and Balls, from designs by Mr.
Benest, city surveyor, for 1,990 pounds.


MARCH.


12.--Mr. George Dawson, of Birmingham, delivered an address at the
Lecture Hall, St. Andrew's, Norwich, on "Martin Luther: his private life
and character."  On the 17th he lectured on "Old Books: their uses,
beauties, and peculiarities."

13.--Mrs. Fred Philips, for several years a favourite actress on the
Norwich circuit, took her final leave of the stage at Norwich Theatre.
The house was crowded, and between 300 and 400 persons were refused
admission.

22.--Hoffman's "Organophonic Band, or Human Voice Orchestra," with Mr.
Thurton, "the living Valentine Vox," gave an entertainment at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  The performance was repeated on the 24th and
25th, and the company made a return visit in April.

24.--Mr. Walter Montgomery, a native of the city, commenced a six nights'
engagement at Norwich Theatre, during which he appeared as Virginius,
Macbeth, Richard the Third, &c.

--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, a letter was received from
Mr. J. B. Morgan, hon. secretary to the Nelson Statue Committee, stating
that it was proposed, on the suggestion of Sir Richard Westmacott, R.A.,
Professor of Sculpture, to remove the statue from the site it had
occupied during the preceding eighteen months, in the Market Place,
opposite the entrance to Dove Street, to a new site in the Upper Close,
immediately facing the Grammar School.  The statue was removed, on April
16th, to the site it now occupies.

30.--Intelligence was received in Norwich of the signing of the Treaty of
Peace.  On the 31st (Monday) the bells of St. Peter Mancroft were rung,
and flags hoisted upon the tower.  In the evening fireworks were
discharged in the Market Place, and, contrary to police regulations, a
bonfire was lighted.  It was extinguished by the constables, whereupon
the mob broke many windows in the Market Place, and proceeded to the
Castle Meadow, where a squib was thrown upon a waggon loaded with straw.
When the fire brigade attempted to put out the flames, the firemen were
stoned by the rioters, some of whom were apprehended, and punished next
day by the magistrates.  Peace was proclaimed on May 1st by the Mayor
(Mr. J. G. Johnson) and the Sheriff (Mr. T. Steward), who were attended
by the Town Clerk and Under-Sheriff.  From an open carriage the Mayor
read her Majesty's Proclamation in the Market Place "and the other
accustomed spots for such announcements."  Peace was celebrated on May
27th.  The Royal Artillery paraded on Mousehold and fired a salute, and
at one o'clock dinner was provided at St. Andrew's Hall for the
non-commissioned officers and men of the Artillery stationed in the city,
for the recruiting and Militia staffs, for soldiers and sailors residing
in the city who had been engaged in the war, and for the fathers, sons,
and brothers of soldiers and sailors who had fallen in the war or who
were then on active service.  Upwards of 8,000 children assembled in
Chapel Field, and walked in procession to the Market Place, where the
National Anthem was sung, and immediately afterwards proceeded to
Victoria Station, where they had tea.  In the evening the Guildhall,
Ethelbert Gate, St. Andrew's Hall, the Shirehall, St. Giles' church,
Erpingham Gate, the gate at the Bishop's Palace, and the Wellington and
Nelson statues were illuminated.  There were displays of fireworks in the
Market Place and on Castle Meadow, where also a bonfire was lighted.  On
the 28th a ball was given at the Assembly Rooms.  Similar celebrations
took place at Yarmouth, Lynn, and other towns.


APRIL.


13.--A serious gas explosion took place at Gurney's Bank, Norwich.  A
clerk, named Utting, who detected an escape of gas, entered with a
lighted candle the office of Mr. Mottram.  A tremendous explosion
followed.  The walls were rent, the windows blown out, and the ceiling
raised so that the gas escaped to the rooms above.

--Died at his residence, Redwell Street, Norwich, Dr. Robert Hull, in his
62nd year.  He was for many years upon the Commission of the Peace for
the city, and was one of the physicians of the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital, a post which he resigned a short time before his death.

23.--Miss Cushman, the celebrated actress, appeared at Norwich Theatre as
Meg Merrilies.  On the 25th she performed the part of Romeo, to the
Juliet of Mrs. Sidney.

25.--The coming of age of Mr. William Amherst Tyssen Amhurst was
celebrated at Didlington Park.  Lord Berners formerly owned the estate,
and in 1849 sold it to Lord William Powlett, from whom it passed by
purchase to Mr. George Tyssen Amhurst, who effected many improvements
upon the property.  The celebration was carried out upon a scale of great
liberality.  A fine bullock, weighing 80 stones, was killed on the 21st,
steamed on the 23rd, and roasted whole on the 25th in a temporary kitchen
specially erected by Mr. Plowright, of Swaffham.  A sheep of six stones
weight was also roasted whole, and the total weight of the plum-puddings
was 700 lbs.  Immense quantities of beef, mutton, and pork were cooked in
joints.  Three tents, each 130 ft. in length, were provided for the
accommodation of the guests, who numbered upwards of 550.  The toast of
"Miss Mitford, the future Mrs. Amhurst," was drunk with great enthusiasm,
and a series of athletic sports concluded the festivities.  [_Note_: The
spelling of the names in the original paragraph is adhered to.  William
G. T. Daniel Tyssen by licence exchanged the name of Daniel Tyssen for
Tyssen-Amhurst: his son, by a second licence, altered it to William
Amhurst Tyssen-Amherst.]


MAY.


5.--The close of the season at Norwich Theatre was marked by the public
presentation to Mr. William Sidney of a handsome silver salver and vase,
"in recognition of his judicious management as lessee."  It was one of
the most successful seasons that had been recorded for many years.

7.--Died at her house in Green Park Buildings, Bath, aged 76, Lady Betty,
widow of Rear-Admiral Sir Edward Berry, Bart., K.C.B., and eldest
daughter of Dr. Forster, formerly headmaster of the Norwich Free Grammar
School.

11.--The centenary of the opening of the Octagon Chapel, Norwich, was
celebrated.  A dinner was held at the Royal Hotel on the 13th, under the
presidency of Mr. John Taylor, F.R.S.

31.--A fire took place on the premises of Mr. Ineson, rag and bone
merchant, St. Andrew's, Norwich.  In addition to the total destruction of
Mr. Ineson's property, the workshops of Mr. Fisher, builder, and the
paint shop of Mr. Turner were burnt down.

--In the Rolls Courts Sir John Romilly gave judgment in the case of the
Norwich Yarn Company, which came before the Court upon appeal from the
Master's certificate.  The question was whether the directors of the
company were entitled to levy contributions upon shareholders, in order
to pay certain sums advanced or borrowed by them for carrying on the
business of the company, which had become insolvent.  Originally
projected in 1833, with the view of relieving the distress which at that
time affected the poor of Norwich, the company struggled on with
increasing difficulties for sixteen years, until in 1850 it was wound up
by order of the Court.  His lordship now discharged altogether a question
of fraud on the part of the directors.  He was of opinion that the
directors were entitled to be allowed all sums advanced by them, with
simple interest at five per cent., and to be repaid that amount as far as
the sum in Court would extend, with payment of the costs, and afterwards
by a surplus raised by a call from the contributors in proportion to the
number of shares held by them respectively, and that the cost of the
proceedings must be borne by the estate of the company.


JUNE.


3.--The Rev. J. Alexander was presented with a purse containing 500
pounds, and a clock, on the occasion of his entering the fortieth year of
his ministry at Prince's Street Independent chapel, Norwich.  The Rev. S.
Titlow and other clergymen of the Church of England were present.

7.--A male specimen of Savi's warbler, the rarest of British marsh
warblers, was shot near Brundall.  "This is the only bird of the species
obtained in the county since 1842, when a pair were killed at South
Walsham, which, with one in the Norwich Museum, are all that are known to
have occurred in Norfolk.  The one in the Museum was obtained by the Rev.
James Brown, at Limpenhoe, in the early part of the century."

21.--At a meeting held at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, it was decided to
establish a pack of foxhounds in Norfolk, and to invite Lord Suffield to
become master.  The first meet of the pack took place at Melton Constable
Park, on November 25th.

23.--A panorama, with the present form of variety entertainment, was
exhibited for the first time at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich, by Mr. J.
Batchelder.  The views were illustrative of a tour in Southern Africa.

25.--The left wing of the West Norfolk Militia arrived at Norwich from
Fermoy, co. Cork; the right wing reached the city on the 26th.  An
influential deputation of the inhabitants of Fermoy, prior to the
departure of the regiment, presented to the colonel a farewell address,
in which they congratulated him upon having the command of "so highly
respectable and well disciplined a corps."


JULY.


5.--A fine brig of 200 tons was launched from Mr. J. S. Southgate's
shipyard at Wells-next-the-Sea.  She was christened the Rambler, by Miss
Ellen Rump.  From Mr. Henry Tyrrell's yard at Wells, on September 3rd,
was launched a new schooner, called the Gem.

11.--The Testerton estate, near Fakenham, comprising a residence and
676a. 3r. 6p. of arable and pasture land, let on lease to Mr. Thomas
Henry Case, at a rental of 1,105 pounds per annum, was sold at the Royal
Hotel, Norwich, by Mr. Butcher, for 34,500 pounds, exclusive of timber.
The purchasers were the trustees of Mr. John Morse, deceased.

16.--Building sites in London Street, Norwich, were offered for sale by
Mr. F. Clowes.  "The highest price made was at the rate of 9s. 0.5d. per
square foot, or 20,000 pounds per acre."

--The new cemetery at Yarmouth was consecrated by the Right Rev. Bishop
Spencer, acting for the Lord Bishop of the Diocese.

21.--An inquiry was opened at Yarmouth by Mr. W. D. Boase, one of her
Majesty's Charity Commissioners, "into the present circumstances and
administration of the various endowed charities existing in the borough,
with the view of hearing any complaints that might be made, and to
suggest improvements in the disposition of the funds."  The inquiry
concluded on the 24th.

23.--A performance of Costa's "Eli" was given by the Norwich Choral
Society, at St. Andrew's Hall.  The principal vocalists were Madame
Rudersdorff, Miss Dolby, Mr. George Perren, Mr. A. Mann, Mr. Weiss, and
Mr. Thomas.  A performance of the same oratorio, under the personal
direction of the composer, had already been advertised by Mr. Gedge, of
Heigham Grove.  The Mayor (Mr. J. G. Johnson) had given permission for
the use of the hall, and his action was sharply criticised at the
meetings of the Town Council and in letters to the newspapers.  The
following announcement was published on July 19th: "'Eli,' for the
benefit of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, under the direction of Mr.
Costa.  Postponed.  Mr. Gedge respectfully informs the public of the
county and city that, as the Town Council has thought fit to set aside
the Mayor's prerogative and fixing a day for the performance in
opposition to the one he announced under the early sanction and promise
of the Mayor for the Assize week, in St. Andrew's Hall, and as the
Council thought fit, at their last meeting, to determine on other
restrictive demands, of which he received a legal notice this day, he has
resolved to postpone 'Eli,' under Mr. Costa's direction, until a future
opportunity, when he trusts he shall be able to benefit the charities and
at the same time to gratify the public."

26.--On this date was published a report of the action, Beaven _v._ Lord
Hastings, heard before the Vice-Chancellor, Sir W. P. Wood.  This was a
bill by a bond creditor of Edward Astley, deceased, praying an account of
the sum due for principal and interest upon his bond, and a decree for
payment against the defendant, Lord Hastings, on the ground that he had
made himself personally liable to pay the debt without regard to a
sufficiency of the assets of the late Edward Astley.  The bill also
brought the declaration that the defendant had constituted himself
executor _de son tort_ of the intestate Edward Astley, and was
accountable on that footing to the plaintiff as the rightful
administrator of the intestate.  Mr. Astley, who resided at Eneilles, in
Belgium, having borrowed 1040 pounds from the plaintiff, gave his bond,
dated July 3rd, 1845, by which he became bound to the plaintiff in the
penal sum of 2,080 pounds, with the condition for defeasance upon payment
on July 3rd, 1847, of 1,040 pounds with interest at 5 per cent.  A
warrant of attorney at even date was executed by Edward Astley, but no
judgment was ever actually entered up under the warrant.  In April, 1846,
the dead body of Edward Astley was found, with marks of violence upon it,
in the River Ourthe in Belgium.  Lord Hastings and his mother, Dame
Hester Astley, his sole next-of-kin, proceeded to Eneilles with his
solicitor, and applied to the Juges de Paix to remove the seals and give
him possession of his brother's property.  A _proces verbal_ having been
signed, possession of the property, "without description or inventory,"
was delivered to Lord Hastings, who, by thus taking possession _pur et
simple_ became personally liable, according to the Belgian law, to pay
the debts of the intestate, without reference to the value of assets.
The Vice-Chancellor dismissed the bill, on the ground that the defendant,
who had legally received the property in Belgium, could not be sued in
England as executor _de son tort_.


AUGUST.


1.--General Windham was received in Norwich with a great demonstration of
welcome, on his return to his native county.  The hero of the Redan
travelled from London by the Eastern Union line, and was presented with
congratulatory addresses at various stations along the route.  At
Victoria Station he was met by the Mayor and Corporation of Norwich, the
Earl of Albemarle, Lord Hastings, Lord Bury, &c., and escorted by the
Royal Artillery, proceeded to the Guildhall, where he was presented with
an address.  A banquet, attended by officers of the Army and Navy
connected with Norfolk and Norwich who had served in the Crimea, was
given in honour of the General, at St. Andrew's Hall.  The Earl of
Albemarle presided, and on behalf of the subscribers to the Windham
Testimonial Fund, presented the General with a service sword and a dress
sword.

2.--Several deaths were reported to have occurred from small-pox at Lynn.
"In no instance has death ensued here after vaccination."

9.--It was reported that at the Suffolk Assizes, at Ipswich, an action
was brought by the Commissioners of Yarmouth Harbour, in the name of
their clerk (Mr. Preston), pursuant to the direction of the Master of the
Rolls, against the Norfolk and Eastern Counties Railway Company.  The
plaintiff complained that the defendants had wrongfully diverted and
obstructed the waters of the Yare, the Wensum, and the Waveney, which of
right ought to flow into and through Yarmouth Harbour, and had turned
them into Lake Lothing, and thence into the sea through Lowestoft
Harbour.  The Eastern Union, the Norfolk, and the Eastern Counties
Railways, had entered into an agreement for amalgamation, by virtue of
which the latter company assumed the entire control over the network of
railways constructed by those companies and the East Anglian Company,
and, among other matters, they undertook the duties created by the
Norwich and Lowestoft Navigation Act, one of which was the maintenance of
Mutford Bridge where Lake Lothing joined Oulton Broad, for the double
purpose of keeping in the fresh waters of the Yare and Waveney and
preserving them for the use of Yarmouth Harbour, and of keeping out the
waters of the sea, which would otherwise flood all the low lands at high
water.  These duties had not been discharged to the satisfaction of the
plaintiffs.  After discussion, terms of reference to Mr. B. Andrew, Q.C.,
were arranged, the defendants undertaking to repair the locks at once,
the plaintiffs being let in to complain of acts of omission as well as of
commission on the part of the defendants.  A verdict was then taken for
the plaintiffs, subject to a special case.  (_See_ January 26th, 1858.)

15.--Lieut.-Col. Edwin Wodehouse, C.B., Royal Artillery, on revisiting
his former home at Hingham, after his return from the Crimea, was
presented with an address by the inhabitants of the town.  He was the
eldest son of Admiral Wodehouse.  At Inkerman a battery called
"Wodehouse's Battery" was furiously attacked and nearly all the men cut
down by overpowering numbers of the enemy.  By heroic courage and
determination he rescued from the enemy the three guns lost early in the
action.  Two slugs passed through his cloak, and one, if not two, horses
were killed under him.

18.--The London Grand Opera Company commenced a season at the Theatre
Royal, Norwich.  The _artistes_ included Miss Rebecca Isaacs, Miss Fanny
Reeves, Mr. Borrani, Mr. Oliver Summers, Mr. J. B. Bowler, and Mr.
Elliott Galer.  Among the operas produced were "La Somnambula," "The
Bohemian Girl," "Maritana," "Lucia Di Lammermoor,'" "Fra Diavolo,"
"Norma," and "Daughter of the Regiment."  The company came direct from
Drury Lane Theatre, on the termination of the season there.

24.--Died at Blofield, Captain Onslow, R.N., in his 61st year.  He
entered the Navy in 1810, saw much active service, and returned to
Portsmouth from Rio de Janeiro with upwards of 888,000 dollars on June
3rd, 1833.  He was advanced to post rank on August 27th, 1834, and was
lastly, from July 23rd, 1842, until paid out of commission in the early
part of 1847, employed in the Pacific, on board the Daphne, 18.

26.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, the Paving Committee
reported in favour of a scheme for draining the northern part of the
city, at the total cost of 7,893 pounds, according to plans prepared by
Mr. E. E. Benest, city surveyor.  The Council declined to adopt the
scheme, on the ground that the city could not afford to undertake it.


SEPTEMBER.


1.--A storm of great severity occurred.  The district in which it was
most felt was across the track of marsh land lying between Bungay and
Ormesby.  At Yarmouth the outbreak began at six p.m., and lasted till
midnight.  Several cottages were flooded, and one fell, in consequence of
its being undermined by the water.

--The first meeting of the provisional committee for erecting the
Britannia Pier, Yarmouth, was held at the Angel Hotel, under the
presidency of Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., M.P.  The estimated cost was
3,900 pounds.  The pier was opened on July 13th, 1858.

14.--A white stork was shot in the plantation of Mr. R. H. Saye, at North
Pickenham.  Its wings measured 6 ft. 3 in. from tip to tip, it was 4 ft.
in length, and weighed 8 lbs.  The bird was preserved by Mr. T. Ellis, of
Swaffham.

23.--Mdlle. Piccolomini gave a concert at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.
Among the _artistes_ from Her Majesty's Theatre who accompanied her were
Mdlle. Firioli, Signor Belletti, Mr. Charles Braham, Signor Beneventano,
and Signor Pilotti.

27.*--"During the past fortnight the catch of herrings at Yarmouth has
been almost unprecedented in the annals of the fisheries.  In many
instances the boats have entered the harbour so heavily laden that their
gunwales were almost level with the water.  In the last ten days it is
computed that the quantity of herrings brought in and landed here from
the various boats has reached the enormous daily average of 100 lasts, or
1,320,000 fish.  From 12 pounds 10s. to 14 pounds per last has been
realised; but in some cases this abundance of fish has proved most
disastrous to the owners, entailing the loss of the boats' nets, stores,
&c.  Mr. J. T. Frosdick has sustained in this way the entire loss of the
nets of two boats, to the serious extent of 450 pounds, for, owing to the
enormous catch of fish, the men were quite unable to draw the nets on
board, and ultimately the weight proved so great that they sunk the nets
and all to the bottom of the sea."

30.--The festival of the Choir Benevolent Fund was held at Norwich
Cathedral.  In addition to those of Norwich, choirs from London, Ely,
Cambridge, Rochester, Peterborough, and Canterbury took part.  The total
sum accruing from the festival amounted to 273 pounds 0s. 9d.


OCTOBER.


1.--Died, in his 83rd year, the Rev. James Brown, B.D., Hon. Canon of
Norwich, and for fifty years vicar of St. Andrew's, Norwich.  "For more
than twenty years chaplain of the county prison, he was one of the
earliest advocates of educational efforts being directed towards
prisoners, and in his practical suggestions may be traced the germ of
much that is valuable in our reformatory institutions.  He lived long
enough to see similar views generally adopted and made compulsory by the
State.  His duties as chaplain were performed during a period when
capital punishments were much more frequent than now, and this gave him
the opportunity of seeing vice in its most degrading forms, and to hear
from the lips of its victims the repentance which the certain approach of
death and judgment generally extracted from them."

6.--The church of the Holy Trinity, Hempton Green, was opened by the
Bishop of Norwich.

--The corner-stone of the new Corn Hall at Aylsham was laid by the
Marquis of Lothian.

7.--Died at Calais, aged 60, Capt. Charles Thurtell, R.N., son of Mr.
Thomas Thurtell, of Lakenham.

16.--The Earl of Albemarle addressed a large meeting of the industrial
class at the Corn Hall, Diss, upon the subject of "Benefit Clubs."  In
the course of his remarks, he asserted "the Manchester Unity of
Oddfellows is humbug from beginning to end."  The action of his lordship
evoked a large amount of newspaper correspondence, and on November 6th
Mr. Samuel Daynes, a former "Grand Master" of the Unity, introduced at
Diss a Mr. Reeve, who delivered an address to rebut the assertions of
Lord Albemarle.

20.--Mr. Fred Phillips' dramatised version of Mrs. Beecher Stowe's
romance of "Dred" was produced at the Surrey Theatre, and was favourably
noticed by the critics.  At the same theatre, on January 19th, 1857, was
produced the comedy, "A Bird in the Hand is worth Two in the Bush," by
the same author.

29.--At a meeting held at Yarmouth, it was resolved to take the necessary
steps towards placing the Nelson column in a proper state of repair.


NOVEMBER.


1.--Mr. T. D. Eaton, president of the Choral Society, was presented by
the members, at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, with a silver snuff-box and
silver inkstand.  "Mr. H. Pierson, the author of the oratorio
'Jerusalem,' and of the opera 'Faust,' was present, and wrote a drinking
song for the occasion, dedicating it to the president."

5.--Died at Liverpool, Mr. Charles Hodgson, formerly of Norwich.  He was
one of the mathematical tutors at Norwich Free Grammar School during the
headmastership of the Rev. Edward Valpy, and nearly the last surviving
member of the Norwich Society of Artists, established in 1803.

9.--The down parliamentary train was on its way from Thetford to Harling
when the engine left the metals, mounted the bank by the side of the
line, and, after running forty yards, turned over upon its side, crushing
the driver to death.  The accident was occasioned by the breaking of the
tire of the leading wheel of the engine.  A few minutes after the
accident a goods up-train ran into the tender of the disabled engine, but
only a slight collision resulted.

10.--Mr. Robert Chamberlin was elected Mayor, and Mr. Robert Seaman
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

13.--A sculling match, for 100 pounds, between Henry Kelly, of Fulham,
and Richard Buttle, of Norwich, was rowed on the Thames, from Putney to
Mortlake.  Kelly won, by little more than half a boat's length.  Time, 25
minutes.  The return match was fixed to take place on the Yare, from
Surlingham to Thorpe, on November 25th, but owing to a dispute as to the
appointment of referee, the race was postponed until the 26th, when
Kelly, who rowed the distance, about 4.5 miles, in 37.5 minutes, won
easily.

19.--Died, the Right Hon. Julia Barbara, Lady Stafford, wife of Henry
Valentine, 9th Baron Stafford, daughter of Edward Howard, of Glossop.
Her ladyship was born in 1807.  The interment took place at the private
chapel at Costessey, on November 27th.

29.--Snow began to fall, and soon reached a greater depth than had been
recorded in Norfolk for many years previously.  At nine o'clock on the
morning of December 4th the thermometer stood at 16 deg.; the reading of
the same instrument, in the same place, at eleven a.m. on December 6th
was 60 deg.  In thirty-six hours from ten to twelve inches of snow had
disappeared, and the weather thenceforth was very mild.


DECEMBER.


2.--At the Norwich Police Court, George Holl and Stephen Gilbert, of
Magdalen Road, were charged by the Commissioners of Inland Revenue with
having an illicit still.  Holl was fined 50 pounds, and Gilbert 200
pounds.

3.--The "exercise" written by Mr. Edward Bunnett, of Norwich, "to qualify
himself for taking the degree of Bachelor of Music, was performed with
great success in the chapel of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge."

25.--Died, in St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, Mrs. Ann Jean, widow of Mr.
Roger Jean, artist, in her 74th year.

26.--Boxing Day was, for the first time, observed in Norwich as a
_general_ holiday, "none of the shops being opened in the Market Place or
principal streets."  The pantomime of "Bluebeard, or the Demon
Curiosity," was produced at the Theatre, and the other amusements
included Brown's Circus, with the spectacles, "St. George and the
Dragon," and "Mazeppa"; and Wombwell's Menagerie on Castle Meadow.



1857.


JANUARY.


4.--During a violent gale from the north, several ships went ashore at
Yarmouth.  "The beach presented a melancholy appearance, from the number
of vessels upon it."

8.--The Rev. A. C. Copeman was elected minister of the parish of St.
Andrew, Norwich.  The Revs. T. Rust, J. W. Cobb, and R. Wade withdrew
from the contest, and Mr. Copeman defeated the remaining candidate, the
Rev. J. W. Evans, by 96 votes to 33.

19.--The D Battery, Field Artillery, commanded by Major Strange, marched
from the Cavalry Barracks, Norwich, _en route_ for Aldershot.  P Field
Battery arrived from Woolwich on the 21st, under the command of Major
Hoste.

23.--A sea eagle was shot at Winterton.  It measured from its beak to its
tail 3 feet, and from tip to tip of its wings 8 feet.

27.--A dinner was held at the Angel Inn, North Walsham, to celebrate the
restoration of the Market Cross.

--Died at his residence, Park Crescent, London, in his 70th year, the
Hon. Sir Edward Hall Alderson, Baron of her Majesty's Court of Exchequer.
He was the eldest son of Mr. Robert Alderson, barrister-at-law, and
Recorder of Norwich, by the daughter of Mr. Samuel Hurry, of Great
Yarmouth, where he was born in 1787.  He received his early education at
the Charter House and at Caius College, Cambridge.  Elected a Fellow of
his college, he, in 1812, proceeded M.A.  On being called to the Bar, he
went the Northern Circuit.  In conjunction with Mr. Barnewell, he edited
five volumes of reports of cases heard in the Court of King's Bench
between 1815 and 1820.  In 1830, though still wearing the stuff gown, he
was promoted an additional puisne judge in the Court of Common Pleas, and
received the honour of knighthood.  In 1834 he was transferred from that
Court to a puisne judgeship in the Court of Exchequer, where for many
years he was second to Baron Parke.  Baron Alderson was a careful,
learned, and conscientious judge, though his mind was naturally inclined
to take a rather hard and dry view of the question at issue, and to strip
it, almost to a fault, of extraneous matter.

28.--A singular action for defamation of character was tried before Mr.
Justice Williams and a special jury in the Court of Common Pleas.  Mr.
Stephen English, Chief Constable of Norwich, was the plaintiff, and Capt.
Black, Chief Constable of Norfolk, the defendant.  The damages were laid
at 3,000 pounds.  According to the opening statement of Mr. Serjeant
Byles, Capt. Black felt himself aggrieved that Mr. English should be
styled Chief Constable of Norwich, and wrote to the Watch Committee
several letters upon the subject, stating that Mr. English's assumed
title, instead of his proper title, "superintendent of police," had
caused him (Capt. Black) obstruction and official inconvenience in the
discharge of his duties.  These letters had no effect, and Capt. Black
then published handbills reflecting upon the personal character of Mr.
English.  He stated that the antecedents of Mr. English in relation to
other county forces were so disreputable as to cause his expulsion from
more than one of them.  This was the defamatory statement complained of.
Many witnesses were examined on both sides, and on the 29th the jury
returned a verdict for the plaintiff, damages 50 pounds.  On February
13th Sir Henry Stracey, M.P., in Committee on the Chief Constables Bill,
moved to insert in clause 4, "And whereas disputes having arisen as to
the title of Chief Constable, for avoiding the same the title of Chief
Constable shall be exclusively applicable to and borne by the officer
appointed by the justices of any county in General or Quarter Sessions
assembled, and the title Head Constable by the officer appointed by the
Watch Committees of boroughs and cities."


FEBRUARY.


4.--A servant girl, named Belinda Wilson, aged 18, was charged at the
County Police Station, Norwich, with stealing, on January 3rd the sum of
90 pounds, in bank notes, the property of her master, Mr. William
Claxton, farmer, of Stoke Holy Cross.  After taking the money, Wilson
attired herself in the clothes of a manservant, and starting from Flordon
railway station, proceeded to Edinburgh, where she had some difficulty in
obtaining change, as English notes were not in general circulation there.
She obtained a new suit of clothes of sporting cut, and travelled from
place to place "like a fast young man."  At the end of January she was
again in the Eastern Counties, and took up her abode at Yarmouth.  During
a visit to Wombwell's Menagerie, she was recognised by an old
schoolfellow, through whom information was given to the police, who
apprehended her at the Waterloo Tavern, St. Peter's Road, where she was
posing as "a lively-looking youth, and smoking a cigar."  She gave the
name of James Smith.  The prisoner was committed for trial, and at the
Norfolk Quarter Sessions in March pleaded guilty, and was sentenced by
Sir Willoughby Jones to two years' imprisonment, with hard labour.

11.--The new Corn Hall at East Dereham, erected on the sites of old
shambles and slaughter-houses, was opened.  A company of 250 guests
assembled at dinner in the hall, under the presidency of Lord Sondes, who
was supported by the Earl of Leicester, Lord Walsingham, Lord Hastings,
Lord Suffield, the Hon. and Rev. E. S. Keppel, Mr. W. Bagge, M.P., Mr. G.
P. Bentinck, M.P., Mr. E. Fellowes, M.P., the Mayor and Sheriff of
Norwich, &c.  The hall was built by a company, with a capital of 3,000
pounds.  Its cost was about 1,800 pounds; Mr. J. B. Goggs, of Swaffham,
was the architect, and Mr. Hubbard, of Dereham, the builder.  (_See_ July
29th, 1857.)

14.*--"A few days since Mr. Wolton, grocer, of Norwich, received by the
London post a letter enclosing the halves of notes to the amount of 140
pounds, with the intimation, written in a disguised hand, that about 14
years ago the writer, being in a place of trust in his establishment, had
appropriated to himself this amount in a dishonest manner, and taken the
present opportunity of returning it.  On Friday morning came the other
halves of the notes, with the request that the rest of the money might be
acknowledged in the 'Daily News.'"

20.--An amateur dramatic performance was given at Norwich Theatre, "by a
number of distinguished amateurs, most of whom had formed port of the
_corps dramatique_ during the late campaign in the Crimea."  The pieces
were "The Black Book," a three-act drama by J. Palgrave Simpson; "The
Thumping Legacy," and "The Critic."  The performers appeared under
fictitious names.

--A singular action was tried at the Yarmouth County Court, before Mr. T.
J. Birch.  Mr. John Cobb sued Mr. G. D. Palmer and Mr. W. N. Burroughes
for the recovery of certain money paid by the plaintiff at the request of
the defendants for expenses incurred in contesting an election of
councillors for the Market Ward in that borough on November 1st, 1851.
Mr. Cobb was induced, on the solicitation of the defendants, who were
leaders of the Liberal party, to offer himself as a candidate for the
Market Ward.  He was not anxious to become a councillor, but the
defendants promised to "see him through," and on the night before the
election distinctly guaranteed him that he should be reimbursed any
outlay incurred beyond the sum of 10 pounds.  Mr. Cobb was defeated at
the poll.  It was not denied that the guarantee was given, but it was
contended that, in order to render it valid to support the action, it
should have been in writing, which it was not.  The Judge concurred, and
nonsuited the plaintiff.  It was admitted, in the course of the hearing,
that the money was applied "to bribery, vulgarly so-called."


MARCH.


11.--A conference was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, as to certain
complaints respecting the management of the Eastern Counties lines of
railway.  The Mayor presided, and deputations were present representing
the Eastern Counties Railway Company, the Norwich Corporation, and the
town of East Dereham.  The principal complaints, as stated by Mr.
Tillett, had reference to unequal charges for the transit of goods, and
the alteration in the price of market tickets.  Mr. Love, the chairman of
the company, assured the meeting that any communication made to the
company would receive consideration.

16.--The Norwich Free Library was thrown open for the use of the
citizens.  There was no formal ceremony, but in the evening the Rev. A.
Bath Power delivered an inaugural address on the advantages of the study
of literature and science.  The building was erected at the total cost of
5,958 pounds, and the internal fittings increased the amount to 6,500
pounds.

19.--At a meeting of the Conservative party in the Eastern Division of
Norfolk, held at Norwich, it was decided that Mr. H. N. Burroughes and
Sir Henry Stracey, Bart., should withdraw from contesting the return of
General Windham and Sir E. N. Buxton.  In West Norfolk, Mr. Bagge, "from
private reasons, and from a desire not to disturb the peace of the
county," retired from the representation, and a compromise was effected
whereby both parties concurred to support Mr. Brampton Gurdon, of Letton,
and Mr. G. Bentinck, the sitting member.

21.--The Bishop of Norwich issued an address to the clergy of the
diocese, announcing that it was his intention to resign the duties of the
episcopate.  On April 21st the Corporation of Norwich voted an address to
Dr. Samuel Hinds, "late Bishop of the Diocese."

27.--The nomination of Sir Samuel Bignold, Viscount Bury, and Mr. Henry
William Schneider, as candidates for the representation of Norwich took
place at the Guildhall.  A poll was demanded on behalf of Mr. Schneider,
and was opened on the 28th.  The result was officially declared on the
30th: Viscount Bury, 2,227; Schneider, 2,235; Bignold, 1,631.

--The Hon. F. Baring and the Earl of Euston were returned unopposed for
the borough of Thetford.

--The nomination of candidates for the representation of Great Yarmouth
took place.  Sir Edmund Lacon.  Mr. McCullagh, Mr. Watkin, and Col.
Vereker were proposed.  The poll was opened on the 28th, and resulted in
the return of the Liberal candidates: McCullagh, 609; Watkin, 590; Lacon,
521; Vereker, 451.  (_See_ July 24th, 1857.)

--Lord Stanley and Mr. J. H. Gurney were re-elected, unopposed, members
for King's Lynn.

29.--Died at Hackford Hall, aged 80, the Ven. John Bedingfeld Collyer,
archdeacon of Norwich, and vicar of Wroxham with Salhouse.  He was the
second son of the Rev. Daniel Collyer, of Wroxham Hall and of Necton, by
Catherine, one of the daughters and co-heiress of John Bedingfeld, of
Caston Castle and of Beeston.  Educated at the Charter House, under Dr.
Matthew Raines, he proceeded to Clare Hall, Cambridge, and after taking
holy orders he married, in 1800, Catherine, daughter of William
Alexander, eldest brother of the first Earl of Caledon, and granddaughter
of Dr. Messenger Monsey, of Chelsea Hospital.  In 1806-7, upon the
threatened invasion of this country by Bonaparte, Mr. Collyer received a
commission as a major of Volunteers, and acted with great energy and
decision.  In recognition of his services in his military capacity, he
was made a deputy-lieutenant of the county and placed upon the commission
of the peace.  Throughout his life he was uniformly attached to Whig
principles.  He was succeeded in the archdeaconry by the Rev. R. E.
Hankinson.

30.--Mr. G. P. Bentinck and Mr. Brampton Gurdon were, at the Shirehall,
Swaffham, nominated and returned unopposed as members for West Norfolk.

31.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Erle, the Grand Jury
returned a bill of indictment against Jacob, Baron Hastings, for a
misdemeanour "in endeavouring to incite Jacob Henry Tillett to fight a
duel."  On the application of Mr. Power, a bench warrant for his
lordship's apprehension was issued.  On April 1st Mr. Kent, solicitor,
appeared on behalf of Lord Hastings, and applied for bail.  His lordship
was admitted to bail, himself in 200 pounds and two sureties of 100
pounds each.  The Earl of Leicester and Lord Suffield were his sureties.
The case was traversed to the next Assizes.  Further proceedings were,
however, withdrawn, after an interview between Lieut.-Col. Astley and Mr.
Tillett.  "His lordship," it was stated "had no intention of sending a
threatening or offensive message to Mr. Tillett, and he felt that an
article published by Mr. Tillett on November 29th, 1856, was an
unjustifiable attack upon him, which led to the warmth exhibited by his
lordship in his interview with Mr. Tillett, for which his lordship
expresses regret and withdraws his offensive epithets.  Mr. Tillett, upon
his lordship's disavowal, withdraws any remarks offensive to his lordship
is the article above alluded to, and expresses his regret that any
unpleasantness should have arisen between Lord Hastings and himself."


APRIL.


6.--General Charles Ash Windham and Sir Edmund North Buxton were, at the
Shirehall, Norwich, nominated and returned unopposed members for East
Norfolk.

9.--At a vestry meeting held at East Dereham, it was resolved that the
Bath House, an unsightly building in the churchyard, be removed.  "By the
removal of this building, the burial-place of St. Withburga, an object of
great local interest, will no longer be hidden to view."

14.--Intelligence was received in Norwich of the birth of a Princess
(Princess Beatrice).

17.--Mr. David Fisher, of the Princess's Theatre, London, appeared at
Norwich Theatre as John Mildmay ("Still Waters Run Deep").

18.--It was announced that the Hon. and Rev. John Thomas Pelham was to
succeed Dr. Samuel Hinds as Bishop of Norwich.  Mr. Pelham, who was the
second son of the second Earl of Chichester, was born in 1811, and
graduated at Oxford.  In 1845 he married a daughter of Mr. Thomas William
Tatten, and was appointed chaplain to the Queen in 1847.  Shortly
afterwards he was presented to the rectory of Berghapton, by the Earl of
Abergavenny.  In 1852 he removed to Christ Church, Hampstead, and in 1854
was nominated by the Crown to the rectory of St. Marylebone, on the death
of Dr. Spry.  On May 9th a special meeting of the Dean and Chapter was
held at the Deanery, Norwich, when the _conge d'elire_, declaring the
vacancy of the bishopric "and recommending to the Dean and Chapter the
Hon. and Rev. John Thomas Pelham, M.A., to be by them elected Bishop of
the See of Norwich," was read, and Mr. Pelham was elected accordingly.
The ceremony of confirming the election took place in the College of
Advocates in Doctors' Commons, on June 6th, and his lordship was
consecrated at the parish church of St. Marylebone on June 11th, by the
Archbishop of Canterbury.  The installation took place at Norwich
Cathedral on June 26th, and addresses were afterwards presented to his
lordship by the Corporations of Norwich and Yarmouth.

25.*--"Lord Hastings has had an interesting addition to his collection of
foreign animals in two wapiti deer, which are among the largest known of
their species in North America.  He has also an increase in a young
kangaroo and three young nylgaus having been born the week before last at
Melton Constable."

--The chancel of East Dereham church was re-opened, after "additional
embellishment, through the liberality of the sinecure rector, the Rev. W.
C. Wollaston."  The open roof was displayed by the removal of an
unsightly ceiling, early English windows were substituted for those of
more debased style, and a window by Wailes, as a memorial to Mrs.
Wollaston, completed the series of stained glass windows.  The reredos
was illuminated by Messrs. King, of Norwich.

27.--At Docking Petty Sessions it was stated, during the hearing of a
case of assault, that the quarrel had its origin in a belief in
witchcraft, "unfortunately too prevalent in most of the country
villages."  The witnesses "displayed a great amount of ignorance and
superstition, showing how the husband of the complainant had been
bewitched and unable to move for twelve months, but was cured in two days
by a witch doctor in the neighbourhood."

27.--The Yarmouth School of Navigation and Art was established at a house
on the South Quay, formerly occupied by Mr. Paget.


MAY.


7.--The adaptation of steam power to ploughing was exhibited in a field
belonging to Mr. Craske Roper, of Croxton Park, near Thetford.  Two
engines, fitted with an "endless railway," were built by Mr. Burrell, of
Thetford, and both were shown at work.  "The new engine is like a railway
locomotive, but with the addition of an apparatus, which answers the
purpose of a railway, attached to the wheels.  The endless railway
consists of a series of flat boards, six in number, plated with iron on
both sides of each wheel, equal in length to the radius of the wheel, and
from 10 to 16 inches in width, loosely attached to the felloe of the
wheel in such a manner that they are carried round with it as it
revolves.  Each in succession is laid flat on the ground in front of the
wheel, and lifted up in its rear as soon as passed over.  On the surface
of the boards next the periphery of the wheel an iron rail is fixed, on
which the wheel runs, the boards thus corresponding to the sleepers of an
ordinary railway, so that the wheels carry their own rails and sleepers
with them, laying down a literally endless railway whenever they are set
in motion."

11.--A meeting was held in the old Library Room, St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, "to take into consideration the expediency of forming a society
to prevent persons from taking and destroying fish by illegal practices."
It was resolved, "That an anglers' society be established in Norwich,
with the view of aiding the authorities in preventing illegal fishing,
and also for promoting the rational recreation of the members."  The
society was called "The Norwich and Norfolk Anglers' Society," and Mr.
Skippon was appointed honorary secretary.

13.--Mr. Thackeray gave the first of two lectures at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich.  The subject was, "George the Third."  The second lecture was
delivered on the 15th, and was entitled, "George the Fourth."  "A very
general feeling of disappointment is expressed at the style and manner of
the lecturer, and at the very high prices charged (4s. and 2s. 6d.).  We
have reason to believe that in some instances those who paid for tickets
for the second evening intentionally absented themselves."  Letters were
published in the NORFOLK CHRONICLE expressing strong disapproval of
Thackeray's strictures upon the personal characters of the Georges.

18.--The polling for the election of a Coroner for the Lynn district, to
fill the vacancy occasioned by the death of Mr. George Sayle, commenced
at Lynn.  The candidates were Mr. Jeffery and Mr. Wilkin.  "An
extraordinary degree of energy was displayed in bringing up the voters in
all parts of the district, and the expenses incurred in paying railway
and coach fares, breakfasts, and dinners for the voters and hangers on
(to say nothing of the sum of money lavished in other ways to obtain
their suffrages, added to the usual outlay upon a contested election),
must have amounted to something enormous, considering the pecuniary value
of the office at stake, probably at the best averaging 25 or 30 pounds a
year."  The poll closed on the 19th, when Mr. Wilkin was declared
elected.

18.--Mr. and Mrs. Charles Dillon commenced a three nights' engagement at
Norwich Theatre in "Othello," "Belphegor," and "Faint Heart Never Won
Fair Lady."

--A meeting was held at the Lecture Hall, Norwich, at which resolutions
were passed condemning the Law of Settlement, and advocating the
introduction of a national rate.  Another meeting was held at St.
Andrew's Hall on the 20th, at which similar resolutions were agreed to.

19.--A sculling match, for 40 pounds, was rowed on the Yare, from
Surlingham to Whitlingham (3.5 miles), between Stephen Wright, of
Norwich, aged 22, and J. H. Clasper, of Newcastle, aged 18.  The former
was trained by John Britcher, and the latter by his father.  Clasper's
boat was the lighter by several pounds, and in length exceeded the
Norwich man's craft by about four feet.  Wright had the better of the
start, but in ten strokes Clasper led by a quarter of a length.  At
Bramerton, however, Wright obtained a clear lead, and at Wood's End led
by four lengths.  Clasper made a desperate spurt, and got nearly abreast
of his antagonist, who won by a length, in 23.5 minutes.  The Newcastle
man suffered severely from exhaustion, and was lifted from his boat in a
helpless condition.  The return match was rowed on the Tyne, on July
24th, when Wright again won.

24.--The yacht Zoe, 170 tons, belonging to the Earl of Yarborough, struck
at midnight on the Lemon Sand, off Happisburgh, while on a voyage from
the Isle of Wight to Grimsby.  Lord Yarborough, with the captain and
crew, took to the boats, and landed at Happisburgh Hill House.

26.--Mr. George Dawson lectured at the Assembly Room, Norwich, on "Daniel
Defoe."

30.*--"Lord Orford has addressed the following letter to the editor of
the 'Morning Post':--'Sir, I enclose you a paragraph which appeared in
your paper of the 21st inst., to the truth of which I desire you to give
the most emphatic denial.  It is a _rechauffe_ of the lie circulated some
thirty years since in a London journal as a hoax, I presume, on the
editor.  At the time I did not think it worthy of contradiction, nor at
my age should I deem it worthy of any such contradiction now, but am
solely induced to do so for the satisfaction of those most justly dear to
me.--Yours, &c., ORFORD.  May 26th, 1857.'"  (The paragraph here alluded
to is the much-quoted reply purported to have been sent by the noble lord
to the secretary of the Norwich Bible Society.  It originally appeared in
the "Freemen's Journal," Dublin.)

31.--Died at his residence, Brighton, Mr. Charles Edmund Rumbold, of
Preston Candover, Hants., aged 69.  He represented for more than 37 years
the borough of Great Yarmouth, for which he was first returned in 1818.


JUNE.


1.--The Annual Moveable Committee of the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows
commenced its sittings at Norwich.  There were 110 delegates present, and
Mr. Cox ("Grand Master") presided.  The meetings, which were held daily
at the Bazaar (afterwards known as Victoria Hall), concluded on the 6th.
The dinner, held at St. Andrew's Hall on the 3rd, was presided over by
Sir Samuel Bignold, and in the course of the proceedings, Mr. Samuel
Daynes was presented with a gift of 160gs., in recognition of the
valuable work he had done for the Order.

1.--Died at Costessey, aged 88, Mr. John Culley, one of the leading
agriculturists of the county.  "It was to him and a few others that the
farmers in this locality are indebted for the establishment of the Hail
Storm Society, and the subscriptions which followed the memorable
hailstorm in this county a few years since."  Mr. Culley took a prominent
part in the movement for the erection of the Norwich Corn Exchange.

11.--A familiar object, known as the "Bassingham Gateway," in London
Street, Norwich, was sold by auction.  The purchaser was Mr. William
Wilde, and the price 12 pounds.  The hope was expressed that this relic
of antiquity would not be removed from the city.  On September 5th it was
announced: "The Bassingham Gateway has been erected at the magistrates'
entrance at the Guildhall, where it is quite out of character with the
building, or, at any rate, that part of it.  Above the gate are the arms
of Henry VII., the arms of the Goldsmiths' Company, to which its builder,
Mr. John Bassingham, belonged, and of the city of Norwich.  Having been
cleaned, the carved work is brought out in bold relief."

--An amateur sculling match took place for 10 pounds, from Bramerton to
Whitlingham (about three miles), between Mr. Henry Watling and Mr. Henry
Balls.  A foul resulted, Mr. Watling claimed stakes, and the referee, Mr.
Vyall, decided in his favour.

13.*--"The Marine Parade (Yarmouth) may now be looked upon as completed,
and certainly in almost every particular it has exceeded the expectations
formed of it.  It was planned and carried out under the immediate
superintendence of the Town Surveyor, Mr. A. W. Morant, and the cost will
not exceed the sum estimated, 1,700 pounds."

16.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, the Grammar School
Committee reported that the hearing took place, before the Master of the
Rolls, on June 10th, of the suit, the Attorney-General _v._ Hudson, when
the principal differences which had existed in reference to the new
scheme for the administration of the School and Hospital had been
amicably adjusted.  The sum of 1,000 pounds per annum, exclusive of the
cost of buildings, was to be taken from the Great Hospital funds and
appropriated, under the management of separate trustees, to the purposes
of education.  Two schools were to be established--a Grammar School and a
Commercial School.  The course of instruction in the Grammar School would
embrace English, Latin, French, and German, &c., and in the Commercial
School, English, French, and the rudiments of Latin, &c.  Prizes and
scholarships were to be given to both schools, and the boy who obtained
an upper class scholarship in the Commercial School would be entitled to
education in the Grammar School without cost.  The payments for boys
educated in the Grammar School were to range from 6 gs. to 8 gs. per
year, and in the Commercial School 30s. per year.  The masters were to be
paid a fixed salary, besides which their stipends would be augmented in
the Grammar School by four-sixths of the money received from the pupils,
and in the Commercial School by three-sixths.  (_See_ March 23rd, 1858.)

17.--A revival of the Dereham Race Meeting attracted thousands of
spectators to the Common.  The subscriptions amounted to 150 pounds, and
horses were run by Lord Suffield and other sportsmen of the county.

18.--Workmen engaged in deepening a dry dock belonging to Mr. Ambrose
Palmer, at Yarmouth, turned up in one spadeful from 700 to 1,000 silver
pennies of Edward I. and of Alexander III., the contemporary King of
Scotland.  The coins were discovered 17 feet beneath the level of the
quay.

23.--Mr. A. A. H. Beckwith, Governor of the Norwich Court of Guardians,
performed the ceremony of turning the first sod upon the line marked out
for the main front of the new Norwich Workhouse.

24.--Mr. Spurgeon, "the celebrated revivalist," preached two sermons at
the Corn Exchange, Lynn, in aid of a fund for repairing the local Baptist
chapel.  Two thousand six hundred tickets were issued, and the
collections amounted to 110 pounds 15s.

27.--Died of cholera, at Kurnaul, aged 59, Major-General the Hon. George
Anson, Commander-in-Chief of the troops in India.  He was the second son
of Thomas, first Viscount Anson, and brother of the first Earl of
Lichfield, served in the Scots Fusilier Guards, and was present at the
battle of Waterloo.  In 1818 he was returned for Yarmouth, and
represented the borough in several Parliaments before and after the
passing of the Reform Bill.  By hereditary descent and by personal
conviction he was a Liberal in politics, and invariably sided with the
leaders of the Whig party.  He became Major-General on November 11th,
1851.  He was a zealous patron of the Turf, on which he was better known
as Colonel Anson.


JULY.


1.--A reformatory was established at Catton, by Mr. Wright, as an
offshoot of a similar institution at Buxton.

4.--Application was made in the Court of Chancery, before the Lord
Chancellor, for a re-hearing of the case, Lombe _v._ Stoughton, which was
decided in the year 1841, by the then Vice-Chancellor.  The testator, Sir
John Lombe, had left a large fund, to be applied to the purpose of
building a mansion on his estate in Norfolk, with a direction that the
fund should accumulate until the house was finished.  Considerable delay
took place in completing the house, and the fund increased to a very
large amount, leaving a surplus of about 20,000 pounds.  The
Vice-Chancellor directed the fund to be applied to building purposes at a
time when it was not known that the surplus would be so large, but the
order was made without prejudice to any question as to the surplus.  This
surplus was now claimed by the representatives of the successive tenants
for life, on the ground that they (the tenants for life) had been
deprived of the enjoyment of the house, and were, therefore, entitled to
the fund by way of compensation.  The Lord Chancellor gave leave for the
Vice-Chancellor to re-hear the case, if he found himself fettered by the
wording of the decree.  The Vice-Chancellor, on July 31st, ruled that
what had been done was according to the intention of the testator, and
held that the surplus must be considered as capital, and not income.

7.--The Bishop of Norwich laid the first stone of the new church of St.
John the Evangelist, erected at Yarmouth for the use of beachmen and
sailors.  (_See_ April 22nd, 1858.)

8.--Mr. Arthur Preston, hon. secretary of the Norfolk and Norwich
Horticultural Society, was, at a dinner held at the Bell Hotel, under the
presidency of the Mayor of Norwich, presented with a piece of plate, in
recognition of his valuable services to the society.

17.--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. R. Chamberlin) was presented with a silver
epergne, valued at 200 gs., "in recognition of the strict impartiality,
sound judgment, and munificent hospitality which distinguished his
official career as Mayor in 1854-5."

24.--A Committee of the House of Commons commenced the hearing of a
petition lodged by Mr. Richard Ferrier, the elder, and Mr. E. H. L.
Preston, against the return for Yarmouth of the sitting members, Messrs.
M'Cullagh and Watkin.  Bribery, treating, and undue influence were
alleged.  The inquiry lasted five days.  On July 29th the Committee found
that Messrs. M'Cullagh and Watkin were, by their agents, guilty of
bribery, that they were not duly elected burgesses to serve in
Parliament, that the election was a void election, and bribes had been
paid.  On August 10th, Mr. Adolphus William Young and Mr. John Mellor,
Q.C., Liberals, were returned without opposition.

29.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Lord Chief Justice Campbell, an
indictment was preferred against the East Dereham Corn Exchange Company,
for obstructing a certain highway over Lion Hill in that town by the
erection of the hall, and further for obstructing Quebec Street and
certain fairs and markets.  The jury, after a long hearing, returned a
verdict for the Crown, with the rider: "We find that there was a public
highway over Lion Hill, and we find that there is an obstruction of that
part occupied by the Corn Exchange Company, but we find that the public
are materially benefited by the alteration, and on the second count we
find for the defendants."  (_See_ May 5th, 1858.)


AUGUST.


6.--Robert Bunn, "the celebrated pedestrian," on the Ipswich Road,
Norwich, ran a mile against time for a wager of 25 pounds.  "The wager
was that he would not cover the distance in 4 minutes 45 secs.  He
accomplished the feat in 4 minutes 30 secs."

13.--A dinner was given in honour of General Windham, at the Corn Hall,
North Walsham, on the eve of his departure for India, on the outbreak of
the Mutiny.

15.*--"A report is going the round of the papers, copied from the
Australian journals, regarding the death of the person known to our
readers as Emily Sandford.  We are assured by a gentleman who interested
himself in her behalf in 1849 that Miss Sandford is not in Australia.
She married a highly respectable merchant in 1850, with whom and their
children she returned to Europe in 1855."

20.--The battery of Royal Artillery marched from the Cavalry Barracks,
Norwich, for Shorncliffe, to hold themselves in readiness for India.

24.--The annual congress of the British Archaeological Association was
opened at Norwich, under the presidency of the Earl of Albemarle.  The
proceedings ended on the 28th.  Caistor Camp, Lynn, Yarmouth, and Burgh
Castle were among the places visited.

25.--An extraordinary leap was made by a horse ridden by Mr. William
Feek, horse trainer, of Norwich.  "Mr. Feek, in the presence of a number
of gentlemen, to show the power of the animal, jumped it over a high
fence on Newmarket Road, without touching it, making a spring from point
to point of 34 feet."


SEPTEMBER.


1.--Died at his residence in King Street, Norwich, Mr. Anthony Hudson,
banker, aged 75.  In early life he enjoyed the friendship of the Right
Hon. William Windham, and had since been on intimate terms with the
Windham family.  For many years he took an active part in the management
of the bank of Messrs. Harveys and Hudsons.  After the passing of the
Municipal Reform Bill, he was appointed a magistrate of the city, and for
more than twenty years was a constant attendant on the Bench.  He was
chairman both of the "Church" and "General" list of Charity Trustees, a
governor of the Bethel Hospital, and President of the Board of Directors
of the Norwich Union Fire Office.

4.--A troop of the 15th Light Dragoons (Hussars), under the command of
Major Knox, arrived at the Cavalry Barracks, Norwich.  The headquarters
followed, under the command of Colonel Key.

10.--A public meeting of the citizens, convened by the Mayor and Sheriff,
was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, "to take into consideration the best
means of affording relief to the suffering Europeans in India whose lives
have not been taken by the mutineers, but by whose conduct they are
rendered entirely destitute."  It was decided to open a public
subscription.

15.--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced with a
miscellaneous concert at St. Andrew's Hall.  Spohr's sacred cantata,
"God, Thou art Great," Mendelssohn's "Hymn of Praise," and Mozart's
"Requiem" were performed on the morning of the 16th, and in the evening a
miscellaneous concert was given.  Beethoven's "Mount of Olives" and
Haydn's "Seasons" were rendered on the morning of the 17th, and a
miscellaneous programme was submitted at the evening concert.  "The
Messiah" was the attraction on the morning of the 18th, and the Festival
concluded with a fancy dress ball at St. Andrew's Hall in the evening.
The vocalists engaged for the Festival were Madame Clara Novello, Mdlle.
Leonhardi (her first appearance in England), Madame Weiss, Mrs. Lockey,
Mdlle. Piccolomini, Signor Gardoni, Signor Guiglini, Mr. Lockey, Mr.
Miranda, Mr. Weiss, and Signor Belletti.  The receipts amounted to 4,348
pounds, and the expenses to 3,997 pounds.

23.--The first exhibition of the Wayland Agricultural Society was held at
Watton under the presidency of Lord Walsingham.


OCTOBER.


7.--By Royal Proclamation this day was observed as one of humiliation and
prayer.  At Norwich all the principal shops were closed, and services
were held morning and evening at the parish churches.  Collections were
made on behalf of the sufferers by the Indian Mutiny.

22.--Mr. W. H. Russell, LL.D., the special correspondent of "The Times"
during the Crimean War, delivered, at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, a
lecture on the principal events of the campaign.  He gave a second
lecture on the 23rd.

--A terrible storm raged on the Norfolk coast.  The brig Ontario, of
South Shield's, from Newcastle to Suez with coals (Capt., Balfour),
foundered on the Barber Sand off Yarmouth, and drifting to the Cockle
Gatway, was lost.  The captain, his wife and son, and the crew of 24
hands perished.  The chief mate, William Coates Robinson, alone escaped.
The Zillah, of Whitby, from Hartlepool to London, commanded by Capt.
Watson, was lost off Winterton, and five men, including the master, were
drowned, out of the crew of eight hands.  Upon the Norfolk coast between
forty and fifty lives were lost.  It was asserted that many lives would
have been saved had the lifeboats and apparatus been in an ordinarily
effective condition.  The strictures made upon the life-saving service
led to negotiations for the amalgamation with the National Society of the
Norfolk Association for Saving the Lives of Shipwrecked Mariners.


NOVEMBER.


2.--A troop of the 15th Hussars left Norwich for Coventry.

7.--Mr. Cadge was elected surgeon of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, in
succession to Mr. B. H. Norgate, resigned.  Mr. T. W. Crosse succeeded
Mr. Cadge as assistant-surgeon.

9.--Mr. Edward Field was elected Mayor, and Mr. Charles Crawshay
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

11.--Intelligence was received in Norwich of the relief of Lucknow and
the capture of Delhi.

20.--Miss P. Horton (Mrs. German Reed) and Mr. T. German Reed gave their
entertainment at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich.

28.--Norwich Theatre was opened for the winter season.  Mr. Sidney
doubled the prices of admission to pit and gallery, and increased the
prices of the dress and upper boxes.  Tuesdays and Fridays were set apart
as "subscription nights," for the production of high-class plays and
dramas.  The manager intimated that the hire of silver tickets was
illegal, "the Theatre deed requiring legal transfer and register with the
proprietors' solicitor to be available for admission."  A printed
circular had been issued by a speculator, offering silver tickets for
hire for the night, week, or the whole season, "on the usual terms."

30.--An alarming accident occurred in a building erected for equestrian
performances at the Orchard Gardens, Norwich.  Soon after the
commencement of the entertainment, the supports of the gallery gave way,
and the structure fell, with between 300 and 400 persons.  "The whole
mass of timber fell under the people, who, with their seats, were thrown
outwards, rolling over one another.  Strange to say, nobody was killed,
no legs or arms broken, and nobody seriously hurt."


DECEMBER.


1.--The Wells and Fakenham Railway was opened.  In 1853 the company was
formed, with a capital of 70,000 pounds, 14,000 pounds of which was
contributed by the inhabitants of Wells, 10,000 pounds by the Earl of
Leicester, and 30,000 pounds by the Norfolk Railway Company.  Mr. G.
Berkeley, of Great George Street, Westminster, was the engineer, and Mr.
Solomon Treadwell the contractor.  The opening-day was observed in the
district as a general holiday.  A special train was run over the nine and
a half miles of line, the Earl of Leicester entertained a large party at
Holkham, and in the evening his lordship presided over a public dinner,
held at the Crown Inn, Wells.

5.*--"Norwich manufactures at present may be said to be almost at a
standstill.  There has not been so complete a state of stagnation for
some years past.  Hundreds of operatives who are usually employed at this
season in the production of spring goods are now out of work."

9.--Mr. Alexander Hugh Baring was returned without opposition member of
Parliament for the borough of Thetford, on the retirement of his father
from the representation of the constituency.

14.--A sculling match, for 10 pounds a side, was rowed from Postwick Hall
to Whitlingham Point, between John Wright and Lancaster.  The former won
easily.

22.--The Norwich Town Council adopted a motion in favour of the erection
of a new Fishmarket.

23.--The West Norfolk Militia, which assembled on November 10th, 600
strong, left Norwich by rail for garrison duty.  The headquarters and
three companies, under the command of Lieut.-Col. Custance, proceeded to
Chester; three companies, commanded by Major Bedingfeld, to Liverpool;
and two companies, commanded by Capt. Marsham, to Stockport.  The
regiment returned to Norwich on April 23rd, 1858.

26.--The pantomime at Norwich Theatre was entitled, "Harlequin Sinbad the
Sailor, or the Princess with the Diamond Eyes and the Fairy of the Island
of Jewels."



1858.


JANUARY.


1.--A fire, involving the destruction of several dwelling-houses and a
large amount of other property, originated on the premises of Mr. W.
Colby, fish merchant, St. James's Place, South End, Yarmouth.

5.--The premises of Mr. H. F. Butcher, paper and mill-board manufacturer,
St. Martin-at-Palace, Norwich, were destroyed by fire.  On the same day a
fire occurred at Mr. Orfeur's timber-yard, St. Edmund's; and on the 6th
an outbreak took place at the soap manufactory of Messrs. Andrews and
French, in Fishgate Street.  The loss occasioned by the three fires
amounted to upwards of 6,000 pounds.

7.--Intelligence was received at Norwich of the defeat of General Windham
and his division by the Gwalier mutineers, near Cawnpore, on November
27th.

8.--Miss P. Horton and Mr. T. German Reed appeared at the Assembly Rooms,
Norwich.  These favourite performers made a return visit on October 27th,
with their entertainments, "After the Ball" and "The Unfinished Opera."

19.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, Mr. J. H. Tillett moved,
"That an inquiry be held respecting the manner in which appointments to
the city magistracy are made, and also the manner in which the
magisterial business of this city is conducted, with the view to the
adoption of any measures which may appear likely to promote the better
administration of justice."  The motion was adopted.  The committee of
inquiry reported in February that they considered "the mode in which the
magistracy is appointed in cities and boroughs is highly objectionable,
the appointments being the result of party influence," and recommended
for the magistracy "those gentlemen who have served the office of Mayor
to the satisfaction of the Council."  Complaints were made that from
excitement or infirmity of temper certain gentlemen made use of language
derogatory to their position, and tending to lower the respect of the
Bench, and these complaints the Committee found were not groundless.  On
March 16th the Town Council adopted a series of resolutions, requesting
the Mayor to address a letter to those gentlemen whose names appeared in
the report as having never attended petty sessions, or as having rarely
or sometimes attended, requiring them to take upon themselves to
discharge the duties of their office; that a rota of attendance be
established; and that, "in relation to the unseemly proceedings which
have taken place in the Sword Room, the Council forbear to memorialise
the Lord Chancellor on the subject, in the hope that similar proceedings
will not occur again."

25.--The marriage of the Princess Royal was celebrated in Norwich by the
ringing of the bells of St. Peter Mancroft, and by public dinners at the
Royal Hotel.  A ball took place in the evening, at St. Andrew's Hall.
The day was similarly observed at Yarmouth, Lynn, and other towns in the
county, and addresses of congratulation were afterwards sent to the Queen
by the respective Corporations.

26.--The long-pending case, Preston _v._ the Eastern Counties and Norfolk
Railway Companies, was before the Court of Exchequer, and Mr. Baron
Watson delivered judgment.  The first count of the declaration charged
the defendants with diverting and obstructing the waters of the rivers,
and the second with omitting to repair certain locks, whereby the water
escaped.  Judgment was given against the Eastern Counties Railway Company
for 40s. on all issues, and for the Norfolk Railway Company on their plea
of not guilty, but against them on all other issues.  Finally the case
was before the Rolls Court on June 8th, and was entered as the
Attorney-General _v._ the Norfolk and Eastern Counties Railway Companies.
The object of the information was to have it declared that the defendants
were not by their Acts of Parliament empowered to divert or obstruct any
of the waters of the Rivers Yare and Waveney, or other waters connected
with them, except Lake Lothing, for the purpose of supplying the entrance
out between Lake Lothing and the sea with water.  The Court made the
injunction already granted perpetual against the Eastern Counties Railway
Company, and ordered the company to pay the costs incurred in equity.

29.--The Norwich Town Council accepted contracts amounting to over 9,000
pounds for draining the northern portion of the city.


FEBRUARY.


5.--A special meeting of the Norwich Court of Guardians, attended by Lord
Bury, M.P., and Mr. Schneider, M.P., was held to consider the subject of
a national poor-rate.  It was stated that Norwich paid 20,000 pounds a
year more in poor relief than it would if the principle of a national
rate were adapted as the law of the land.  Both members of Parliament
expressed themselves in favour of national rating.

8.--Mr. Thomas Barnes, R.G.S., was presented by the Corporation of King's
Lynn with an "honorary address," in lieu of the freedom of the borough,
"disallowed by the Municipal Reform Act."  Mr. Baines, the son of a ship
captain of the town, was a self-taught artist, who achieved for himself a
very honourable position by his own enterprise and industry.  He was
serving as a volunteer at the Cape when he was selected as artist to
accompany the North Australian Exploring Expedition, under Mr. Gregory.
At the time of the presentation he was about to join Livingstone, on his
expedition into the heart of Africa.  Mr. Baines had already received
considerable honours from the Royal Geographical Society, of which he was
a member, and from other learned bodies.

12.--A public meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, to consider a
Bill then before Parliament introduced for the purpose of amalgamating
the Norwich Gas Company with the British Gas Company.  A resolution was
adopted affirming that the operation of the proposed Bill would be very
prejudicial to the interests of the ratepayers and inhabitants, by
placing the future management of the gas supply in the hands of a company
which had no local connection or sympathy with the interests of Norwich,
and over whom the rate-payers and inhabitants would have no control.  The
meeting having heard the report of the Special Committee appointed by the
Corporation, cordially approved the course adopted by the Committee, and
pledged itself to use every effort to oppose the passing of the Bill.  A
petition was addressed to the House of Commons against the Bill, and on
the 16th the Town Council adopted the same petition.  The House of
Commons Committee on Private Bills sat on April 20th, for the purpose of
hearing objections to the measure.  The proceedings closed on the 23rd,
when the Bill was ordered to be reported to the House.

27.*--"Sir Henry Stracey, of Rackheath Hall, has obtained provisional
protection for a cartridge which, by a very simple contrivance, gets rid
of the necessity of biting off the end, a proceeding which is always
objectionable."


MARCH.


4.--Lord Stanley was re-elected member of Parliament for the borough of
King's Lynn, on his appointment as Secretary to the Colonial Department.
On June 5th his lordship was again re-elected, on accepting the
presidency of the Board of Control, vacated by Lord Ellenborough.

--Died at his residence, South Quay, Yarmouth, Sir Eaton Stanley Travers.
A son of Mr. John Travers, of Hethyfield Grange, co. Cork, he was born in
1782, and entered the Navy September 15th, 1798, as midshipman, on board
the Juno.  He saw much active service, and was nine times mentioned in
despatches.  He was nominated K.H. on February 4th, 1834, and on March
5th in the same year had conferred upon him the honour of knighthood.
Sir Eaton Travers was a Deputy Lieutenant of Norfolk.  He married in
April, 1815, Anne, eldest daughter of William Steward, of Yarmouth, by
whom he had issue five sons and two daughters.

6.*--"Within the last few days a stone has been placed in the churchyard
at East Dereham, in memory of Jean de Narde, a French prisoner of war,
who, in the year 1796 while _en route_ from Yarmouth to Norman Cross
prison, was lodged in the lower chamber of the bell tower of the church,
and escaped therefrom.  He was pursued by the guard, and, after some
search, was espied in a tree on the Scarning Road, and when summoned by a
soldier to descend and surrender he did not comply.  His non-compliance
forfeited his life, for he was shot off it like a crow.  The stone was
erected by the vicar and two other gentlemen."

8.--Miss Vandenhoff, tragic actress, from Drury Lane and Haymarket
Theatres, commenced an engagement at Norwich Theatre, in her play,
"Woman's Heart."  She also appeared in "Love's Sacrifice," "Ingomar,"
"Macbeth," and "The Stranger."

22.--In the House of Lords, Lord Sondes presented a petition from the
Town Council and certain magistrates of Yarmouth, praying for an inquiry
into a recent appointment of justices for that borough.  It was stated
that the magistrates were constant in their attendance upon the Bench,
and were sufficiently numerous.  The borough contained 31,000
inhabitants, there were 31 magistrates, and 31 policemen.  Upon the Bench
every shade of political feeling was represented, but all the
newly-appointed magistrates were of one political party.  The Mayor of
Yarmouth had interviewed the Lord Chancellor, and his lordship had
intimated that it was his intention to persist in the appointment, and,
moreover, he felt it his duty to appoint new magistrates of one
particular party.  The action of the Lord Chancellor had excited much
feeling in the borough.  Lord Cranworth now informed the House that he
felt bound to put the magistracy in a position in which justice should
not be partially administered, and if an inquiry were instituted it
should have his entire concurrence.  No further action resulted.

23.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, a resolution was
adopted expressing surprise and indignation that a covert attempt had
been made to pervert the Grammar School and the Commercial School
proposed to be established into exclusive institutions, which would not
only deprive a large proportion of the inhabitants of the advantage of
the schools, but would condemn them in public estimation, and tend to the
frustration and utter subversion of the proposed scheme.  The Charity
Trustees were requested to resist this proceeding, to ascertain at whose
instance the suggestion was made, and to consider whether recent
complaints did not imperatively demand that a searching inquiry should be
instituted into the conduct and management of the Grammar School.  The
Master of the Rolls, on July 17th, gave his decision upon the Grammar
School case, which had long been before the Courts.  It was ordered that
twenty-one governors be appointed; the sum of 1,000 pounds per annum
derived from land and house property was to be appropriated to the
maintenance of the Grammar School and Commercial School; the benefits of
the Grammar School were to be open to all England; and all the expenses
to which the Corporation and those who represented Norwich had been put
were to be paid by the Charity Trustees.  On December 4th the NORFOLK
CHRONICLE made the following remarkable statement in relation to the
treatment of boys at the Grammar School: "We have recently been informed
of a circumstance connected with the Grammar School which we could
scarcely have credited but for the authority upon which we have received
it.  It is that there exists in that school a form of punishment which
ought long since to have been unknown in a civilised country, amounting
very nearly to bodily torture.  We have been assured that for offences of
a not very serious character boys are placed for hours between shelves so
constructed that they cannot stand upright, but are obliged to stoop
until the head is brought nearly level with the knees."  At a meeting of
the Governors of the School, on December 8th, it was resolved, "That in
consequence of the informant declining to come to the Governors and
substantiate the charge referred to in the CHRONICLE newspaper of last
Saturday, we proceed no further in the matter; but that we intimate to
Dr. Vincent that we strongly disapprove of the mode of punishment alluded
to in that newspaper, and if it has been practised, we request it may be
discontinued."  The accusation was not denied, either by Dr. Vincent or
by anyone on his behalf.  On December 27th Dr. Vincent resigned his
appointment as headmaster.

25.--Died at Hempnall, John Holmes, aged 104.  "The deceased leaves
behind him a son, Thomas, aged 87 years, and a grandson, aged 60 years,
the latter himself being a great-grandfather, thus presenting the
remarkable fact of a man living to witness the sixth generation, and to
see his great-grandson become a grandfather."

30.--The first annual dinner of the Norfolk and Norwich Anglers' Society
was held at the Bell Hotel, Norwich, under the presidency of Mr. R. N.
Bacon.


APRIL.


3.--Mr. R. Rising, of Costessey, rode his horse for a wager over nine
consecutive single hurdles set up in the centre of a field.  "This was
performed in excellent style, coming back also over the same ground, and
not refusing one.  The spectators were rather astonished to see Mr.
Rising repeat the feat with cap in hand.  The judge of the bet, one of
the first riders in the Norfolk Hunt, asked permission to ride the horse
himself, saying he had ridden many good horses, but never one that would
take a single hurdle.  Upon Mr. Rising consenting, he rode the same
round, thus making the animal in all leap 54 single hurdles."

11.--Died, in his 82nd year, Mr. John Venning, of Surrey House, Norwich.
A native of Totnos, Devonshire, he spent several years in Russia, as the
representative of a firm of merchants.  He became a member of the church
at which the Rev. R. Knill officiated in St. Petersburg, and devoted his
time and means to improving the wretched condition of the neglected and
depraved populace of the Russian metropolis.  He founded a school on the
Lancasterian system for poor Russian children, a free school for the
children of foreigners, a refuge for the reception and care of the
helpless and destitute, a lunatic asylum in which the best modes of
treatment were introduced, the Litofsky prison, constructed to admit of
the classification and separation of prisoners; and he remodelled the
great hospital for the reception of invalids.  Mr. Venning gained the
esteem of the Emperors Alexander and Nicholas, and the hearty
co-operation of the Empress Dowager, as well as of other members of the
Imperial family.  Through his instrumentality all exiles starting for
Siberia were furnished with copies of the Scriptures.  When the
destructive inundation of November, 1824, overwhelmed the city with the
waters of the Neva, the Grand Duke Michael sent General Politica with
20,000 roubles to Mr. Venning to distribute among the suffering populace.
"Throughout his long life Mr. Venning was a conscientious Dissenter--an
Independent--but he saw without regret his nearest and dearest relations
staunch members of the Church of England."  He married a daughter of Mr.
Meybohm, of St. Petersburg, by whom he was survived.

22.--St. John's church, Yarmouth, erected at the estimated cost of 1,700
pounds, was consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich.

24.--Died, in his 77th year, Mr. Thomas Osborn Springfield, one of the
magistrates of Norwich, and head of the firm of Springfield, Son, and
Nephew, of St. Mary's, Norwich, and Coleman Street, London.  Born in a
comparatively humble sphere, he rose from the position of a small
tradesman to a large silk merchant, "and during his career won and lost
several fortunes, in consequence of the fluctuations of the silk
markets."  His business career ended prosperously.  He took an active
part in all local matters, from the election of a parish beadle to that
of a member of Parliament, ranging himself on the side called Radical.
As he himself avowed, whenever he engaged in a contest he went in to win,
and many of his victories were, doubtless, most costly.  In 1827 he was
elected one of the Sheriffs, and in 1829 Mayor of the city.  After the
passing of the Municipal Reform Act, he was, in 1836, selected to be the
first Chief Magistrate under the new order of things.  With a majority of
one only of elected councillors, the Liberals were able to add sixteen
aldermen to their number.  This power they then exercised to the fullest
extent, selecting men of their own party only, a one-sided system which
was pursued without a break to the day of Mr. Springfield's death.  In
1852 he was solicited by requisition to become a candidate for the
representation of the city, and if he had been inclined to accede there
is little doubt that he would have secured his election.  In private life
Mr. Springfield exhibited many good traits; he was never unamiable nor
ungenerous, and there were not a few persons in the city who could trace
their first advancement in life to his assistance.


MAY.


5.--The action in relation to the East Dereham Corn Exchange came before
the Vice-Chancellor's Court.  An order was made upon the Corn Exchange
Company to pay the costs of the suit, except so far as they were incurred
by the inquiries raised as to the user of the site occupied by the Corn
Exchange, for the purpose of fairs and markets, and that they also pay
the costs of the proceedings by way of indictment on the several counts
upon which a verdict had been found for the Crown.  The case was then
ordered to stand over until after the Trinity term, for the consideration
of the Attorney-General as to what further decree or order, if any, he
might think right to apply for.  The Vice-Chancellor declined to order
the building to be pulled down as asked for by the relators, because it
was a great public improvement.  On June 26th the final decision was
announced, namely, that upon payment by the proprietors of the new Corn
Exchange of the costs awarded by the Court of Chancery and of 100 pounds
to the East Dereham Corn Market Company, the suit would be withdrawn, and
in case of any indictment laid a _nolle prosequi_ be entered.  "These
proceedings are, therefore, terminated.  The hall is to remain, and the
payment for admission will continue as heretofore."  (_See_ February
16th, 1866.)


JUNE.


2.--Mountjoy the pedestrian, then in his 58th year, started from Lynn to
Wisbech for his task of walking sixty-seven miles a day for four
successive days.  On August 16th he began a walk from Norwich to Dereham
and back twice every day, but on the 17th was stopped on his way to
Norwich, by order of the magistrates, because of the obstruction caused
by the number of persons who assembled on the roads in the vicinity of
the city.  Mountjoy was apprehended in Norwich on September 11th, for
leaving his wife and family chargeable to the funds of the St. Pancras
Union; and on the same night attempted to commit suicide in his cell at
the Guildhall by strangling himself with a pockethandkerchief.

11.--Died at Colne House, Cromer, aged 46, Sir Edward North Buxton,
Bart., M.P.  He was son of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, first baronet, by
the fifth daughter of Mr. John Gurney, of Earlham Hall, where he was born
in 1812, and married in 1836 the second daughter of Mr. Samuel Gurney, of
Ham House, Essex.  He succeeded to the title on the death of his father,
in 1845.  From 1847 to 1852 he represented South Essex in Parliament, and
in 1857 was returned unopposed with General Windham as member for East
Norfolk.  He was succeeded in the title by his son, Thomas Fowell, born
in 1837.

13.--The Bishop of Oxford preached at Norwich Cathedral and at St. Peter
Mancroft, on behalf of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel.
His lordship, with Sir James Brooke, K.C.B., attended the annual meeting
at St. Andrew's Hall, on the 14th.

15.--A dinner of the Valpeian Club was held at the Royal Hotel, Norwich,
under the presidency of Sir James Brooke, Rajah of Sarawak.  The guest of
the evening was Major-General Sir Archdale Wilson, Bart., K.C.B., the
conqueror of Delhi.  General Wilson, who was an old boy of Norwich
Grammar School, was presented with a dress sword, "in commemoration of
his distinguished services in India, 1857-8, and as a memento of old
friendships."

20.--Died at Lee Cottage, Old Brompton, Mr. Dawson Turner, F.R.S.,
F.S.A., formerly of Great Yarmouth.  He was in his 83rd year.

21.--The London Grand Opera Company appeared at Norwich Theatre.  It
included Miss Fanny Reeves, Miss Ethel Thirlwall, Miss Raymond, Mr. Henry
Corri, Mr. J. B. Bowler, Mr. O. Summers, and Mr. Elliot Galer.  Among the
productions were "La Somnambula," "Maritana," "The Bohemian Girl," and
"Il Trovatore."

26.--The nomination of candidates to fill the vacancy in the
representation of East Norfolk caused by the death of Sir E. N. Buxton
took place at the Shirehall, Norwich.  Sir Henry Josias Stracey was
nominated by the Conservatives, and Major Coke by the Liberals.  The
polling took place on the 29th,--the first time in twenty years,--and on
July 1st the result was officially declared as follows: Coke, 2,933;
Stracey, 2,720.


JULY.


5.--A largely advertised "monstre _fete_ and fancy fair," under the
management of Mr. J. W. Hoffman, was held on the old Cricket Ground,
Norwich, under the patronage of the Mayor and Sheriff, the officers of
the 15th Hussars, &c.  Hoffman, who had already visited Norwich as the
manager of an "organophonic" band, announced himself as the
representative of "the Society for the Promotion of Public
Amusements"--an entirely fictitious organization.  Business was suspended
in Norwich, the railway companies ran excursion trains, and the streets
were thronged by many thousands of persons anxious to witness the "grand
Middle-age pageant."  This consisted of a procession of between thirty
and forty persons on foot and one horseman.  It was everywhere received
with groans and hisses.  Ten thousand persons were present on the Cricket
Ground to witness the "Old English Sports"; every item in the programme
resulted in failure, and a _bal champetre_ was described as "a
disgraceful affair, which ended in indiscriminate fighting among the
blackguards on the ground."  For many years afterwards this "_fete_" was
popularly known in Norwich as "Hoffman's Humbug."

7.--The headquarters of the 15th Hussars marched from Norwich, and were
replaced, on Sept. 11th, by a detachment of Royal Horse Artillery, under
the command of Major Brandling, C.B.

30.--A cricket match, Norfolk and Norwich _v._ Oxford and Cambridge
Universities, was played on the Norwich ground.  Norfolk and Norwich,
148--79; Oxford and Cambridge (1st innings), 122.  The return match was
played at Gunton Park on August 9th.  Universities, 96--45; Norfolk and
Norwich (first innings), 138.


AUGUST.


3.--The Mayor and Corporation of Lynn claimed, under the privileges
extended by ancient charter, their right to a sturgeon weighing twelve
stones, captured on the previous day by a fisherman named Norris.  The
man compounded with the Mayor by payment of the nominal sum of one penny.

5.--The residence of the Rev. Sir George Stracey, Bart., deceased, with
eleven acres of land, at Thorpe, was sold by Messrs. Spelman, at the
Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, for 6,035 pounds.

7.*--"The date of the present harvest will be remembered as the year in
which reaping machines were fully established in Norfolk.  It was only
last year that they were introduced, for although there had been one or
two in the county previously, they were not of the right sort, and it was
not until M'Cormick's reaper, as now made by Burgess and Key, that their
number increased or their merits were appreciated by Norfolk farmers.
The fact that the chief part of the Hussey machines, with their back
delivery, have been returned or laid aside, and that on most large farms
there was _one_ of Burgess and Key's last year there are two this
harvest, will at once point out which machine is best adapted to Norfolk
agriculture."

16.--Died at Oulton Hall, Suffolk, Ann Borrow, widow of Captain Thomas
Borrow, aged 87.

18.--Violent thunderstorms occurred in various parts of the county.  The
barn and other buildings at Newfoundland Farm, Cringleford, occupied by
Mr. Drane, were destroyed by fire, with the loss of 340 coombs of barley,
&c.  A house was burnt down at Kenninghall, and horses were killed by
lightning at Holt.

20.--Died at Woodbridge, Mr. David Fisher, aged 70.  "He was a highly
talented and respectable public character, and had resided at Woodbridge
since his retirement from the stage twenty years previously.  He belonged
to a class much more numerous half a century since than at the present
day.  He was not only an actor, as nine-tenths of those who now strut
their hour upon the stage are, by _profession_, but by intuition.  Mr.
Fisher was blessed with very rare histrionic and musical attainments.
When he appeared at Drury Lane, as the contemporary and rival of Edmund
Kean, it was felt to be the nearest approximation then or since seen to
the overtowering abilities of that great dramatic luminary.  Mr. Fisher,
his father and family, made greater efforts than any other family ever
did to establish and cultivate in the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk a
taste for the drama, at a time when this amusement was more calculated to
serve the highest office of the stage than in the present degenerate
days.  Mr. Fisher built himself theatres at Bungay, Beccles, Halesworth,
Wells, North Walsham, Dereham, Lowestoft, Eye, and other towns, entirely
at his own cost.  He generally used to feel his way by sending a company
in advance for a few seasons, who located themselves in such buildings as
were available for their temporary purposes, and then, having whetted the
appetites of the dwellers in rural districts for one of the most
intellectual of all amusements, he summoned up courage to build a
theatre, generally one of the best structures in the town.  For very many
years these speculations proved remunerative, even though the season did
not last more than two or three months, and at intervals generally of two
years.  It is rarely that a good actor makes a good manager, but Mr.
Fisher was an honourable exception to this rule--indeed, it was difficult
to say what department this distinguished gentleman could not fill, and
fill well, too.  He was a first-rate musician, and for a considerable
time was leader at our choral concerts, and occupied a good position at
our first and early Festivals.  So versatile was his genius that he has
been known to play in the overture, then to appear in almost every act of
the tragedy of 'Hamlet,' and subsequently re-appear as Dr. O'Toole in the
farce of 'The Irish Tutor.'  He was also an admirable scene painter.
During the latter years of his management he was much assisted by his two
brothers, Charles and George.  Finding that the palmy days of the drama
were fast fading away, Mr. Fisher retired from public life when about 50
years of age, and before all the little reserve fund he had accumulated
was too much wasted to enjoy the evening of life in a quiet and
unostentatious privacy.  He was very much esteemed where he lived and
died."

24.--The Thorpe Grove estate, formerly the property of Mr. George Harvey,
deceased, was sold for 11,390 pounds, about 2,000 pounds in excess of the
valuation sent in previous to the auction.

25.--Died at his residence, Crown Point, Norwich, Lieut.-General Money,
C.B., K.C., Colonel of the 2nd Regiment of Dragoons.  He entered the Army
in 1794, was promoted Lieutenant the same year, and Captain in May, 1800;
Major, December, 1809; Lieut.-Colonel, June 4th, 1814; Colonel, January
10th, 1837; Major-General, Nov. 9th, 1846; and Lieut.-General, June 20th,
1854.  He served twenty-five years in the 11th Dragoons, and was in
Flanders and Holland in 1794-95, and in the latter year saw service in
Germany.  He took part in the attack on the French lines, was present at
their defeats on the heights of Cateau and near Tournay, and was at the
battles of Roubaix, Launey, and other engagements.  Under Sir Ralph
Abercromby, he commanded a detachment of his regiment at Leghorn,
Minorca, at the expedition to Cadiz in 1800, in Egypt in 1801, and was at
the capture of Grand Cairo and Alexandria.  In the Peninsula campaigns of
1811 and 1812 he was present at the siege of Badajoz, the battle of
Salamanca, and the affair of cavalry near the Tormes on the following
day, when three French battalions were taken.  He was at the cavalry
affairs of Callada Camino and Fenta de Poso.  He served also in the
campaign of 1815, and was at the battles of Quatre Bras and Waterloo;
towards the close of the latter the command of the 11th Dragoons devolved
upon him.  General Money married, in 1841, Lady Annetta Laura Maria
Waldegrave, daughter of the sixth Earl of Waldegrave.  She died in 1856,
leaving two daughters.


SEPTEMBER.


6.--The stone statue above the entrance to the Corn Exchange at East
Dereham was inaugurated on this date.  Mr. W. Freeman, of Swanton, was
the principal promoter of the public fund with which the statue was
purchased.  It weighed upwards of three tons, and was cut out of a solid
block of stone weighing over seven tons, taken from the Isle of Portland.
Mr. Butler, of London, was the sculptor.  The luncheon in celebration of
the inauguration was presided over by Lord Sondes.

11.--Donati's Comet was viewed with interest by thousands of the citizens
of Norwich.  "The extreme heat of the present month has impressed many
that the comet has something to do with it."

28.--A public testimonial, consisting of a piece of plate and a portrait
of himself, painted by Mr. Boxall, of London, was presented by the
inhabitants of Diss to Mr. Thomas Lombe Taylor, in recognition of his
munificence in building, at his own expense, a Corn Hall for the use of
the town, at the cost of 7,000 pounds.  The presentation took place at
the Corn Hall, where dinner was served, under the presidency of the Earl
of Albemarle.

30.--The Congregational chapel, Chapel Field, Norwich, was opened for
public worship.  The special preacher was the Rev. Newman Hall, LL.B.
The chapel was erected at the cost of 3,000 pounds, by Mr. Horace Sexton,
from the plans of Mr. Joseph James, architect, Furnival's Inn.  It was
intended to accommodate one thousand persons.


OCTOBER.


2.--The theft was reported, from the nave of St. Michael-at-Coslany,
Norwich, of a brass which measured 14 in. by 5.5 in., and had engraved
upon it five lines of Latin verse, commemorating Richard Wallour, and
bearing date 1505.

5.--A meeting was held at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich, to initiate
measures for insuring to schools in Norfolk the advantages afforded by
the Cambridge Middle Class examinations.  Sir J. P. Boileau presided.
The first examination was held at the Free Library, on December 14th, by
Mr. H. M. Butler, when 31 boys were presented.

15.--Died at Sprowston, Mr. John Stracey, in his 86th year.  He was born
at Fort William, on November 26th, 1772, and was fifth son of the first
baronet.  In 1790 he went to India as a cadet in the Civil Service, and
rose afterwards to be a judge, an appointment which he held for several
years.  On his return to England he took an active part in the business
of the county, and was instrumental in obtaining the Act of Parliament
for the removal of the Lent Assizes from Thetford to Norwich.  He was
twice married, and left three children--Col. Edward Stracey, of the Scots
Fusilier Guards; the Rev. William Stracey, rector of Buxton and Oxnead;
and Emma, widow of Mr. Arckwright.

23.--Died at his residence, Heigham Lodge, Norwich, Mr. Timothy Steward,
aged 64.  Early in life he came from Yarmouth, where he was born, to take
a leading part in one of the largest commercial establishments of the
city--the Pockthorpe Brewery.  A member of the old Whig party, he was
elected, after the passing of the Municipal Reform Act, to the Town
Council, but after three years had expired be declined to offer himself
for re-election, and retired from municipal duties with the Gurneys,
Birkbecks, and Geldarts.  In 1855, however, he was unexpectedly called
upon to discharge the duties of the Shrievalty.  He was a director of the
East of England Bank and of the Norwich Union Fire Office, and was
vice-president of the Norwich Union Life Office.

31.--The William Corry and Reliance steam vessels, with the North of
Europe submarine cable on board, arrived off Weybourne and commenced
laying the cable to the island of Borkum, at the mouth of the Ems, whence
it was continued to Emden, in Hanover.  The work was completed on
November 4th.  A line of telegraph was erected between Weybourne and
Norwich, and continued along the old coach road, _via_ Newmarket to
London.


NOVEMBER.


3.--The Gresham Grammar School, at Holt, founded in 1554 by Sir John
Gresham, was re-opened by the Fishmongers' Company, of London, the
trustees of the foundation.  The new building was erected from designs by
Mr. Suter, the architect to the Company, by Mr. Orman, of Ipswich.  A
commemoration service was held at the parish church, and luncheon was
served in the school-house, under the presidency of the Prime Warden, Mr.
Thomas Boddington.

9.--Mr. George Middleton was elected Mayor, and Mr. H. S. Patteson
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

20.--A meeting of agriculturists and merchants was held at the Royal
Hotel, Norwich, presided over by the Mayor, with the object of raising a
fund for the erection of a new Corn Exchange, "upon a site next London
Street and Exchange Street," at the cost of 20,000 pounds.  (_See_
February 3rd, 1859.)


DECEMBER.


2.--Died at Bedford Place, Camden Hill, Kensington, aged 27, Robert
Howlett, "well known by his successful applications of photography."  He
was a son of the Rev. Robert Howlett, of Longham, where he spent his
early days.  He determined to devote himself to the scientific
application of photography to the illustration and advancement of the
fine arts.  He had just perfected a method of transferring microscopic
views of minute dissections to photographic agency without the necessity
of intermediate drawings.  The Queen and the Prince Consort were among
his distinguished patrons.

21.--Mr. T. Townsend, M.P. for Greenwich, appeared at Norwich Theatre, in
the character of Shylock.  He also performed the parts of Hamlet and
Richard the Third.  He was announced "to address the public, giving he
reasons for a Parliamentary orator adopting the stage as a profession."

27.--The Christmas pantomime at Norwich Theatre was written by Mr. J. B.
Buckstone, and entitled, "The Sleeping Beauty in the Wood, or Harlequin
and the Spiteful Ogress and the Seven Fairy Godmothers from the Realm of
Golden Flowers."  The other Christmas amusements were Brown's "Royal
Cirque Unique," on the Castle Meadow, and Wombwell's Menagerie.

27.--Mr. Fiddaman's ch. g. Tinker, under 14 hands high, "very cleverly
performed, with some time to spare," twenty miles in an hour on the
turnpike road between Lynn and Narborough.

29.--Died at Wolterton Park, Horatio, Earl of Orford, in his 76th year.
He was son of the second earl by his first wife, daughter of Mr. Charles
Churchill, and granddaughter maternally of Sir Robert Walpole, first Earl
of Orford.  Born in Whitehall, in 1783, he married the eldest daughter of
Mr. William Augustus Fawkner, one of the clerks of the Privy Council, and
succeeded his father in 1822.  From July, 1812, to April, 1825, he was
attached to the Embassy at St. Petersburg, and was subsequently a Lord of
the Admiralty and a Commissioner for the affairs of India.  He was
elected member of Parliament for King's Lynn in March, 1809, represented
the constituency till June, 1822, and was in 1852 appointed a Deputy
Lieutenant of Norfolk.  For many years he held a distinguished position
in the county as an influential leader on the Conservative side, and was
a warm patron of the Turf.  He was Colonel of the West Norfolk Militia,
and Lord High Steward of the borough of King's Lynn.  The deceased earl
was succeeded by his son, Horatio William, Lord Walpole, born in Belton
Row in 1813, who married, in 1841, the only daughter of the Hon. Sir
Fleetwood Pellew.



1859.


JANUARY.


6.--At the Norwich Police Court, Mr. H. Brown, proprietor of the "Cirque
Unique," Castle Meadow, appeared to answer an information preferred by
Mr. William Sidney, manager of Norwich Theatre, charging him with
performing a stage play without licence from the Lord Chamberlain.  It
was contended by the prosecution that the equestrian spectacle of
"Mazeppa," as presented at the Circus, was a stage play within the
meaning of the Act to Regulate Theatres.  The magistrates held that there
was no contravention of the Act, and dismissed the case.

12.--A public meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, under the
presidency of the Sheriff, to promote the objects of "The Metropolitan
and County Association for the Equalization of the Poor Rates."  A
resolution was adopted, affirming that as the poor rates generally of the
County of Norfolk were unequally levied, some parishes paying less than
one penny and others more than four shillings in the pound, and as the
city suffered from this inequality and great discontent was caused among
the ratepayers, it was the opinion of the meeting that the rates should
be equalised by establishing a county rate.

31.--The Norwich Court of Guardians presented an illuminated address to
Mr. A. A. H. Beckwith, on his retirement from the office of Governor of
the Court, after a service of upwards of a quarter of a century.


FEBRUARY.


3.--The Norwich Corn Exchange Bill was before the examiner of private
Bills in the House of Commons.  The Standing Orders of the House were
declared to have been complied with.  The Bill passed through its
remaining stages, and on August 1st received the Royal assent.  (_See_
November 9th, 1861.)

5.*--"Several primroses were gathered in the hedges near Ormesby a few
days ago.  The weather is exceedingly mild in this locality, which is not
a little remarkable for this, almost the easternmost, part of England."

10.--Mr. Gough, the celebrated temperance advocate, made his second
appearance at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.

12.--Died at Buxton Vicarage, in his 79th year, Lieut.-General James
Claud Bourchier, Colonel of the 3rd Dragoon Guards.  He served under Sir
Ralph Abercrombie in the expedition against Cadiz, in 1800, in the
campaign in Egypt in 1801, and in the campaigns of 1811-12-15.  He was
present at the siege of Badajoz, the battle of Salamanca, the cavalry
affairs at Callada de Carino and Venta de Toso, the battles of Quatre
Bras and Waterloo, and the capture of Paris.

14.--Mr. Barnum, the celebrated showman, lectured at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, on "Money-making and the Art of Humbug."  The lecture was
described as "a strange medley--a most anomalous production."


MARCH.


6.--East Dereham church was, for the first time, lighted with gas,
through the munificence of an anonymous parishioner.  Evening services
were held from this date.

8.--The Norwich New Street Bill, the object of which was to acquire
powers for constructing what is now known as the Prince of Wales Road,
was before a Select Committee of the House of Lords.  It was stated that
a number of Norwich gentlemen had formed themselves into a company to
construct a new roadway and street, and to buy the land fronting the said
street to the depth of about 108 feet, leading from a point near the
Eastern Counties Railway Station to King street, near Harveys and
Hudsons' Bank, a distance of something less than 500 yards.  Rose Lane at
that time formed the only approach from the station to the city.  The
Committee decided in favour of the Bill, leaving the question of
compensation to be determined by a jury.  The Bill was considered by a
Select Committee of the House of Commons on June 28th, when the whole of
the clauses were passed.  (_See_ June 19th, 1860.)

20.--Died at his residence, Highgate Rise, London, Mr. M. Prendergast,
Q.C., Recorder of Norwich, and Judge of the City of London Sheriff's
Court.  He was called to the Bar in 1820, and was appointed Recorder of
Norwich on the death of Mr. Jermy, in 1848.  He was succeeded in the
Recordership by Mr. Peter Frederick O'Malley, Q.C.

24.--Supt. Robert Hitchman, of Devonport, was appointed Chief Constable
of Norwich, in place of Mr. English.

31.--The first fall of snow during the winter, which had been very mild,
occurred on this date.  On April 6th and 7th the thermometer recorded 90
deg. in the sun.


APRIL.


6.--The celebrated dwarf, "General Tom Thumb," held a series of "levees"
at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, commencing on this date.  "The General
left the Hall daily in his miniature carriage, drawn by the smallest
ponies in the world, and attended by an African coachman and footman in
livery."

19.--A clipper barque named the Athelstan, of 500 tons burthen, was
launched from the yard of Messrs. H. Fellows and Son, Yarmouth.

29.--The General Election, consequent upon the defeat of the Derby
Ministry on the Reform Bill and the Dissolution of Parliament on April
23rd, commenced in Norfolk on this date.  At Yarmouth Sir Edmund Lacon
(C) and Sir H. Stracey (C) were returned, with 699 and 659 votes
respectively.  The Liberal candidates were Mr. A. W. Young, 536, and Mr.
E. W. Watkin, 568.

--The nomination of candidates for the representation of Norwich took
place at the Guildhall.  The Conservative candidates were Sir Samuel
Bignold and Mr. Charles Manners Lushington; and the Liberal candidates
Mr. W. H. Schneider and Lord Bury.  The Mayor announced at the
Police-Court that, having received information that probable attempts
would be made to prevent voters from exercising their rights, he had
obtained the assistance of a large body of county police, and had
telegraphed to Sir Richard Mayne to supply a strong party of Metropolitan
constables.  The poll was opened on the 30th, and the election resulted
as follows: Bury, 2,154; Schneider, 2,138; Bignold, 1,966; Lushington,
1,900.  (_See_ June 17th.)

--The Earl of Euston and Mr. Baring were returned without opposition as
members of Parliament for Thetford.  Mr. J. J. Colman, of Norwich, had
been invited to become a candidate in the Liberal interest, but declined.
The register contained the names of 220 electors.

--Lord Stanley (C) and Mr. J. H. Gurney (L) were returned unopposed for
King's Lynn.


MAY.


2.--Mr. Edward Howes (C) and Col. Wenman C. W. Coke (L) were returned
unopposed for the division of East Norfolk.

4.--The Governors elected the Rev. Augustus Jessopp, of St. John's
College, Cambridge, head master of Helston Grammar School, to be head
master of Norwich Grammar School.

6.--Mr. George William Pierrepont Bentinck (C) and Mr. Brampton Gurdon
(L) were returned without opposition members for West Norfolk.

16.--The Mayor of Norwich, in compliance with a requisition, convened a
Common Hall, at which a loyal address to the Queen was adopted, praying
that there should be no interference in the war which had arisen on the
Continent, but at the same time assuring her Majesty of the readiness of
the citizens of Norwich to uphold the honour and dignity of her Crown
under any circumstances that might arise.

17.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, Mr. J. H. Tillett moved
that a petition be presented to Parliament praying for a full, searching,
and impartial inquiry into corrupt and illegal practices at elections for
members of Parliament for Norwich.  The motion was adopted, and a
committee appointed to draft the petition, which was presented for the
approval of the Council on June 21st.  It asserted that extensive and
systematic bribery was practised; that it was rumoured a fund was raised
in London prior to the last General Election for election purposes, and a
considerable contribution from that fund was sent down to Norwich for the
purpose of being used at the late election; and that a large sum of money
had been subscribed in Norwich for the same purpose.  The Council adopted
the petition, and requested Mr. J. Bright, M.P., to present it to the
House of Commons.  The petition was presented on July 11th, and was
ordered to lie upon the table.  At a meeting of the Town Council on July
19th, it was agreed "That it be referred to a special committee to
consider the propriety and expediency of applying in the next Session of
Parliament for an Act for better regulating the election of members to
serve in Parliament."  The Special Committee reported on August 8th, and
recommended the Council to resolve that as soon as it should be known
that an election for a member or members was to take place, the
candidates with their influential and active supporters, to the number of
not less than twenty on each side, be called upon to sign a declaration
pledging themselves to abstain, both directly and indirectly, from and to
discountenance treating and every form of corrupt or illegal practice or
expenditure, and also engaging not to practice canvassing; that in case
of infraction of the above-named, it be referred to the Right Hon.
William E. Gladstone, M.P., and the Right Hon. Spencer Horatio Walpole,
M.P., as referees, or to such third person as they might name, to
determine whether the understanding had been honourably carried out or
not, and the member or members returned should be bound to abide by such
decision and to resign his or their seats if it were adjudged that his or
their election was secured or promoted by the violation of such
understanding, and that the other candidates and parties subscribing such
declaration should also abide by the decision of such referees or umpire.
The report was adopted, and a committee appointed to give effect to it.
On October 29th a meeting was held at the Guildhall, convened by the
following circular, issued by the Mayor (Mr. Middleton) and the
Deputy-Mayor (Mr. Field): "Having heard from various quarters that an
unusual effort will be made by each political party to secure the
majority at the approaching municipal elections, we take upon ourselves
the responsibility of asking our fellow-citizens to meet . . . with the
view of saving the city, if possible, from a repetition of those
disgraceful proceedings which have recently taken place in Norwich."  At
the meeting the Deputy-Mayor moved the following resolution: "That, in
the opinion of this meeting, the business of the Town Council and the
Corporation of Guardians ought henceforth to be conducted without
reference to political interests, but alone with the view of promoting
the best interests of the citizens."  The discussion showed that the
principle of the resolution was not agreeable to the meeting, whereupon
Mr. Field withdrew it, and the proceedings ended.

23.--Miss Goddard, a tragic actress of some repute, appeared at Norwich
Theatre, in the character of Hamlet.  "Hamlet is now played by a woman,"
wrote the critic, "infinitely better than it has been played by almost
any of the opposite sex who have ever attempted it."

24.--The Queen's birthday was celebrated in Norwich by the entertainment
at dinner at St. Andrew's Hall, of nearly 700 of the poor of the city, at
the joint expense of the Mayor and Sheriff.

26.--A _dejeuner_ was given at the Town Hall, Yarmouth, in honour of the
Bight Rev. Dr. Hills, Bishop of Columbia, and formerly incumbent of the
parish, who was presented with an address and several gifts by the
townspeople.

--The Volunteer movement commenced in Norfolk on this date.  A public
meeting, convened by the Mayor of Norwich, by request of the Lord
Lieutenant of the county, was held at the Shirehall.  It was decided that
the inhabitants of the city and neighbourhood be invited to enrol
themselves as active and honorary members of the Norwich Rifle Corps
Club.  All members were to provide their own uniform, the expense of
which was not to exceed 3 or 4 pounds, and if the Government did not
provide arms, the Committee would assist in individual cases to such an
extent as the funds would permit.  Honorary members were to pay an annual
subscription of one guinea.  The drill required from active members was
not to exceed two hours a day on three days a week, and they were assured
that "on no occasion could they be called from Norwich except in case of
actual invasion or rebellion."  Many Volunteers were enrolled at the
conclusion of the meeting.  Similar meetings were held in all the towns
of the county, and the movement soon became general.  At an adjourned
meeting, held at the Shirehall, Norwich, on July 2nd, and presided over
by Lieut.-Col. FitzRoy, "to consider the best patterns for the clothing
and accoutrements of the Rifle Corps in the towns throughout the county,"
it was resolved, "That the uniform for the city of Norwich and the
boroughs in the county be a gray cloth tunic coat with black mohair braid
and buttons down the centre, with a low, upright collar, and trousers of
the same colour and material, and with a shako of hair cloth of the same
colour as the uniform, that a plume be worn, and that the appointments be
a patent leather black waistbelt, with pouch bags; the officers' dress to
be distinguished by some embroidery above the cuff of the coat and by a
pouch-belt, with bronzed whistle and chain, and a slung waistbelt, with
sword and steel scabbard."  A general meeting of the members of the three
companies formed in Norwich--the Mayor's Company, the Sheriff's Company,
and Mr. Hay Gurney's Company--was held at the Guildhall, on July 5th,
when the officers were elected as follows: For the Mayor's Company, Mr.
R. Seaman lieutenant, and Mr. A. J. Cresswell ensign.  For the Sheriff's
Company, Mr. Henry Morgan lieutenant, and Mr. Charles Foster ensign.  For
Mr. Hay Gurney's Company, Mr. Croker lieutenant, and Mr. Charles Henry
Gurney ensign.  The captains were respectively Mr. Middleton (Mayor), Mr.
H. S. Patteson (Sheriff), and Mr. Hay Gurney.  In the month of September
two additional companies were formed, one commanded by Mr. J. H. Orde,
with Mr. E. P. Youell as lieutenant and Mr. J. Tomlinson as ensign; and
the other by Mr. William Swatman (brevet colonel), with Mr. F. J.
Cresswell as lieutenant.  The first public parade of the corps took place
on October 7th, when the muster was 220, and "Capt. Black, an honorary
member of the corps, kindly consented to put them through their
evolutions on the Cricket Field."  Mr. Simms Reeve, the honorary
secretary, announced on November 5th that long Enfield rifles had been
supplied by Government free of cost; and on December 5th, at a general
meeting of the corps, Major Brett was elected Major Commandant.


JUNE.


17.--A petition against the return of Lord Bury and Mr. Schneider as
members of Parliament for Norwich, was presented in the House of Commons.
Bribery and other corrupt and illegal practices were alleged.  The
Special Committee appointed to inquire into the petition sat on July
29th, and on July 30th decided "That the election of Lord Bury and Mr.
Schneider was a void election, and that both, by their agents, were
guilty of bribery."  Sir Samuel Bignold, on his return from London, on
the 30th, was welcomed by an immense crowd at Thorpe Station, and,
escorted by a torch-light procession headed by a band of music, his
carriage was dragged in triumph to his residence in Surrey Street.

23.--A writ was issued for the election of a member of Parliament for
Norwich, in consequence of a vacancy caused in the representation of the
city by the acceptance of the appointment of Comptroller of Her Majesty's
Household by Viscount Bury.  The nomination took place at the Guildhall,
on the 28th, when the candidates were Viscount Bury, Sir Samuel Bignold,
and Col. Henry George Baldero.  The show of hands was in favour of Lord
Bury, and a poll was demanded on behalf of Sir Samuel Bignold and Col.
Baldero.  The poll was opened on the 29th, and declared on the 30th, as
follows: Bury, 1,922; Bignold, 1,561; Baldero, 39.  Lord Bury was
declared elected.  (_See_ March 9th, 1860.)


JULY.


3.--Died in London, in his 90th year, the Right Rev. Dr. Maltby, formerly
Bishop of Durham.  He was born in the parish of St. George Tombland,
Norwich, on April 9th, 1770, and at the age of nine years was sent to the
Free Grammar School, then under the mastership of Dr. Parr.  On the
resignation of Dr. Parr, Maltby, who was then head boy, proceeded to
Winchester, and entering Pembroke Hall, Cambridge, he there gained a
University scholarship.  He was seventh or eighth wrangler and first
medallist, and obtained a prize for Greek epigrams.  Maltby afterwards
became domestic chaplain to the Bishop of Lincoln.  He was author of
"Sermons on the Christian Religion," and editor of Morell's "Thesaurus,"
and wrote a very learned and judicious book on "Divinity."  He held one
of the prebends of Lincoln Cathedral and the living of Brickdon.  In 1831
he was consecrated Bishop of Chichester, and was translated to Durham in
1836.  Under Act of Parliament he resigned the latter see in September,
1856, and was allowed an annuity of 4,500 pounds.

7.--Died at Roydon Rectory, the Rev. Temple Frere, canon of Westminster
and rector of Roydon, aged 78.  He was son of Mr. John Frere, for some
years member of Parliament for Norwich, and took his B.A. degree at
Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1802, as eighth junior optime, migrating
afterwards to Downing College.  Ordained deacon in 1804 and priest in
1805, he was presented, in 1820, to the family living of Roydon (valued
at 400 pounds), which he held until his death.  He owned the greater part
of Diss, and was an active magistrate in that division of the county.
Having served some time as chaplain of the House of Commons, he was
gazetted to a canonry in Westminster Abbey in 1838.  Canon Frere was
remarkable for his businesslike habits, and is said to have considerably
improved in value the Abbey estates.

12.--The new "marine promenade" at Wells-next-the-Sea, for which the town
was indebted to the Earl of Leicester, was opened on this date.  The work
of construction was commenced in March, 1857.  The length of the
embankment is 1 mile 132 yards, and its height at the highest part 22 ft.
6 in.

14.--A fire occurred on the premises of Mr. Noble, organ builder,
Pottergate Street, Norwich.  The entire stock was destroyed.  The
building adjoined the hospital for invalids of the West Norfolk Militia.
"Ten sick Militiamen escaped from the house in great alarm, and only
partially dressed."

18.--Messrs. Butcher, of Norwich, commenced the sale of the Earl of
Orford's estates; the proceedings concluded on the 21st.  The Tivetshall
estate realised 73,775 pounds; the Saxthorpe estate, 99,740 pounds; the
Briston and Corpusty estate, 8,427 pounds; and the Burnham and Weybourne
estate, 6,182 pounds.


AUGUST.


3.--Mr. Spurgeon made his first appearance in Norwich, on his mission for
procuring funds to erect a "monstre tabernacle in London to accommodate
the immense congregations drawn together by his peculiar pulpit oratory."
About 2,500 persons assembled at St. Andrew's Hall to hear his sermon.
In the evening Mr. Spurgeon preached in the open air, in Chapel Field, to
a congregation of more than 10,000.  "The collection at the afternoon
service amounted to 28 pounds, which Mr. Spurgeon took occasion to say,
in introducing another collection in the evening, was the shabbiest
collection he had ever had."  In the evening 23 pounds was contributed.

12.--The Donegal Militia, 300 strong, arrived at Yarmouth, in the ss.
Himalaya.  Lieut.-Col. Lord Claud Hamilton was in command of the
regiment, which relieved the Louth Rifles (Militia).

13.--A meeting of landowners and others interested in a proposed line of
railway from Norwich to Aylsham and Cromer was held at the Royal Hotel,
Norwich, under the presidency of Sir Henry Stracey, Bart., M.P.  The
meeting favoured the scheme, and appointed a provisional committee.

18.--The first recorded angling match took place on this date, at
Limpenhoe Reach, on the Yare, for prizes given by Mr. C. J. Greene, of
Rose Lane, Norwich.  The total weight of fish taken by the 28 competitors
in the course of eight hours was 16 st. 7 lbs. 1 oz.  Mr. G. Harman
secured first prize, with a catch of 33 lbs. 3 ozs.

28.--A remarkable case of protracted abstinence from food was discovered
at St. Faith's.  A man, who gave the name of William Watling, of
Felmingham, aged 60, was found in a prostrate and apparently dying
condition in a plantation.  His statement was to the effect that five
weeks previously, when tramping the country, he was overcome with heat
and crawled into the plantation.  From that spot, he declared, he had not
moved for five weeks, and although persons passed very near the wood, he
failed, in consequence of physical exhaustion, to attract their
attention.  He had neither food nor drink during the whole time, and ate
nothing but the grass and leaves around him, and a few blackberries.
"His bones almost protruded through his skin, and his flesh was nearly
all dried up."  The medical opinion was that he would not recover, but
there is no further record of the case.

31.--The ceremony of laying the first stone of the new church of Holy
Trinity, Norwich, was performed by the Mayor (Mr. Middleton).  A special
service was held at St. Peter Mancroft, when the sermon was preached by
the Ven. Archdeacon Bouverie, and, after the laying of the stone, a large
gathering was held in a temporary building adjoining the site.  (_See_
August 8th, 1861.)


SEPTEMBER.


2.--Died Mrs. Sarah Bickersteth, widow of the Rev. Edward Bickersteth,
rector of Watton, Herts.  She was the eldest daughter of Mr. Thomas
Bignold, of Norwich, and sister of Sir Samuel Bignold.  Born on October
3rd, 1788, she married, on May 5th, 1812, Mr. Edward Bickersteth, who was
then a solicitor practising in Norwich.  Two years afterwards, at the
call of the Rev. Josiah Pratt, he gave up a lucrative business for the
laborious post of co-secretary in the Church Missionary House, and
visited the missions on the West Coast of Africa.  Four fourteen years
Mrs. Bickersteth shared all his toils, until 1830, when he was presented
to the living of Watton, by Mr. Abel Smith, M.P.  He died in February,
1850, and Mrs. Bickersteth, for the last nine years of her life, divided
her time among her children.  She spent the last month with her son, the
incumbent of Christ church, Hampstead.

15.--The church of Framingham Pigot, built through the munificence of Mr.
G. H. Christie, at a cost exceeding 5,000 pounds, was consecrated by the
Bishop of Norwich.


OCTOBER.


8.--Died, in the 100th year of her age, Mary Tallowin, of Bowthorpe.

11.--Charles Dickens gave a reading, at St. Andrew's Hall, of the
"Christmas Carol" and the trial scene from "The Pickwick Papers," and on
the 12th read the story of Little Dombey and of Mrs. Gamp.  "The
reception of Mr. Dickens, on his first appearing in front of a very
artistically arranged screen, was cordial and enthusiastic.  His voice
was far from powerful, but he had remarkable expression and the power of
exhibiting this in face as well as in voice.  As a pecuniary speculation,
it must have been highly profitable to Mr. Dickens."

17.--The town of Attleborough was, for the first time, lighted with gas,
an event which was celebrated by a public dinner at the New Inn.

20.--At the Norwich Quarter Sessions, John Plummer (25), shoemaker, was
indicted for stealing a model of a gold nugget, the property of the
trustees of the Norfolk and Norwich Museum.  Mr. Reeve, the curator of
the Museum, stated that the model was worth only a few shillings, but it
was an attractive object, and generally supposed by visitors, and no
doubt by the prisoner, to be a piece of genuine gold.  The prisoner was
sentenced to seven years' penal servitude.

21.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, the Police Committee called
attention to an Act of Parliament passed in the previous month of August,
empowering the substitution of policemen for javelin men at the Assizes,
and recommending that the Chief Constable be authorised, on the
application of the High Sheriff, to employ a sufficient number of
constables for that purpose, the High Sheriff engaging to pay such sum as
would, in the estimation of the Chief Constable, be sufficient to meet
the additional expense of such employment.  The matter was adjourned for
further consideration.  (_See_ January 5th, 1860.)

--Mr. R. M. Phipson was elected County Surveyor.

24.--A singular question came before the Norwich Town Council, in
relation to the right of the Corporation to the property of convicts.
The Police Committee reported they had been informed by the Chief
Constable that on the apprehension of one George Valentine, on a charge
of felony, a large sum of money was found in his possession.  Valentine
having been tried and convicted at the Quarter Sessions, the Town Clerk
had stated that the city was entitled to the convict's money.  The Chief
Constable wished to know how he should dispose of the money.  The
Committee were advised that, after the conviction, the city had become
entitled to the money under a Royal charter granted during the reign of
Henry IV.  The Council ordered that the money remain in the hands of the
City Treasurer, pending further inquiry.  The question was again
considered by the Council on May 12th, 1863, when the Town Clerk reported
that after Valentine's conviction it was found that, in addition to the
sum in question (90 pounds), he had 60 pounds deposited in a savings bank
in London.  The Town Clerk had given notice to the bank directors that
the Corporation claimed the money, but since the liberation of the
prisoner he had been pressed to withdraw the notices, and had refused to
do so without the sanction of the Corporation.  The difficulty under
which the Corporation laboured was that the money was out of their
jurisdiction, and they had no control over it beyond the notice that had
been given.  If further steps were taken the question would arise whether
it was a forfeiture to the Corporation or to the Crown, but as this would
involve an inquisition, the cost of which would probably exhaust the
money enquired about, it was for the Council to say whether, the man,
having served his term of three years' penal servitude, and having
petitioned for some relief from the fund to place him in a position to
gain an honest livelihood, they would authorise the withdrawal of the
notice.  It was agreed that the notice be withdrawn.

25.--A severe storm occurred off the Norfolk coast.  At Winterton two
vessels were wrecked and thirteen lives lost.  At Yarmouth there were
several wrecks, and for miles the shore was strewn with remains of
cargoes and portions of vessels.  The sloop James and Jessie drifted on
to the Britannia Pier, and severed the structure into two parts.

26.--Mr. and Mrs. German Reed gave, at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich, their
entertainment entitled, "Seaside Studies."


NOVEMBER.


9.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, Mr. J. H. Tillett was
elected Mayor, and Mr. Joseph Underwood appointed Sheriff.

--Mr. Tillett, on taking his seat as Mayor of Norwich, informed the Town
Council that an attempt had been made to bribe one of the Councillors.
Mr. Joel Fox, the member in question, produced the halves of three 100
pounds bank notes, which, he alleged, the Conservatives had handed to him
to induce him to vote for eight Conservative Aldermen.  After the vote
had been recorded the payment was to be completed.  Amid much excitement,
a Special Committee was appointed to investigate the case.  On November
12th, before the Committee had presented their report, criminal
proceedings were instituted against Mr. Albert John Collins, solicitor, a
member of the firm of Beckwith and Collins, who was charged at the Police
Court with conspiring with Henry Croxford, stationer and others, to bribe
Joel Fox, Town Councillor, by promising and offering him a sum of money
to vote for certain Aldermen.  Croxford, the other defendant, had
absconded.  Fox alleged that he went to Croxford's house, where he was
shown the halves of three 100 pounds notes and four 50 pounds notes,
which were offered to him by Croxford, on behalf of Collins, on condition
that he voted for the Conservative Aldermen.  After formal evidence, the
case was adjourned.  On the 16th the Committee of the Council asked for
full power and authority to proceed with the investigation, and to take
such steps as might be necessary for the prosecution of the offenders.
The Council granted the application.  The magisterial proceedings were
resumed on the 17th, when Mr. Power, Q.C. (instructed by the Town Clerk,
Mr. Mendham), appeared for the prosecution, and Mr. Serjeant Ballantine
for the defendant Collins.  After further evidence had been taken, the
case was again adjourned.  Meanwhile informations had been laid against
William Wilde, William Wilde, the younger, William George Wilde, James
Stowers, and Sir William Foster, members of the Liberal party, for
conspiring to bribe at the last General Election for the city.  By way of
reprisal, the Liberals obtained summonses, through William Randell Lacey,
against Sir Samuel Bignold, the Rev. F. S. Bignold, J. H. Bignold, James
Hardy, Capt. Ives, and G. Priest, for unlawfully conspiring by bribery
and other illegal means to return Sir Samuel Bignold and Mr. Charles
Lushington at the last election of members of Parliament.  On Nov. 19th
the magistrates decided to hear all the cases on December 8th.  A special
meeting of the Town Council was held on December 6th, to consider the
following motion by Mr. Simms Reeve: "That it is the opinion of this
Council that the peace and welfare of the city will be best promoted by
the cessation of political strife, and, with the view to the attainment
of that object, the resolution of the Council of the 16th November last,
with reference to the charge of bribery made by Mr. Councillor Fox, be
cancelled, and that all further legal proceedings against Henry Croxford
and Albert John Collins and others for conspiracy be stayed."  The motion
was seconded by Mr. Field.  Mr. C. M. Gibson moved, as an amendment,
"That the due administration of justice is essential to the peace and
welfare of the city, and it is therefore the opinion of the Council that
the resolution of the 16th November . . . should be again confirmed."
The motion was carried by 28 votes against 19.  On December 8th, when the
magisterial proceedings were resumed, the Town Clerk said he had no
instructions from the Town Council to proceed with the prosecution.
After he had formally withdrawn, Mr. R. N. Bacon, Mr. J. J. Colman, Mr.
J. Youngs, Mr. J. Newbegin, Mr. C. N. Bolingbroke, the Rev. G. Gould, the
Rev. J. Crompton, Mr. E. C. Holland, and Mr. John Pymar appeared as
prosecutors, and Mr. Power claimed to be heard as their counsel.  The
Bench decided that there was no _prima facie_ case against Collins, who
was discharged on giving sureties to answer any charge that might be made
against him at the Assizes.  Serjeant Ballantine thereupon said that he
would offer no evidence in the charges against the Messrs. Wilde, and Mr.
S. H. Asker, who appeared for the complainant Lacey, withdrew the summons
issued on his information.

12.--Mr. Louth, landlord of the Rampant Horse Hotel, Norwich, received
fatal injuries by the overturning of his vehicle in London Street.  His
father, by whom he was accompanied, also sustained severe wounds, from
which he died on the 18th.

30.--The foundation-stone of the St. Andrew's Wherrymen's chapel, at
Yarmouth, was laid by the Mayor (Mr. W. Worship).  The building, which
was erected at the cost of 1,050 pounds, by Mr. Stanley, of Yarmouth,
from plans by Mr. C. E. Giles, of London, was consecrated by the Bishop
of Norwich on October 9th, 1860.


DECEMBER.


1.--The Norwich Operatic Union gave its first concert, from Verdi's "Il
Trovatore," at St. Andrew's Hall.  The principal vocalists were Miss
Theresa Jefferys, Mr. Angus Braham, Miss Laura Baxter, and Mr. Durand.
The band and chorus of 80 performers were conducted by Mr. Bunnett, B.M.,
Mr. Alfred Bowles was instrumental leader, and Mr. Henry Rudd choral
director.

--A fatal accident occurred on the works in progress at the new
Fishmarket, Norwich, by the falling in of three of the arches beneath the
"promenade."  A workman, named William Powley, of Necton, was killed, and
another workman sustained a broken leg.  At the adjourned inquest, on
December 15th, the jury returned a verdict of accidental death, with the
rider: "They consider, from the evidence of eminent architects of London
and builders of Norwich, that the buildings are in an unsafe condition,
and require the immediate attention of the Corporation, in order to
insure the perfect safety of the public."

10.--Died at Sydenham, Col. the Hon. John Walpole, of 18, Jermyn Street,
Piccadilly, aged 73.  He was son of the second Earl of Orford, served
with the Guards in the Peninsula War, and was severely wounded at the
siege of Burgos.  From 1827 to 1831 he was member of Parliament for
King's Lynn; from 1830 to 1833 private secretary to Lord Palmerston; from
1833 to 1841 Consul-General in Chili; and from 1841 to 1849 _charge
d'affaires_ there.

17.--A heavy fall of snow and a frost of great severity were recorded.
"In the course of the 17th, the thermometer fell to 14 degrees, and on
the 18th to 9 degrees, or 27 degrees below freezing-point."

26.--The pantomime at Norwich Theatre was "founded on the celebrated and
world-known Norfolk ballad," and entitled, "The Babes in the Wood, and
Harlequin and the Cruel Uncle, or the Forest Queen of the Fairy Dell."
The other Christmas attraction was Mander's Menagerie.

27.--Died, Jacob Astley, Lord Hastings, of Melton Constable and of Seaton
Delaval, Northumberland.  He was son of Sir Jacob Henry Astley, fifth
baronet, by the youngest daughter and co-heiress of Samuel Browne, of
King's Lynn.  His lordship was born in 1797, married in March, 1819, the
youngest daughter of Sir Henry Watkin Dashwood, Bart., and succeeded his
father in the baronetcy in 1817.  As one of the heirs of Sir John de
Hastings, who sat in the Parliament of 18th Edward I., he was summoned to
the House of Peers in 1841.  He was appointed first Captain and
Commandant of the Norfolk Militia Artillery in 1853, and Hon. Colonel in
1856.  From 1832 to 1837 he represented West Norfolk in Parliament.  His
lordship was succeeded by his son, the Hon. Jacob Henry Delaval Astley,
born in 1822.



1860.


JANUARY.


5.--At the County Sessions, at Norwich, the Committee appointed at the
previous Sessions recommended that the Chief Constable, on the
application of the High Sheriff, be allowed to supply police-constables
for keeping order in the Assize Courts, in place of the javelin men
previously employed, the High Sheriff engaging to pay the additional
expense.  The Chairman (Sir Willoughby Jones) remarked that theoretically
the javelin men kept the Courts, but practically they kept the
neighbouring public-houses.  The recommendation was agreed to.  On March
27th, Mr. Justice Williams was received at Victoria Station by the High
Sheriff (Mr. Henry Birkbeck) and a posse of policemen, "in the place of
the time-honoured body which had long constituted a conspicuous part of
the pomp and circumstance of our Assizes, having at length succumbed to
the utilitarian tyranny of the age.  His arrival at the Shirehall and
Guildhall was signalised, however, by the customary fanfaronade on a
couple of inharmonious trumpets."

15.--St. Giles' church, Norwich, was for the first time lighted with gas,
and evening services were held there from this date.

17.--Mr. E. E. Benest, City Surveyor, tendered his resignation to the
Norwich Town Council, after eight years' service.  He was succeeded, on
March 14th, by Mr. Thomas D. Barry.

20.--Lord Sondes was presented by his Norfolk tenantry with a piece of
plate, of the value of 140 gs., as a birthday gift and as a testimony of
the esteem in which he was held by them as a landlord and nobleman.


FEBRUARY.


7.--A fire occurred on the premises of Mr. W. C. Aberdein, pastry cook,
Dove Street, Norwich.  The outbreak itself was not of a serious
character, but in a room upon the adjoining premises of Mr. Cubitt,
ironmonger, was stored upwards of 400 lbs. of gunpowder, which was safely
removed in wet blankets.  The circumstance caused much sensation, and the
practicability of establishing a public powder magazine was discussed by
the magistrates.

20.--Died at King's Lynn, Mr. J. F. Reddie, many years organist at St.
Margaret's church, in that town.

24.--A petition against the return of Sir Edmund Lacon and Sir H.
Stracey, as members of Parliament for Great Yarmouth, in April, 1859,
commenced before a Special Committee of the House of Commons.  The
petitioners, Mr. Joseph Bayly, surgeon, and Mr. Robert Pilgrim, linen
draper, alleged bribery, undue influence, treating, and intimidation.  On
March 1st the Committee declared the members to have been duly elected,
and were of opinion that one of the witnesses, Henry Fayerman, had been
guilty of wilful and corrupt perjury.  The members were received with
great enthusiasm on their return to Yarmouth, and were entertained at a
public dinner, given at the Theatre, on April 12th.  At the Westminster
Police Court, on June 11th, Fayerman was committed for trial on the
charge of perjury, but at the Old Bailey, on July 12th, the jury gave a
verdict of acquittal.

28.--A terrible gale raged throughout the country.  At Norwich, between
ten o'clock and noon, the thermometer rose from 36 degrees to 47 degrees;
at two o'clock it registered 45 degrees.  The wind blew from the west,
veering occasionally to the north and to W.N.W., but during the height of
the gale it blew west by north.  Great damage was done to buildings,
trees were uprooted, and "locomotion was extremely difficult and
laborious, and, indeed, quite out of the question to those of the fair
sex whose fashionable expanded dresses, assuming the properties of
parachutes, compelled them to undertake a species of aerial voyage for a
distance of a few yards, or exposed them to the still more unpleasant
predicament of having their parachute garments inverted."  There were
many disasters along the coast, and several lives were lost.


MARCH.


9.--A Special Committee of the House of Commons sat to decide various
questions arising out of the elections at Norwich in 1859.  The first
point to be decided was whether Lord Bury's claim, by virtue of the
election in July, was not nullified by the bribery which was proved to
have been made by his agents when he was returned with Mr. Schneider in
April; and secondly, whether, in the event of such disqualification, Sir
Samuel Bignold or Colonel Boldero had a valid claim.  There were three
petitions: (1) against the return of Lord Bury and the qualification of
Sir Samuel Bignold, on the ground that both had been guilty of bribery at
the April election, and the seat was, therefore, claimed for Colonel
Boldero (signed by Josiah Fletcher, S. Jarrold, and J. J. Kempster); (2)
alleging the disqualification of Lord Bury, and claiming the seat for Sir
Samuel Bignold (signed by J. G. Johnson and R. Kerrison); and (3)
alleging the disqualification of both Lord Bury and Sir Samuel Bignold,
and claiming the seat for Colonel Boldero (signed by P. Back and G. C.
Stevens).  No appearance was put in in support of the first petition.
The Committee declared that Lord Bury was not merely disqualified from
sitting in the House of Commons during the then Parliament, but the last
election was void, in consequence of his lordship having been found,
since that return, guilty of bribery by his agents.  A writ was then
issued for another election, and on March 28th the following candidates
were nominated: Mr. W. Forlonge (C), Aynhoe Park, Northamptonshire; Mr.
W. D. Lewis, Q.C. (C); Sir William Russell (L), and Mr. Edward Warner
(L).  The polling took place on the 29th, and the result was officially
declared on the 30th, as follows: Warner, 2,083; Russell, 2,045;
Forlonge, 1,636; Lewis, 1,631.

24.--Died at his residence, Hillington Hall, aged 73, Sir William John
Henry Browne ffolkes, Bart.  He represented the county, and afterwards
the Western Division, as a supporter of Liberal principles from 1830
through the Reform era, but lost the seat on the redaction of the
Conservative party in 1837, when Mr. Bagge and Mr. Chute were returned.
As a magistrate, country gentleman, and landlord, Sir William was highly
esteemed.  He was Chairman of Quarter Sessions at Swaffham, and chairman
of the Norfolk Estuary Company.  He was succeeded by his grandson,
William Howell, then in his twelfth year, and eldest son of Martin Brown
ffolkes, who was killed by lightning in July, 1849.

24.--The Rev. J. W. L. Heaviside was installed Canon of Norwich
Cathedral, in succession to Canon Wodehouse, resigned.  Mr. Heaviside was
a professor at Haileybury College, an examiner in mathematics for the
University of London and for the Council of Military Education, and a
brother of Mr. Heaviside, formerly master of the Norwich School of Art.

29.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Lord Chief Justice Cockburn and a
special jury, was tried a libel action, in which Mr. Samuel B. Cory,
solicitor, Yarmouth, was the plaintiff, and Mr. T. W. Bond, publisher of
the "Norfolk News," Norwich, the defendant.  The libel was contained in a
letter written to the newspaper by a Mr. Fabb, who alleged, among other
things, that Mr. Cory had laid informations in certain game cases, with
the object of putting the fees into his own pocket.  Mr. Fabb, it was
understood, had indemnified the "Norfolk News."  The jury returned a
verdict for the plaintiff, with one farthing damages, as to that part of
the libel above quoted, and for the defendant as to other portions of the
libel, on the ground that they had been justified as true.  The effect of
the verdict was that plaintiff had to pay his own costs and half the
costs of the defendant.  In a second action, Mr. Fabb sued Mr. Cory for
malicious prosecution, and obtained a verdict for 30 pounds damages.

30.--Died, in her 63rd year, at Cheltenham, while on a visit to her
son-in-law, the Rev. J. F. Fenn, Lady Bignold, wife of Sir Samuel
Bignold.


APRIL.


2.--An important will case, Wright _v._ Wilkin, commenced at the Norfolk
Assizes, before Lord Chief Justice Cockburn and a special jury.  It was
brought in the form of an action for ejectment to recover possession of
certain tenements and lands held by the defendant, Thomas Martin Wilkin,
solicitor, of Lynn, under the will of an old lady named Mary Mann.  The
plaintiff, who was heir-at-law, alleged that the will was obtained from
an infirm and weak-minded person by fraudulent practices and
contrivances.  The will had already been disputed, and in that trial a
verdict was given in favour of Mr. Wilkin; this action was brought
because there had come to the knowledge of the plaintiff facts and
circumstances which had been entirely withheld from the former jury.  The
trial lasted until the afternoon of the 3rd, when the jury found for the
defendant, subject to argument upon certain points reserved.  These were
stated in the Court of Queen's Bench on April 9th, and were to the effect
that the devise to the defendant was defeated by his neglect to comply
with a condition of the will, namely, that the devise was conditional on
the devisee paying off certain legacies within twelvemonths in case the
personal estate should be insufficient for that purpose.  It transpired
that the personal estate was insufficient, but the defendant did not pay
one of the legacies within the time stipulated.  It was also contended
for the plaintiff that the devise to the defendant was void, inasmuch as
it was a contrivance to defeat the Statute of Mortmain, several of the
legacies being for charitable purposes, and that the defendant had misled
the testatrix by not telling her that, under 43rd George III., she could
leave as much as five acres of land for the repair of the church.  Lord
Chief Justice Cockburn granted a rule _nisi_.  In the Court of Queen's
Bench, on November 27th, the Lord Chief Justice said the rule must be
discharged, as the words in the will were not intended to impose a
condition, the non-observance of which would involve forfeiture.  Mr.
Justice Crompton and Mr. Justice Blackburn concurred.  The rule was
discharged.


MAY.


24.--The Queen's birthday was celebrated at Norwich by a parade on
Mousehold of the Royal Horse Artillery, the West Norfolk Militia, and the
Rifle Volunteers.  The Mayor afterwards entertained the officers at
luncheon at the Guildhall, and in the evening the Volunteers dined at St.
Andrew's Hall, under the presidency of Major Brett.

28.--A violent gale from the north-west did extensive damage in Norwich
and throughout the county.  Terrible disasters were reported on the
coast.  Twenty vessels belonging to Yarmouth and Lowestoft were lost, 200
men and boys perished, and 240 women and children were left in a state of
destitution.  On the 29th an inquiry was held at Yarmouth into certain
allegations as to the conduct of the beachmen and crew of the lifeboat.
It was stated that, in consequence of differences which had arisen, much
valuable time was lost in launching the lifeboat, and a resolution
expressing regret at the delay was adopted.  A public fund was raised for
the destitute families of the local fishermen.  During the gale, the
north-east pinnacle of St. Peter's church, Yarmouth, was dislodged, the
windows of Cromer church were blown in, and at Blickling 247 oaks were
uprooted in the Great Wood, 216 in Hercules Wood, and 190 in other
portions of the park.  It was estimated that 1,500 trees were levelled on
the estate.

--The American horse tamer, Rarey, gave an exhibition of his system of
training, in the riding school at the Cavalry Barracks, Norwich.


JUNE.


4.--The Royal Horse Artillery marched from the Cavalry Barracks, Norwich,
_en route_ to Woolwich, and were escorted to the city boundary by the
Rifle Volunteers.

9.--An extraordinary case, arising out of the sudden disappearance of a
lad named Vansittart, came before the Norwich magistrates.  The lad was a
son of Mr. Vansittart, member of Parliament for Windsor, and had been
placed at school under the care of the Rev. F. H. S. Hodgson, rector of
Rackheath.  At Brighton, some time previously, he had developed Roman
Catholic tendencies, and his friends were anxious to remove him from the
sphere of such influences.  Mr. Hodgson, while engaged in parochial
duties, missed the youth, and gave information to the police at Norwich,
who found him at the house of a Roman Catholic jeweller, named Beha.  The
lad made a very singular statement, to the effect that an Italian priest,
attired in a long blue cloak, had persuaded him to leave school and join
the Roman Catholics in London; that he had gone to Norwich and met Canon
Dalton, the priest at St. John Maddermarket Roman Catholic chapel, to
whom he had shown a watch belonging to a school-fellow; that Canon Dalton
had advanced him six shillings, and recommended him to take the watch to
Beha, for the purpose of raising sufficient money to pay the balance of
his railway fare to London; and that he was preparing to start for town
when he was detained by the police.  Canon Dalton declared that he had
not seen the lad prior to his coming to St. John Maddermarket.  The
matter was adjourned for further inquiry, and on the 11th Canon Dalton,
Jacob Beha, Matthew Beha, and Thomas Foulsham were required to attend
before the magistrates, when the proceedings were deferred until the
18th, the persons named protesting against the course adopted by the
Bench, and urging that no charge had at present been preferred against
them.  Another adjournment took place until the 25th, when Mr. Serjeant
Ballantine appeared for the prosecution, and preferred a charge of
conspiracy against Canon Dalton and the Behas.  The boy Vansittart gave
evidence, and, in cross-examination by Mr. Woollett, counsel for the
defence, admitted that he had told "a tissue of lies," and that the main
points of his story were entirely invented by himself.  The magistrates
dismissed the case, but expressed the opinion that the conduct of Canon
Dalton was exceedingly reprehensible in not advising the lad to return to
his father.

18.--Died at his residence, at Thorpe, General Sir Robert J. Harvey,
C.B., K.T.S., Knight Commander of the Order of St. Bento d'Avis, F.R.S.,
F.A.S.  Sir Robert, who was in his 75th year, saw much active service
during his military career.  He was present at the battles of the Douro
and Busaco, the battle of Salamanca, the siege of Burgos, and at
Vittoria, the Pyrenees (where he was wounded in the thigh by a musket
shot), Nivelle, Nive, Orthes, and Toulouse.  The long-protracted war
having been brought to a close in 1815 by the crowning victory at
Waterloo, on the anniversary of which he died, he returned to Norwich and
became an acting partner in the bank of Harveys and Hudson, and was head
of the firm at the time of his death.  He was a magistrate and a Deputy
Lieutenant of Norfolk, president of the Norwich Union Life Office and the
Norwich Union Fire Insurance Society, chairman of the General
Reversionary Interest Society in London, and founder of several other
important institutions of a kindred character.  In politics he was a
Conservative, but took no prominent part in local affairs.  Sir Robert
married a daughter of Mr. Robert Harvey, of Walton, Suffolk, a distant
relative, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Mr. R. J. H. Harvey.  The
will of the deceased was proved on February 21st, 1861, when the
personalty was sworn under 350,000 pounds.  "Mr. R. J. H. Harvey has
purchased all his brother's (Mr. E. K. Harvey's) interest under the will,
so that he is now in possession of the whole of the real and personal
property of his late father, subject to Lady Harvey's life interest in
the Mousehold estates and to the annuities named in the will."

19.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, it was agreed,
"That the Lords of the Treasury having sanctioned the sale to the New
Street Company of the property required by them belonging to the
Corporation for the sum of 3,260 pounds, and having required to be
informed of the purpose to which the Corporation propose to apply such
purchase-money, this Council agrees, with the sanction of the Lords of
the Treasury, to apply 2,000 pounds towards the making of the new street,
which, on its completion, will be vested in the Corporation, and, the
remaining 1,260 pounds towards the widening of the present approach to
the Cattle Market by Rose Lane."

30.--The Channel Fleet, under the command of Admiral Sir C. Fremantle,
K.C.B., arrived in Yarmouth Roads.  Since the year 1814 no two ships of
the line had been moored at the same time off Yarmouth.  The fleet
consisted of nine ships of the line, two frigates, a corvette, and a
tender.  The Mayor and Corporation of the borough waited upon the Admiral
and invited the officers to a ball, but orders came for the fleet to sail
early on the morning of July 2nd.


JULY.


9.--Mousehold Rifle Range was used for the first time by the Norwich
Volunteers.  The first prize-meeting took place on September 17th, when
there were twelve competitors from the city and twenty-four from the
county.

23.--The Donegal Militia left Yarmouth.

27.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Chief Baron Pollock and a special
jury, an action, Gillings _v._ Manders, was tried.  The plaintiff was a
carpenter at Yarmouth, and the defendant the proprietor of a travelling
menagerie.  One of the attractions of the show was the performance of a
Zulu named Maccomo, who was styled a "Lion King," and fired off pistols
and carbines in a cage containing half a dozen lions and lionesses.  In a
performance given at Yarmouth, Maccomo, instead of firing his pistol to
the top of the cage, discharged it among the spectators, and the wad
entering the plaintiff's eyes destroyed it.  Muccomo said it was the
result of an accident.  One of his lions attacked him in a fit of temper,
and the trigger, catching in the beast's mane, was prematurely
discharged.  The jury found for the plaintiff, damages 150 pounds.

31.--In the Norwich Episcopal Consistory Court, Mr. Chancellor Evans gave
judgment in a protracted case, Archdeacon Bouverie _v._ the Rev. W. L.
Barnes.  The suit was instituted by the Archdeacon of Norfolk, against
the rector of Knapton, for procurations for the years 1856-57-58-59.  The
plaintiff alleged, in his libels, that he was entitled to receive from
the rector the sum of 7s. 7.5d., due at Michaelmas every year, by reason
of his visiting, of his archidiaconal dignity, or by custom.  Mr. Barnes
required the Archdeacon to prove such parts of his case as were not
admitted, and, further, he said that, supposing the case as stated in the
libels were proved, the Archdeacon was not entitled to be paid his
procurations for the years 1857-58-59, because he did not in those years
hold a parochial visitation at Knapton.  The Court decreed in favour of
the Archdeacon, with costs, and Mr. Barnes gave notice that he should
appeal against the judgment.  No further proceedings, however, were
taken.


AUGUST.


27.--Died at Hampstead Marshall, Newbury, Berks., the Right Hon. Louisa,
Dowager Countess of Craven, aged 78.  She was a daughter of Mr. John
Brunton, manager of Norwich Theatre, and half a century before her death
was a favourite actress upon the Norwich and the London stage.  She
married the Earl of Craven in 1807, and of the marriage there were three
sons and a daughter.

28.--The first festival of the associated choirs belonging to the Norfolk
and Suffolk Church Choral Association, established in October, 1859, was
hold at Norwich Cathedral.

30.--Died at her residence in Kentish Town, aged 61, Elizabeth, widow of
Frederick Yates, formerly of the Adelphi Theatre.  She was a daughter of
John Brunton, the younger, of Norwich and a niece of the Dowager Countess
of Craven.  She made her _debut_ at King's Lynn, in the character of
Desdemona, and her first appearance in London at Covent Garden Theatre,
on Sept. 12th, 1817, as Letitia Hardy.  At Covent Garden she continued to
play leading high comedy until 1824, when she married Mr. Frederick
Yates, who died in 1842, leaving an only son, born in 1831.  After the
death of her husband, Mrs. Yates remained at the Adelphi with Mr.
Webster, played for one season at the Lyceum with Madame Vestris, and
finally retired from the stage in 1849.


SEPTEMBER.


17.--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich, with an evening performance of "The Creation."
The morning performances were as follow: On the 19th, the "Dettingen Te
Deum" and "The Last Judgment"; on the 20th, "Abraham" and "As the hart
pants"; and on the 21st "The Messiah."  Miscellaneous programmes were
performed on the evenings of the 19th and 20th.  The principal vocalists
were Madame Clara Novello (her farewell appearance), Mdlle. Titiens (her
first appearance), Madame Weiss, Miss Palmer, Madame Borghi Mamo (her
first appearance), Mr. Sims Reeves, Signor Giulini, Mr. Willye Cooper,
Mr. Santley, Mr. Weiss, Signor Belletti; solo pianoforte, Miss Arabella
Goddard; leaders of the band, Mr. Sainton and Mr. H. Blagrove; solo
violon-cello, Signor Piatti; organist, Mr. Harcourt; chorus master, Mr.
J. F. Hill; conductor, Mr. Benedict.  A "fancy dress ball" was announced
for the evening of the 21st.  "Only three individuals appeared in fancy
dress--costumes which, from their quality, would have far more fitted a
masquerade at the Baronial Hall than an elegant assembly like that of
Friday evening.  The wearers of them evidently felt ill at ease, and,
after enduring the rather marked observation that they attracted for some
time, were glad to call a fly and take their departure."  The total
receipts of the Festival amounted to 5,095 pounds 16s., and the
disbursements to 4,179 pounds 12s. 1d.

18.--The Earl of Leicester, as Lord Lieutenant of Norfolk, and
Major-General Wood, C.B., reviewed 1,200 Volunteers of the city and
county on Mousehold Heath, Norwich.

20.--Prince Jerome Bonaparte, with his suite, consisting of an
_aide-de-camp_ and six members of the French Ministry, visited
Gressenhall Workhouse and made particular enquiries into the management
of the institution.

28.--Died at Upper Harley Street, London, in his 85th year, Mr. Charles
Lombe, of Great Melton.  He was a son of Dr. Beevor, of Norwich, and
succeeded to the entailed estate on the death of his nephew, Mr. Edward
Lombe, son of the first Mr. Lombe.  Mr. Charles Lombe was succeeded by
Mr. Edward Evans, eldest son of Mr. T. B. Evans, formerly of Norwich.
(_See_ November 10th.)

30.--The headquarters of the 10th Hussars, commanded by Lieut.-Col.
Baker, arrived at the Cavalry Barracks, Norwich.


OCTOBER.


10.--Mr. and Mrs. Charles Kean gave a farewell performance at Norwich
Theatre, prior to their departure for America.  "One of the largest and
most fashionable audiences which have ever assembled at the Theatre was
brought together, at twice the ordinary playhouse prices in Norwich."
Mr. Kean appeared as Sir Walter Amyott, and Mrs. Kean as Lady Amyott, in
"The Wife's Secret."  On the 13th they performed in "Louis XI.," and
afterwards appeared at Yarmouth Theatre.

10.--An inquest was held at the Bethlehem Hospital, London, on the body
of Anthony Abel, a criminal lunatic, who had been removed from Norwich
after being acquitted of a charge of murder on the ground of insanity.
He had been an inmate of the establishment since June 18th, 1817.  When
25 years of age he was indicted for the murder of his uncle near
Thetford.  "For many years he was considered so violent and dangerous
that he was confined in a strong room, and under the old _regime_ then in
use in the establishment, he had a strong belt and gloves, and was put
into irons."

22.--Mr. George Dawson lectured at the Free Library, Norwich, on "Pepys'
Diary."

--Norwich Theatre was opened for a brief season by Mr. Charles Dillon and
Miss Gomersal.

24.--Mr. Henry Villebois, master of the Norfolk Fox Hounds, was presented
with his portrait, subscribed for by 400 gentlemen, "in appreciation of
his untiring and successful efforts to promote field sports in the county
of Norfolk."  Lord Sondes presided at the dinner held at the Town Hall,
Lynn, and presented the portrait, which was painted by F. Grant, R.A.

29.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, the resignations of
Aldermen Sir W. Foster and Gibson were accepted, and Mr. R. J. H. Harvey
and Mr. Fred Brown were elected to fill the vacancies.  "The abolition of
political ascendancy in the Town Council has been accomplished by the
general consent of the influential men of each party, and duplicate
agreements have been signed by at least three-fourths of the Corporation.
To the Mayor (Mr. J. H. Tillett) belongs the honour of having taken the
initiative in this laudable effort."


NOVEMBER.


3.--A description was published of an iron lighthouse, completed by
Messrs. Barnard, Bishop, and Barnards, of the Norfolk Iron Works,
Norwich, for the Brazilian Government.  It was designed by Messrs.
Bramwell and Reynolds, of Westminster, for erection on the island of
Abrolhos, on the coast of Brazil.  Made in sections, it was temporarily
erected by the riverside near St. George's Bridge.  The tower was
circular in form, and constructed of 144 iron plates.  Its base was 17
ft. in diameter, it was 46 ft. in height, and the lantern at the summit
was 16 ft. high.

--A fearful boiler explosion occurred on the steamship Tonning, off
Yarmouth, by which eight persons were blown out of the vessel and never
again seen, three subsequently died, and several were seriously injured.
The Tonning was an iron vessel of 734 tons register, belonging originally
to the North of Europe Steam Navigation Company, and was afterwards
employed in the conveyance of cattle and passengers between England and
the Continent.

9.--Mr. W. J. Utten Browne was elected Mayor, and Dr. Dalrymple appointed
Sheriff of Norwich.

10.*--"The Queen has been pleased to grant unto Edward Evans, of Great
Melton and of Bylaugh, clerk, her Royal licence and authority that he
may, in compliance with a proviso contained in the will of his great
uncle, Sir John Lombe, henceforth take and use the surname of Lombe only,
and use and bear the arms of Lombe in lieu of his present surname and
arms of Evans."

--*"Mr. George Allen, of St. Stephen's, has introduced to Norwich the
manufacture of elastic cloth, a fine material which has hitherto only
been made in the West of England."

17.--During a strong gale from the N.N.W., several vessels lying off
Yarmouth parted from their anchors and were driven ashore and wrecked.
Several lives were lost.


DECEMBER.


1.--A gunpowder explosion occurred at the shop of Mr. Marrison, gun
maker, Little Orford Street, Norwich.  The entire shop front was wrecked,
as also was that of the adjoining shop, occupied by Mr. Frankland,
photographer and dealer in art materials.  Two lives were lost.  Mrs.
Dady, sister of Mr. Frankland, was sitting in a room over Mr. Marrison's
shop, and was dashed by the force of the explosion to the ceiling.  She
fell through the chasm in the floor to the burning ruins beneath, where
she was fearfully injured.  Charles Hill, a shop boy in the employment of
Mr. Marrison, was killed outright, and terribly mangled.  The force of
the explosion shattered the windows of the Bell Hotel and of other houses
in the vicinity.  At the Norwich Assizes on March 26th, 1861, before
Chief Baron Pollock, Mr. Marrison brought an action against the London
Union Fire Office, for the recovery of 300 pounds under a policy of
insurance on his stock and furniture.  The plaintiff had been offered and
had refused 100 pounds in settlement of the claim.  The company then
proved that the plaintiff had kept more gunpowder on his premises than
was allowed by the terms of his contract, whereupon the judge ordered a
non-suit.

3.--Died at Brighton, in his 61st year, Capt. Frederick Loftus, formerly
of the 17th Lancers, youngest son of General and Lady Elizabeth Loftus,
and grandson of George, first Marquis Townshend and Charlotte, Baroness
De Ferrars and Compton.  His remains were interred at Rainham, on
December 11th.

5.--The suit, Gurney _v._ Gurney and Taylor, came before the Divorce
Court, Westminster.  The husband sought dissolution of marriage, on the
ground of misconduct by the wife.  A petition had been presented for the
settlement of property then vested in the wife in favour of the children,
the issue of the marriage, and the Solicitor-General applied for a rule
_nisi_ calling on the respondent, Mrs. Gurney, to show cause why a plea
or a pleading in the nature of or intended to be a plea should not be
taken off the file, and why the petition for settlement should not be
treated as unanswered or unopposed.  Sir C. Cresswell granted a rule
_nisi_.  Evidence was given in the case on January 22nd, 1861, and the
decree was made absolute on May 22nd.

11.--In the Vice-Chancellor's Court was heard the action, Berney _v._ the
Norfolk and Eastern Counties Railway Company.  By an agreement dated June
6th, 1843, the plaintiff sold certain land to the Norwich and Yarmouth
Railway Company, and it was provided that such company should establish
and for ever maintain a station in connection with their railway at
Reedham, on part of the land sold to them by plaintiff.  Nothing was said
in the agreement in reference to stopping trains at the station.  In 1844
the Norwich and Yarmouth railway was completed, and a station was
constructed in accordance with the agreement, and called the Barney Arms
Station, at which certain trains stopped.  In 1845 the Norwich and
Yarmouth Company was incorporated with the Norfolk Railway Company, and
trains continued to stop at the station until 1850, when the Norfolk
Company discontinued the practice.  The plaintiff thereupon instituted
this suit, praying for a specific performance of the agreement of June,
1843, and an injunction to restrain the Norfolk Company from permitting
the trains on their railway to pass the Berney Arms Station without
stopping thereat, which was, in effect, to compel the company to stop the
trains at that station.  The motion for the injunction did not come on,
in consequence of an arrangement whereby the Norfolk Company agreed to
stop at Berney Arms Station one train from Norwich and one from Yarmouth
on every Monday, Wednesday, and Saturday.  The Norfolk Railway was now
worked by the Eastern Counties Railway on an agreement dated in 1854,
which had received the sanction of the Legislature.  The Eastern Counties
Company were then made parties to the suit.  Although the trains then
stopped in a manner satisfactory to the plaintiff, there was no security
that they would continue to do so.  The Vice-Chancellor said there must
be a specific performance of the agreement of June, 1843, and an order
that one train from Norwich and one from Yarmouth should stop at Berney
Arms Station on Monday, Wednesday, and Saturday in every week; but he
should also order that each of the companies should pay 100 pounds to the
plaintiff by way of costs.  But for the plaintiff's forbearance in this
respect, it would be difficult to say whether the Eastern Counties
Company would have escaped from the litigation with having nothing else
to pay than the plaintiff's ordinary costs.

14.--The Norwich Operatic Union gave its second concert, at St. Andrew's
Hall.  The programme included "Norma" and selections from "Il Trovatore."
The principal vocalists were Mdlle. Paripa, Mdlle. Vaneri, Mr. Santley,
and Mr. Swift.  Mr. Bunnett, B.M., conducted.

16.--The first of a series of special services was conducted at Norwich
Theatre, by the Rev. T. B. Stephenson, Wesleyan minister.  "The boxes
were reserved for the most respectable-looking, and the unmitigated
plebs. were relegated to the pit and gallery.  The occupants of the
gallery conducted themselves as the gods usually do, and were rebuked by
the preacher, who took up his position on the stage in front of the drop
scene, surrounded by a number of persons of both sexes."

25.--This was the coldest Christmas that had been experienced for at
least a century.  "At the Literary Institute at Norwich the minimum
registered was 3 degrees above zero.  At Costessey the register was 7
degrees below zero, or 39 degrees lower than the point at which water
freezes.  A peculiarity of the temperature on Christmas-day was the fact
of its being colder in the morning than during the night.  The coldest
register was between 7 a.m. and 10 a.m., and there was scarcely any
appreciable variation till after two o'clock.  Ice was about four inches
thick."

26.--The pantomime at Norwich Theatre was entitled, "Cinderella, or the
Little Glass Slipper and the Fairy Godmother from the Realms of Golden
Palms."  Wombwell's Menagerie was stationed on the Castle Meadow, and
performances were given at the Royal Crystal Palace Amphitheatre, Golden
Ball Street, under the management of Messrs. Emidy and Moffatt.  The
lessee was Mr. C. Testar.

27.--Died at 36, Berkeley Square, London, in his 57th year, Dr. Edward
Rigby.  He was the eldest son of the celebrated Dr. Rigby, of Norwich,
and was educated at the Grammar School, under Dr. Valpy.  He graduated at
Edinburgh, and subsequently commenced practice in London, where he
gradually raised himself to the very highest branches of his profession.



1861.


JANUARY.


5.--At the annual meeting of the Norfolk Agricultural Association, held
at the Swan Hotel, Norwich, Mr. Clare Sewell Read moved that the annual
show for 1861 be held at East Dereham, instead of at Swaffham.  This
effort to abolish the system of holding the exhibitions alternately at
Norwich and Swaffham was defeated by 19 votes to 15.

6.--The frost continued with unusual intensity, and on this day
snowstorms, which covered the ground to the depth of twelve inches,
occurred.  On the 10th a public meeting was held at Norwich, under the
presidency of the Mayor (Mr. W. J. Utten Browne), at which a fund was
inaugurated to relieve the distresses of the poor.  In a few days the sum
of 4,139 pounds 12s. 11d. was subscribed.  The river was frozen from
Norwich to Yarmouth, and on the 16th a large party of ladies and
gentlemen assembled on the ice on Breydon and "skated" quadrilles.  The
frost continued for more than five weeks, during the whole of which
period the ground was covered with snow.

11.--Walsingham Quarter Sessions were held for the last time.  Sir
Willoughby Jones, who presided, informed the Grand Jury that the Sessions
would be removed part to Swaffham and part to Norwich, "on account of the
expenses being so great in proportion to the number of prisoners for
trial."  On March lst the Bridewell ceased to be used as a house of
correction, and the prisoners were removed to Norwich Castle.

16.--Died, aged 85, Mr. Kinnebrook, for many years a proprietor of the
"Norwich Mercury."

18.--Died, in his 60th year, Mr. Thomas Lound, for 35 years confidential
clerk at King Street Old Brewery, Norwich.  "As an artist, but
principally as a painter in water-colours, he had maintained a high
reputation for many years.  The local river and rural scenery afforded
materials for a large proportion of his works.  He occasionally painted
street scenes and monastic ruins, and of late years he made excursions
into Wales and Yorkshire, bringing home with him a vast variety of
subjects."  In addition to his own collection, he left many water-colour
drawings by Bright, Thirtle, Cox, and others, some of them of
considerable value.

26.--At Norwich Castle, James Blomfield Rush, aged 30, "eldest son of
_the_ Rush," was committed for trial on the charge of breaking into the
dwelling-house of Mr. Abraham Cannell, farmer, Cringleford, on the night
of January 12th.  At the Norfolk Assizes, on March 27th, before Chief
Baron Pollock, the prisoner was acquitted.  At subsequent dates he was
twice acquitted for housebreaking, but at the Norfolk Quarter Sessions on
March 11th, 1862, was sentenced to four years' penal servitude for
breaking into a house at North Tuddenham.


FEBRUARY.


13.--In the Court of Queen's Bench, before the Lord Chief Justice and a
special jury, an action was brought by Mr. Costerton, solicitor, of
Yarmouth, against Sir Edmund Lacon, M.P., for a scandalous attack made
upon the plaintiff by the defendant in the course of an election speech.
The jury returned a verdict for the plaintiff, damages 40s.

25.--Judgment was given by the Barons of the Exchequer in the cause
Morant _v._ Chamberlin.  It was an action between the Corporation of
Yarmouth and Mr. G. D. Palmer, who claimed a right to a portion of the
south end of the public quays.  Judgment was for the plaintiff, damages 5
pounds 5s.  "This decision thus settles this long-pending dispute, now
nearly three years from its commencement, and decides the right of the
Corporation to the soil of the quays and the right of the public to the
free use of the same without any of the inconveniences which for so long
a time prevented the proper enjoyment of the part in dispute.  The
verdict gives the plaintiffs the costs of this heavy litigation, except
on two unimportant issues.  The defendant will have to pay somewhere
about 2,800 pounds."


MARCH.


16.--On this date was published the announcement that the First Norfolk
Mounted Rifle Volunteer Corps had been attached to the City of Norwich
Rifle Volunteer Corps for administrative purposes.  The mounted corps,
which numbered 50, was commanded by Capt. F. Hay Gurney.  The uniform
consisted of scarlet tunic with blue facings, white cross belt, white
breeches, and Napoleon boots.  The head-dress was a busby with blue bag;
the forage-cap was blue trimmed with white.

16.--Intelligence was received at Norwich of the death, of the Duchess of
Kent.  On the 17th (Sunday) special references were made to the
melancholy event at the religious services in the city, and at intervals
the age of the deceased was tolled upon the muffled bells of the
Cathedral and St. Peter Mancroft church.  The Town Council, on April 5th,
adopted an address of sympathy with the Queen.

--The Surlingham estate was sold by Messrs. Butcher, at the Royal Hotel,
Norwich, for 16,895 pounds.

26.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Chief Baron Pollock and a special
jury, was tried the libel action, Cufaude _v._ Cory.  The plaintiff and
defendant had taken different sides at the election of a vestry clerk at
Yarmouth, and the libel was contained in a handbill issued during the
contest by the defendant, who referred to the printed statement of the
income and expenditure of the Guardians, to which body the plaintiff was
clerk, as "cooked," and left the sum of 779 pounds unaccounted for.  The
special jury returned a verdict for plaintiff, damages 500 pounds.  In
the Court of Queen's Bench, on April 17th, Mr. Lush moved for a rule to
set aside the verdict, on the ground of excessive damages.  A rule was
granted.  Mr. Cufaude subsequently consented to a reduction of damages
from 500 to 300 pounds, "much against the advice of his counsel."


APRIL.


2.--The High Sheriff of Norfolk (Mr. J. T. Mott) delivered a lecture at
Noverre's Rooms, Norwich, on "The Paston Letters."

10.--The 10th Hussars Steeplechases took place at Crostwick.

23.--A vessel, named the Harmony, built by Messrs. Fellows and Son, of
Yarmouth, for the Moravian mission in Labrador, was launched.


MAY.


18.--The census returns were published on this date.  In Norwich the
number of inhabited houses was 17,012; uninhabited, 786; building, 97.
The population consisted of 33,717 males, and 40,697 females; total,
74,414.

20.--A serious military riot took place at Yarmouth, between men of the
Royal Artillery and of the East Norfolk Militia.  Belts and stones were
freely used.  A party of 200 Artillerymen, armed with swords and knives,
issued from the arsenal, and were going to the assistance of their
comrades, when Mr. R. Steward, by persuasion and threats, kept the
greater portion from proceeding further.  Officers of both corps exerted
themselves to quell the disturbance, and strong pickets were stationed at
the bridge, to prevent the Artillery from entering Yarmouth and the
Militia from crossing to Southtown.


JUNE.


13.--The Norwich Grammar School athletic sports were held for the first
time.

18.--A memorial was presented to the Norwich Town Council, by farmers,
graziers, dealers, &c., praying the Corporation to enlarge the Cattle
Market.  The Market Committee recommended the Council to adopt in its
entirety a plan for executing the work, at a cost not exceeding 20,000
pounds.  This scheme involved the demolition of the notorious locality
known as Pump Street.

20.--Mr. and Mrs. Ringer, of Walcot Green, near Diss, left their house in
charge of a servant, named Susan Garrod, and on their return in the
evening found her suffering from several gunshot wounds in the head and
face, inflicted by a man named Charles Sheldrake, a returned convict,
employed as a groom and gardener by Mr. Ringer.  Sheldrake, after
committing the deed, secreted himself in a wood.  On being called on by
the police to surrender, he placed the muzzle of a double-barrelled gun
to his mouth and blew out his brains.  At the inquest the jury returned a
verdict of _felo de se_, and the Coroner gave a warrant for the interment
of the body between the hours of nine and twelve o'clock.  "The body was
accordingly buried at ten o'clock at night, under one of the paths in the
churchyard."

24.--The London Royal English Opera Company commenced a week's engagement
at Norwich Theatre.  The repertory included "four new successful operas
never before performed in Norwich," namely, Balfe's "The Rose of
Castille," Loder's "The Night Dancers," Macfarren's "Robin Hood," and
Balfe's "Satanella, or the Power of Love."  In addition to the
above-named works, "Il Trovatore," "Martha," and "Maritana" were
produced.  The _artistes_ included Miss Fanny Ternan, Miss Bronte, Miss
Angel, Miss Fanny Reeves, Mr. Edmund Rosenthal, Mr. J. Manley, Mr. E. D.
Corri, Mr. Oliver Summers, and Mr. Elliott Galer.  Mr. W. Meyer Lutz was
the conductor.  The performances received very inadequate public support.
The company revisited Norwich for six nights, commencing on September
9th.

--Herr Kolisch, the celebrated chess-player, contested, at the Rampant
Horse Hotel, Norwich, 13 games simultaneously against some of the best
players in the neighbourhood.  He won eight games, lost three, and two
were drawn.

28.--Died, at Feniton Court, Devonshire, the Right Hon. Sir John
Patteson.  The second son of the Rev. Henry Patteson, and nephew of Mr.
John Patteson, who for some time represented Norwich in Parliament, he
was born in that city on February 11th, 1790.  He was educated at Eton
and King's College, Cambridge, and, after talking his degree, removed to
London and entered at the Middle Temple.  On being called to the Bar, he
went the Northern Circuit.  "He had been only nine years a barrister, he
had not a silk gown, he had never led a cause or once addressed a jury,"
when he was appointed to the Queen's Bench, and from that time to
February 11th, 1852, continued to discharge the duties of his high office
with a reputation for industry, learning, and integrity.


JULY.


20.*--"The first number of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE was published on the
18th of July, 1761.  We are, therefore, as journalists, exactly 100 years
old. . . .  The difference between the newspapers of the last and present
century is, perhaps, more conspicuous in the quantity of space occupied
than in any other respect, and the present sheet is at least four times
the size of our first publication."

27.*--"The repairs at St. Gregory's church, Norwich, the interior of
which has been undergoing general restoration, have brought to light an
interesting fresco, representing the renowned fight between St. George
and the Dragon, a subject which has a local association, St. George being
the titular saint of the city and patron of a once flourishing civic
company.  The painting, which, in all probability, is of a date of the
middle of the fifteenth century, was discovered on the removal of the
organ at the west end of the north aisle, for the purpose of cleaning the
wall.  The figures are life-size, and the colours and drawing exceedingly
good."

--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Chief Justice Erle and a special jury, a
libel action, Lane _v._ the Yarmouth Free Press and Printing Company,
Limited, was tried.  Damages were laid at 300 pounds.  The declaration
alleged that the defendants published in a paper called the "Yarmouth
Independent," certain reflections upon the plaintiff in his capacity as
collector of market tolls.  The defendants contended that, at the request
of and by agreement with the plaintiff, they had inserted in the
newspaper a paragraph explaining the alleged libel, and had exonerated
him from the imputations made against his character, and plaintiff had
accepted it as satisfaction.  The case ended with the withdrawal of a
juror.


AUGUST.


1.--Died at the residence of his son-in-law, 48, Elgin Crescent, Notting
Hill, in his 84th year, Philip John Money, formerly captain of the 17th
Regiment.  He was a magistrate of Norwich, and served the office of Mayor
in 1839.

2.--The celebrated tight-rope walker, Blondin, made his first appearance
at Norwich.  The rope was fixed at an altitude of about 60 feet, in a
field on Newmarket Road.  "It is a very fortunate circumstance for M.
Blondin that he crossed Niagara and had the Prince of Wales for a
spectator, for it has added a much greater interest to has performances
than they would otherwise have acquired, and even, if we may judge from
what we saw here, they deserved."

4.--Mr. Edward Casson, aged 33, medical superintendent of the County
Lunatic Asylum at Thorpe St. Andrew, committed suicide by poisoning
himself.

8.--Holy Trinity church, Norwich, was consecrated by the Lord Bishop of
the Diocese.  "The ceremony should have taken place three weeks
previously, but at the eleventh hour the Bishop requested that a capital
fund of about 300 pounds should be provided prior to the consecration.
As the committee were then about 1,000 pounds in debt, it was felt to be
indiscreet to increase their risk, and consequently it was determined to
delay the opening of the church until they had received nearly all that
they required.  In less than three weeks more than 1,200 pounds had been
subscribed out of the 1,300 pounds then supposed to be needed."  The
consecration was attended by the Mayor (Mr. W. J. Utten Browne) and
several members of the Corporation.

29.--A troop of the 15th Hussars left Norwich, _en route_ to York; the
remainder of the regiment marched on September 3rd.


SEPTEMBER.


12.--A great review of the whole of the Volunteer Companies in the county
and city, with the Norwich Mounted Volunteers and the Yarmouth Artillery,
was held at Holkham Park, by Major-General Sir Archdale Wilson, Bart.,
K.C.B.  This was the first occasion on which the corps had been brigaded
since their formation.  The review was fixed for eleven o'clock, but in
consequence of a breakdown in the railway arrangements, and the
consequent detention of companies on their way to the _rendezvous_, the
parade was not formed until 2.15 p.m.  The troops numbered upwards of
1,700, and were divided into two brigades, commanded respectively by
Lieut.-Col. Custance and Major the Hon. F. Walpole, West Norfolk Militia.
The railway company displayed the same incompetency in conveying the
corps from Holkham as in taking them there, and the Norwich men did not
reach the city until six o'clock on the morning of the 13th.

28.--The headquarters of the 5th Dragoon Guards arrived at Norwich
Cavalry Barracks, from Aldershot.  "It is known in the service as the
'Green Horse,' being the only cavalry regiment which wears green
facings."


OCTOBER.


13.--Died, Sir William Cubitt, the eminent engineer.  Born in Norfolk, in
1785, he was apprenticed to a joiner, and, becoming a very superior
handicraftsman, he rapidly took a prominent position as a maker of
agricultural implements.  Within a short time he became a millwright, and
about 1807 invented self-regulating windmill sails, and ultimately became
connected with Messrs. Ransome and Son, of Ipswich.  He was the inventor
also of the treadmill for gaols and houses of correction.  His reputation
increasing his engagements, it became necessary for him to remove to the
Metropolis in 1826, and after that period there was scarcely a port,
harbour, dock, navigable river, or canal in the United Kingdom with which
he was not in some way engaged.  The South-Eastern Railway from London to
Dover was designed and executed by him.  He undertook the bold project of
blowing away the face of the Round Down cliff, which he successfully
executed by exploding 18,000 lbs. of gunpowder in one blast, and
precipitated one million tons of chalk cliff into the sea.  The great
landing-stage at Liverpool, the deck of which was nearly one acre in
extent, was a unique example of his work.  As consulting engineer of the
Great Northern Railway, he materially contributed to the production of
one of the best lines in England.  One of his last public works was the
superintendence of the construction of the palace for the Great
Exhibition in Hyde Park in 1851, which he undertook at the pressing
instance of his coadjutors on the Royal Commission, and his services were
recognised in a marked manner by the Queen and the Prince Consort.

22.--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. W. J. Utten Browne) delivered a lecture to
the members of the parochial library, Lakenham, on "The Times of King
Charles the First."

24.--Died, suddenly, of apoplexy, at his residence, West Parade, Earlham
Road, Norwich, in his 46th year, Mr. Edward Garrod, editor of the NORFOLK
CHRONICLE.

28.--Charles Dickens gave the former of two readings at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich.  The work selected was "David Copperfield."  On the 29th
he read "Nicholas Nickleby at Mr. Squeer's School," and the Trial scene
from the "Pickwick Papers."  "Our opinion is," the NORFOLK CHRONICLE
remarked, "that Mr. Dickens as a reader fails to do justice to himself as
an author."


NOVEMBER.


6.--Norwich Theatre was opened, under the management of Mr. George Owen.
Mr. Sidney, however, retained the lesseeship.

8.--Died at Hingham, in her 100th year, Mrs. Rebecca Houchen.

9.--The new Corn Hall at Norwich was opened for business.  The
contractors for the building were Messrs. Ling and Balls, of Norwich, and
for the roof Messrs. Barnard, Bishop, and Barnards.  The total cost was
about 8,000 pounds.  The work was executed from the designs of Mr. Barry,
of Norwich, and Mr. H. Butcher, of 37, Bedford Row, London; and the roofs
were adapted and carried into detail from the design of the architects by
Mr. E. A. Cowper, C.E., of Westminster.  The first brick of the new
building was laid on May 1st, 1861.

--Mr. John Oddin Taylor was elected Mayor, and Mr. Addison John Cresswell
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

10.--Died at North Runcton Rectory, in his 85th year, the Rev. James
Cumming, M.A., professor of chemistry in the University of Cambridge, to
which office he was elected in 1815.  He was a Fellow of Trinity College,
and had held the living of North Runcton for more than forty years.

22.--In the Court of the Lords Justices in Lincoln's Inn, a petition was
presented by Major-General Charles Ash Windham, Capt. Windham, the
Marquis of Bristol, Lord Alfred Hervey, M.P., Lord Listowel, and others,
praying that a writ _de lunatico inquirendo_ might issue against William
Frederick Windham.  In support of the petition, affidavits were read
which alleged a variety of eccentricities and extravagances on the part
of William Frederick Windham, and laid great stress upon a marriage he
had contracted with one Agnes Ann Rogers, better known by the name of
Agnes Willoughby.  The judges, after hearing the affidavits on the other
side, considered that a _prima facie_ case had been made out, and allowed
the prayer of the petition.  On December 4th, in the Vice-Chancellor's
Court, a motion was heard for the committal of Mr. James Bowen May for
contempt of court, in having, during the infancy of William Frederick
Windham, and without the knowledge of his guardian or the sanction of the
Court, drawn or sided and abetted in drawing the said William Frederick
Windham into a promise of marriage with Agues Rogers or Willoughby, in
which promises had been made of settlements or dispositions of his
property in her favour.  The motion was refused, with costs.  On December
11th the Court of Chancery granted leave to William Frederick Windham to
raise as a mortgage charge on his property the sum of 2,000 pounds, in
order that he might defend himself before the Commission.  The Commission
held its first sitting in the Court of Exchequer, Westminster, on
December 16th, under the presidency of Mr. Samuel Warren, Q.C., one of
the Masters in Lunacy.  Mr. Windham was the only son of Mr. Howe Windham,
who died in 1854, and the great-grandson of Mr. Windham, the great
politician.  He became of age on August 9th, 1861, when he succeeded to
the Felbrigg Hall estate, worth upwards of 1,200 pounds a year, and to
other properties in which he had a life interest, and which, in the year
1869, would yield him 9,000 pounds a year more.  During his minority he
was under the guardianship of his uncle, General Windham, and of his
mother, Lady Sophia Hervey.  He married a woman of loose character, upon
whom he bestowed jewellery of the value of 1,200 or 1,400 pounds, and
upon whom he settled a present annuity of 800 pounds, with a further
annuity of 1,500 pounds contingent upon his coming in to the whole of his
property in 1869.  It was also alleged that he sold, in a wild and
reckless way, and upon terms of the utmost disadvantage, the whole of the
timber, ornamental as well as useful, on the Felbrigg estate.  The
inquiry lasted thirty-four days, and upwards of 150 witnesses were
examined.  It is said to have cost something like 160 pounds per hour, or
nearly 3 pounds per minute, for all the leading talent of the Bar of
England was engaged in the case.  On January 30th, 1862, the jury
returned the following verdict: "That the said Mr. William Frederick
Windham, at the time of taking this inquisition, was a person of sound
mind, so as to be sufficient for the government of himself, his manners,
his messuages, his lands, his tenements, his goods, and his chattels."
The moment the verdict was uttered a loud and enthusiastic cheer rose
from the audience, and was repeated again and again.  When Mr. Windham
left the Court he was received outside with the shouts of an admiring
crowd, who almost carried him to the cab in which he drove away, amid a
deafening cheer.  In the Court of Equity, on April 23rd, 1862, the Lords
Justices refused to exonerate the alleged lunatic from the payment of the
whole of the costs, amounting to 20,000 pounds, consequent upon the
enquiry.

30.*--"The portrait of Mr. J. H. Gurney, M.P., President of the Norfolk
and Norwich Museum, has this week been placed on the walls of that
institution.  It was painted by F. Grant, R.A., at the cost of 200
guineas."


DECEMBER.


7.--Died, in his 73rd year, Mr. Charles Turner, who was Sheriff of
Norwich in 1824, elected Alderman in 1832, and was Mayor in 1834.  He was
the last Mayor who served the full term of office under the old
Corporation.

9.--A six miles race for 50 pounds was run at the Green Hill Gardens,
Norwich, between Deerfoot, the celebrated Seneca Indian, Brighten, the
"Norwich Milk Boy," and Long, of Middlesbrough.  This was one of the
so-called matches run during a provincial tour by these pedestrians.
Deerfoot wore his Indian costume, decorated with shells and feathers.  He
stood 5 ft. 11 in., was of muscular frame, but not well knitted, and his
limbs were long and loose, contrasting badly with the neat, compact
figure of the "Milk Boy."  Among the spectators of the "match," which
was, of course, won by the Indian, were the Duke of Wellington and Sir
Samuel Bignold.

15.--Intelligence was received in Norwich of the death of the Prince
Consort.  Early on the following morning (Monday) the Mayor requested the
citizens to partially close their business establishments until after the
funeral.  On the day of the funeral (December 23rd), business was
entirely suspended, and the Mayor and Corporation, accompanied by the
Rifle Volunteers, attended service at the Cathedral.  The Nonconformist
bodies held a united service at St. Andrew's Hall, at which the Rev. John
Alexander delivered an address.  Addresses of condolence with the Queen
were voted by the Norwich Town Council, on December 30th, and by a county
meeting, held at the Shirehall, under the presidency of the High Sheriff
(Mr. J. T. Mott), on January 18th, 1862.

26.--Mr. George Owen produced the Christmas pantomime, "Puss in Boots,"
at the Theatre Royal, Norwich; and Mander's Royal Menagerie was exhibited
on the Castle Meadow.  The African "lion tamer," Maccomo, whilst
performing at the latter show, on the 28th, was severely attacked by a
young lion, and narrowly escaped with his life.



1862.


JANUARY.


2.--Mr. Thomas Richmond Pinder, head master of Hingham Endowed School,
was elected head master of the new Commercial School, built on the site
of the old Workhouse, adjoining St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, at the cost
of about 1,500 pounds.  The school was designed by Mr. James S. Benest,
architect to the trustees, and built by Messrs. Ling and Balls.  It was
opened as King Edward the Sixth's Commercial School, on July 28th.

19.--An alarming fire occurred in the centre wing of Swaffham prison.
The inmates of the cells, who were greatly terrified, were safely
removed, and afterwards conveyed to Norwich Castle.  The roof of the new
portion of the prison was completely destroyed, with three looms and a
considerable quantity of stock in raw materials and manufactured
articles.

28.--Died at Swainsthorpe, Eleanor Harrison, widow, aged 101.

30.--A rifle match, between eleven Norfolk and a like number of
Northamptonshire Volunteers, took place at the seat of Earl Spencer,
Althorp Park.  The teams were under the respective commands of Lord Bury
and Earl Spencer.  Northamptonshire won by 170 points against 164 made by
their opponents.  The return match, which took place on the Mousehold
Range, Norwich, on September 27th, was also won by Northamptonshire, by
17 points.


FEBRUARY.


1.*--"A private named Thomas Nelson, attached to one of the troops of the
5th Dragoon Guards, now stationed in Norwich, is said to have become the
possessor of a fortune of 70,000 pounds, besides a fine estate near
Liverpool, of the value of 9,000 pounds per annum."

3.--H.R.H. the Prince of Wales visited Norfolk, "for the purpose of
inspecting the Sandringham Hall estate, with the view of purchasing it
for shooting purposes, for which it is well adapted."  On the 22nd it was
announced that his Royal Highness had concluded the purchase for 220,000
pounds, and, it was added, "Norfolk people entertain strong hopes that
they shall see a good deal of their future Sovereign."

15.--The subject of the proposed amalgamation of the Eastern Counties,
the Norfolk, the Eastern Union, the East Anglian, and other railways'
communicating with Norwich obtained publicity on this date.  The Norwich
Town Council, on the 21st, decided to petition Parliament against the
Railway Amalgamation Bill, on the ground that the amalgamation was
calculated to injuriously affect the citizens by depriving them of the
advantages of competition in railway transit.


MARCH.


1.--Died at his house at Charlton, Kent, aged 86, Professor Peter Barlow,
F.R.S.  He was born in the parish of St. Simon, Norwich, in October,
1776.  Related to one of the leading manufacturing families in the city,
the Columbines, his early life was passed in their warehouse.  He
continued there about three years, and during that period acquired, by
his own industry, a considerable knowledge of algebra, geometry,
trigonometry, navigation, and French.  Subsequently he obtained a
situation in a school in Essex, and afterwards proceeded to Shipdham,
when, the master dying, he succeeded to the school, and married a
Shipdham lady.  He commenced a regular correspondence with the "Ladies'
Diary," then under the management of Dr. Hutton, professor of mathematics
at Woolwich, whose attention was favourably attracted by the
contributions furnished by Mr. Barlow.  Dr. Hutton recommended him as
candidate, in 1801, for the post of additional master at the Royal
Military Academy, and he was successful.  In 1811 he published his first
work, "The Theory of Numbers," in 1813, "The Mathematical Dictionary,"
and in the same year his "Mathematical Tables."  In 1817 his work, "The
Strength of Materials," was published.  In 1819 he turned his attention
to magnetic experiments, in which he was very successful in developing
the laws of action and in the application of those laws to the correction
of a long-standing error in navigation.  For this discovery he received
several honorary and pecuniary rewards.  His "Essay on Magnetic
Attraction" was published in 1819.

25.--The new Poor Removal Act came into force.  It materially altered the
law of settlement, and made new regulations as to the manner in which
parishes contributed their share to the common fund charges of the
unions.

31.--An accident occurred at a circus building at St. Stephen's Gates,
Norwich, hired by Mace and King, the pugilists, for the purposes of a
benefit performance.  The rows of seats elevated one above the other and
forming the pit were densely crowded with spectators, whose weight broke
the frail supports, with the result that the centre of the pit fall with
its load of human beings.  Many were severely bruised and shaken, and one
man, suffering from a broken leg, was removed to the Hospital.


APRIL.


10.--Madame Jenny Lind Goldschmidt appeared at a miscellaneous concert,
given at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, and on the 11th sang in Haydn's
oratorio, "The Creation."  The other _artistes_ included Mr. Sims Reeves,
Signor Belletti, Mr. H. Blagrove (solo violin), Signor Patti (solo
violoncello), and Mr. Otto Goldschmidt (pianoforte).  The chorus for the
oratorio was composed of members of the Cathedral choir and of the
Norwich Choral Society.

21.--Tom Sayers, "the pugilistic ex-champion," visited Norwich with his
circus, "exhibited his belts, medals, and the diamond ring presented to
him by the students of Oxford, and set-to with young Hicks, of
Birmingham."  Heenan, the American pugilist, brought a circus to Norwich
on September 11th, and "apologised to the spectators for not sparring, as
the authorities had forbidden him, and it was only on giving this promise
that he was allowed to erect his tent on the Castle Hill."  Mace's circus
visited the city on October 6th.  "The spectators were disappointed at
the non-appearance of Mace, the magistrates having forbidden him to give
an illustration of his noble art."


MAY.


3.*--"Died last week, at Rackheath, Phoebe Clayburn, at the advanced age
of 103 years.  She had 22 children, and her eldest son is now living at
Bramerton, aged 80 years; her grandchild is 50; her great-grandchild is
20, and her great-great-grandchild is now two years of age."

4.--The large tract of land known as the Middle Level of the Fens, which
had been greatly improved by the construction of the Middle Level Drain,
a small river which collected the waters of the district and discharged
them into the Ouse near Wiggenhall St. German's, was inundated, in
consequence of a breach in the sluice erected at the point where the two
streams joined.  The tide, no longer confined to the channel of the Ouse,
rushed up the drain, broke through the bank on the west side at two
places, and, in a wild torrent, overspread the adjacent lands.  Efforts
were at once made to strengthen the dams, by placing vast quantities of
clinch and gravel at the foot of the piles.  On June 20th, a meeting of
the owners and occupiers of land was held at the Globe Hotel, Lynn, under
the presidency of the Rev. Henry ffolkes, at which resolutions were
passed requiring the Middle Level Commissioners to take prompt and
efficient measures to prevent the recurrence of such a disaster.  It was
also agreed that more satisfactory means for redress for damage should be
given than were afforded by the Middle Level Act, and that application be
made to Parliament for the insertion in the Middle Level Bill then before
the House of Lords of necessary provisions for securing both objects.  At
the Norfolk Assizes, on July 29th, before Lord Chief Justice Cockburn,
commenced the long course of litigation resulting from the inundation.
Mr. William Mason, lessee of 18 acres of land at Tilney All Saints,
within the Marshland Fen district, sued Mr. Wise, clerk to the Middle
Level Commissioners, for the recovery of 500 pounds damages sustained
through the alleged negligence of the Commissioners in making and
maintaining the Middle Level Sluice and Drain.  Leave was given to both
sides to move in the Common Pleas or Queen's Bench for the removal of the
trial to London.  On August 16th it was announced that the expenses
incident to the disaster were estimated at about 25,000 pounds, to meet
which 20,000 pounds had been taken up by way of temporary loan.  A second
disaster occurred on October 4th.  One of the outfall sluices of the
Marshland Smeeth and Fen Drain, an important arterial drain running into
the Ouse about 200 or 300 yards northward of the ruined Middle Level
Sluice, gave way, and again a wide extent of country was submerged.  Four
hundred navvies were at once set to work to form a dam of many thousands
of sacks filled with earth.  On the 5th the temporary dam gave way
bodily, and the entire mass having been carried a score yards up the
drain, sank out of sight.  The tidal water having overcome the obstacle,
went with a rush and a roar on its work of devastation, carrying with it
great quantities of earth and timber.  About 1,000 acres were flooded;
4,000 acres were under water before the completion of another temporary
dam on the 8th.  After that the water was removed by means of huge
syphons.  On November 10th the Court of Common Pleas refused a rule for
the changing of the venue of the trial of the action, Mason _v._ Wise,
from Norfolk to Surrey, and with this decision ended the first stage of
the legal proceedings.  (_See_ January 31st, 1863.)

5.--The Braham Grand English Opera Company commenced a six nights'
engagement at Norwich Theatre, with the performance of "Il Trovatore."
The other operas produced during the engagement included "The Bohemian
Girl," "Robin Hood," "The Daughter of the Regiment," "Der Freischutz,"
"Cinderella," and "Lucia Di Lammermoor."  Among the principals were Miss
Fanny Ternan, Miss Maria Ternan, Mdlle. A. Kemp, Mr. Brookhouse Bowler,
and Mr. Hamilton Braham.

24.--The Norfolk Volunteer Service Association was formed at a meeting
held at the Shirehall, Norwich, under the chairmanship of the Lord
Lieutenant, who was elected president.  Its objects were, "the promotion
of rifle shooting and giving permanence to the Volunteer corps throughout
the county."  The first prize-meeting was held on the Mousehold Range,
Norwich, from September 8th to 11th.

27.--The Channel Squadron, under the command of Rear-Admiral Robert
Smart, arrived in Yarmouth Roads, and on June 1st was joined by the St.
George, with H.R.H. Prince Alfred on board.  The Squadron sailed for the
Downs on the 4th.


JUNE.


11.--In the Divorce Court, before Sir C. Cresswell, judgement was given
in the action, Burroughs _v._ Burroughs and Silcock.  This was a cross
suit.  Mrs. Burroughs prayed for the restitution of conjugal rights, and
her husband, in his answer, charged her with adultery, and prayed for a
judicial separation.  In the second case Mr. Burroughs prayed for a
dissolution of marriage, on the ground of his wife's misconduct.  The
second case had been tried by a common jury on March 6th, 7th, 8th, and
13th, and terminated in a verdict that neither the petitioner, the
respondent, nor the co-respondent had been guilty of adultery.  His
lordship had deferred judgment in the first suit, in order that his
opinion might not affect the opinion of the jury in the second suit,
which had not then been tried.  He now said he thought Mrs. Burroughs had
misconducted herself, and he could not order her husband to take her home
again.  He, therefore, dismissed her petition for restitution.  He
refused, however, to pronounce a decree of judicial separation, on the
ground that as the parties themselves had been examined, he could not
treat the husband's answer as a counter petition.

16.--At Swaffham County Court, a jury was engaged in the trial of an
action, Green _v._ Sayers.  The plaintiff, a shoemaker, sought to recover
25 pounds damages for an assault by the defendant, described as "a circus
proprietor, but better known as the ex-champion of England."  The case
excited great local interest.  "The defendant," it was said, "conducted
himself with a degree of modesty, propriety, and decorum that caused no
little feeling in his favour."  The assault arose out of a dispute as to
the withholding of change alleged to be due to the plaintiff on money
tendered for admission to the defendant's show, and the jury gave a
verdict for Green, damages 5 pounds.

19.--A great Volunteer review took place at Yarmouth.  The first brigade
of 910 men was commanded by Lieut.-Col. Astley, Norfolk Artillery; the
second (1,230 men) by Lieut.-Col. Sir E. Lacon, Bart., M.P., and the
third (350 men) by Lieut.-Col. Custance.  The reviewing officer was Col.
Guy, C.B., and the proceedings were witnessed by many thousands of
spectators.

24.--Died, in the Workhouse of the Loddon and Clavering Union, in her
105th year, Mary, widow of Samuel Lock, of Loddon.

--An extraordinary fight took place between a bull and a stallion, both
the property of Mr. James Coker.  The animals were grazing in a field
near the Chase at King's Lynn, and became engaged in a deadly combat,
which ended in the bull disembowelling the horse with its horns.  The
stallion was valued at 60 pounds.


JULY.


1.--The marriage of H.R.H. Princess Alice and the Grand Duke of Hesse was
celebrated throughout the county with great rejoicing.  The day was
observed at Norwich as a public holiday; at a special meeting of the Town
Council a congratulatory address to the Queen was adopted; the Mayor gave
a luncheon at St. Andrew's Hall, and in the evening a firework display
was given in the Market Place.

--At the Norwich Quarter Sessions, before the Recorder (Mr. O'Malley,
Q.C.), Edward Durrant (27), grocer, surrendered to his bail on the charge
of "having by fraud in playing with cards won the sum of 14s., the money
of Samuel Boughton, at the Star Inn, Haymarket, Norwich."  There were
other counts, charging the defendant with defrauding other persons by the
same means.  Mr. Serjeant Ballantyne, specially retained, succeeded in
obtaining a verdict of not guilty.  The Recorder observed: "Well,
prisoner, you have had a most merciful jury; that is all I can say."  The
defendant was cheered as he left the Court.

9.--The first of the peripatetic shows of the Norfolk Agricultural
Association was held at East Dereham.  "The cautious and timid members of
the Norfolk Association who prophesied that so many dark and dreadful
events would happen to the society if absolved from her marriage vow
which wedded her entirely to Norwich, and Swaffham, must have been
pleasantly surprised by the entire success of the Dereham meeting."  So
great was the rush to the show-ground that more than once the barrier was
broken down.  The sum of 230 pounds was taken in admission money, whereas
it had never before amounted to 150 pounds, and rarely exceeded 80
pounds.

17.--Mr. Henry Stevenson, one of the proprietors of the NORFOLK
CHRONICLE, was driving through Upper Surrey Street, Norwich, with his
wife, when the horse started off at full speed in the direction of All
Saints' church, where the phaeton was upset, and Mrs. Stevenson sustained
injuries from which she died an hour afterwards.

27.--Died, in St. John de Sepulchre, Norwich, the Widow Rumsby, aged 100
years.

--Died, in London, Mr. H. L. Styleman le Strange.  He was the only son of
Mr. Henry Styleman, of Snettisham Hall, where he was born in 1815.
Educated at Eton and at Christchurch, Oxford, he travelled, on the
completion of his University career, in Egypt, and, returning home in
1836, his majority was celebrated at Hunstanton Hall, the ancient
residence of the le Stranges.  In 1839 he procured the Royal licence to
assume the patronymic surname of le Strange, in addition to that of
Styleman, and in the same year married Jamesina Joice Ellen, daughter of
Mr. John Stewart, of Balladrum, Inverness, by whom he left issue two sons
and three daughters.  Mr. le Strange, acceding to the request of the
Conservative party, stood for the Western division of the county, and was
defeated by a small majority.  He left the hustings with the promise that
at the next election he would again offer himself; he kept his promise,
but eventually withdrew, and retired from politics.  He then commenced
his great work of painting the roof of Ely Cathedral, on the design and
execution of which he bestowed many years of hard toil.  At his death the
work was about half completed, and he had only recently received
recognition of his artistic talents by being appointed a member of a
commission for investigating the state of the frescoes in the new Houses
of Parliament.  Hunstanton church is a monument to his taste and skill.
Mr. le Strange was senior co-heir to the baronies of Hastings and Foliot,
and co-heir to those of Camoys and Strathbolgie.  He had served the
office of High Sheriff of Norfolk, was a magistrate and deputy
lieutenant, and a director of the Lynn and Hunstanton Railway Company.

30.--Mr. Simmons, of Lydney, Gloucestershire, made a balloon ascent from
the Orchard Gardens, Norwich, and, after attaining an altitude of 5,000
feet, descended in Spixworth Park.  There he lightened the balloon by
landing a fellow-passenger, and having re-ascended to the height of
12,000 feet, finally came to earth in Mr. Trafford's park at Wroxham.
Mr. Simmons made another ascent from the Orchard Gardens on September
8th, and descended at Little Plumstead; and after re-ascending, came down
among the ruins of St. Benet's Abbey.


AUGUST.


28.--A cricket match, between twenty-two of Norfolk and Norwich and
eleven of United All England commenced on the Cricket Ground, Norwich,
and concluded on the 29th.  Norfolk and Norwich, 73--75; United All
England, 119--31.


SEPTEMBER.


8.--A trial of McCormick's new reaper took place on Mr. Clare Sewell
Read's farm at Little Plumstead.  The experiments were conducted by Mr.
McCormick, the inventor, and Mr. Burgess, the manufacturer of the
machine, in the presence of Baron Ricasoli, ex-Prime Minister of Italy,
and of several other foreigners of distinction.

11.--Three troops of the 5th Royal Irish Lancers, with headquarters and
band, arrived at Norwich.  "Although the regiment has been formed only
five years, the principal portion of the non-commissioned officers and
many of the privates were engaged at Balaclava, being Volunteers from
other regiments to assist in training the present regiment."

12.--A great Volunteer _fete_, given at Crown Point, by the High Sheriff
of Norfolk (Mr. Harvey), was attended by many thousands of spectators
from all parts of the county.  The city and county corps, in two
brigades, commanded respectively by Lieut.-Col. Custance and Lieut.-Col.
Astley, with the Norwich Light Horse, under Lieut. Hay Gurney, were
reviewed by Major-General Sir Archdale Wilson, K.C.B.  The Norwich Cadet
Corps, recently organized by Mr. Noverre, and the Grammar School Cadet
Corps, were also in attendance.  After the review the troops were
entertained at dinner, a balloon ascent was made by Mr. Simmons, and
military and other sports followed.

17.--The foundation-stone of a new church at Hautbois Magna was laid by
Lord Suffield.  The new building, which was designed to supplement the
old parish church, was erected mainly by the exertions of the rector (the
Rev. J. C. Girling), who gave the site.  The cost was estimated at from
800 to 900 pounds.  The church was consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich
on May 26th, 1864.


OCTOBER.


6.--Died at his house, Belitha Villas, Barnsbury Park, London, Mr. John
Curtis, F.L.S., aged 72.  Mr. Curtis was a native of Norwich, where he
resided many years.  He was author of the celebrated work, "British
Entomology," on the completion of which Sir Robert Peel awarded him a
pension for life.

13.--A ten miles race, between the Indian Deerfoot and Brighten, "the
Norwich Milk Boy," for a silver cup of the value of 30, took place on
Figg's Cricket Ground, Newmarket Road, Norwich.  Previous performances of
Brighten and Deerfoot had given rise to suspicion as to the genuineness
of these contests, but on this occasion it was announced that "Deerfoot's
career in England being about to terminate," the race would be a
legitimate trial of speed.  Brighten won by 30 yards, in 54 minutes, 30
sees.

17.--A severe storm occurred at Yarmouth, and numerous shipping
casualties were reported.

19.--A fire took place on the premises of Messrs. Tillyard and Howlett,
wholesale boot and shoe manufacturers, Water Lane, St. George's Colegate,
Norwich, and damage was done to the amount of 2000.

29.--Died at St. Leonard's-on-Sea, the Dowager Lady Stafford.  Her
ladyship was an American by birth, one of four daughters of Mr. C. Caton,
of Baltimore.  So remarkable were the sisters for their personal charms,
that they were known as "the beauties of Baltimore," a reputation which
had the effect of securing for three of them British coronets, one as the
Duchess of Leeds, another as the Marchioness Wellesley, and the third as
the Baroness Stafford.  She became the second wife of the 8th Lord
Stafford in 1837.


NOVEMBER.


10.--Mr. Henry Staniforth Patteson was elected Mayor, and Mr. J. J.
Colman appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

18.--The Norwich Town Council adopted an address to the Queen,
congratulating her Majesty upon the attainment of his majority by H.R.H.
the Prince of Wales.  The county magistrates adopted a similar address on
January 8th, 1863.

19.--Died, suddenly, aged 50, Mr. John Wodderspoon, sub-editor of the
"Norwich Mercury."  He had resided in Norwich about fourteen years, and
had previously been connected with the "Suffolk Chronicle," at Ipswich.
Mr. Wodderspoon devoted his leisure time to the pursuit of the fine arts,
and had achieved considerable proficiency as an amateur artist, a talent
which assisted him materially in his other favourite study, archaeology.
He was an active member of the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological
Society, and whilst resident at Ipswich, wrote, "Memorials of Ipswich"
and "Historic Sites of Suffolk."  His death occurred under painful
circumstances.  On the previous day a summons had been served upon him
for threatening, it was alleged, a reporter on the "Mercury" staff.  When
giving instructions to Mr. Bugg, his solicitor in the case, Mr.
Wodderspoon fell down and instantly expired.

22.*--"The Queen has been pleased to grant unto Henry Evans, the elder,
of Lyng and of Bylaugh, clerk, and to his eldest son, Henry Evans, the
younger, of Elmswell, in Suffolk, clerk, her Royal licence and authority
that they and their respective heirs may, in compliance with a proviso
contained in the last will and testament of Sir John Lombe, late of Great
Melton, baronet, deceased, respectively take and henceforth use the
surname of Lombe only, and use and bear the arms of Lombe in lieu of
their present surname and arms of Evans."


DECEMBER.


1.--Father Gavazzi lectured at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, on "Italy,
Victor Emanuel, Garibaldi, and the Pope," and on the 2nd on "The Progress
of the Gospel in Italy."

10.--Mr. Charles Mathews appeared at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, in his
entertainment, "Personal Reminiscences, in Eight Chapters."  The
entertainment was repeated on December 13th.

13.--Died at his residence, Elmsfield, Harrow, Lieut.-Col. Richard
Montague Oakes, formerly of the 1st Life Guards, and Chief Constable of
Norfolk, aged 71.

18.--A gale of great severity commenced at Yarmouth, and continued until
the 22nd.  "The lifeboats were suffered to lie quiescent on the beach,
their crews (of the Young and Diamond Company) standing stolidly by,
indifferent even to the signals of distress which from time to time came
over the raging waters from vessels in great danger."  There was no loss
of life.  An inquiry was opened on January 6th, 1863, as to the conduct
of the lifeboat crew, and adjourned to the 12th, when a resolution was
adopted exonerating them from blame.

20.--Died at his residence, Norton Lodge, Freshwater, Isle of Wight,
Admiral of the Fleet Sir Graham E. Hamond, Bart., G.C.B.  He was the only
son of Captain Sir Andrew Snape Hamond, R.N., created baronet in 1783,
and was born December 30th, 1779.  On the death of his father, at the
advanced age of 90, in September, 1828, he succeeded to the baronetcy.
He commenced his naval career in 1793, as midshipman in the Phaeton 38,
under the command of his cousin, Sir A. S. Douglas; he then removed to
the Queen Charlotte, 100, the flagship of Admiral Lord Howe, under whom
he shared the honour and took part in the victory of "the glorious first
of June."  Joining the Britannia, 100, the flagship of Admiral Hotham, he
served in the Mediterranean, and witnessed the destruction of L'Alcide
74, taken in the action of July 13th.  After constant active service on
the Lisbon and home stations, during which he assisted at the capture of
several French privateers and at the blockade of Malta and the siege of
La Valette, he was appointed to the command of the Blanche, 36, in which
ship he participated in the battle of Copenhagen.  In 1804 he was
appointed to the Lively, 38, in which frigate he captured, off Cape St.
Mary, three Spanish frigates laden with treasure, and destroyed a fourth;
during a subsequent cruise off Cape St. Vincent he captured the San
Miguel, and the same day, in company with the Polyphemus, 64, took the
Santa Gertruyda, 36, laden with a valuable cargo of 11,215,000 dollars in
specie.  In December, 1808, he was appointed to the command of the
Victorious, 74, in which he assisted at the reduction of Flushing in
1809.  He was appointed commander-in-chief of the South African station
in September, 1834.  Sir Graham was a magistrate and deputy lieutenant
for the county of Norfolk.

21.--The sea broke over the sandhills at Wells and flooded about 700
acres of the west marshes, which had been reclaimed from the ocean by the
Earl of Leicester.  The damage was estimated at 10,000.

26.--The Christmas pantomime at Norwich Theatre, produced under the
management of Mr. Sidney, was entitled "Jack the Giant-Killer."
Wombwell's Menagerie was exhibited on the Castle Meadow.



1863.


JANUARY.


21.--Died at his residence, Thorpe Hamlet, aged 82, Mr. John Skipper, who
had filled several offices under the old Corporation of Norwich,
including those of Speaker and Chamberlain.

24.--Died at Trumpington Street, Cambridge, Mr. S. D. Colkett, artist,
formerly of Norwich.

31.--The litigation arising from the inundation in Marshland commenced on
this date with the hearing, in the Vice-Chancellor's Court, of an
application for a mandamus to compel the Middle Level Commissioners to
restore the paling path over the breach made by the inundations.  At the
suggestion of the Court, it was agreed that the only question in dispute,
that of legal liability, should be raised as a special case.  At the
Norfolk Assizes, on April 1st, before Lord Chief Justice Erle, two
actions, Mason _v._ Wise and Coe _v._ Wise (clerk to the Middle Level
Commissioners), were down for trial by special jury.  It was understood
that these cases, which were brought for the recovery of damages
consequent upon the inundation, were selected out of a total of 107
causes in which writs had been issued.  In the action Coe _v._ Wise, the
declaration alleged that by a certain Act of Parliament the Middle Level
Commissioners were bound to make and maintain a certain cut, bank, and
sluices; it was complained that, in consequence of their negligence, the
tidal waters burst through them and flooded the lands of the plaintiff.
The defendant entered a plea of not guilty, and alleged that the
plaintiff was not possessed of the lands.  The hearing of the case
occupied four days.  The Judge, in summing up, directed the jury to
decide whether the damage was caused to the plaintiff by the absence of
due care and skill on the part of the defendants, (1) in respect of the
making of the sluice; (2) in respect of maintaining the sluice; (3) in
respect of providing remedies against mishap after the sluice was
destroyed; and (4) was damage caused to the plaintiff by reason that no
puddled wall was made along both banks of the cut?  The jury found for
the defendant on the first point, and for the plaintiff on the other
three points.  In the Court of Queen's Bench, on April 18th, Mr. Fitzroy
Kelly moved for a rule calling upon plaintiff to show cause why the
verdict should not be set aside and entered for the defendant, on the
ground of misdirection, and that the verdict was against the evidence.
Lord Chief Justice Cockburn said the Court would grant a rule upon the
question of law involved, but not as regarded the evidence, because their
lordships found that Lord Chief Justice Erle was satisfied with the
verdict.  The case was again before the Court of Queen's Bench on
November 19th, and, alter two days' argument, was ordered to stand over
until the next term.  (_See_ January 21st, 1864.)


FEBRUARY.


16.--Charles Mower, the Dereham pedestrian, ran a one-mile match for 50 a
side, with Edward Mills, of London, the six miles champion, on the
Brampton Pedestrian Ground.  Mower was a runner of considerable repute.
His best performance was at Salford, in December, 1860, when he defeated
Allison for the champion cup, running the mile in 4 minutes 24 seconds,
the ground at the time being covered with snow.  In his match with Mills
he was beaten by 20 yards, in 4 minutes 34 seconds.


MARCH.


3.--The Norwich Poor-law Amendment Bill was considered by a Committee of
the House of Commons.  Its object was to repeal the Act passed in 1831,
"for the better management of the several parishes and hamlets of the
city and county of the city of Norwich"; to substitute another body for
the Incorporation of Guardians; and to introduce certain clauses for the
equalisation of the rates between the city and hamlets; and for the
inclusion of the Cathedral Close, which was not then within the
jurisdiction of the Guardians.  The Bill passed through Committee on
March 12th, and was directed to be reported to the House.  The last
meeting of the old Court of Guardians was held at the Guildhall, Norwich,
on October 6th, and its existence as a corporate body expired on the
22nd, when the new Board was elected.  Prior to the election, a meeting,
presided over by the Mayor (Mr. Patteson), was held, at which was passed
a resolution to the effect that, "considering the excessive poor-rates
which have pressed upon this city for so many years, and the abuses which
have sprung up in the administration of the Poor-law, it is incumbent
upon the ratepayers to sink party and other differences and co-operate
for carrying out the new Act with integrity and impartiality."

10.--Great rejoicings took place in city and county, in celebration of
the marriage of H.R.H. the Prince of Wales.  The streets of Norwich were
gaily decorated, and the day was observed as a general holiday.  A parade
of the troops, namely, the 5th Royal Irish Lancers, the 1st Norfolk Light
Horse, the enrolled pensioners, the staff of the West Norfolk Militia,
and the Norwich Battalion of Rifle Volunteers, took place on Major
Middleton's field on Ipswich Road.  "All the troops wore wedding favours
of uniform pattern."  After the review a _feu de joie_ was fired in the
Market Place, where the members of the Choral Society sang, "God Bless
the Prince of Wales."  The military were entertained at luncheon in a
marquee erected on the parade-ground at the Militia Barracks; the Sheriff
(Mr. Colman) gave a dinner to the aged poor, at St. Andrew's Hall, and
14,403 Sunday school children were entertained.  At night the city was
illuminated, a firework display took place on the Castle Meadow, and the
proceedings concluded with the lighting of a huge bonfire opposite the
Shirehall.  Similar celebrations took place at Yarmouth and Lynn, and
festivities were held in all the smaller towns and villages in the
county.  At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council on the 12th,
congratulatory addresses were voted to the Queen and to the Prince and
Princess of Wales, and it was announced that many of the textile
manufacturers had decided to present to her Royal Highness articles of
home manufacture.  The citizens gave the famous "Norwich Gates" exhibited
at the Great Exhibition, which were purchased by public subscription and
afterwards erected at Sandringham.  A county meeting was held at the
Shirehall on the 14th, and congratulatory addresses adopted.  Their Royal
Highnesses arrived at their Norfolk home on March 28th.  At Lynn railway
station the Mayor (Mr. L. W. Jarvis) presented an address, and from
Wolferton station to Sandringham the Prince and Princess were escorted by
the Norfolk Light Horse, commanded by Capt. Hay Gurney, and by a large
body of mounted tenantry.

12.--Died at Brentwood, Mr. Edward Taylor, professor of music at Gresham
College, London, aged 79.  He was a native of Norwich, and a son of Mr.
John Taylor, who occupied a prominent position in the city as a wool and
yarn factor, and displayed considerable literary and musical abilities.
Mr. Edward Taylor had been many years resident in London, but he
constantly attended the Norwich Musical Festivals, in the establishment
of which he took a leading part, and was a frequent vocal performer.  He
was a pleasing composer, and some of his songs met with deserved
appreciation.

16.--Professor J. H. Pepper lectured at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich, on
"Optical Illusions," and for the first time exhibited in the city the now
well-known illusion, "Pepper's Ghost."

19.--The Yarmouth Gas Bill, the object of which was to incorporate the
Great Yarmouth Gas Company and to make further provision for lighting the
town and certain neighbouring places with gas, was considered by a
Committee of the House of Lords.  The Bill was read a third time in that
House on the 24th, and passed.

29.--Died at Wakefield Lodge, Northamptonshire, his Grace the Duke of
Grafton.  He was the eldest son of George Henry, fourth Duke, by
Charlotte Maria Waldegrave, second daughter of James, second Earl
Waldegrave and Maria, who afterwards became Duchess of Gloucester.  Born
on February 10th, 1790, he married, on June 20th, 1812, Mary Caroline,
third daughter of Admiral the Hon. Sir George Cranfield Berkeley.  He
represented Bury St. Edmund's from 1826 to 1830, and had a seat in the
Lower House for Thetford from 1834 to September, 1844.  By his death, his
eldest son, the Earl of Euston, M.P. for Thetford since 1847, inherited
the family honours.

31.--A remarkable charge of abduction was tried at the Norfolk Assizes,
before Mr. Justice Williams.  Frederick Burrell (21), a clerk employed at
the Royal Arsenal, was indicted "for having, from motives of lucre,
fraudulently allured, taken away, and detained Jane Burrell, a person
under 21 years of age, she having a present legal interest in certain
real estates in Norfolk, out of the possession and against the will of
her mother, Mary Ann Hyder, and her guardian, William Silver Hyder, with
intent to marry her, on January 20th, 1863."  Henry Richard Burrell, his
brother, was indicted for aiding and abetting.  The defendants were
uncles of the girl, who was the daughter of the eldest son of one Daniel
Burrell, who died without a will.  As the eldest son died during Daniel
Burrell's lifetime, the daughter became possessed of all his freehold
property.  The girl left school at Norwich at Christmas, and went to
Fakenham, but instead of staying with her mother and stepfather, went to
the house of Henry Burrell, and on January 19th left for London with
Frederick Burrell.  The next day they were married at Plumstead, near
Woolwich, the marriage licence obtained by Frederick Burrell being, it
was alleged, "full of the grossest perjury."  The jury returned a verdict
of guilty, but sentence was deferred, pending the argument of certain
points before the Court for the consideration of Crown cases reserved.
The defendants, on April 25th, appealed against their conviction, and the
Court, after hearing arguments, reserved judgment.  The case came before
the Court for the consideration of Crown cases reserved, on November
24th.  Their lordships were divided in opinion, not upon any question of
law, but upon the facts of the case.  Judgment was delivered upon the
opinion of the majority, who held that the facts did not bear out that
which was necessary to sustain a prosecution, and therefore, "with very
great regret," they quashed the conviction.


APRIL.


5.--Died at Chester Terrace, Regent's Park, London, Mr. John Taylor,
F.R.S.  Born at Norwich on August 22nd, 1779, he was trained as a land
surveyor and engineer, and in 1798 was invited to take the management of
a mine near Tavistock.  It proved very profitable.  In 1803 he projected
and commenced the Tavistock Canal, of which about three miles were
tunnelled through a granite hill.  The execution of this work led to the
discovery of two other mines, which produced large quantities of copper,
and yielded considerable profits.  The success of these and other mines
in the neighbourhood of Tavistock, in Cornwall, and in the North of
England, brought Mr. Taylor into great repute as a mining engineer.  He
was the author of several useful papers on mining, and one of the first
to propose the formation of a Mining School; he was, too, one of the
earliest Fellows of the Geological Society, and for many years acted as
treasurer and vice-president.  In 1825 he was elected a Fellow of the
Royal Society, and was one of the founders of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science, of which organization he was treasurer until
1862.  An excellent portrait of Mr. Taylor was painted by Sir Thomas
Lawrence in 1825, and afterwards engraved by Charles Turner.  Another
portrait was painted in 1861, by Mr. Sydney Hodges.

6.--Madame Celeste commenced, at Norwich Theatre, a short season, during
which she appeared in a round of her favourite characters.

20.--The nomination of candidates to contest the seat rendered vacant by
the elevation of the Earl of Euston to the House of Lords took place at
Thetford.  Lord Frederick John FitzRoy and Mr. Robert John Harvey Harvey
were proposed.  The poll was opened on the 21st, and resulted as follows:
FitzRoy, 93; Harvey, 81.  There had been no contest at Thetford for
twenty-two years previously.


MAY.


1.--Died at his residence, Newmarket Road, Norwich, aged 63, Mr. Isaac
Wiseman, who served the office of Sheriff in 1830.

6.--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. H. S. Patteson), as captain of the Second
Company, Norwich Battalion Rifle Volunteers, was presented by the members
of the company with Mr. Claude L. Nursey's original painting, "The
Officers of the Norwich Battalion," in recognition of "his zeal in the
Volunteer cause and of his courtesy to those under his command."

9.*--"Challenge: Thomas Jessup, of East Harling, now in his 102nd year,
is willing to walk against 'Father Time' or any other man of the same age
as himself now living in England or elsewhere, a fair toe and heel match,
without the aid of stick, crutch, or other auxiliary.  The one doing the
greatest distance in one day (or in a month, if preferred) to be entitled
to the stakes, which can be made for any sum not exceeding 50 a side."

11.--At Norwich Police Court, Mr. Edward Manning, of London Street, and
Mr. William Edwards, of Sprowston, were summoned for assaulting Jonas
Dye, of Pockthorpe, in contesting the question of common rights on
Mousehold Heath.  According to Mr. Simms Reeve, who appeared for the
prosecution, the Dean and Chapter of Norwich owned the Heath, and the
people of Pockthorpe, whether they had the right or not, claimed common
rights.  The Dean and Chapter did not dispute those rights, and the
people not only used the Heath themselves, but let it to others to graze
their cattle, to take turf at so much per hundred, and gravel at so much
per load.  The revenue formed a common fund, managed by a committee
elected each year at a public meeting, at which the clergyman of the
parish presided.  The defendants contested these rights, and liberated
stock which had been impounded.  The Town Clerk (Mr. Mendham) objected to
the magistrates' jurisdiction, under 6th and 7th Vic., cap. 30, which
provided that no justice of the peace "should hear and determine any case
of assault or battery in which any question should arise as to the title
of any lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or the interest accruing
therefrom."  The magistrates dismissed the case.

26.--A dreadful accident occurred at Yarmouth.  Two negro vocalists,
named Charles Marsh and Henry Wharton, attended the Whit-Tuesday sports
on the South Denes, when the former proposed that they should ascend the
Nelson Monument.  The other agreed, and the ascent commenced, Marsh
performing "God Save the Queen" upon his violin, and Wharton playing a
banjo accompaniment.  Arrived at the summit, Marsh, who added to his
other accomplishments that of a posturer, scaled the stone fence on the
platform, and, seizing the lightning conductor, climbed upon the
emblematic figure of Britannia and there remained for ten minutes,
singing and waving his hands to the crowd beneath.  In descending, he was
compelled to stoop head foremost to grasp the handle of Britannia's
trident.  From some cause he slipped, fell upon the plinth, and thence
rebounded into space, falling with arms outstretched to the base of the
column, a depth of 144 feet.  His death was instantaneous.

27.--The official celebration of the Queen's birthday at Norwich was
observed as a half-holiday.  A review of the military took place on
Mousehold Heath, when colours, given by Mr. R. N. Bacon, were presented
to the Norwich Battalion of Rifle Volunteers by the Hon. Mrs. F. Walpole.
The regimental colour was received by Ensign Steward, and the Union Jack
by Ensign Hansell, after which there was a consecration ceremony by the
Rev. T. Clarke.  The first-named colour bore the motto, _Gloria virtutis
umbra_, in the centre, with the city arms and the name of the corps--1st
City of Norwich Rifle Volunteers.  The groundwork of the flag was green,
and the armorial bearings and inscriptions were encircled by a floral
border in gilt.

28.--Died at Edinburgh, aged 52, Mr. Archibald Dalrymple, F.R.C.S.,
formerly surgeon to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.


JUNE.


4.--Four specimens of Pallas's sand grouse--one male and three
females--were shot at Waxham, by the Rev. Mr. Wheeler and Mr. Gibbs.  On
the 8th a fine male specimen was shot on Yarmouth Denes, near the old
battery; and on the 9th and 10th a flock of about forty of the birds
appeared upon Horsey beach.  A pair was killed on Titchwell beach on the
10th, and another pair at about the same date in the adjoining parish of
Brancaster.  Altogether twenty-six specimens of these rare visitants from
the Kirghis steppes of Tartary were procured in the county, and all were
found either basking in the sands or feeding in grass fields close to the
sea shore.

13.--At the sale of the Rev. John Gilbert's property, by Messrs. Spelman,
at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, a farm of forty acres realised 2,600, and
the Church Farm, of forty-nine acres, at Heckingham, was sold for 2,000.

17.--The show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association took place at
Yarmouth, and was the most successful of the exhibitions yet held.

22.--The 5th Royal Irish Lancers marched from the Cavalry Barracks,
Norwich, for Aldershot, and a few weeks later sailed for India.


JULY.


1.--A fine barque of 410 tons, named the Egbert, was launched from the
shipyard of Messrs. Fellows and Son, Southtown, Great Yarmouth.

2.--The Second Administrative Battalion of Norfolk Rifle Volunteers,
numbering 22 officers, 30 non-commissioned officers, and 260 rank and
file, encamped at Langley Park, the seat of the Colonel-Commandant, Sir
Thomas Proctor Beauchamp, Bart.  This was the first Volunteer camp formed
in the county.  "Fifty camp tents, borrowed from the War Office for the
occasion, were pitched in rows beyond the parade-ground, and in these the
Volunteers encamped for the night, a plentiful supply of straw being
provided for them."  The First Administrative Battalion encamped at
Gunton Park, from July 22nd to 25th, and the Dereham and Wymondham
Companies formed a camp at Letton Park, on September 22nd.

6.--A shocking accident occurred at Burgh Water Frolic.  A large wherry,
named the Ruby, belonging to Mr. England, of Limpenhoe, had been
chartered for the day by a Yarmouth publican, and was crowded with
passengers both above and below the hatches.  The craft was sailing to
the _rendezvous_, and when between the Dickey-walk and the Cross-stakes,
the Red Rover, a famous yacht, was sighted coming full sail down the
river.  The passengers rushed hurriedly from the larboard to the
starboard side of the wherry, to watch her progress, and those beneath
the hatches protruded their heads and necks over the gunwale.  The
stanchions, unable to resist the sudden strain, gave way, and the hatches
falling, came with terrific force upon the heads and bodies of the
persons below.  Two men, named Charles Aldis Rushmer and James Tripp, had
their necks dislocated and skulls fractured, several persons sustained
minor injuries, and others were thrown into the water, but were rescued
by boats.

14.--The Channel Fleet of eight ships of war, under the command of
Rear-Admiral Dacres, arrived in Yarmouth Roads.  The total number of men
on board was 4,800.  The Fleet weighed anchor on the 18th, and sailed for
the Downs.

15.--The Maharajah Duleep Singh, the new owner of the Elveden estate,
arrived at Thetford for the purpose of inspecting the property.  The
church bells were rung in honour of the illustrious visitor.  On November
21st it was announced that the Maharajah made almost daily excursions in
pursuit of his favourite sport of hawking, and that a pack of hounds had
also arrived at Elveden.

16.--A serious fire occurred at East Dereham, on the premises of Mr.
William Hubbard, builder.  It resulted in the total destruction of the
large workshops, and entailed a loss of about 2,000.  An adjacent
warehouse was stored with 400 worth of goods belonging to Mr. E. Smith
was also destroyed.  Furniture and goods were hastily removed from
adjoining houses and placed in the Corn Hall; the tenants of Mrs.
Dingle's cottages suffered great loss from their articles being broken or
stolen.  A public subscription was made to recoup Mr. Hubbard's workmen
the loss of their trade tools, valued at about 130; and on August 10th,
at a meeting of the townspeople, a fire brigade was organized.  The
origin of the fire was never discovered.  A groom in the employment of
Mr. Hubbard was apprehended upon suspicion, but was discharged for want
of evidence.

30.--Died at his residence, Town Close, Norwich, Mr. Samuel Shalders
Bears, aged 76.  He was for many years prominently connected with
Norwich, both as a man of business and as a member of most of the leading
institutions, charitable, literary, and political.  In 1829, under the
old Corporation, he was elected Sheriff, and in 1837, under the new
_regime_, he served the office of Mayor.  Mr. Beare was senior magistrate
on the Norwich Bench, and was upon the commission of the peace for the
county of Suffolk.


AUGUST.


3.--A dreadful railway accident took place upon the newly-opened line
between Lynn and Hunstanton, by which five persons were killed and
between twenty and thirty seriously injured.  The accident was caused by
the over-running of a bullock which had strayed upon the line.  At the
inquest, on August 13th, the jury returned a verdict of accidental death,
and called attention to the insufficiency of the fences provided by the
Great Eastern Railway Company.  The amount paid by the company in claims
and compensation exceeded, it was stated, the sum of 10,000.

12.--The completion of the restoration of St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, was
celebrated by a dinner given at the hall by the Mayor (Mr. Patteson).
The work of renovation was carried out by Mr. J. W. Lacey, from designs
by Mr. Barry, the City Surveyor.  The cost, about 1,500, was defrayed by
public subscription.

19.--Three troops of the 18th Hussars, with headquarters, marched into
Norwich, under the command of Lieut.-Col. Knox, formerly Major in the
15th Hussars.

--A great archery _fete_ was held at Crown Point, Norwich.  The societies
represented were the Norfolk and Norwich Archery Club, the East Norfolk,
West Norfolk, East Suffolk, West Suffolk, Westwick, Long Melford, Waveney
Borderers, Waveney Valley, Yarmouth, and Copdock Archers.

31.--Died at his residence, the South Quay, Great Yarmouth, Mr. Samuel
Charles Marsh, aged 53.  He occupied for many years a conspicuous public
position in the borough, and twice served the office of Mayor--in 1844
and 1852.


SEPTEMBER.


10.--Died at Raynham Hall, his Norfolk seat, Rear-Admiral the Marquis
Townshend.  His lordship was riding in the park on the 9th, when he was
seized with a paralytic stroke.  John Townshend was son of Lord John
Townshend, second son of George, first Marquis Townshend.  He was born
March 28th, 1798, and succeeded to the family honours on the death of his
cousin, George Ferrars, third Marquis, in December, 1855.  He married,
August 18th, 1825, Elizabeth Jane, eldest daughter of Rear-Admiral Lord
George Stuart, who survived him, and left issue an only son, John
Villiers Stuart, Viscount Rainham, M.P., and three daughters.  He entered
the Navy as midshipman in 1814, but his services, owing to the peace of
1815, were not distinguished.  Before his accession to the House of Lords
he was elected member for Tamworth.  In politics he was a pronounced
Liberal, "being in advance of the political party to which he professed
to belong, for he had voted in favour of the ballot, and was also for the
admission of Jews into Parliament and the removal of all religious
disabilities."

14.--The Earl of Leicester, as Lord Lieutenant of the county, reviewed
the Volunteers of Norfolk and Norwich, on Mousehold Heath.  Upwards of
2,000 were on parade, and were inspected by Col. McMurdo,
Inspector-General of the Volunteer Forces.  The troops were afterwards
entertained at dinner at the Corn Hall.  The Mayor (Mr. Patteson)
presided, supported by the Lord Lieutenant and many distinguished guests.

--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced with an
evening performance of "Judas Maccabaeus."  On the evenings of the 15th,
16th, and 17th, miscellaneous concerts were given.  "Joash" (E. Silas),
conducted by the composer, was produced on the morning of the 16th,
followed by "Scene at the Gates of Nain," from "Emmanuel," and a portion
of the "Stabat Mater"; "Elijah" on the morning of the 17th, and "The
Messiah" on the morning of the 18th.  The principal performers were
Mdlle. Tietjens, Madame Lemmens Sherrington, Madame Weiss, Miss
Wilkinson, Miss Palmer, Mdlle. Trebelli, Mr. Sims Reeves, Signor Bettini,
Mr. Montem Smith, Mr. Santley, Signor Bossi, and Mr. Weiss.  Mr. Benedict
conducted.  A "full dress" ball was held on the night of the 18th.

21.--James Naylor, of Elsing, aged 51, murdered his wife, Charlotte
Naylor, aged 81.  "From the time he was committed to Norwich Castle to
take his trial at the Assizes, he endeavoured to lead people to imagine
that he was not of sound mind."  He died in prison on November 23rd, from
cancer in the stomach.

30.--At a dinner held at St. Nicholas' Hall, East Dereham, Capt. Bulwer,
the commanding-officer of the 15th Norfolk Rifle Volunteers, was
presented with an album containing photographs of every member of the
company, "in recognition of his valuable services in promoting the
success and efficiency of the corps."  A presentation was also made to
Mrs. Bulwer.


OCTOBER.


2.--Died in London, Sir William Bellairs, of Mulbarton Lodge, in his 70th
year.  From 1811 to 1819 he served in the 15th Hussars, and went through
the campaigns of 1813 and 1814.  He was present at Vittoria, the
Pyrenees, Orthes, Tarbes, Toulouse, and other engagements, and also
served in the campaign of 1815, had a horse killed under him in the
retreat from Quatre Bras, and received two wounds at the battle of
Waterloo.  In 1837 he was appointed exon of the Yeomen of the Guard,
which he held up to 1849.  He married, in 1822, Miss Hooke, daughter and
heiress of Mr. Edmund Hooke, of Mulbarton Lodge.

10.--Died at his residence, St. Catherine's Cottage, Norwich, in his 62nd
year, Mr. William Matchett, senior proprietor of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE.
He was the second son of Mr. Jonathan Matchett, a former proprietor of
the journal.  Educated at Norwich Grammar School, under the Rev. Dr.
Valpy, he became a partner in the establishment in 1827, from which time
until his death he took an active share in its management.  "In former
days, before the science of shorthand writing had become a business in
itself, Mr. Matchett, like his school-fellow and contemporary, Mr. R. N.
Bacon, performed for this newspaper all those duties which the exigencies
of the present age require should be distributed amongst a 'staff of
reporters,' and as the representative of the CHRONICLE attended most of
the principal meetings in the city and county, the proceedings at which
were ably condensed for the public eye by the aid of his brief notes and
singularly retentive memory.  Under the old Corporation, and for a short
period under the new _regime_, Mr. Matchett was connected with the
Norwich Town Council for upwards of eight years, and at all times took a
warm interest in the welfare and improvement of his native city.

27.--Elihu Burritt, "the Learned Blacksmith," delivered a lecture to the
Norwich Young Men's Christian Association, on "The Higher Law and Mission
of Commerce."

29.--Mdlle. Carlotta Patti appeared at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich,
accompanied by Madame Fanny Huddart, Herr Reichardt, Signor Ferranti, and
MM. Vieuxtemps and Ascher (violin and pianoforte).  "Mdlle. Patti had
been offered an engagement at the Festival, but had declined to come
unless she was paid 500 gs.  The Festival Committee were justified in
rejecting her terms, which could only be accorded to a second Jenny Lind,
which she is not.  Nevertheless she is a wonderful singer."


NOVEMBER.


7.*--"The gales that have visited the coast during the last week have
been terrific.  For days there has been an enormous fleet of southward
bound colliers in Yarmouth Roads.  With other vessels, the coast,
extending from Caister to Corton, a distance of several miles, has been
crowded with shipping, and several shipwrecked crews have been landed at
the Sailors' Home."

9.--Died at Norwich, in his 76th year, Mr. William Stark, F.G.S.  He was
well-known in his day as an able chemist, and was one of the first dyers
of fabrics of Norwich manufacture, "particularly of the colour called
Turkey red, the manufacturers in the North sending large quantities of
goods for dyeing."  He devoted much of his time to the prosecution of
scientific studies, and was a Fellow of the Geological Society.  In the
days when Dr. Rigby, William Taylor, Dalrymple, Crosse, C. Austrin, Dr.
Evans, &c., belonged to the Norwich Philosophical Society, Mr. Stark
contributed many papers at its meetings, in which he bore a distinguished
part.  For many years he had been afflicted by partial loss of sight, and
a few months before his death became totally blind.

9.--Mr. Osborn Springfield was elected Mayor, and Mr. Frederick Brown
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

14.--A meeting for the promotion of the East Norfolk Railway was held at
the Swan Hotel, St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, under the presidency of Lord
Suffield.  A resolution emphasising the importance of the scheme was
adopted, and the following motion was also unanimously passed: "That the
offer of the Great Eastern Railway Company to render substantial help in
the formation of lines of railway to North Walsham, Aylsham, and Cromer,
and to work the same when made at 50 per cent. upon the gross receipts,
should be cordially accepted by the district, as conferring the means of
accomplishing public works of the greatest benefit, and which otherwise
must have been indefinitely postponed."  (_See_ May 5th, 1864.)

16.--Mr. James Caird, M.P., Mr. G. Shaw Lefevre, M.P., and Professor T.
H. Huxley, the Commissioners appointed to enquire into the condition of
the sea fisheries of the United Kingdom, attended at the Sailors' Home,
Yarmouth, for the purpose of hearing evidence.  The objects of the
inquiry were to ascertain (1) whether the supply of fish from the
fisheries of the United Kingdom had increased of late years, remained
stationary, or diminished; (2) whether any of the methods of catching
fish involved the wasteful diminution of fish spawn, and whether
legislative interference was required to increase the supply; and (3)
whether any existing legislative enactments operated prejudicially
against fisheries.  The Commissioners afterwards visited King's Lynn.

22.--The death occurred at Yarmouth, in his 43rd year, of Hales, the
Norfolk Giant.  He was born at West Somerton, and for some years was
engaged in seafaring pursuits, until his enormous height, 7 ft. 6 inches,
gained for him such notoriety that he was induced to abandon the sea and
exhibit himself.  During his nomadic career he visited almost every town
in the kingdom, and scarcely a fair was considered complete without the
huge yellow caravan which formed his temporary abode.  Becoming tired of
his wandering life.  Hales took up his abode in London, and whilst there
had the honour of appearing before the Court and of receiving from the
Queen a handsome gold watch and chain.  Shortly after his appearance at
Court, the fame of the Norfolk Giant reached Barnum, who lost no time in
engaging his services.  Hales remained with Barnum for some years, in the
course of which he visited most of the cities and towns in America.  On
his return to England he resumed his wanderings, and, in the course of
the summer of 1862 came to Yarmouth, where his presence on the Britannia
Pier attracted large numbers of visitors.  Hales's parents were
conspicuous for their great height, his father being 6 ft 6 ins., and his
mother 6 ft.  He had five sisters, who averaged 6 ft 6 ins.  One of them,
Mary, was 7 ft. 2 ins. in height, and for some years travelled with her
brother.  She died in Guernsey.  His four brothers averaged 6 ft 5
inches.  A few days before his death, Hales was walking about Norwich,
where he attracted great crowds by his immense size.

23.--Died at the Rectory, Long Stratton, Mr. George Birch Jerrard, son of
Major-General Jerrard.  Born at Bodmin, on November 24th, 1804, he
acquired considerable fame as a mathematician, and was the author of
"Mathematical Researches" and of "An Essay on the Resolution of
Equations."  In his first-named work, "he made a great step in Algebra,
and one acknowledged by all mathematicians, namely, the taking away of
_three_ terms from equations of any degree.  In his latter work he
maintains he has solved _the_ great problem of Algebra, namely, the
resolution of _all_ equations."  At the time of his death he was engaged
in writing a work on "Prophecy," a subject in which he was greatly
interested.

26.--Brother Ignatius, "a clergyman of the English Church, who has the
temerity to come before a public audience attired as a Benedictine monk,
with bare head and bare feet, carrying a rosary and crucifix, which in
this country are regarded as symbolic only of the Romish Church, and
calling himself by a name not accorded to him by his godfathers and
godmother," lectured at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, on "Monks and
Monasteries for the English Church."  (_See_ February 13th, 1864.)


DECEMBER.


2.--A gale of unusual violence began in the night, and prevailed during
the whole of the 3rd.  There was hardly a street in Norwich in which the
roofs of houses escaped damage.  Many vessels were lost off the Norfolk
coast.  One hundred and forty-four men and boys were drowned, and 68
widows and 105 children were left destitute.  A public subscription, to
which the Queen contributed 100, was opened at Yarmouth to relieve their
distress.

9.--A meeting of weavers was held at Norwich, to consider the rates of
payment for work.  It was stated that in 1846 a list of prices was agreed
to by the manufacturers and operatives for all fabrics then made.  These
prices had, with few exceptions, been maintained in Norwich, but a great
deal of work was sent into the country, where it was done at the reduced
rate of 5.5d. per dozen skeins, or considerably more than 50 per cent.
difference.  The weavers resolved that any departure from the list of
prices would be alike injurious to employers and employed, and a
deputation was appointed to wait upon the manufacturers to enforce this
view.

--Mr. David Fisher gave, at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich, his entertainment,
entitled, "Facts and Fancies," with which he had achieved great success
during the London season.  Mr. Fisher was known in Norwich not only as an
excellent actor and accomplished musician, but as a vocalist of much
taste.

21.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Baron Martin, James Margatroyed
Hubbard (24), described as a general dealer, and son of a Norwich brewer,
was indicted for forging a bill of exchange for 45, and sentenced to 20
years' penal servitude.

25.--The weather was very mild.  A picotee bloom and rose were gathered
in a garden at Norwich.

26.--Mr. H. J. Byron was the author of the pantomime produced at Norwich
Theatre.  It was entitled, "Ali Baba, or the Thirty-nine Thieves."

--A revolting performance was given at one of the shows at the Norwich
Christmas Fair.  "A man and woman, said to be Kaffirs, actually fed upon
live rats, in the presence of continually succeeding audiences."  The
details, as published in the newspaper, are too horrible to be quoted.
The Mayor, on being informed of the proceedings, prohibited the
exhibition, after which raw flesh was substituted for live rats.  At
Walsingham, a few days afterwards, the show was visited by many hundreds
of country folk; at Wells the police expelled the performers from the
town.



1864.


JANUARY.


6.--The mild weather of Christmas week was succeeded by frost of great
intensity.  On this day the thermometer stood at 14 degrees, and the
river above the New Mills at Norwich was frozen.  Large numbers of golden
plover made their appearance in the neighbourhood of Thetford, and an
extraordinary quantity of wild fowl came within the bounds of Shadwell,
where Sir Robert Buxton prohibited their being shot or molested.

9.--Early in the morning intelligence was received at Norwich that the
Princess of Wales had, on the previous evening, given birth to a son
(Prince Albert Victor).  Throughout the day rejoicing peals were rung
upon the bells of St. Peter Mancroft, the Royal Standard was displayed at
the Guildhall, and on the 19th the Corporation sent a congratulatory
address to the Queen and to the Prince and Princess of Wales.

19.--Died at Norwich, Mr. George Fisher, a member of the talented and
well-known local family of that name, and of the Norfolk and Suffolk
Company of Comedians.  On retiring from the stage, he conducted a school
at Swaffham, and subsequently resided at Lynn, where he was for many
years known as an enthusiastic votary of the violin, and a useful member
of the band of the Musical Union.  He was author of a curious and
voluminous work, entitled, "A Companion and Key to the History of
England," printed by Skill, of Swaffham, and published in 1832.

20.--Died at Hove, Brighton, Captain J. J. B. E. Frere, R.N.  He entered
the Navy in 1826, and had been for nearly twenty-five years engaged on
active service--against the pirates in the Mediterranean, in the
operations on the coast of Syria, in the Pacific with Lord George Paulet,
and as commissioner for the Government of the Sandwich Islands, while
held temporarily under the British flag.

21.--The hearing of the action, Cox _v._ Wise, arising out of the
inundation in Marshland, was resumed in the Court of Queen's Bench, and,
after three days' argument for the rule in support of the verdict, and
against the rule to set it aside, the case was closed.  Their lordships
reserved judgment until May 24th, when Mr. Justice Mellor held that the
Middle Level Commissioners were trustees for public purposes, acting
without reward and deriving no tolls from the works; they had not the
means of raising funds except for the specific performance of the objects
of their private Act.  He was of opinion that they were not liable for
damages, and that the rule must be made absolute.  Mr. Justice Blackburn
was of the contrary opinion; he thought the plaintiff had a right to his
verdict, and that the rule should be discharged.  Lord Chief Justice
Cockburn thought the defendants were not liable, and said that the rule
must be made absolute.  Rule absolute accordingly.  (_See_ June 9th,
1865.)


FEBRUARY.


8.--Died, aged 91, Mr. John Bennett, for many years resident in Norwich.
"The deceased wore a pigtail to the day of his death and was the last of
the old school in the city."

13.--It was announced that an attempt was being made to form a religious
order or brotherhood in Norwich, and that a house on Elm Hill, formerly
occupied by Mr. Elisha De Hague, had been purchased for conversion into a
monastery.  Shortly afterwards a party of five brethren, headed by "the
notorious Brother Ignatius," took up their quarters in the newly-acquired
premises, and, it was asserted, had the countenance, if not the active
support, of advanced High Churchmen in the city, under whose auspices at
this date lectures were delivered "in defence of Church principles," one
of the lecturers being the Rev. Dr. A. F. Littledale.  On February 24th,
the "Benedictine chapel," known as the "priory of St. Mary and Dunstan,"
was dedicated by Ignatius.  From this date scenes of disorder and riot
were of frequent occurrence in the neighbourhood of the monastery, and
directly and indirectly the existence of the confraternity gave rise to
several remarkable incidents.  During Easter week the "monks" made daily
visits to St. Lawrence' church, which had already been brought into
notoriety by the ritualistic practices of the rector, the Rev. E. A.
Hillyard.  There daily Communion was celebrated, and the brethren walking
in procession to and from the church were assailed and insulted by the
mob.  The protection of the police was demanded by Ignatius, and the
magistrates were frequently engaged in the hearing of cases of riot and
assault arising out of the proceedings at Elm Hill and St. Lawrence'.  A
spirit of unrest manifested itself in other directions.  On April 6th a
person calling himself the Baron De Camin, who stated that he was an
ex-priest of the Romish Church, delivered, at the Victoria Hall, St.
Andrew's, a lecture full of scurrilous and indecent observations.  A
scene of great tumult ensued; the gas was extinguished, and, under cover
of darkness, the "baron" escaped.  Another lecturer appeared on the 14th
and 15th, in the person of Signor (formerly Father) Allessandro Gavazzi,
who delivered orations at St. Andrew's Hall, on "Romish Encroachments at
Home" and "Garibaldi and Italy's Impending Future."  Whilst the High
Church party were taking an aggressive stand in the city, a section of
the Low Church party in the county, led by the Rev. W. Haslam, of
Buckenham, were seeking, under the name of "Revivalism," to introduce
Nonconformist methods into the services of the Church.  Meanwhile
official notice was taken of Mr. Hillyard's proceedings.  At a meeting of
the Board of Guardians, on April 28th, it was agreed, "That the Rev. E.
A. Hillyard having identified himself with certain persons calling
themselves monks, whom he has allowed to participate in the services of
his church, no longer holds the confidence of the Board, and is called
upon to resign his situation as chaplain of the Norwich Workhouse."  Mr.
Hillyard declined to vacate the office, and a deputation of the Board
waited upon the Bishop, who expressed strong disapproval of the reverend
gentleman's action.  A meeting of the parishioners of St. Lawrence'
passed a resolution on May 6th: "That this vestry views with grief and
indignation the manner in which Divine worship has been performed of
late, particularly as regards the dressing of the Communion table, and
the minister allowing persons calling themselves monks to take a
prominent part in the performance of the services."  The resolution was
numerously signed by the parishioners and presented to the Bishop.  St.
Gregory's church, during the incumbency of the Rev. W. B. Sharpe, became
a centre of ritualism, and on June 9th advantage was taken, on the
appointment of the new incumbent, the Rev. J. Wortley, to petition the
Archdeacon of Norwich to sanction the removal of "a floral cross and
other floral decorations from the chancel and the candlesticks from the
Communion table, of monograms and emblems recently painted on the chancel
steps, and of the curtains and drapery from the walls of the chancel, and
to order the restoration of the Commandments, the Belief, and the Lord's
Prayer in their place"; and the minister was requested "to discontinue
the weekly offering, as it was strongly objected to by many of the
parishioners."  On August 23rd Mr. Wortley announced that many of the
objectionable ornaments had been removed; and on August 27th it was
stated that the English Church Union had resolved to raise a special fund
to meet expenses that might be incurred by Mr. Smith, churchwarden, in
legally protesting against the action which had led to their removal.  On
June 27th a meeting of the supporters of the district schools of the
associated parishes of St. Peter Mancroft, St. John Maddermarket, St.
Gregory, St. Lawrence, and St. Margaret, resolved "That the Rev. E. A.
Hillyard had entirely forfeited the confidence of the committee, by
mixing himself up with certain persons calling themselves monks, and Mr.
Henry Browne finding it impossible, under the circumstances, to collect
subscriptions, had therefore refused to continue to act with Mr.
Hillyard, either as treasurer, secretary, or manager."  Mr. Hillyard upon
this decision severed his connection with the association, but refused to
accede to a request, signed by some of the leading clergy in Norwich and
Norfolk, on July 2nd, to discontinue his practices at St. Lawrence' or to
comply with the wishes of the Bishop.  On August 17th the Guardians
passed a resolution prohibiting his further attendance at the Workhouse;
and on October 25th Sir John Walsham, the Poor-Law Inspector for the
district, held an inquiry at the Guildhall into his conduct.  The
Poor-Law Board, on December 14th, intimated to the Guardians that they
had dismissed Mr. Hillyard from the chaplaincy.  The Elm Hill monastery
was closed in May, 1866, and the building work of a proposed new chapel
to be erected by Ignatius suspended.  (_See_ January 16th, 1869.)

22.--Died at Sidcup, Kent, in his 96th year, Mr. Edward Smyth, formerly
agent in Norwich of the Bank of England.  His early career was spent in
the Army.  He served at the fall of Seringapatam, in 1799, with the 25th
Light Dragoons, who, at Mullavelly, routed the cavalry of Tippoo Sahib,
thereby enabling Lord Harris to bring to a successful termination his
siege operations against that important fortress.  Mr. Smith afterwards
served with the Duke of Wellington in that Indian campaign which ended
with the famous battles of Assaye and Urgam.


MARCH.


8.--The agitation for the repeal of the Malt Tax was re-opened with
increased vigour at a large meeting of West Norfolk farmers, held at the
Town Hall, Lynn, under the presidency of the High Sheriff (Mr. H. Lee
Warner).  A resolution was passed affirming that the tax was unjust in
principle, utterly opposed to the Free Trade policy adopted on the repeal
of the Corn Laws, and most injurious to British farmers as producers of
barley.  Members of Parliament were urged to support its repeal.

9.--Sir Henry Stracey announced to the electors of Yarmouth his intention
of retiring from the representation of the borough.

10.--The Mayor of Yarmouth (Mr. R. Steward), who, for the fourth time,
had held that office, was presented with a piece of plate, valued at 200
gs., in appreciation of his public services and his private worth.


APRIL.


5.--The church of St. John Maddermarket, Norwich, was re-opened by the
Bishop of Norwich.  Extensive repairs and restoration had been carried
out, under the direction of Messrs. Elmslie, Franey, and Haddon, of
London, at the cost of 1,431.

9.*--"Col. Black, Chief Constable of the county, has accepted the command
of the Norwich Battalion of Volunteers, as offered him by the Lord
Lieutenant, on the retirement of Lieut.-Col. Brett."

22.--Died at his residence, Prince of Wales Road, Norwich, Mr. David
Hodgson, artist.  He was the son of Mr. Charles Hodgson.  "The names of
both father and son are connected with the list of local celebrities in
Art, in which may be included the names of Crome, Vincent, Stark, and
Joseph Stannard."  David Hodgson excelled in architectural subjects,
which he painted with great care and truthfulness of detail.

26.--The marriage of Viscount Powerscourt and Lady Julia Coke, eldest
daughter of the Earl and Countess of Leicester, was solemnised at St.
George's church, Hanover Square.

27.--The first meeting of the Norwich Geological Society was held under
the presidency of the Rev. J. Gunn, F.G.S.


MAY.


5.--The Bill for the projected East Norfolk Railway was considered before
a Committee of the House of Commons.  It was strongly opposed by the
Yarmouth Haven and Pier Commissioners, and by the North Walsham and
Dilham Canal Commissioners, as offering unfair competition with water
communication in that part of the county.  (_See_ October 18th, 1865.)

16.--Mr. Edmund Rosenthal's grand English opera and burlesque company
commenced an engagement at Norwich Theatre.  The _artistes_ included
Madame Haigh-Dyer, Miss Ada Taylor, Miss Hodgson, Miss Brooke, Miss
Alessandri, Miss Bronti, Miss Mills, Miss Shepherd, Miss Tempest, and
Miss Marian Taylor; Mr. W. Parkinson, Mr. J. Manley, Mr. Tempest, Mr.
Warden, Mr. Bentley, Mr. Melville, Mr. R. Arthur, Mr. Smith, Mr. Arnott,
Mr. Morgan, and Mr. Edmund Rosenthal.  The operas produced were
"Maritana," "Lucia di Lammermoor," &c., and the burlesque "Prince
Amabel."

19.--The Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, was sold by Messrs. Spelman, at the
Auction Mart, London, for the sum of 4,000.

24.--The Queen's birthday was observed at Norwich as a general holiday.
The 18th Hussars, the Norfolk Light Horse, the Artillery and Rifle
Volunteers, and the Cadet Corps were reviewed in Chapel Field; the
officers were entertained at luncheon at the Guildhall, and the
Volunteers at the Corn Hall; and at night the Mayor and Miss Springfield
gave a ball at St. Andrew's Hall.

30.--Died at his seat, Raveningham Hall, Sir Edmund Bacon, premier
baronet of England.  Born in 1779, he was the eldest son of the eighth
baronet, by Anne, eldest daughter of Sir William Beauchamp Proctor,
Bart., of Langley Park.  He was educated at Rugby, and succeeded to the
baronetcy in 1820.  In 1801 he married his cousin, Mary Anne Elizabeth,
daughter of Mr. Dashwood Bacon, of Ottery St. Mary, Devon, who died in
1820, leaving two sons and three daughters.  Sir Edmund served the office
of High Sheriff of Norfolk in 1826, and was a magistrate and
Deputy-Lieutenant for the county.  He was succeeded in his title and
estates by his nephew, a son of Mr. Nicholas Bacon, for many years
resident in Norwich.


JUNE.


2.--Died at his residence, Tombland, Norwich, Mr. Roger Kerrison, aged
61.  He had for some time been in ill-health, and five weeks before his
death, while superintending the cutting down of some timber, sustained a
fall and received a severe shock.  Mr. Kerrison was, in many respects, a
remarkable personage.  He was the son of Mr. Allday Kerrison, and was
educated for the law, a profession he continued to practise until his
decease, although a large accession of fortune on the death of his uncle,
Mr. Matthew Kerrison, of Ranworth, twenty years previously, had placed
him in independent circumstances.  Mr. Kerrison held several important
public appointments, but he was more widely known by reason of his
connection with the Norwich Triennial Musical Festival, of which he was
for some years the active honorary secretary.  In politics he was
Conservative, but by no means a prejudiced partisan, and he never
scrupled to act independently when he deemed it right to do so.  He was a
bachelor, and the bulk of his fortune went to his brother, Mr. Allday
Kerrison, a partner in the Crown Bank, Norwich.

3.--Died, in his 78th year, Mr. William Johnson Fox, for many years
member of Parliament for Oldham, and popularly known as "the Norwich
Weaver Boy."

7.--The 18th Hussars left Norwich for Shorncliffe, prior to their
embarkation for India.  This was the first regiment which departed from
the city by train.

8.--The annual show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was held at
Lynn, and was visited by upwards of 14,000 persons.  Mr. R. J. H. Harvey
was president for the year.

18.--Died, near Christchurch, New Zealand, aged 59, the Ven. Octavius
Mathias, Archdeacon of Akaron and formerly vicar of Horsford.  He was one
of the first to take an interest in the foundation of Canterbury
Cathedral, New Zealand, and was elected one of the capitular clergy.


JULY.


5.--A barque, named the Oriental, was launched from Mr. J. W. Rust's
shipyard at Yarmouth.  The vessel, which was intended for the China
trade, was 115 feet long, 24 feet beam, 15 ft. 8 inches in depth, and 320
tons burthen.

9.*--"An agreement has been entered into for the purchase, by the
Provincial Banking Corporation, of the business of the East of England
Bank, an unlimited joint stock bank established in 1836, with head office
at Norwich and branches at Yarmouth, Lynn, North Walsham, Fakenham, East
Dereham, Swaffham, Bungay, Halesworth, and Harleston, and agencies at
Wymondham, Wells, and Hingham."  The city was startled on the 20th by the
rumour that the Bank had suspended payment.  "On those who had accounts
at the Bank going to that establishment, the doors were found to be
closed, and a printed notice was exhibited in the windows to the effect
that the directors regretted to intimate that they were compelled to
suspend business.  Up to the hour of closing on the previous day the
directors, after having resolved to suspend payment, continued to receive
the money of unsuspecting customers."  A few days afterwards was issued a
statement, from which it appeared that the Bank's liabilities were
576,963 7s. 6d., and assets 453,256 5s. 3d., leaving a deficit of 123,707
2s. 3d.  Meetings of the shareholders were held, at which resolutions
were passed in favour of registering the company under the Companies Act,
1862, with the view to a voluntary winding up.  On August 13th it was
announced that the Provincial Banking Company had issued a circular to
the late customers of the Bank, stating "that being satisfied there was a
probability of the customers being paid in full, they had authorised the
branch managers at once to give credit to each customer of the East of
England Bank in his pass-book for the full amount of the balance due to
him on his current account with the East of England Bank."  Messrs.
Harveys and Hudsons, immediately after the issue of the circular, offered
like terms.  Dividends were, in due course, paid to the creditors of the
Bank.  In July, 1866, it was stated that the liquidators had announced "a
further dividend of 2s. 6d. in the pound, which will make 20s. in the
pound distributed, exclusive of interest, payment of which is postponed."

23.--Died at the Palace Hotel, Buckingham Gate, London, Admiral Bertie
Cornelius Cator, younger brother of Mr. John Cator, of Beckenham, Kent,
and of Woodbastwick.  He entered the Navy in 1800, under his uncle,
Captain Albemarle Bertie, and was actively employed early in his
professional career in the capture of privateers in the Mediterranean.
In 1810 he assisted at the taking of the Isle of France; commanded the
Actaeon on the coast of America in the attack on the enemy's barracks in
Lynn Haven Bay in 1813, and participated in various other services.
After gaining post rank, he was not employed afloat.  He accepted
retirement in 1846.

29.--Merton Park was the scene of great rejoicing, on the coming of age
of the Hon. Thomas de Grey.  Seven hundred cottagers and labourers were
entertained at dinner, and Lord and Lady Walsingham received a large
number of personal friends in a pavilion erected near the famous Merton
oak.  At luncheon Lord Ashburton proposed the health of Mr. de Grey,
which was drunk with great enthusiasm.  The day's festivities concluded
with a display of fireworks.  On the 30th Lord and Lady Walsingham gave a
ball to 150 tenants on the Merton estate, and on the 31st the celebration
ended with a servants' ball.


AUGUST.


26.--Two troops of the 16th Lancers arrived at Norwich Barracks.

28.--St. George's Brewery, Norwich, and 40 public-houses were offered for
sale by Messrs. Spelman.  Messrs. Youngs, Crawshay, and Youngs were the
purchasers, at the sum of 15,300.


SEPTEMBER.


11.--Died at Norwich, aged 81, Henry Drane, for thirty-six years
proprietor of the Telegraph coach.

19.--A prize-fight for 5 took place near Lynn, between Pooley Mace and
Grey.  Mace was declared the victor, after a contest which lasted 35
minutes.


OCTOBER.


4.--The Yarmouth Town Council, by a majority of 25 to 11, adopted the
Public House Closing Act, 1864.

8.--The first sod of the West Norfolk Junction Railway was turned by Miss
Ellen Simpson, daughter of Mr. Lightly Simpson, the chairman of the
company.  Many persons travelled to Heacham to take part in the
proceedings.  (_See_ January 8th, 1866.)

11.--Died, Captain Becher, "the well-known sportsman and father of
steeplechase riders, whose deeds in the pigskin some 30 years back have
immortalised him in the annals of that sport."  Captain Becher was born
in Norfolk, and was the son of a farmer, "who was very conspicuous as a
horseman and the last of the leather breeches school."

16.--A new screw steamer, the Ontario, 3,200 tons, Captain Brooklin, upon
her first voyage, from Shields to Alexandria, laden with coals and iron,
struck upon Happisburgh Sand.  Three steam tugs and the Caister lifeboat
proceeded to her assistance, and her cargo was thrown overboard, but
every effort made to get her off proved unavailing.  On the 17th the
weather became very threatening, and the lifeboat took off 56 coal
heavers, but the captain and officers and 86 of the crew determined to
remain with the vessel.  During the night the storm increased, and the
crew, apparently in great distress, sent up rockets and burned blue
lights.  The Yarmouth lifeboatmen were implored by the ship's agent, Mr.
Butler, to go to the ship, but in vain.  They refused to launch the
lifeboat unless they were paid from 400 to 500, saying that the steam
tugs had begun the work and had better finish it.  The Caister lifeboat
stood by the vessel, which, by the 20th, had so settled down that it was
hopeless to attempt to get her off.  On this day 68 of the crew left in a
lifeboat belonging to the steamer, but the captain and officers declined
to desert her.  They were, however, compelled to leave on the 22nd, when
she became a total wreck, and was offered for sale.  The original value
of the Ontario was 120,000.

21.--The church of St. Nicholas, Yarmouth, was opened after restoration,
at the cost of about 6,000.  The sermon was preached by the Bishop of
Oxford, and at the luncheon held subsequently, under the presidency of
the Mayor (Mr. R. Steward), the company included the Bishops of Norwich
and Oxford, the Bishop of British Columbia, Lord Sondes (High Steward of
the borough), and many other distinguished guests.


NOVEMBER.


9.--Mr. Charles Edward Tuck was elected Mayor, and Mr. Charles Jecks
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

9.--Died at Keswick, near Norwich, in his 90th year, Mr. Hudson Gurney.
He was the eldest son of Mr. Richard Gurney, who died at Keswick in 1811.
Educated by Dr. Thomas Young, of scientific celebrity, he became
connected early in life with the great banking firm of the Gurneys, of
which he was for many years senior partner, as well as with the noted
London brewery of Barclay and Co., his mother being the daughter and
heiress of Mr. David Barclay, of Youngbury, Herts.  In 1809 he married
Margaret, daughter of Robert Barclay, of Ury, descended from the
celebrated Barclay, the Apologist for the Quakers.  Mrs. Gurney died at
Keswick on December 16th, 1855.  In politics Mr. Gurney was, in many
respects, decidedly Conservative, though on some points he held opinions
more in accordance with the most advanced Liberalism, and, as a perfectly
independent member, allied himself to no party in particular.  His
Parliamentary career commenced in 1812, when he was elected for
Shaftesbury; from the year 1816 he represented Newport, Hants., in six
successive Parliaments.  In 1835 he served the office of High Sheriff for
the county of Norfolk.  He was a man of high literary attainments, and
was vice-president of the Society of Antiquaries, a Fellow of the Royal
and Linnaean Societies, vice-president of the Norwich Museum, the
Literary Institute, and of the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological
Society.  As an author his chief production was probably the beautiful
poem in English verse under the title of "Cupid and Psyche," a
mythological tale from the "Golden Ass" of Apuleius; in 1801 it had
reached a third edition, and was afterwards reprinted in Mr. Davenport's
"Poetical Register."  He also published, for private distribution, in
1843, a translation into English verse of the "Orlando Furioso" of
Ludovico Ariosto; and in 1847, in a letter to Mr. Dawson Turner, "Proofs
that Norwich, and not Caistor, was the Venta Icenorum."  In his latter
years, confined almost entirely to his own residence, "he reversed in his
hours the usual custom, amusing himself with his books and writings till
four or five o'clock in the morning, and, of course, rising comparatively
late in the day."  His estate, real and personal included, was valued at
1,200,000.

--The Lynn Town Council resolved to put an end to the absurd and
obnoxious impost known as "the Lady Mayoresses' Pin Money."  "For many
years the custom has prevailed in the town of the constables (who perform
no other duties) going round to all the inhabitants in October and
November and collecting from all who were foolish enough to pay it a kind
of blackmail, under the ridiculous title of the Lady Mayoresses' Pin
Money, pretending that it was legally payable under the charters, and
that those who did not pay would be summoned before the magistrates or
the County Court.  It appears that the custom has grown out of the
collection of fines for non-attendance at the Court Leet held annually by
the Mayor as Lord of the Manor; but for many generations past no such
attendance has been either any use or capable of enforcement.  The fines
have also completely lapsed, and those who collect the 'pin money' are
completely ignorant of its origin.  The pretence has been that the money
was to buy a piece of plate for the Mayoress, but in reality the greater
part of it has been appropriated by the collectors themselves, and of the
many pounds obtained not more than some fifty shillings annually found
its way into the borough fund."

12.*--"There appears to be some probability that the absurd system of
inspection of weights and measures at Lynn by a 'jury of headboroughs'
going round the town in a posse and discharging their functions in such a
manner that the innocent only are punished and the guilty easily escape
detection, is about to come to an end.  Several persons have refused to
admit the headboroughs on their premises, and others have declined to pay
the fines imposed on them by the 'jury'; and as the authority of this
jury is based on ancient charters of very doubtful legal force, and there
is no prospect of that authority being respected or enforced, the jury
have refused to be sworn in again on the Court Leet by which they are
appointed.  It may be hoped, therefore, that the farce has come to an
end, and that very shortly a proper and efficient officer will be
appointed under the provisions of the Weights and Measures Act."

14.--The newly-erected chancel of St. Mark's church, Lakenham, Norwich,
built at the cost of about 1,000, was consecrated by the Bishop of
Norwich.

24.--A severe gale occurred off the Norfolk coast.  Many shipping
casualties were reported.  The screw steamer William Hutt, 530 tons,
employed as a transport during the Crimean War, was lost off Yarmouth
with her crew of sixteen hands, whilst on a voyage from Sunderland to
London, with coals.


DECEMBER.


17.*--"Mr. Thomas W. Rutland, carpenter, West Wymer Street, Norwich, has
invented a very ingenious means of communication between the passengers
and guard in a railway train.  It has the additional advantage of acting
also as an extra break when required.  By its use a passenger can at once
communicate with both guard and driver, and at the same time a signal is
exhibited which shows from what carriage the alarm is given."

20.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, a communication
was received from the Dean and Chapter as to the giving up of their
interest in Mousehold Heath, with the view of enabling the Council to
convert the Heath into a people's park.

26.--The Christmas "burlesque and comic pantomime" produced at Norwich
Theatre was written by F. C. Burnand, and entitled, "Snowdrop, King
Bonbon, and the Seven Elves, or the Magic Mirror and the Fatal Sewing
Machine."  At Sanger's Circus, on the Castle Meadow, was produced "the
equestrian pantomime," entitled, "Jack the Giant Killer, or Harlequin and
the Fairies of the Crystal Fountain."  A great novelty at the Christmas
Fair was "the striking feature of a roundabout worked by a steam engine,
which at the same time turns a barrel organ."

30.--Died at Dunston, John Fish, aged 100 years and 10 months.



1865.


JANUARY.


2.--The Prince and Princess of Wales arrived at Holkham Park, on a visit
to the Earl and Countess of Leicester.  On the 3rd, 4th, and 5th his
Royal Highness shot over the estate, and on the latter date 2,000 head of
game was killed.  On the night of the 5th a distinguished company were
invited to a ball, given by the Earl and Countess; and on the morning of
the 6th the Prince and his noble host engaged in wildfowl shooting.
Their Royal Highnesses returned to Sandringham the same afternoon.

7.*--"Amongst the recent improvements in Norwich there are none to bear
comparison with the magnificent bank of Messrs. Harveys and Hudson, which
is now approaching completion by Messrs. Lucas, nor will there be one
which has been erected at so small a comparative cost.  The contract for
the new bank, of which Mr. P. Hardwicke is the architect, does not exceed
13,000."  The bank was opened for business on January 1st, 1866.

13.--The Prince of Wales visited Lord Walsingham, at Merton Hall, and
attended a meet of the West Norfolk Hunt.  On the 14th, after a day's
cover shooting, has Royal Highness returned to Sandringham, accompanied
by the Hon. T. de Grey.

31.--The agitation against the Malt Tax was re-opened this year at Lynn,
when a great meeting, convened by the West Norfolk Anti-Malt Tax
Association, was held at the Town Hall, under the presidency of the High
Sheriff (Mr. H. Lee Warner).  On February 4th, at a preliminary meeting
held at the Swan Hotel, Norwich, presided over by Mr. Clare Sewell Read,
the farmers of East Norfolk formed a similar association, and at a public
meeting which took place on February 18th, Sir Henry Stracey was elected
president, Mr. Robert Gillett treasurer, and Mr. G. H. Murrell secretary.
Many petitions were signed in the district in favour of the repeal of the
tax.


FEBRUARY.


3.--A meeting of the inhabitants was held at the Corn Hall, Yarmouth, "to
take into consideration the provisions of the Haven and Port Bill, and to
determine whether the scheme should be supported or opposed in
Parliament."  This Bill was intended to supersede the functions of the
Haven Commissioners and to protect the shipowners and fishermen, but
great opposition was raised against it by the class in whose interests it
was avowedly framed.  The Norwich Town Council, at a meeting on March
21st, decided to oppose the measure.  A Committee of the House of
Commons, by whom the Bill was considered, on March 30th unanimously
resolved that, "in the absence of unanimity of feeling among the parties
affected, including the town of Yarmouth itself, it is not expedient to
pass the preamble of the Bill."  It was, therefore, thrown out.  (_See_
April 30th, 1866.)


MARCH.


6.--The respective merits of the new iron ploughs introduced by Messrs.
Ransomes and Sims, of Ipswich, and of the common Norfolk plough, were
tested on Messrs. Salter's farm at Attleborough.  "In their lightness and
symmetry the former presented a strong contrast.  The Norfolk plough drew
nearly half as heavy again as the iron ploughs, or in the proportion of 3
to 2 in the shallow work, and in the deep work one quarter heavier, or in
the proportion of 4 to 5."

10.--A remarkable incident occurred at Lakenham church.  A wedding had
been arranged, and the Rev. C. Baldwin, of St. Stephen's, Norwich, had
promised, with the approbation of the vicar, the Rev. A. Pownall, to
officiate.  When the wedding party arrived at Lakenham, they found the
church closed.  An entrance was effected, but the vestry was locked, and
neither surplice nor books were provided for the clergyman.  "It was
suggested that a sheet should be borrowed, and the Rev. Mr. Baldwin,
habited in this novel vestment, proceeded to unite the parties in the
bonds of matrimony, and after having sent to the clergyman's house for
the parish registers, the happy couple were at length enabled to proceed
on their wedding trip.  Mr. Pownall, who was himself the cause of the
whole difficulty, having forgotten to inform the clerk of the forthcoming
ceremony, issued the following extraordinary handbill:--'Lakenham church.
A solemn service will be held on Friday, the 24th inst., to avert the
wrath of Almighty God and to deprecate His righteous judgments in
consequence of the profanation of His sanctuary on Monday last . . .
Ezekiel v., 11.'"  The incident gave rise to much comment.

15.--A great fire occurred at Frazer's sawmills, near St.
Martin-at-Palace church, Norwich, and resulted in the loss of about 4,000
worth of property.

18.--Died at North Walsham, Mary Doughty, aged 101 years.

28.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Lord Chief Justice Cockburn, was
tried a remarkable action for assault, false imprisonment, and malicious
prosecution.  The plaintiff, Mr. Albert Pell (son of Sir Albert Pell, of
Northamptonshire), with his brother, while on a visit to Yarmouth,
crossed the fields of the defendant, Mr. Mayes Wigg, at Caister.  They
had with them a Skye terrier, and defendant, alleging that they were
poaching, gave them into the custody of a policeman, who, after detaining
them at his cottage, took them before a magistrate at Thrigby.  The
charge was dismissed, whereupon the present action was commenced.  The
jury found for the plaintiff on the first count, charging assault and
false imprisonment, and awarded damages 5; and for defendant on the
second count, charging malicious prosecution.


APRIL.


4.--Died at Yarmouth, Mr. George Danby Palmer, aged 77.  In early life
Mr. Palmer was an active supporter of the Tory party, but previous to the
passing of the Reform Bill he adopted Liberal principles, and after the
introduction of the Municipal Reform Act became decidedly Radical.  He
was the oldest member of the borough Bench, and a justice of the peace
for the county.  "Possessed of large property, he lavished his wealth
with unsparing hand upon those whom he deemed worthy of his assistance,
but as it was rendered so unobtrusively, with the exception of the
recipients of his bounty, the world was not aware of his generosity.  He
was a straightforward Englishman, and was greatly lamented by all classes
in Yarmouth."

17.--The English Grand Opera Company, under the management of Mr. G. B.
Loveday, commenced an engagement at Norwich Theatre.  Madame Haigh-Dyer,
Miss Annie Kemp, Miss Ada Taylor, Mr. Brookhouse Bowler, Mr. Grantham,
Mr. E. Connell, Mr. Oliver Summers, and Mr. Henry Rowland were the
principal _artistes_, and the works produced included "Faust," "Dinorah,"
"The Crown Diamonds," "Lucrezia Borgia," "The Lady of Lyons" (burlesque),
"Satanella," and "Norma."


MAY.


17.--The Snettisham Hall estate of 2,600 acres and a rental of 3,600 was
offered for sale at Garraway's.  The highest bid was 99,000, and the
reserve was declared at 130,000.

20.--In the Court of Queen's Bench, the action, le Strange _v._ Rowe,
which raised an important question as to sea-shore rights, came on for
hearing.  The defendant was proceeded against for taking shingle, sand,
and shell-fish from the sea shore in the manor of Snettisham, belonging
to the plaintiff.  About twenty special pleas were set up by the
defendant and demurred to in point of law, on the broad ground that there
could not be in law any such rights as alleged, "either in all the
subjects of the realm or by Royal grant or by custom or by prescription
in inhabitants or occupiers."  The Court deferred judgment, and
ultimately referred the case to the Norfolk Assizes for decision as to
questions of fact.  At Norwich, on August 4th, the case was adjourned to
enable the plaintiff to amend the declarations.  The case came before
Lord Chief Justice Erle at the Norfolk Assizes on August 13th, 1866, when
the jury returned a verdict for the plaintiff, damages one shilling.  In
the Court of Queen's Bench, on May 28th, 1867, application was made for a
new trial, on the ground of misdirection and that the verdict was given
for the plaintiff against the weight of evidence.  The application was
refused.

23.--An earthquake shock was distinctly felt along the coast from
Scratby, on the north of Yarmouth, to Lowestoft, on the south.

24.--The Queen's birthday was observed as a general holiday at Norwich.
A detachment of the 16th Lancers and the Volunteers were reviewed in
Chapel Field, and fired a _feu de joie_ in the Market Place; the Mayor
gave a luncheon at the Guildhall, and the Volunteers were entertained at
the Corn Hall.  The Mayor's ball took place in the evening, at St.
Andrew's Hall.

27.--Considerable opposition was manifested, not only by the villagers,
but by the citizens of Norwich, to an attempt made by Capt. Bellairs to
enclose Mulbarton Common.  A meeting was held in the village, at which a
strong protest was made against the proposal, and it was asserted that if
ever the ancestors of Capt. Bellairs had possessed the power to effect
the enclosure, they had allowed their rights to lapse.


JUNE.


2.--The detachment of the 16th Lancers, _en route_ to India, marched from
the Cavalry Barracks, Norwich, accompanied to the city boundary by the
officers and band of the Norfolk Light Horse Volunteers.

7.--Mr. A. Dennison, brother of the Speaker of the House of Commons,
visited Norwich, for the purpose of hearing the bells of St. Peter
Mancroft.  "He rang the tenor in good style, and was highly delighted
with the quality of tone of this far-famed peal of twelve."

9.--In the Court of the Queen's Bench, application was made in the
action, the Queen _v._ the Middle Level Commissioners, for a rule calling
upon them to show cause why a mandamus should not issue commanding them
to make and maintain a bridge with a commodious road or hailing path in
the place formerly occupied by their sluice which was destroyed in the
great inundation in 1862.  A rule was granted.  (_See_ January 7th,
1867.)

13.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, a report was
received from Mr. Bazalgette, C.E., who had visited Norwich with the view
of determining what steps could be taken for the immediate purification
of the river Wensum in the vicinity of the city.  He stated that it would
be impossible to render the river pure so long as it continued to be a
receptacle for the town refuse; and he had examined the city and suburbs
to ascertain how to improve the drainage and to dispose of the sewage.
The time would come, he added, when a drainage scheme would be urgently
necessary, and very costly.  The Council authorised the Sanitary and
River Committees to expend a sum not exceeding 50 in obtaining levels and
plans and other information required by Mr. Bazalgette, "to assist him in
the preparation of his scheme for diverting the drainage from the river."
On October 17th Mr. Bazalgette's scheme was laid before the Council.  It
provided for two intercepting sewers, one for the higher and the other
for the lower parts of the city, both forming a junction on the opposite
side of the river near Trowse Station, whence the sewage would be
conveyed to a point on Mr. Harvey's estate at Crown Point, to the east of
the old Whitlingham Road.  The plan also comprised the completion of the
drainage of the western part of the city, then unconnected with the main
sewers.  For the first part of the scheme 50,000 was required, and for
the latter 30,000.  On October 31st the Council adopted a recommendation
of the Sanitary and River Committees, that it was desirable to try more
fully the possibility of cleansing the river by flushing and sluicing or
otherwise before proceeding to carry out Mr. Bazalgette's report; that
the City Engineer be instructed accordingly; and that immediate steps be
taken to improve the drainage on the south side of the city, at a cost
not exceeding 10,000.  (_See_ April 21st, 1866.)

15.--The first two-days' show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association
commenced in Chapel Field, Norwich.  The society's dinner was held at the
Royal Hotel, and was presided over by the Marquis Townshend.

17.--Died at Elm Lodge, near Hampton, Lord Charles FitzRoy, second son of
the fourth Duke of Grafton.  His lordship was born on February 28th,
1791, and married, in 1825, Anne, eldest daughter of George Augustus
Henry, first Earl of Burlington.  Lord Charles was at the battle of
Corunna, and served in the Walcheren Expedition with the Guards.  In 1811
he joined Lord Hill's staff, and was present at the siege and capture of
Badajoz, and at the battles of Vittoria, Pyrenees, Nivelle, Nive, Othes,
Toulouse, and Waterloo, and received the war medal with eight clasps.
For two years he served with the army of occupation in France.  His
lordship sat in Parliament, as member for Thetford, from 1818 till the
passing of the Reform Bill, and at the General Election which ensued was
elected for Bury, in the Liberal interest.  He was Vice-Chancellor of the
Household from 1835 to 1839, and was also appointed a Privy Councillor.
In four successive Parliaments he represented Bury, and resigned his seat
in 1847.


JULY.


1.--The 5.30 p.m. express from London to Norwich had a narrow escape.  On
reaching a portion of the line near Harford Bridges, the engine, on
running down the incline, left the metals, and, tearing up the permanent
way for some distance, stopped on the wooden bridge which crosses the
Yare a little below Old Lakenham.  "One of the carriages was overturned,
and the occupants, among whom was Lord Stafford, had to make their escape
by climbing through the windows which were then uppermost."  None of the
passengers were seriously hurt.

7.--At a Liberal meeting held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, certain
accusations founded upon letters received from Mr. John Bright, M.P.,
were made against Mr. Robert Edmond Chester Waters, one of the
Conservative candidates for the representation of the city.  The
principal charges were that Mr. Waters (previously a Liberal) had been
compelled to resign his membership of the Reform Club for cheating at
cards, and that while he came before the Norwich electors as a Protestant
Churchman, in Rome he professed to be a Roman Catholic.  Mr. Waters
declared these statements to be scandalous and false; and on the 8th
announced that he had authorised legal proceedings to be taken against
Sir William Foster and the Rev. George Gould for making imputations on
his personal character.  On the 10th a deputation, consisting of Messrs.
H. S. Patteson, Edward Field, D. Dalrymple, and J. H. Tillett, proceeded
to London to investigate at the Reform Club the truth of the allegations,
and in the course of the day the following telegram was received
simultaneously by Sir Samuel Bignold and Sir William Foster: "We have the
minutes.  They have been produced before us, and we find that it is true
that Mr. Waters was accused of cheating at cards at the Reform Club, and
unanimously called upon by the committee to resign to prevent expulsion,
and further that he did, on receiving that communication, resign on the
23rd November, 1860."  The telegram was dated from the Reform Club, and
signed by the deputation.  In consequence of the telegram, Messrs. Fred
Brown, J. B. Morgan, F. E. Watson, and Henry Ling issued a notice stating
that they felt it their duty to withdraw their support from Mr. Waters as
one of the candidates for the city.  Mr. Waters thereupon stated that he
would stand independently.  The nomination took place at the Guildhall on
the 11th.  The other candidates were Sir William Russell and Mr. Edward
Warner, Liberals; and Mr. Augustus Goldsmid, Conservative.  The polling
took place on the 12th, and was officially declared on the 13th, as
follows:--Russell, 1,845; Warner, 1,838; Goldsmid, 1,466; Waters, 1,363.
Mr. Waters, who was exceedingly popular with what the NORFOLK CHRONICLE
described as "the lower order of Conservatives," made a return visit to
Norwich on October 10th, and was escorted by a torchlight procession
round the city.  Thirty thousand people assembled in the Market Place,
the bells of St. Peter Mancroft were rung, and the late candidate, after
making a complimentary call upon Sir Samuel Bignold, proceeded to the
Norfolk Hotel and addressed from the window a dense crowd assembled in
St. Giles' Street.  On the 11th he was entertained at dinner by the Eldon
Club; and at St. Andrew's Hall, on the 12th, was received with the utmost
enthusiasm by a crowded audience.  Mr. Waters, who was accompanied by
Lord Henry Thynne and Sir Alfred Slade, was presented with a massive
silver epergne, "by a very large number of the Conservatives of Norwich,
as an expression of their cordial sympathy and regard, and in
appreciation of the gallant and chivalrous spirit in which, under
difficulties unprecedented, he fought the battle of the Conservative
cause loyally, courteously, and fearlessly at the Parliamentary election
for Norwich, 1865."  A "testimonial dinner" was given to Mr. Waters at
the Norfolk Hotel on the evening of the 13th, when the Norwich
Conservative Association was inaugurated.  Upwards of 100 members were at
once enrolled, and on the 14th Sir Samuel Bignold, in response to the
request of a deputation, accepted the presidency.

8.--A meeting of the independent electors of East Norfolk was held at the
Swan Hotel, Norwich, for the purpose of selecting a candidate to contest
the constituency in the interests of the supporters of the movement for
the repeal of the Malt Tax.  Mr. Clare Sewell Read, who had been for some
time prominently identified with the party in favour of the repeal, was
unanimously chosen.  Mr. Jacob Henry Tillett attended the meeting and
made a remarkable speech.  If Mr. Read were nominated, he said, he would
help him to the utmost of his power; and he added, "If you want money, if
you want help, if you want what enthusiasm I can put into the cause, let
your chairman write to me and I will respond with all my heart."  The
nomination took place at the Shirehall on the 15th.  Several times the
proceedings were stayed and consultations held by the leaders of the
respective parties, with the view of effecting a compromise.  The
candidates nominated were Mr. Edward Howes, Sir Thomas Beauchamp, and
Col. Coke.  Mr. Robert Leamon offered not to proceed with the nomination
of Mr. Read if the Liberal party would pledge themselves to return to
Parliament a Malt Tax repealer; in the absence of that assurance he
nominated Mr. Read, whose candidature was seconded by Mr. H. S. Grimmer.
It was subsequently agreed by the friends of Mr. Howes to permit the name
of Mr. Read to appear upon the election cards and posters issued by the
former.  The poll was opened on the 18th, and was officially declared on
the 20th, as follows:--Howes, 3,100; Read, 2,985; Beauchamp, 2,150; Coke,
1,994

11.--The nomination of candidates for the representation of Yarmouth was
held at the Town Hall.  Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., and Mr. J. Goodson,
Conservatives, and Mr. Philip Vanderbyl and Mr. Brogden, liberals, were
nominated.  The polling took place on the 12th, and resulted as
follows:--Lacon 828; Goodson, 784; Brogden, 634; Vanderbyl, 589.  (_See_
March 20th, 1866.)

11.--At Thetford, the Hon. Alexander Hugh Baring and Mr. Robert John
Harvey Harvey, Conservatives, and Mr. Thomas Dakin (Alderman of London
and Sheriff of Middlesex), Liberal, were nominated to represent the
borough.  The poll, on the 12th, resulted as follows:--Harvey, 193;
Baring, 137; Dakin, 69.

12.--Lord Stanley and the Hon. Frederick Walpole, Conservatives, and Sir
T. Fowell Buxton, Liberal, were nominated for the representation of
King's Lynn.  The polling, on the 13th, resulted in the return of Lord
Stanley, 445 votes, and Sir T. Fowell Buxton, 401 votes.  Mr. Walpole
polled 339 votes.

--Died at Herne Bay, aged 43 years, Mr. Samuel Peckworth Woodward, Ph.D.,
F.G.S., assistant in the Geological Department of the British Museum, and
second son of Mr. Samuel Woodward, of Norwich.  He was a member of
several learned societies, and in 1845 was appointed professor of botany
and geology at the Royal Agricultural College.

19.--The nomination of candidates for West Norfolk took place at
Swaffham.  The Conservatives were Mr. William Bagge and the Hon. T. de
Grey (the latter strongly opposed as "an excessive game preserver"); and
the Liberals, Sir Willoughby Jones, Bart. (Conservative member for
Cheltenham in 1847), and Mr. Brampton Gurdon.  The poll was opened on the
22nd, and the following was the result: Bagge, 2,710; de Grey, 2,611;
Jones, 2,133; Gurdon, 2,088.  A petition against the return of the
successful candidates was dismissed, owing to informality in the
recognisances.  Great disturbances took place at Swaffham, for which
several persons were punished at the ensuing Quarter Sessions.  Mr. de
Grey, on his return to Merton, on the 24th, was most enthusiastically
received at Watton and other places on the route.

26.--The comic singer Vance--"the Great Vance"--made his first appearance
in Norwich at St. Andrew's Hall.  "He is the original singer of the
absurd 'Slap Bang,' and has better recommendations, but the judicious
portion of the audience could not see enough in him to explain the great
success he has achieved in the Metropolis."


AUGUST.


5.--A reminiscence of the old convict days was forthcoming in a case
tried before Lord Chief Baron Pollock at the Norfolk Assizes.  Cornelius
Bradnum, a fruit dealer, was indicted for being feloniously and
unlawfully at large at Heckingham on February 6th, 1865, "he having been
transported for the term of his natural life, in pursuance of a certain
judgment against him at the Norfolk Assizes on July 21st, 1847, on an
indictment for burglary."  The prisoner, in his defence, made a
remarkable statement, to the effect that in consequence of his having
given information of an intended mutiny of the convicts at Gibraltar, his
sentence was mitigated to fifteen years.  From Gibraltar he was sent to
Swan River, Western Australia, where the Governor gave him his ticket of
leave, and after "serving his ticket" he received a free pardon.  He then
went to Callao, in Peru.  One evening, when standing on the Mole, he was
kidnapped, put upon an American ship, and brutally ill-used and crippled.
Sixty-five dollars had been paid for him, but as he was useless he was
put ashore at Hamburgh, whence, after remaining some time in hospital, he
came to England.  Unfortunately, he had left at Callao the document
conveying to him his free pardon.  The prosecution denied that a free
pardon had been granted.  His lordship said it was for the prosecution to
show that the prisoner's statement was untrue, after using that statement
against him as evidence.  The statement must be taken as true until it
was contradicted.  It had not been contradicted, and, he added, turning
to the jury, "It is for you to say whether you believe it or not.  I must
say I don't see why you should not believe it, and why he is not entitled
to a verdict of not guilty."  The jury acquitted the prisoner.

5.--A large meeting of agriculturists was held at the Swan Hotel,
Norwich, for the purpose of considering what steps should be taken to
combat "a disease known as the Russian murrain, which had broken out
among the cattle of Norfolk."  Mr. Clare Sewell Read, M.P., presided,
and, in the course of the proceedings, alarming reports were given of the
spread of the contagion and of the immediate steps that were necessary to
arrest its progress.  A deputation, consisting of Mr. Read, Mr. Steeds,
Mr. W. Smith, and Mr. R. Leamon, was appointed to wait upon the Home
Office, and at a committee meeting on the 9th Mr. Read reported what had
taken place.  It was resolved, on the motion of Sir Thomas Beauchamp, who
headed the list with a donation of 100, that a public subscription be
opened at once, and Professor Simonds, in a long address, showed that the
disease was of foreign importation, and was known in Russia, whence it
came, as rinderpest.  At this meeting it was reported that in the
neighbourhood of North Walsham alone losses to the extent of 1,000 and
upwards had been sustained.  Isolation of the herds and the slaughter of
diseased animals were the means advocated for stamping out the murrain.
A Norfolk Cattle Plague Association was at once formed, and at a large
and influential meeting, held at St. Andrew's Hall on the 12th, under the
presidency of Mr. Read, whose great services at this crisis were
acknowledged by the Earl of Leicester, resolutions were adopted (1)
recommending to the consideration of the public the means suggested by
Professor Simonds for dealing with the disease, and urging that no farmer
should purchase any store stock in any market for the period of six
weeks; (2) that a subscription be entered into for the purpose of meeting
the losses sustained by those who should conform to the resolutions drawn
up by the committee, and for defraying the expenses incurred in carrying
out the objects of the meeting; and (3) that no person who did not
subscribe to the amount of twopence in the pound on his assessment should
participate in the relief.  At this meeting the Earl of Leicester
contributed a donation of 500.  Meetings of the Cattle Plague Association
were then held weekly, reports were presented upon the state of the
disease in various parts of the county, and matters of detail received
attention.  On October 21st a public meeting was held at St. Andrew's
Hall, under the presidency of the Earl of Leicester, "to consider the
desirability of closing all markets in the county of Norfolk."  Sir
Thomas Beauchamp moved, and the Earl of Albemarle seconded, a resolution
in favour of the adoption of this course, which was agreed to.  During
this month Mr. Read was appointed a member of the Royal Commission to
inquire into the causes of cattle plague and to suggest remedies.  The
Commission recommended the slaughter of animals and the stringent
prohibition of the passage of cattle across public roads, &c.  At Norwich
and elsewhere there were frequent magisterial proceedings against dealers
and others for contravention of the Orders of Council; medical men and
veterinary surgeons suggested many remedies for the disease, and quacks
advertised their nostrums, but the end of the year found the fatal
rinderpest more rampant than ever.  Science seemed confounded by the
insidious character of the outbreak, and precautionary measures appeared
to be vain to prevent its extension.  It was officially announced that
from September 6th to December 20th compensation had been given in
respect of 1,486 animals, to the amount of 9,448 3s. 11d.  (_See_
February 23rd, 1866.)

8.--A barque named the Edgar, of 600 tons burthen, built by Messrs.
Fellows and Son, for the South American trade, was launched from their
shipyard at Southtown, Great Yarmouth.

11.--The Earl of Leicester issued to the tenants on his estate an
address, in which he referred to an election circular sent out to them
during his absence in Norway, the spirit of which he described as "a
flagrant contradiction of the principles and practices that have been
professed and followed on the Holkham estate for nearly a century."  His
lordship had counselled not coercion in any form, but the adoption of
every legitimate measure to achieve the return of Mr. Gurdon and Sir
Willoughby Jones at the West Norfolk election; but the zeal of his agent
(Mr. Shellabear) in carrying out instructions which were only indicated
and not given in detail led him to issue a circular which had caused much
scandal, the impolicy and unfittingness of which no one now saw more
clearly than his lordship himself.

12.--Died at Kew, Sir William Jackson Hooker, K.H., F.R.S., F.L.S., &c.,
Regius Professor of Botany in the University of Glasgow.  Sir William was
a native of Norwich, where his father, Mr. Joseph Hooker, a manufacturer,
took much interest in horticulture, and possessed a rich collection of
succulent and other exotics.  Hooker spent some of his earlier years in
the study of agriculture with Mr. Robert Paul, of Starston Hall, but the
death of a relative enabled him to devote himself to his favourite
pursuit, natural history.  With his brother, Mr. Joseph Hooker, the Rev.
James Brown, and other naturalists, he thoroughly explored the rich
district of the Norfolk Broads in the study of ornithology.  He was the
author of several works, and editor of the "Botanical Magazine."
Resigning the appointment of Regius Professor for the curatorship of the
Royal Gardens at Kew, he received the honour of knighthood in 1835, and
in 1845 had conferred upon him the degree of D.C.L. by the University of
Oxford.  He married a daughter of Mr. Dawson Turner, of Yarmouth.  His
eldest son, Dr. Hooker, F.L.S., was no less distinguished than his father
for his valuable works in natural history and for the scientific
explorations with which his name was associated.

13.--Died at Southwell, the Ven. Archdeacon Wilkins, D.D.  He was born at
Norwich in 1785, and was the youngest son of Mr. William Wilkins, F.S.A.,
and brother of the Professor of Architecture in the Royal Academy.
Educated at the Grammar School, Bury St. Edmund's, under the
headmastership of Becher, he entered Caius College, Cambridge, in 1803,
and having received his degree, removed to Oxford to prosecute his
favourite study of divinity.  He was ordained at Norwich in 1808, and was
ultimately presented to the vicarage of St. Mary's, Nottingham, where he
ministered single-handed to a population of 28,000.  He was the author of
"A History of the Destruction of Jerusalem," and of several other works.

18.--A sculling match, known as the "Great Lynn Sweepstakes," was
contested over the Ouse championship course in the Eau Brink Cut, a
distance of 3,300 yards.  The competitors were Robert Chambers, champion
of the Tyne and ex-champion of the Thames; Harry Kelley, who just
previously had wrested the championship of the Thames from his formidable
North country rival; and Robert Cooper, of Newcastle.  The sweepstakes
amounted to 50, with 100 added by the Lynn Regatta Committee.  The
conditions provided that if three competed the winner should receive 200
and the second man 50, and if only two came to the post a first prize of
200 only would be given.  The race lay between Cooper and Kelley alone.
The former kept a slight lead, and as Kelley's efforts to pass him were
unavailing, he rowed past the winning-post a quarter of a length ahead.
The referee decided that Kelley had won, disqualified Cooper on the
ground that he had taken the other man's water, and awarded second prize
to Chambers.  At a meeting presided over by the Mayor of Lynn (Mr. W.
Monement), a protest was lodged by Cooper's backers against the second
prize being awarded to Chambers.  The Mayor decided to withhold the
second prize until the referee had been communicated with, and handed to
Kelley a cheque for 200.  Cooper's protest was ultimately disallowed.

26.--The 13th Hussars, with headquarters, arrived at Norwich Cavalry
Barracks.


SEPTEMBER.


8.--A prize-fight took place on Grimstone Common, between Pooley Mace and
a man named Rackaby.  After five rounds had been contested, the police
stopped hostilities, and Rackaby's party declining to resume the fight,
the stakes were awarded to Mace.

30.--Died at Clive House, Beckenham, Kent, in his 71st year, Lieut.-Col.
Henry Alexander, 96th Foot.  He was born at Caister, and entered the Army
as ensign in the 28th Foot in June, 1811.  He received the war medal with
six clasps for Vittoria, Pyrenees, Nivelle, Nive, Orthes, and Toulouse.


OCTOBER.


3.--The first Church Congress commenced at Norwich.  The Congress sermon
was preached at the Cathedral by the Archbishop of York, and the first
general meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, presided over by the
Bishop of Norwich.  The final meeting took place on the afternoon of the
5th, after which the members of Congress attended luncheon, given at the
new bank by Mr. R. J. H. Harvey, M.P.  Two thousand guests were present.
On the morning of the 6th, the Bishop of Oxford preached the annual
sermon at the Cathedral on behalf of the Five Religious Societies.

9.--Died at the house of Mrs. Church, Lady Lane, Norwich, Bartholomew
Gattey, "the eccentric but clever flute-player at the Theatre Royal."
For forty years he had scarcely been absent from his place in the
orchestra of the theatres in the Norwich circuit, "a position to which he
fondly clung, in spite of many most favourable offers of engagement that
were made to him, and which, if accepted, would, no doubt, have resulted
in his obtaining a position in the musical world of honour and emolument.
At length a mind never very strong gave way, and he was obliged to have
recourse to the assistance of his friends.  Mr. Hewlett and other
gentlemen got up a concert for him in December, 1863, and 50 was
realised, which, with Mr. Gattey's simple habits, was sufficient for his
maintenance until his death."  He was a son of Mr. Gattey, a yarn
manufacturer, and a native of Norwich, and had attained his 64th year.

14.*--"Died at his residence, Bury St. Edmund's, Mr. Frederick Ladbrooke,
portrait painter.  The deceased was the youngest son of the late Mr.
Robert Ladbrooke, one of the founders of the celebrated Society of
Norfolk and Norwich Artists.  He was a painter of considerable power."

18.--The ceremony of cutting the first sod of the East Norfolk Railway
was performed on the estate of Mr. C. Jecks, Sheriff of Norwich, by Lady
Suffield, in the presence of a large number of spectators.  In the
evening a dinner, attended by representatives of most of the principal
families in the county, was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, in
celebration of the event.  Lord Suffield presided.  (_See_ August 13th,
1870.)

21.*--"The Queen has been pleased to grant to Edward John Stracey, of
Sprowston, Lieut.-Colonel of the Scots Fusilier Guards, her Royal licence
and authority that he and his issue may, in compliance with a clause
contained in the last will and testament of James Clitherow, take and use
the name of Clitherow in addition to that of Stracey."

25.--A new lifeboat, named the James Pearce, was launched at Yarmouth.
It was built at the cost of 350, subscribed by the artisans of
Birmingham, and presented through the Royal National Lifeboat Institution
to the Caister station.

30.--Died at Hilgay, aged 110 years (as was originally stated), Mr. John
Naylor, formerly landlord of the Crown Hotel, Downham Market.  An amended
notice, published on November 18th, says: "The late Mr. John Naylor, who
died on the 30th ult., and was supposed by his eldest son to be _only_
110 years of age, appears from the parish register of Welney to be 117,
he having been born on the 29th of May, 1748.  In 1825 the deceased
retired from his business as a publican, he having kept the Crown at
Downham and the George and Dragon at Hilgay in succession, and had since
lived on a small property of his own in the latter village.  He was
always a smart, active man, and constant in taking his walk up to
October, 1860.  Since that time he had been confined to his house, but
used to sit up in his chair for some portion of the day until June, 1864,
when he did so for the last time.  His sight had failed him, but his
hearing was so good that he could distinguish the voices of his friends,
and he was rational until within six weeks of his death."


NOVEMBER.


1.--Died of apoplexy, at his residence, Acton Green, Middlesex, John
Lindley, F.R.S., Ph.D., and formerly Professor of Botany at University
College.  He was born at Catton, near Norwich, in 1799, and was the son
of a nurseryman.  His first literary effort, after devoting much of his
early youth to the practical details of botany, was the translation of
Richard's "Analyse de Fruit" from the French, and the contribution of
some papers to the Transactions of the Linnaean Society.  Afterwards he
proceeded to London, where he was engaged by Mr. Loudon to assist in the
production of the "Encyclopaedia of Plants."  In 1832 he published his
"Introduction to Systematic and Physiological Botany," but his _chef
d'oeuvre_ was the "Vegetable Kingdom."  For more than a quarter of a
century Dr. Lindley filled the chair of Botany at University College,
London, and in 1860 was appointed examiner in the University of London.
He was a member of several learned bodies, and edited the horticultural
department of the "Gardeners' Chronicle" from its commencement in
January, 1841, to the time of his death.

7.--Lord Hastings, master of the East Norfolk Foxhounds, was presented
with his portrait in oil, subscribed for by 400 gentlemen of the Hunt.
The portrait was painted by Mr. Eddis, and his lordship was depicted in
hunting dress, mounted on Archer, his favourite hunter.  Sir Willoughby
Jones, Bart., made the presentation, on behalf of the subscribers.

8.--The Marquis and Marchioness Townshend, whose marriage had taken place
a few weeks previously, were welcomed with great enthusiasm on their
return to Rainham, and were presented by the tenantry with a handsome
silver epergne.

9.--Mr. William Peter Nichols was elected Mayor, and Mr. William Jary
Cubitt appointed Sheriff of Norwich.


DECEMBER.


2.--Died at Necton Hall, Colonel William Mason.  He was the head of an
old county family, whose head, Paul Miller Mason, a citizen of London,
built Necton Hall in the time of Henry VII.  Col. Mason served the office
of High Sheriff in 1849, was for many years a chairman of Quarter
Sessions at Swaffham, and was Lieut.-Colonel of the East Norfolk Militia.

4.--The Prince and Princess of Wales left Sandringham, on a visit to Lord
and Lady Suffield, at Gunton Park.  Their Royal Highnesses travelled by
special train from Wolferton to Lynn and thence to East Dereham, where
they were received by Lord Suffield, Viscount Hamilton, and the Hon.
Harbord Harbord.  A guard of honour was formed by the 15th Norfolk
Volunteer Company, under the command of Capt. Bulwer, and their Royal
Highnesses, entering a carriage drawn by four greys, proceeded along
Norwich Road and the Market Place.  Three triumphal arches were erected
in the town, which was handsomely decorated, guns were fired, and the
church bells rung, and in the evening there was a display of fireworks.
After leaving Dereham, the Royal visitors proceeded by way of Swanton,
Bylaugh, and Bawdeswell to Reepham, where the Aylsham Volunteers,
commanded by Capt. Scott, provided a guard of honour.  At Aylsham their
Royal Highnesses were welcomed with great enthusiasm, and at Gunton Park
gates the North Walsham corps, commanded by Major Duff, mounted a guard
of honour.  On the 5th and 6th the Prince shot over the estate, and on
the evening of the last-named day a dinner and ball were given at the
hall.  On the 7th his Royal Highness attended a meet of the East Norfolk
Foxhounds, and on the 8th shot on the Hanworth side of the hall.  The
visit terminated on the 9th.  The Prince and Princess had arranged to
honour Lord Sondes by attending luncheon at Elmham Hall, but, owing to
intelligence received of the critical condition of the King of the
Belgians, the visit was postponed.  Their Royal Highnesses left Elmham
station by special train, and arrived at Sandringham the same afternoon.

7.--The Rev. J. M. Bellew gave public readings from the great poets and
other authors, with organ accompaniments, at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.
He was described as "a perfect master of the elocutionary art."

20.--Died at Yarmouth, in his 71st year, Mr. Edward Cubitt, of Honing
Hall.  He served in the Peninsular War with the 4th Dragoons, was at the
retreat from Burgos, and received the medal with clasps for Vittoria,
Pampeluna, and Toulouse.

26.--The Christmas pantomime at Norwich Theatre was entitled,
"Camaralzaman and Badoura, or the Little God of Love and the Good Fairy
of Lake Lovely."



1866.


JANUARY.


6.--At a meeting of the Norfolk Agricultural Association, held at the
Swan Hotel, Norwich, it was decided to abandon the annual show for that
year, "because the bringing of cattle from all parts of the country would
be inconsistent with what is being done to prevent the transit of cattle
during the prevalence of the cattle plague."

8.--The Prince and Princess of Wales, accompanied by the Hon. T. de Grey,
arrived at Holkham, on a visit to the Earl and Countess of Leicester.
"Their Royal Highnesses _de facto_ opened the new line of the West
Norfolk Junction Railway, which had been pushed forward by the contractor
so as to be ready for the purpose."  It was by this line that the Prince
and Princess travelled to Holkham.  Their Royal Highnesses returned to
Sandringham on the 13th.

11.--The first wintry weather of the season was experienced on this date,
when there was a considerable fall of snow, accompanied by showers of
rain and sleet, followed by a sharp wind frost.  Telegraphic
communication with London was suspended, in consequence of the blowing
down of several miles of the telegraph line.

--Lost in the Bay of Biscay, by the wreck of the steamship London, on her
voyage to Australia, the Rev. John Woolley, D.C.L., formerly headmaster
of Norwich Grammar School, Fellow of University College, Oxford, and
principal and professor of classics and logic in the University of
Sydney.  Mr. G. V. Brooke, the actor, formerly a member of the Norwich
Company, went down in the same ill-fated vessel.

13.--The new building, then known as the Consolidated Bank, London
Street, Norwich, was opened for the transaction of business.  It was
designed by Mr. R. M. Phipson, of Norwich and Ipswich, and built by Mr.
Hall, of Pottergate Street, at the cost of 4,000.  It is now known as the
National Provincial Bank.

--A vessel running through Yarmouth Roads was observed to be flying a
"waif."  Two lifeboats, the Rescuer, belonging to the Ranger Company, and
the Friend of All Nations, the property of the Young Company of Beachmen,
put off to her assistance.  The Rescuer, in attempting to pass through
the rough water at the bar, unshipped her rudder, was capsized, and
twelve of her crew of sixteen were drowned.

15.--Judgment was given in the Arches Court by Dr. Lushington, in the
action, Edwards and Mann _v._ Hatton, otherwise known as the "Mattishall
Church Rate case."  The plaintiffs were the churchwardens, and the
defendant a parishioner of Mattishall.  Hatton having refused to pay the
Church Rate, proceedings were taken in the Arches Court to enforce it.
The whole sum in dispute was 6s. 8d., but it had given rise to many
months of litigation, to much unpleasantness and ill-feeling in the
parish, and to rioting and disturbance.  Two objections were urged
against the rate: (1) That proper notice had not been given on the church
doors, as provided by the Act of Parliament; and (2) that the rate was
unequal and unjust.  The Court entered judgment for the churchwardens,
and condemned the defendant in the costs of the protracted proceedings.


FEBRUARY.


1.--Under the Prisons Act, 1865, the old borough jail at Lynn ceased to
be used as a prison.

2.--Mr. F. W. Windham, who for five or six years had enjoyed unenviable
notoriety, died suddenly at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich.  He had been
unwell for several days, and was seen by his medical attendant, Mr. F. C.
Bailey, on January 31st.  Mr. Windham became better on February 1st, and
still further improvement was manifested on the 2nd; but later in the day
his symptoms were completely altered, and became so alarming that Mr.
Bailey called in Dr. Bateman and Dr. Eade.  Every effort was made to
restore animation, but without avail; this victim of an ill-spent life
gradually sank, and in a few hours expired, in the presence of the
medical men and of some of the servants of the hotel.  Death was due to
the obstruction of the circulation by a clot of blood in the pulmonary
artery.  On the 7th the body was removed to Tucker's Hotel, Cromer, and
the interment took place on the 8th, in the family vault at Felbrigg.
Mr. Windham had completely dissipated the residue of the extensive
property which he inherited, after payment of the law expenses contingent
on the great suit, Windham _v._ Windham (_q.v._ November 22nd, 1861), and
became dependent for a livelihood on the little income he made as driver
of the Cromer coach.  His uncle, General Windham, had made arrangements
by which he was supplied with the means of living respectably.  He had
rooms at the Norfolk Hotel, but generally spent his time in one or other
of the low public-houses in the city.  The effect of his death was to
deprive Mrs. Windham of the annuity granted on Mr. Windham's life, and of
any interest whatever in the Hanworth estate.

16.--A case was heard at East Dereham Petty Sessions, in which the points
urged in the Corn Hall litigation in 1857-58 were again brought
prominently before the public.  George Squire, a Lincolnshire merchant,
was charged with assaulting Charles Howard, the keeper of the Corn Hall.
He had paid twopence for admission, and Howard informed him that he ought
to take a merchant's ticket and hire a stand.  In the course of the
altercation, defendant took plaintiff by the collar and pinched his neck.
Mr. J. C. Chittock, solicitor, on behalf of the defendant, contended that
any person had a right to go into the hall, whether he paid for doing so
or not, because at the Summer Assizes in 1857 the proprietors were
indicted for obstructing a highway and a verdict was given for the Crown.
The hall was built upon a highway known as Lion Hill, and Lion Hill had
never ceased to be a highway.  The Bench determined that they had no
jurisdiction, and dismissed the case.

18.--Died at Great Yarmouth, Mr. Isaac Preston, aged 92 years.  One of
the oldest inhabitants of the borough, he had, previous to the passing of
the Municipal Reform Act, held several important offices in connection
with the Corporation, and was twice Mayor.  He was a justice of the peace
and a deputy-lieutenant for the county, and was one of the promoters of
the movement for the erection of the Nelson Column on the South Denes.

23.--A serious difficulty arose at Norwich, owing to the operation of the
Cattle Diseases Prevention Act.  A large number of dealers, apprehending
that the provisions of the Act would not be enforced until the following
week, sent stock to Norwich for the market on the 24th, or for
transmission by rail to London.  Two hundred fat beasts arrived at Trowse
for conveyance, but the railway authorities refused to receive them.
Salesmen on the Hill experienced the same difficulty, and dealers had to
dispose of their cattle as best they could.  Many beasts were sent to
butchers for immediate slaughter; others were removed to Trowse.  The
Mayor (Mr. Nichols) went down on the 25th to see what help he could
render, but the only way out of the difficulty was to send the animals to
the Norwich slaughter-houses, whence the principal portion of the meat
was forwarded to London.  In order to obviate any further difficulty of
the kind, the Norwich Town Council, on the 27th, resolved to erect
slaughter-houses and to provide a dead meat market.  The cattle plague
continued with unabated virulence.  Thursday, March 8th, was observed as
a day of humiliation, business was suspended, and special services were
held at the Cathedral and the parish churches.  Similar services took
place throughout the county.  On June 30th it was announced, "Rinderpest
is now nearly extinct in Norfolk and Suffolk"; and on October 13th it was
stated: "The non-existence of the cattle plague in the county has
rendered the work of the Central Committee and the Cattle Plague
Association very light."  Norwich Cattle Market was re-opened on November
17th.


MARCH.


6.--A dastardly attempt was made to destroy the church of St. Lawrence,
Norwich.  Mr. David Penrice, the churchwarden, accompanied by a lad, went
to prepare the church for evening service, and found it to be full of
gas.  The lad, on endeavouring to open the windows, was overcome by the
fumes.  Assistance was obtained, and it was discovered that every burner
in the church had been fully turned on.  At the Police Court, on the
21st, a lad named George Nobbs, described as a shoemaker, of St.
Martin-at-Oak, was charged with "wilfully and maliciously turning on the
gas at St. Lawrence' church, thereby endangering the lives of her
Majesty's subjects."  The offence was fully proved, but the magistrates
dismissed the case, on the ground that "the lad did not show he had any
knowledge of the consequences of the act."

13.--A boiler explosion occurred at the brewery of Messrs. Arnold and
Wyatt, St. Margaret's Plain, Norwich.  William Whitworth, an engine
driver, was killed, "his body being hurled into the beck containing six
quarters of boiling wort."

20.--The hearing of the petition against the return of Sir E. H. K. Lacon
and Mr. J. Goodson commenced, before a Committee of the House of Commons.
Bribery, undue influence, and treating were alleged.  The inquiry
concluded on the 22nd, when the chairman (the Right Hon. J. R. Mowbray)
announced that the Committee had arrived at the unanimous conclusion that
the members had been duly elected.  On April 12th Mr. Mowbray gave notice
of his intention to move the appointment of a Royal Commission "to
inquire into the corrupt practices which prevailed at the last election
for Great Yarmouth."  The Commissioners, Mr. Wyndham Slade, Mr. Lucius
Henry Fitzgerald, and Mr. George Russell, began their sittings at the
Town Hall on August 16th, and on September 11th adjourned until October
3rd, on which day the proceedings recommenced.  The final adjournment
took place on October 15th, the thirty-fourth day of the inquiry.  Six
hundred and fifty-six witnesses were examined, and full investigations
made as to the elections of 1865, 1859, and 1857.  The Commissioners
reported that corrupt and illegal practices extensively prevailed, and in
consequence the borough was disfranchised.

27.--The 13th Hussars marched from Norwich, _en route_ to Newcastle.

28.--In the course of a civil action, Creake _v._ Smith, at the Norfolk
Assizes, before Mr. Baron Martin, reference was made to "the science of
Bibliomancy," as practised by a "cunning woman" in the neighbourhood of
Wells-next-the-Sea.  The defendant, who was landlord of the Railway Hotel
at Wells, had lost articles from his house, and had consulted the woman
with the view of discovering the thief.  A Bible was suspended by a
string and made to revolve; during its revolutions the names of several
suspected persons were called out, and it was alleged that it stopped on
the name of the plaintiff being mentioned--a clear proof that he was the
guilty person.  The defendant returned to the hotel, alleged that Creake
was a thief, "for he knew it by the turn of the Bible," and dismissed him
from his service.  Hence these legal proceedings for slander and wrongful
dismissal, which resulted in a verdict for the plaintiff on the first
count, and for the defendant on the second count.


APRIL.


2.--Loveday's English Grand Opera Company commenced an engagement at
Norwich Theatre.  The principals included Madame Florence Lancia, Mdlle.
Ella Miraldi, Miss Annie Leng, Miss Fanny Leng, Mr. Brookhouse Bowler,
Mr. Grantham, Mr. Oliver Summers, and Mr. Henry Rowland.  The repertory
included "La Somnambula," "Il Trovatore," "Don Giovanni," "Faust,"
"Dinorah," "Der Frieschutz," "Lucrezia Borgia," "Norma," and "Satanella."

3.--Died at Hethel Hall, John Davy Brett, formerly major in the 17th
Lancers, and lieut.-colonel of the 1st Norfolk Battalion of Volunteers,
aged 51.

5.--The marriage of the Right Hon. Charles Adolphus Murray, seventh Earl
of Dunmore, and Lady Gertrude Coke, third daughter of the Lord Lieutenant
of Norfolk, took place at Holkham.  The ceremony was honoured by the
presence of the Prince and Princess of Wales, who arrived at the Hall on
the 4th, as the private guests of the Earl and Countess of Leicester.

9.--Died at Chequers Court, Herts., aged 56, Lieut.-Col. Francis
L'Estrange Astley, commandant of the Norfolk Militia Artillery.  He was
born in 1810, and married first in 1835, Charlotte, second daughter of
Mr. N. Micklethwait, of Taverham; and secondly, in 1854, Rosalind Alicia,
fifth daughter of Sir Robert Frankland Russell, Bart.

21.--The Norwich sewerage scheme was further considered by the Town
Council.  A scheme known as the Hope scheme, introduced at a previous
meeting, was abandoned, and the future management of the matter referred
to a committee selected from members opposed to the scheme.  On May 12th
appeared the announcement that preliminary steps had been taken in
Chancery by the inhabitants of Thorpe and a bill filed against the Mayor
and Corporation for an injunction to compel them to desist from emptying
sewage into the river.  On May 15th a special committee reported that
certain attempts made to cleanse the river had been attended with
considerable success, and at the same meeting a memorial was presented by
the inhabitants of the city, expressing regret and disappointment at the
abandonment of the proposed plan for diverting the sewage from the river,
and stating that under no circumstances whatever should the stream be
made use of as a sewer.  Acting upon counsel's opinion, the Corporation,
on May 31st, determined that it was needful at once to take measures for
the diversion of the sewage from the river.  The Sewerage Committee
resigned, and a new committee was appointed.  This committee, on July
10th, recommended the hiring "of 1,300 acres of land on the Crown Point
estate, for the purpose of irrigating the same with the Norwich sewage."
The recommendation was agreed to.  On October 9th the Town Clerk was
authorised, under the direction of the Special Sewerage Committee, to
give the necessary notices to enable application to be made in the next
Session of Parliament for an Act of Parliament for carrying out sewerage
works, and for the preparation of the necessary plans to be deposited in
conformity with the Standing Orders of the House.  (_See_ January 15th,
1867.)

22.--The Rev. John Alexander, minister of the Independent congregation
meeting at Prince's Street, Norwich, resigned the pastorate of the
chapel, after a service of nearly half a century.  Mr. Alexander came to
Norwich on April 4th, 1817, and for a time officiated at the Tabernacle
belonging to Lady Huntingdon's Connexion.  His small congregation next
met at the Lancastrian School, and in order to retain his services they
built the Prince's Street chapel, where he ministered until the date of
his resignation.  He was succeeded by the Rev. G. S. Barrett, B.A., of
the Lancashire Independent College.

24.--Died at Coltishall Hall, Mr. William Burroughes.  The younger son of
a family seated in Norfolk for considerably more than one hundred years,
he was educated at Norwich Grammar School "in the palmy Valpeian days,"
and at St. John's College, Cambridge.  He was upon the commission of the
peace for the county, chairman of the visiting justices, and joint
secretary of the Norfolk Agricultural Association.

30.--The Great Yarmouth Fish Wharves and Tramways Bill and the Great
Yarmouth Haven, Port, and Rivers Bill, were before a Committee of the
House of Commons.  The first-named Bill went through Committee without
opposition on May 7th, and the latter was ordered to be reported on May
28th.  The Port and Haven Bill, among other matters, provided that the
Commission should consist of thirteen members, namely, four for Yarmouth
(two to be elected by the Corporation, one by the registered shipowners
and payers of dues, and one by the owners of fishing vessels and payers
of dues on fish); three elected by the justices of Norfolk; three by the
justices of Suffolk; and three by the Corporation of Norwich, one of each
set of Commissioners for Norfolk, Suffolk, and Norwich being a merchant
residing and carrying on business within the district for which he was
elected.  (_See_ October 28th, 1867.)


MAY.


2.--The organ at St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, restored by Mr. Hedgeland,
at the cost of 430, was used for the first time at commemorative services
held at the church.  The instrument was built by Renatus Harris, in 1707.

5.*--"Lord Suffield has been appointed Lieut.-Col. Commandant of the
Norfolk Militia Artillery, in place of the late Col. Astley."

11.--Intelligence was received from London that the banking firm of
Overend, Gurney, and Co. had been compelled, owing to the panic in the
money market, to suspend payment.  The announcement created great anxiety
in Norwich, lest the firm of Messrs. Gurney and Co. were involved.
Public confidence was restored by a notice issued by the firm, who stated
that they were in no way liable, and were not affected by the affairs of
Messrs. Overend, Gurney, and Co.  A meeting of the citizens was at once
convened at the Guildhall, under the presidency of the Mayor, and a
resolution passed "declaring publicly and unhesitatingly its unbounded
confidence in the house of Messrs. Gurneys and Birkbecks, and its
unabated reliance on its perfect financial security."  (_See_ January
1st, 1869.)

23.--Mrs. Bulwer, wife of Capt. Bulwer, commanding the 15th (Dereham)
Company of Rifle Volunteers, opened a new rifle range at Billingford by
firing the first shot, in the presence of a large gathering of Volunteers
and civilians.

24.--The Queen's birthday was celebrated at Norwich by a parade in Chapel
Field of the 1st Norfolk Light Horse Volunteers and the Artillery and
Rifle Volunteers.  The Mayoress (Mrs. Nichols) laid the foundation-stone
of the new Drill Hall, and after the ceremony luncheon was served at St.
Andrew's Hall.

--The Norfolk and Norwich Gymnastic Society held their first annual
sports on the Newmarket Road Cricket Ground.  The programme included
gymnastic exercises, boxing, high jumping, flat and hurdle racing, &c.

31.--The new church at Thorpe St. Andrew was consecrated by the Bishop of
Norwich.  The site on the north side of the old church was given by Mr.
William Birkbeck; the building was designed by Mr. Thomas Jeckyll, of
Norwich and London, and the contractor and subcontractors were Mr.
Cornish, of North Walsham; Mr. J. W. Lacey and Mr. Rust, of Norwich.  The
estimated cost of the work was 4,000.


JUNE.


1.--The Marquis of Hartington having stated in the House of Commons that
as the troops would be accommodated in the new barracks at Colchester,
the Government intended to give up the Cavalry Barracks at Norwich, and
the lease having expired, the buildings would be handed over to the Dean
and Chapter of Norwich, to whom they belonged, a meeting of citizens was
held at the Guildhall, at which a resolution was passed asking the
authorities to reconsider their determination.  A deputation consisting
of the Earl of Leicester, the Earl of Albemarle, Lord Suffield, the
members of Parliament for the city, and other gentlemen, waited upon Lord
Hartington at the War Office on June 14th, and on July 7th it was
announced that, after due consideration, the authorities had decided to
continue the barracks at Norwich.

6.--Earl Fortesque attended at the Free Library, Norwich, and presented
the prizes awarded under the Cambridge Prize Scheme.


JULY.


11.--Lord Stanley, on his appointment as Foreign Secretary in the new
Conservative Administration, was re-elected without opposition member of
Parliament for the borough of King's Lynn.

16.--A meeting was held at the Rampant Horse Hotel, Norwich, to consider
what steps should be taken to prevent the intended closing of Victoria
Station, under the Great Eastern Railway (Additional Powers) Bill.  A
memorial was addressed to the Town Council, calling attention to the fact
that this was the fourth attempt made by the company to close the
terminus, and that by the Act of Parliament which sanctioned the
amalgamation of the Eastern Union with the Eastern Counties Railway a
special clause was inserted for the sufficient maintenance of the
station.  On these grounds the Corporation were asked to oppose the Bill.
At a meeting of the Town Council on the 17th, a letter was read from the
company, in which they offered, in consideration of being permitted to
close the station, to contribute 1,000 towards the improvement of Foundry
Bridge.  The Council were not prepared to accede to the proposition.
When the Company's Bill was before the Committee of the House of Commons,
in March, 1867, the clause providing for the abandonment of the station
was disallowed.

19.--St. Giles' church, Norwich, was re-opened, after extensive
restoration.  A new chancel had also been built, and a new organ, costing
350, erected.  The scheme included the widening of the street by the
giving up of a portion of the churchyard.  The restoration was carried
out, under the direction of Mr. R. M. Phipson, by Mr. J. W. Lacey,
conjointly with Messrs. Atkins and Hawes.  The total cost of the work was
about 4,000, of which 1,000 was given by the rector (the Rev. W. N.
Ripley).

25.--The National Archery meeting commenced at Crown Point, Norwich, and
was continued on the 26th and 27th.  The show of the Norfolk and Norwich
Horticultural Society was held in the grounds on the 26th (when the band
of the 1st Life Guards was present), and a ball was given at St. Andrew's
Hall in the evening.

28.--Died at Bramerton, in his 76th year, Mr. William Wilde, Coroner for
Norwich.  "In Mr. Wilde the city has lost an active and intelligent
public officer and a useful citizen, and the Liberal party a most
efficient agent.  To his shrewdness, accurate judgment, and devotion to
their interests, the Liberals of Norwich and elsewhere have been indebted
for many a triumph."  Mr. Wilde was a member of the Court of Guardians,
and for some time its chairman, and a member of the Festival Committee.
He had been Coroner for thirty years.

31.--A new lifeboat, named the Leicester, was launched at Gorleston.  It
was purchased by a fund amounting to 900 inaugurated by the Mayoress of
Leicester (Mrs. Hodges), and was lodged in a new lifeboat house built at
the cost of 250.


AUGUST.


5.--Died at his seat at Honingham, the Right Hon. and Rev. Lord Bayning.
His lordship was the second son of Mr. Charles Townshend, who was created
Baron Bayning in 1797, and succeeded his brother, Charles Frederick, as
third Baron on August 2nd, 1823, when he assumed, by sign manual (in lieu
of his patronymic, Townshend), the name of his maternal grandfather,
William Powlett.  Born on June 8th, 1797, he married, on August 9th,
1842, Emma, only daughter of Mr. W. H. Fellowes, of Ramsey Abbey,
Huntingdon, by whom he had one son, who died twelve months previously to
his lordship's death, and the barony thus became extinct.  Lord Bayning
was educated at St. John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated M.A. in
1818, and was appointed rector of Brome, Suffolk, in 1821, and rural dean
in the diocese of Norwich in 1844.  He resigned the rectory of Brome in
1847, and was appointed to the rectory of Honingham with the vicarage of
East Tuddenham in 1851.  His lordship was High Steward of Norwich
Cathedral, Vice-President of the Norwich Diocesan Association for the
Propagation of the Gospel, of the Norfolk and Norwich Museum, of the
Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society, and of the Institution for
the Indigent Blind, and he was a trustee of the Norwich Savings Rank, &c.
For some years he was treasurer and a most active promoter of the
Diocesan Church Building Society.

6.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, Mr. Edward S.
Bignold was elected Coroner, in place of Mr. Wilde.  In order to take the
office, he resigned his seat in the Town Council, and was permitted to
retire without paying the customary fine.

10.--A new self-righting lifeboat was launched at Happisburgh.  The
vessel was presented to the National Lifeboat Institution by the people
of Huddersfield, who contributed upwards of 1,000 for its purchase.

14.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Lord Chief Justice Erle and a special
jury, was tried the libel action, Athill _v._ Soman.  The declaration
stated that the libel was published in a newspaper called the "Norwich
Argus," of which the defendant was the printer, and was contained in a
letter signed "Honour Lingley," dated November 25th, 1865.  The writer
accused Athill, a superintendent of police, of wrongfully ransacking her
chests of linen at a house at Sprowston called the "Haunted Cottage," at
which disturbances had taken place, and where Athill had been present in
the discharge of his official duties.  The damages were laid at 500; the
jury returned a verdict for the plaintiff, damages one farthing.
Application was made on behalf of the plaintiff for costs, but his
lordship held that "there was not a solitary instance of any personal
malice or ill-will on the part of the defendant," and refused it.  The
county magistrates subsequently contributed to a fund to defray the
expenses of the plaintiff.

25.--At the sale of the Lessingham House estate, by Messrs. Hewitt and
Capon, at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, a portion of Surlingham Broad was
purchased by Mr. R. Pratt, for 1,300.  "The last time this lot was sold
by public auction it fetched about 900."

27.--The Hon. Thomas de Grey, M.P., shooting on Blubberhouse Moor, made a
bag of 215 brace of grouse, "a feat which has not met with its equal on
any of the Yorkshire moors, nor on any other in England or Scotland."


SEPTEMBER.


4.--Died at the King and Miller Inn, Norfolk Street, Sheffield, of
"mortification of the big toe," William Pilch, the cricketer, formerly of
Norwich, in his 69th year.

19.--Died at Southsea, aged 80, General Sir William Robert Clayton,
Bart., son of Sir William.  Clayton, fourth baronet.  He saw much service
in the Peninsular campaign.  On the death of his father, in 1834, he
succeeded to the extensive patrimonial estates in Norfolk, Bucks.,
Surrey, and South Wales.  Sir William's Norfolk seat was White Hall,
Saham Toney.

22.*--"The Dean and Chapter of Norwich have offered to confer the office
of Lord High Steward of the Cathedral Church, vacant by the death of Lord
Bayning, on the Earl of Kimberley, and his lordship has signified to the
Dean and Chapter his intention to accept the office.  The grandfather and
the great-grandfather of the present Earl have been Lord High Stewards of
the Cathedral."

25.--Minnie Stratton, daughter of "General Tom Thumb" and Mrs. Stratton,
died at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, and was, on the 26th, buried at the
Cemetery.  "Mr. and Mrs. Stratton were chief mourners, and there was a
large number of spectators."

--A boiler explosion took place at the dye and chemical works of Messrs.
Stark and Co., Duke's Palace Street, Norwich.  Three men (Taylor, Breeze,
and Clarke) were killed on the spot, and three others died of their
injuries.  The Coroner's jury found that the explosion was due to the
defective construction of the boiler.  At the Norwich Assizes, on March
27th, 1867, an action was brought by Mr. Stark against Messrs. Riches and
Watts, for the recovery of damages.  A verdict was given for plaintiff,
the amount to be assessed by arbitration.  (_See_ February 19th, 1868.)


OCTOBER.


6.--The Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture, "to co-operate with the Central
Chamber of Agriculture in watching over the measures affecting the
agricultural interest," was established at a meeting held at the Norfolk
Hotel, Norwich, under the presidency of Mr. C. S. Read, M.P.  On October
20th Mr. Read was elected chairman, and Mr. Richard England
vice-chairman.

13.--Norwich Theatre was opened for the winter season, under the
management of Mr. J. F. Young, who had previously managed, with success,
the Yarmouth and Lynn Theatres.

--Died at Great Chart Rectory, Kent, the Hon. and Very Rev. George
Pellew, D.D., Dean of Norwich.  He was third son of Admiral Sir Edward
Pellew, afterwards Viscount Exmouth, and was born in Tregeny, Cornwall,
in 1793.  Educated at Eton and at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where
he took his B.A. degree in 1815 and his M.A. in 1818, he received holy
orders in 1817, and in 1820 married the Hon. Frances Addington, second
daughter of the first Viscount Sidmouth.  In 1823 he was appointed to a
canonry in Canterbury Cathedral, where he resided until his preferment to
the Deanery of Norwich in 1828, on the death of Dean Turner.  The degree
of D.D. was conferred upon him in the same year, and in 1852 he was
presented by the Archbishop of Canterbury to the living of Great Chart,
which he held at the time of his death.  Besides publishing "Sermons
preached in Cathedral Churches on the Leading Doctrines of the Church of
England" (1848), he wrote "The Seven Ages of a Christian's Life" (1866)
and a "Memoir of Lord Sidmouth" (1847).  Dr. Pellew left three daughters
and a son.

29.--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced with an
evening performance of "Israel in Egypt."  Miscellaneous concerts were
given on the evenings of October 30th and 31st and November 1st.  On the
morning of October 31st were given an anthem by Spohr (the first time of
performance) and "Naaman" (the first time of performance in Norwich),
conducted by the composer, M. Costa; on the morning of November 1st,
"Saint Cecilia" (composed expressly for the Festival), a selection from
the Passion Music (the first time of performance "in any country"), and
the first and second parts of "The Creation"; and on the morning of
November 2nd, "The Messiah."  The principal performers were Mdlle.
Tietjens, Madame Rudersdorff, Miss Edith Wynne, Mdlle. Sinico, Madame De
Meric Lablache, Mdlle. Anna Drasdel, Mr. Sims Reeves, Mr. W. H. Cummings,
Signor Morini, Mr. Santley, Mr. Weiss, and Signor Gassier.  Mr. Benedict
conducted.  The Festival concluded with a "full dress" ball on the
evening of November 2nd.  The total receipts amounted to 5,783 11s., and
the balance in favour of the committee to 971 7s. 3d.

30.--The Prince and Princess of Wales, with her Majesty the Queen of
Denmark and suite, left Sandringham, on a visit to Lord and Lady
Stafford, at Costessey Park.  They were accompanied by the Duke of
Edinburgh, who had accepted the invitation of the High Sheriff (Mr. W. A.
Tyssen Amhurst) to spend the Festival week in Norwich.  The Royal party,
who travelled by special train to East Dereham, where the Volunteers
formed a guard of honour, were received by Lord Stafford and the Earl of
Leicester at the station, whence they travelled by road to Costessey, and
were enthusiastically greeted by a large gathering in the park.  On the
morning of the 31st the illustrious visitors, escorted by the 1st Norfolk
Light Horse Volunteers, under Capt. Hay Gurney, proceeded to Norwich, and
were received by the Mayor (Mr. W. P. Nichols), the Sheriff (Mr. W. J.
Cubitt), and other civic dignitaries at the city boundary, and by members
of the Corporation and Guardians and representatives of friendly
societies, &c., at St. Giles' Gates.  At the Guildhall addresses were
presented to the Prince and Princess and the Queen by the Corporation and
by the Bishop and clergy of the diocese.  The party then proceeded to St.
Andrew's Hall, to attend the Musical Festival.  During the interval at
the performance, the Mayor gave a luncheon in one of the rooms to the
Prince and Princess, the Queen of Denmark, and their suite; and the
Princess was presented by Miss C. M. Nichols, on behalf of the ladies of
Norwich, with an album containing photographic views of the city, &c.
Their Royal Highnesses then drove to Chapel Field and planted two trees,
in commemoration of their visit, and the day's proceedings ended with the
opening, by the Prince of Wales, of the new Volunteer Drill Hall, the
first stone of which was laid a few months previously by Mrs. Nichols,
who was presented with a silver trowel designed for the occasion.  A
ball, preceded by a dinner, was given at Costessey in the evening.  At
the dinner the party comprised only the Prince and Princess, the Queen of
Denmark, Lord and Lady Stafford, and Mr. and Mrs. Nichols.  On November
1st the Royal party passed through Norwich, escorted by a squadron of the
1st King's Dragoon Guards (from Colchester), on their way to Thorpe
Station, whence they departed for Sandringham.  The city was lavishly
decorated in honour of the Royal visit, and on the night of the 30th
there were illuminations and fireworks.  The Duke of Edinburgh stayed
with the High Sheriff at Mr. Firth's house in St. Giles' Street, where a
distinguished company was invited to meet his Royal Highness.


NOVEMBER.


5.--A remarkable outrage was perpetrated at Little Walsingham church.  A
few minutes after the clerk had tolled the "curfew" bell, a violent
explosion took place in the south transept.  It was found that a charge
of gunpowder had been placed beneath the organ and ignited by a train of
cotton.  The instrument, with the exception of the swell organ, was
scattered to pieces, the south transept window entirely destroyed, and
other windows seriously damaged.  The organ was purchased in 1862, at the
cost of 250, and the total amount of damage done by the explosion was
about 300.  A reward of 200 was offered for information that would lead
to the conviction of the perpetrator of the outrage.

9.--Mr. Frederick Elwin Watson was elected Mayor, and Mr. William Copeman
Clabburn appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

16.--Eight vessels were wrecked and five lives lost, on the Norfolk
coast, between Mundesley and Palling.

17.--A Bohemian waxwing (_Bombycilla garrulus_) was observed at Old
Buckenham, and another was shot the same day near Thetford.  By the first
week of December the birdstuffers received at least 22 specimens, from
Mutford, Worstead, Northrepps, St. Faith's, Rollesby, Cawston Woodrow,
Wroxham, and other districts.  In the last week of December it was stated
that more than one hundred specimens had been procured.  "With the
exception of one or two stragglers, this species has not been noticed
here since 1863, when some sixteen specimens were killed in Norfolk."


DECEMBER.


3.--A storm of terrific violence occurred off Yarmouth, and several ships
were lost and men drowned.  A new gas-holder of 100,000 cubic feet
capacity, surrounded by massive iron columns, was blown over at Yarmouth
Gas Works, and considerably damaged.

4.--The Rev. Edward Meyrick Goulburn, D.D., incumbent of St. John's,
Paddington, was installed Dean of Norwich by the Rev. Canon Heaviside, in
the absence of the Bishop of Norwich.

10.--The Prince and Princess of Wales and the Duke of Edinburgh arrived,
by rail, at Diss, whence the Prince and Princess proceeded to Oakley
Park, on a visit to Sir E. C. Kerrison, Bart., M.P., and Lady Caroline
Kerrison; and the Duke to Thornham Hall, on a visit to Baron and Lady
Hartismere.  Their Royal Highnesses returned to Sandringham on the 13th.

--An extraordinary charge was preferred before the Walsingham
magistrates, against Mr. Miles Brown, a large farmer, of Houghton St.
Giles, and his brother, Mr. William Brown.  It was alleged that they had
exhibited in the window of a cottage in High Street, Walsingham, "an
apparatus revolving before a light, and exhibiting in a glass behind an
upright coffin, on the lid of which was a photograph of the Rev. Septimus
Henry Lee Warner, such public exhibition being a threat on the part of
the defendants to take away the life of the said complainant."  The
defendants were bound over in the sum of 1,600 to keep the peace.

15.*--"The old lighthouse at Cromer, which had for so many years been a
conspicuous object on the edge of the lofty hill, toppled over the other
day, and was immediately buried by a great fall from the cliff, which
followed it.  It was first erected in the year 1719, and was lit by a
coal fire until oil lamps with powerful reflectors were introduced."

17.--The Duke of Edinburgh arrived at Norwich, _en route_ to Gunton Park.
Before proceeding on his journey, his Royal Highness visited the
Cathedral.

25.--Died at East Dereham, aged 65, Mr. William Drake, many years
Conservative registration agent for West Norfolk.

26.--The pantomime at Norwich Theatre, written by Mr. R. Soutar, was
founded upon the story of the intrigue of Henry II. and Fair Rosamond.

31.--A heavy fall of snow occurred, and the roads in many parts of the
county were rendered impassable.

--The Prince and Princess of Wales arrived at Holkham, on a visit to the
Earl and Countess of Leicester.  "So considerable was the destruction of
hares, rabbits, pheasants, &c., during the Royal visit that on one day 2
tons 19 cwt. of game were forwarded from Wells Station to Leadenhall
Market."  The Prince, with the Duke of Edinburgh, who was also a guest of
the Earl and Countess, left on January 10th, 1867, for Marham House, on a
visit to Mr. and Mrs. Villebois.



1867.


JANUARY.


6.--During a severe storm off Yarmouth, the brigs Ark, of Sunderland, and
Sarah, of the same port, had a collision in the Roads, and were lost,
with their crews of sixteen hands.

7.--The actions arising out of the Middle Level inundations now took the
form of an arbitration.  The arbitrators were laymen, appointed by both
parties, with a legal umpire, and their investigation of the merits of
the case or cases commenced on this date, at the Incorporated Law
Society's house, Chancery Lane, London.  The proceedings were protracted.
In the first week of March several of the claimants, among them Mr.
Mason, in whose name the first action was brought, accepted offers made
by the Commissioners.  The offers were in excess of the following items:
(1) a year's rent, tithes, taxes, and outgoings; (2) all expenses on the
crops destroyed (tillage, seed sowing, &c.) up to the day of the
inundation; (3) damage to fences, buildings, &c., and (4) the amount of a
full year's rent, tithes, and drainage taxes as profits to the tenants.
In May the cases Coe _v._ Wise and Sharpe _v._ the Commissioners were
argued in the Rolls Court, before Mr. Serjeant Hayes and Mr. Durrant and
Mr. Bailey Denton, the arbitrators; and on June 22nd it was announced
that Mr. Coe had been awarded 2,575, and Mr. Sharpe 405, the former
getting 500 and the latter 100 more than the defendants offered.  The
defendants, therefore, were ordered to pay costs, and the litigation
ended.

12.--Died at Bedford, Colonel Vincent Matthias, Madras Army, aged 73.
Born at Norwich, he was of a family of fifteen, and nine of his brothers
entered either the Navy or Army.  He was appointed a cadet in 1810, and
received his commission as ensign on August 24th, 1811, Colonel Mathias'
service extended over a period of more than thirty years.  He was an
ardent sportsman, and while in India made a valuable collection of
natural history specimens, which he presented to the Norfolk and Norwich
Museum.

15.--The proceedings of the Town Council relative to the Norwich sewerage
scheme commenced this year with the payment to Mr. P. E. Hansell,
solicitor, of 205, the amount of taxed costs allowed to the informants in
obtaining the injunction restraining the Corporation from putting sewage
into the river Wensum.  On the 22nd the Council, after considerable
debate, decided that the dry earth system advocated by Mr. Edward
Boardman was not applicable to the district.  The Court of Reference
appointed by the House of Commons to try the merits of the Norwich Local
Board of Health Bill with reference to its engineering details and the
estimated cost of the proposed works, commenced its investigations on
March 11th.  The object of the Bill was "to provide for the better
sewering of the city and the applying of the sewage to the irrigation of
land."  The referees reported to the House on the 14th that the works and
estimates were sufficient for the objects proposed.  The Bill was before
a Select Committee of the House of Commons on March 13th, and on March
26th it was, with certain amendments, reported to the House.  (_See_
January 28th, 1868.)

16.--A deep snow caused considerable inconvenience to railway traffic.  A
train from Norwich to Lowestoft came to a standstill in the Mutford
cutting, and was not got out until the afternoon of the 17th.  The snow
drifted to the depth of seven feet upon most of the lines, some of which
remained closed for three days.  Many of the roads were impassable for
vehicular traffic, and in some instances the mail bags were carried
across country on foot.  Great distress prevailed amongst the poor, and
special funds were raised in several towns for their relief.  At Norwich
the amount contributed was 2,227.  On the 22nd a rapid thaw commenced.


FEBRUARY.


14.--Sir S. W. Baker, the discoverer of the sources of the Nile,
delivered a lecture at St. Peter's Hall, Norwich, upon the political
condition of Egypt.  The Mayor presided over the large audience, who
accorded a warm reception to Sir Samuel, who, at that time, was a
resident in the county.


MARCH.


19.--The boiler of an engine at work in a field near Watlington Station
exploded, killing five persons outright, and injuring seven others, two
of whom died on the following day.  Such was the force of the explosion
that the boiler was blown a distance of forty yards.  It was proved at
the inquest that the accident resulted from the tying down the
safety-valve.

29.--Charles Dickens appeared at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, and read,
before a numerous audience, "Dr. Marigold" and the trial scene from
"Pickwick."


APRIL.


5.--Mr. Sothern appeared at Norwich Theatre, in the character of Lord
Dundreary.  On the 6th he performed the part of David Garrick.  The house
was crowded to excess on both occasions.

22.--Mr. Loveday's English Grand Opera Company commenced an engagement at
Norwich Theatre.  Madame Haigh-Dyer was the _prima donna_, and Mr. and
Mrs. Aynsley Cooke were of the company.  The works produced included
"Robert le Diable," "The Fairy and the Cobbler," "The Puritan's
Daughter," "The Barber of Seville," "Faust," "Don Giovanni," "Satanella,"
"The Quaker," &c.

24.--Lord Hastings and Mr. Anthony Hamond, masters of Norfolk foxhounds,
were entertained at dinner at the Corn Hall, Fakenham, "in appreciation
of their efforts to provide sport during the season."  The Earl of
Leicester presided.


MAY.


8.--Died at Yarmouth, aged 76, Lieut. William Simpson, R.M., of North
Walsham.  He was one of the officers who received the Emperor Napoleon on
board the Bellerophon, on July 15th, 1815.

14.--A great public meeting, in support of the United Kingdom Alliance,
was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, and was addressed by General Neal
Dow, who had taken a prominent part in the passing of the Maine Liquor
Law.

18.--A meeting of the Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture, presided over by
Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., was held "to discuss the future aggregate
representation of the county in Parliament, in the event of the loss of
three of its borough members," namely, of two on the disenfranchisement
of Yarmouth, and of one on Thetford being constituted a "single membered"
borough.  The following motion was adopted: "That the attention of the
Chamber having been directed to the clauses in the Bill before Parliament
for the redistribution of seats, it is resolved that the proposal to take
away three members from the county is unjust, and that the most strenuous
efforts be made to retain twelve members, to which it is justly entitled,
by reason of its population, wealth, and importance."  It was announced
on June 15th that, under the redistribution scheme, Norfolk would in
future have three divisions, namely, West, North-East, and South-East.
The Boundary Commissioners appointed under the provisions of the
Representation of the People Act held inquiries at Thetford on September
24th, at Norwich on September 27th and October 9th, at Lynn on October
2nd, and at the Shirehall, Norwich, on October 7th.  (_See_ June 18th,
1868.)

21.--Died at West Bilney Hall, Mr. Thomas William Coke.  He was born in
January, 1793, and was the eldest son of Edward Coke, of Longford,
Derbyshire.  In his youth he was frequently at Holkham, and was long
regarded as heir to the estate, but this prospect ended by the marriages
in 1822, of his uncle, Thomas William Coke (created Earl of Leicester in
1837), to Lady Anne Keppel, the issue of which was the large family of
whom the present Earl is the head.  Mr. Coke was very popular, and in
early life was a fearless and accomplished horseman.

24.--The Queen's birthday was observed at Norwich by a parade of the
Volunteers and the firing of a _feu de joie_ in the Market Place.  The
Volunteers were entertained at dinner at the Drill Hall, 700 old people
were invited by the Mayor and Sheriff to a feast at the Corn Hall, and
luncheon was served at St. Andrew's Hall for many of the leading
residents in city and county.

28.--A modified observance of the old custom of "beating the bounds" took
place in the parish of Colkirk.  "The existence of tithe maps and other
circumstances halving rendered actual perambulation comparatively
unnecessary, the circuit of the parish was omitted; but two brief
services were held in the pretty green lanes at the opposite extremities
of the parish, and were attended by 60 or 70 persons, including the
little children of the village school, who marched through the village
singing hymns, preceded by a modest banner."  An address was given at
both services by the Rev. W. A. Chapman.


JUNE.


4.--Died, at the age of 53, Dr. W. H. Ranking, formerly of Norwich.  He
was descended from a family living on the borders of Norfolk and Suffolk,
who had for three generations been engaged in the practice of medicine.
Dr. Ranking received his early education at Hastings, and subsequently
entered the University of Cambridge.  After spending some time in the
hospitals of Paris, he settled at Bury St. Edmund's, and became physician
to the Suffolk General Hospital, a post which he filled for seven years.
After the death of Dr. Lubbock, Dr. Ranking removed to Norwich, and
became physician to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, and editor of the
Journal of the Council of the Provincial Medical and Surgical
Association.  "He was a most uncompromising enemy to quackery in all its
forms, and he always testified to the absurdity of what he considered the
fashionable humbug of the age--homoeopathy."

19.--The annual show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association commenced at
Fakenham, and was continued on the 20th.  By special permission granted
by the Privy Council, at the request of a deputation introduced on May
9th by Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., cattle were exhibited under certain
restrictions.  At the dinner, presided over by the Earl of Kimberley, Mr.
E. C. Bailey was presented with a handsome testimonial, on his
resignation of the office of secretary, after twenty-five years' service.

24.--The First Administrative Battalion of Norfolk Volunteers, commanded
by Col. James Duff, encamped in Hunstanton Park.


JULY.


5.--Mr. J. L. Toole commenced a two nights' engagement at Norwich
Theatre, and appeared in "The Spitialfields Weaver," "Ici on parle
Francais," and "The Area Belle."

6.--Died, in his 70th year, at his residence, Surrey Road, Norwich, Mr.
William Day, who for upwards of forty years had held the office of
magistrates' clerk.

9.--Died, Sir George James Turner, the senior Lord Justice of Appeal.  He
was born at Great Yarmouth in 1798, where his father, the Rev. Richard
Turner, was for thirty years vicar.  His education commenced at the
Charterhouse (of which he was afterwards a governor), and finished at
Pembroke College, Cambridge, where his uncle, Dr. Joseph Turner, Dean of
Norwich, was then master.  In 1819 he took his degree as wrangler, and
was soon afterwards elected a Fellow of Pembroke.  Having entered at
Lincoln's Inn, he was called to the Bar in 1821, and became Queen's
Counsel in 1840, and from 1847 to 1851 sat in the House of Commons as
member for Coventry.  In 1851 he was selected as a Vice-Chancellor, and
in 1853, when Lord Cottenham was appointed Lord Chancellor, he was
promoted Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal.  Sir George married in
1823, Louisa, youngest daughter of Mr. Edward Jones, of Brackley,
Northamptonshire.


AUGUST.


1.--A new lifeboat, the cost of which had been generously defrayed by a
lady residing at Bath, was launched at Sheringham.  It was named the
Duncan, and was housed in a commodious building, with reading-room
attached for the use of the fishermen.

8.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Byles, Hubbard Lingley,
aged 22, was indicted for the murder of Benjamin Black, his uncle, by
shooting him at Barton Bendish, on May 17th.  The prisoner was found
guilty and sentenced to death.  The execution was carried out by
Calcraft, on the Castle Hill, Norwich, at eight a.m. on August 26.  "The
holding of an execution upon Monday instead of on the market-day
(Saturday) is a vast improvement, but it is to be hoped the time is not
far distant when executions will take place within instead of outside the
prison walls."  (This was the last public execution in Norwich.)

--Died at her residence, at Weybridge, Mrs. Austin (Sarah Taylor, of
Norwich).  She was born in 1793, and married, in 1820, Mr. John Austin, a
barrister on the Norfolk Circuit.  A miscellaneous writer of some repute,
she never aspired to original literary compositions, but devoted the
singular power of her pen to the reproduction in English of many of the
best contemporary works of German and French literature.  Her
translations, from the German especially, were of the highest excellence.

12.--Chapel Field, Norwich, which had for some months been closed to the
public, was re-opened.  Several portions of the old city wall had been
removed, and railings erected, and efforts were also made to level the
area.

14.--The Norfolk and Eastern Counties Working Classes Exhibition and
Industrial Festival was opened at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, by the
Mayor (Mr. F. E. Watson).  The exhibition consisted of works of art,
industry, and mechanical invention, and remained open for one month.

30.--Mr. George Buttler Kennett, formerly of Great Yarmouth, was
appointed clerk to the justices of Norwich, in place of Mr. William Day,
deceased.


SEPTEMBER.


4.--A new lifeboat, named the "Licensed Victualler," was launched at
Hunstanton.  Its cost was defrayed by a fund inaugurated by Mr. James
Wyld, editor of the "Licensed Victuallers' Guardian."

10.--A surf lifeboat was launched at Caister-next-the-Sea.  It was
provided, at the cost of 300, by means of a fund raised by the editor of
"Routledge's Magazine for Boys," and was christened by Mrs. Routledge,
"The Boys' Lifeboat."

11.--The Royal Commission appointed to inquire into and report on the
employment of children, young persons, and women in agriculture, for the
purpose of ascertaining to what extent and with what modifications the
principles of the Factory Acts could be adapted for the regulation of
such employment, and especially with the view of the better education of
such children, commenced its investigations in Norfolk in the Docking
Union.  The Assistant-Commissioner (the Rev. James Frazer) held similar
inquiries in other parts of the county, and, in an address to the members
of the Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture, on September 28th, said he had met
at forty-eight meetings 500 Norfolk farmers, "and not on one occasion had
he heard a single painful or discourteous word drop from anybody's lips."

16.--The first annual regatta of the Norfolk and Norwich Rowing Club was
held at Whitlingham.

17.--The Norfolk and Norwich Licensed Victuallers' Association was formed
at a meeting held at the Three Pigeons, Charing Cross, Norwich.

19.--A new church erected at Overstrand, in place of the old church,
which had fallen into decay, was consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich.
The architect was Mr. A. Salvin, of London, and the builder Mr. R.
Cornish, of North Walsham.  The necessary funds were provided principally
by the Dowager Lady Buxton and the descendants of Sir Thomas Fowell
Buxton, deceased, by Mr. Gurney Hoare, Mr. Joseph Hoare, and others.

21.*--"A destructive parasitical weed has made its appearance on some of
the small farms at Navarina, an open district forming a part of the very
extensive manor of Lord Ashburton, at Thetford.  It is known as 'the
dodder.'  It completely absorbs or destroys the crop wherever it appears,
and leaves the land barren of all but its own hair-like fibres.  So
powerful and fatal is the grasp of this singular plant, that even the
hardy and prickly gorse succumbs to the pressure of its delicate fibres."


OCTOBER.


1.--The 15th Hussars, from Aldershot, marched into Norwich, under the
command of Col. F. W. J. Fitzwygram.

12.*--"The county having for upwards of a year been free from cattle
plague, the Norfolk Cattle Plague Association has been wound up, and the
balance in hand, amounting to upwards of 4,000, has been invested in the
names of trustees, Mr. Howes, M.P., and Mr. Read, M.P., to be available
in case of any further emergency."  The "London Gazette," on October
23rd, contained an Order to take effect on November 4th, for the
withdrawal of restrictions on the movement of cattle in the interior of
the kingdom.

14.--A huge female elephant, weighing five tons, and belonging to
Edmonds' (late Wombwell's) Menagerie, started from Diss with the show,
but had not gone far when she fell in Denmark Street.  Poles and tackle
had to be procured, and after four hours' labour the ponderous animal was
raised, put in the caravan, and taken back to the fair green, where she
was placed in slings.  Cordials and other restoratives were administered,
but the animal died on the following day.  She was valued at between 800
and 900, and had been fifteen years in the collection.

22.--An immense eel was taken from the river Ouse, near Denver Sluice.
It measured 5 ft. 8 in. in length, 17.25 in. in girth, and weighed 36
lbs. before and 28 lbs. after being skinned.  "Yarrel, in his 'British
Fishes,' mentions having seen the skins of two at Cambridge which
together weighed 50 lbs.--one 27 lbs. and the other 23 lbs., which were
taken within a few miles of this spot."

28.--The new fishmarket, wharves, and tramways constructed at Great
Yarmouth, at the total cost of 15,799, were opened.


NOVEMBER.


5.--The new Drill Hall at Great Yarmouth, erected at the cost of 1,300,
by Mr. Leggett, from designs by Mr. J. T. Bottle, was opened.

6.--St. Andrew's church, Norwich, was re-opened after restoration.  The
architect who superintended the work was Mr. William Smith, the Adelphi,
London, and the contractor, Mr. Burrell, of Norwich.  The Bishop of
Norwich preached the sermon.

--Died at Yarmouth, aged 82, James Sharman, the keeper of the Nelson
monument on the South Denes.  He was a native of Yarmouth, and entered
the Navy in 1799, having been "pressed" when a waiting lad at the
Wrestlers Inn, and taken on board H.M.S. Weazel, Captain Durben.  After
four years' service he was wrecked off Cabaratta Point, near Gibraltar.
He then joined the Victory, under Captain Thomas Hardy, and at Trafalgar
"assisted in carrying the dying Nelson from the lower deck to the
cockpit."

9.--Mr. Jeremiah James Colman was elected Mayor, and Mr. Robert Fitch
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, a memorial was received from
the parents of boys educated at the Commercial School, praying that the
efficiency of that school should not be impaired in consequence of the
large outlay required for making alterations in and additions to the
Grammar School premises.  The Parliamentary and Bylaws Committee, to whom
the memorial was referred, reported to the Town Council on November 26th
that they strongly deprecated any increase in the fees of the Commercial
School, but they considered the successful maintenance of the Grammar
School of great advantage to the city.  The report was adopted.

10.--Died in Paris, aged 63, Mr. W. Wilshere, of Welwyn, Herts., and
formerly member of Parliament for Yarmouth.  He became a candidate for
that borough with Mr. Rumbold, in the Liberal interest, in 1837, when the
Conservative candidates were Messrs. Baring and Gambier.  On the
dissolution of Parliament in 1847, he retired from the representation of
the borough.  "It is said that his various contests cost him a very large
sum of money, and that in other respects the expenses incident to the
representation of a borough on Liberal principles were too much for
endurance."

16.--Reference was made to the disbandment of the 1st Norfolk Light
Horse, which had been under the command of Capt. Hay Gurney since its
institution by him in 1861.  The members presented to their
commanding-officer a testimonial "representing in frosted silver, on an
ebony stand, a mounted officer and trumpeter in full dress."

20.--The Scratby Hall estate, comprising 280 acres, was sold by auction
by Messrs. Butcher, at the Star Hotel, Yarmouth, for 16,760.

26.--The Rev. Edward Marjoribanks Nisbet, M.A., was installed a
residentiary canon at Norwich Cathedral.

30.--The Right Hon. Edward Stratham Gordon, Lord Advocate of Scotland,
was elected to represent the borough of Thetford in Parliament, upon the
resignation of the Hon. A. H. Baring.  Lord Frederick FitzRoy, who had
come forward as a candidate, withdrew from the contest on the day
appointed for the nomination.  "He departed for London, leaving behind
him an address telling the electors that, by means of treachery,
opposition had been brought against him."


DECEMBER.


1.--The Norfolk coast, in common with the whole of England, was visited
by a gale of unusual violence.  It resulted not only in great destruction
of property, but in the loss of many lives.  At Yarmouth the waters
overflowed the banks of the river, inundated all the low-lying lands from
the harbour's mouth to Reedham, and, flooding the neighbouring railways,
stopped the traffic.  Several vessels were driven ashore and their crews
lost.  On December 2nd the lifeboat Rescuer was entering the harbour with
the shipwrecked crew of the ship George Kendall, from Liverpool to Hull,
on board, when she fouled with a fishing-boat and was capsized.  Of the
shipwrecked crew of twenty-three only four were saved, and of the
lifeboat crew six were drowned.  Many widows and children were left
destitute, owing to the large number of lives lost during the gale.

--The parish church of Little Ellingham was destroyed by fire.  The
building had recently undergone extensive restoration, and the damage,
due to the overheating of a new warming apparatus, amounted to upwards of
1,000.  Efforts were made by the Hingham fire brigade to preserve the
chancel, and were in part successful, but the nave was wholly demolished.
Under the supervision of Messrs. T. H. and F. Healey, architects, of
Bradford, the nave was rebuilt and the chancel repaired by the
contractor, Mr. Clarke, of Hingham; and the church was re-opened for
public worship on Ascension Day, 1869.

24.--A common hall was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the
presidency of the Mayor (Mr. J. J. Colman), at which the citizens
expressed their "detestation of the late Fenian outrage at Clerkenwell,
their sympathy with the sufferers, and their loyal attachment to the
Queen and the Constitution."

26.--The Christmas pantomime produced by Mr. Sidney at Norwich Theatre
was entitled, "Hush-a-Bye Baby on the Tree Top, or Harlequin Fortunio,
Clown King Frog of Frog Island, and the Fairy Queen of the Golden
Flowers."  At Mander's Menagerie, stationed on the Castle Meadow, "the
electric light was exhibited in the interior during Maccomo's performance
with the lions, tigers, and elephants."  On the 30th was produced at
Henry and Adams' Circus an "equestrian pantomime," entitled, "O'Donaghue
of the Lakes, or Harlequin Dermot Astore and the White Horse of
Killarney."

30.--The Prince and Princess of Wales arrived at Holkham, on a visit to
the Earl and Countess of Leicester, and returned to Sandringham on
January 4th, 1868.  Prince Edward of Saxe-Weimar was of the party.



1868.


JANUARY.


2.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, held at Norwich, Mr. Day, the County
Treasurer, gave notice of his intention at the Easter Sessions, to resign
that office, which he had held for thirty-three years.  Mr. Day took
leave of the Court on April 2nd, and Mr. Herbert William Day was elected
in his place.

--Lord Suffield, at the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, moved the adoption of
an address to her Majesty, expressing indignation at the Fenian outrages
committed throughout the kingdom, and promising the hearty and vigorous
co-operation of her Majesty's loyal subjects in the county in supporting
the Government in any efforts that might be made "to repress this odious
conspiracy."  It was stated on January 11th that at Yarmouth precautions
had been taken to prevent an outbreak in the borough.  Each ward was
under the special supervision of two magistrates; the store of gunpowder
was removed from the outlying magazine at the North Battery to the South
Battery, where a strong guard was stationed; and directions were given to
the Artillery and Rifle Volunteers as to the course to be pursued in the
event of their services being required.

14.--The Norwich Churchmen's Club was established at a meeting held at
the Clerical Rooms.  It was intended for "the self-culture and rational
recreation of young men."  For some years afterwards the society
continued to flourish, and was instrumental during the early period of
its existence in introducing to the city several eminent lecturers on
scientific and other subjects.

16.--A remarkable seizure of about one hundred coombs of wheat was made
at the New Mills, Norwich.  This "mass of filth, one-tenth wheat and
nine-tenths rats' dung and maggots," had been sent to the mills by Mr.
Orlando Barnes, of Beeston, "for the purpose of being dressed for the
preparation of human food."  The magistrates granted an order for its
destruction, and on the 22nd and 23rd it was publicly burned in the
Cattle Market.  At the Norwich Police Court, on February 7th, Mr. Barnes
was summoned for sending the wheat to the mills with the view of
preparing it for human consumption, and was fined 40s. and costs.  The
Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture, on February 8th, discussed "the policy of
destroying agricultural produce by any local authority under the
Nuisances Removal Act, 1863, without sufficient proof of its unfitness
for feeding or some other useful purpose."  A motion was adopted
affirming that such a practice was impolitic.  In the following week
handbills were circulated calling upon the citizens to make an
"indignation visit" to Mr. Barnes' premises at Beeston on Sunday,
February 16th.  The Mayor issued notices warning all persons to abstain
from taking part in the proposed proceedings, and the Chief Constable of
the county (Col. Black) drafted to the district thirty police-officers
and eight mounted inspectors and sergeants to prevent trespass upon the
farm.  Several thousands of persons visited the village during the
afternoon, but a hostile demonstration was prevented.

18.--The colours of the 54th (West Norfolk) Regiment, bearing the marks
of the severe conflicts through which they had passed, were "laid up" at
Norwich Cathedral.  They were brought from Aldershot on the 17th, in
charge of Capt. Shirecliff Parker, Lieut. Smart, Ensign Ibbetson, and two
colour-sergeants, and were deposited for the night at the Guildhall.  On
the morning of the 18th the colours, escorted by the 15th Hussars, and
preceded by the band of that regiment, were borne to the Cathedral.
After Morning Prayer had been said, Lieut. Smart carried the Queen's and
Ensign Ibbetson the Regimental colour to the altar rails, and, kneeling,
handed them to Canon Nisbet and Canon Heaviside, "who placed them leaning
across the altar, one on the north and the other on the south side"; the
National Anthem was played upon the organ, and the officers and escort,
who wore their busbies, saluted.  Canon Nisbet preached from Psalm xx.,
part of the 5th verse.  The colours were subsequently placed in the
positions they now occupy in the choir.

23.--A fire, involving the loss of three lives and the destruction of
much valuable property, occurred at the house of Mr. Frederick Pigg,
hosier and boot and shoe manufacturer, Market Row, Yarmouth.  Mrs. Pigg,
in heroically attempting to save her two children, was buried beneath the
falling roof of the building, and the charred remains of the mother and
infants were found the following day.  The value of the property
destroyed was about 3,500.

28.--The first of the many long discussions upon the sewerage question
during this year took place at a special meeting of the Norwich Town
Council, on a recommendation of the Sewerage Committee that a memorial
from the citizens, praying for the introduction of the dry earth system,
instead of an expensive scheme of drainage, be not adopted.  It was
decided that the works had progressed too far to admit of any
reconsideration of the plans.  On February 28th a large meeting of
ratepayers was held at the Lecture Hall, St. Andrew's, under the
presidency of Sir Samuel Bignold, at which the following resolution was
passed:--"That the Local Board of Health be respectfully requested to
postpone the proposed drainage works, and that Messrs. Hay Gurney,
Charles Foster, J. Davey, and W. H. Clabburn and the other promoters of
the injunction be earnestly entreated not to interpose any obstacle to
the Board's compliance with this request."  The "injunctionists," on
March 2nd, received a deputation appointed by the meeting, and, after
hearing their statements, Dr. Dalrymple replied on behalf of the relators
in the suit that they were of opinion "the question of proceeding with
the scheme of drainage did not rest with them but with the Town Council,
and they were not prepared to take any steps which would prejudice their
legal position for enforcing the purification of the river."  On March
10th a memorial was presented to the Town Council, urging that the
drainage scheme in the then perplexity of sanitary science was "a
speculation with the health of the city," and that it was "stark madness
to plunge into a gulf of unplumbed expenditure unwarned by the failures
in other cities."  A motion was adopted authorising the Sewerage and
Irrigation Committee to negotiate for a loan not exceeding 60,000,
required for the construction of sewerage works.  On the 17th a band
paraded the city to attract the citizens to a common hall, at which
resolutions were adopted affirming that the rates were too high and the
trade of Norwich too depressed to warrant this costly experiment in
drainage.  The Town Council, on April 7th, entered into a contract with
Messrs. Shrimpton and Co., of Uxbridge Road, London, for the construction
of certain sewerage works, at the cost of 28,874; and it was agreed to
take up at interest of the Hand-in-Hand Fire and Life Office the sum of
30,000, of which 20,000 was to be paid as soon as the necessary security
was prepared, and the remaining 10,000 at the expiration of six months,
at the rate of 4 15s. per cent. per annum.  (_See_ March 5th, 1869.)

31.--Died at Welborne, aged 100 years, Benjamin Tooley, "leaving a widow
at the advanced age of 99."


FEBRUARY.


1.--During the prevalence of a severe gale from W. and S.W., shipping
casualties of a very serious character occurred off the coast of Norfolk,
and inland considerable damage was done to property.  Trees were
uprooted, stacks overturned, and many houses partially unroofed.

6.--A collision occurred off Happisburgh, between the screw steamer Swan,
of and for Newcastle, and the paddle steamer Seagull, of Hull.  The
Seagull, which foundered, with the loss of a passenger, was valued at
15,000, and her cargo at 10,000.

13.--During a run of the Norfolk and Suffolk Harriers over land at West
Tofts, in the occupation of Mr. Colman, the hare was shot by a gamekeeper
in the service of that gentleman.  During the altercation which ensued
Mr. Colman appeared, and blows were exchanged between the members of the
Hunt and himself.  Reinforcements came to Mr. Column's assistance, and
the engagement became general, the conflict ending in favour of the Hunt.
At the Norfolk Assizes, on March 31st. before Mr. Baron Martin, was tried
the action, Colman _v._ Larkman, in which the plaintiff claimed damages
for injury done to his crops and fences and for being assaulted with a
hunting-whip by the defendant.  The special jury gave a verdict for the
plaintiff, damages 50.

15.--Died at his residence, St. Giles' Street, Norwich, Mr. Arthur
Dalrymple, who had held the office of Clerk of the Peace since 1856.  He
was a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, a lover of science and art,
and possessed a unique and valuable collection of Norfolk portraits.

19.--In the Court of Exchequer, before the Lord Chief Baron, Messrs.
Henry Morgan and others, as assignees of the estate and effects of
Messrs. Riches and Watts, engineers, of Norwich, brought a claim against
William Cafferata, engineer, of Newark, for the recovery of 5,000 damages
which had been sustained by the estate of the bankrupts by reason of the
explosion of a steam boiler which they purchased of the defendant and had
supplied to Mr. Richard John Stark.  It was warranted to be of the very
best metal, but was really of inferior quality, and burst with disastrous
consequences.  The defendant accepted a verdict against himself of 2,000
damages.

20.--Died at Portsmouth, Rear-Admiral Robert Sharpe, K.T.S., aged 76
years.  A native of Tunstead, he entered the Navy in 1807, on board the
Mars (Captain Lukin), and retired with the rank of Rear-Admiral in 1865.
"Whilst in command of the Siska, he conducted the King of Musquito from
Blasford to Belize to be crowned."


MARCH.


8.--Died at Thetford, in his 73rd year, Mr. Isaac Carr.  He was described
as "a veteran politician of the old school, who was deputed some two
years since by Mr. Harvey, M.P., to compile a history of Thetford, which
he had not completed at the time of his death."

9.--The ceremony of laying the foundation-stone of the new dock at Lynn
was performed by Mrs. Jarvis, wife of Mr. L. W. Jarvis, chairman of the
Dock Company.  (_See_ July 7th, 1869.)

10.--The first screw steamboat built in Norwich was launched from Field's
boatbuilding yard, Carrow Abbey.  She was named the Alexandra, and was
intended for passenger traffic on the local rivers.  Mr. John Hart
Boughen was the owner of the vessel.

--Mr. Elijah Crosier Bailey was appointed Clerk of the Peace for the city
and county of the city of Norwich.

--The Norwich Town Council, on the motion of Mr. Field, adopted a
resolution affirming the desirability of arranging with the Board of
Guardians for the collection by one set of paid collectors of all the
public rates within the corporate district of Norwich.  On April 21st the
Town Council adopted the report of a joint committee of the Corporation
and the Guardians, who recommended that the corporate district be divided
into eight districts; that the then four collectors be retained at the
salary of 140 per year each; that four new collectors be appointed, at
the salary of 100 a year each; that in future two poor rates be made
yearly, namely, one in January and one in July, both of such rates to be
collected in two instalments, the first in January and July, and the
second in April and October; and that a like arrangement be made as to
the making and collection of the rates of the Board of Health.  This
arrangement was known as the consolidation of the rates.

27.--Died at North Creake, in his 71st year, the Ven. R. E. Hankinson,
M.A., Archdeacon of Norwich.  He was educated at Corpus Christi College,
Cambridge, where he took his B.A. degree in 1821, and was ordained in the
same year by Bishop Bathurst, of Norwich.  For some years he was minister
of Well Walk Chapel, Hampstead; in 1847 was presented by the Dean and
Chapter of Norwich to the incumbency of St. Margaret and St. Nicholas,
King's Lynn, which he held until 1863, when he was presented to the
rectory of North Creake; and was appointed to the Archdeaconry of Norwich
in 1857.  He was succeeded by the Rev. Augustus Macdonald Hopper,
honorary canon and rural dean, and proctor for the Archdeaconries of
Norfolk and Norwich, who was collated on April 26th.

31.--At the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, a meeting of the Conservative and
Constitutional Association passed a resolution condemnatory of Mr.
Gladstone's resolutions on the Irish Church.  Many meetings were held for
the same purpose in different parts of the county, and on April 23rd the
Norwich Diocesan Church Association recorded its protest against the
measure.


APRIL.


8.--A complimentary dinner, attended by about 150 gentlemen, was given to
Lord Hastings at the Royal Hotel, Norwich, in recognition of the
successful manner in which he had hunted the East Norfolk Foxhounds.

13.--The English Grand Opera Company, managed by Mr. G. B. Loveday and
Mr. Oliver Summers, commenced a season's engagement at Norwich Theatre.
Madame Haigh-Dyer was the _prima donna_, and Mr. Henry Haigh and Mr.
Henry Rowland were members of the company.  The works produced included
"Un Ballo in Maschira," "Fidelio," "Masaniello," "Faust," "Lurline," "Il
Trovatore," "Satanella," "Rose of Castile," and "Crown Diamonds."

14.--The headquarters of the 15th Hussars marched from Norwich Cavalry
Barracks, _en route_ to York.

17.--East Raynham church was re-opened, after restoration.  The Marquis
Townshend had entirely rebuilt the nave, at the cost of upwards of 4,000,
and the rector, the Rev. R. Phayre, the chancel, at the cost of 1,000.
The work was commenced in May, 1866, by the contractor, Mr. William
Hubbard, of East Dereham.

25.--Died at Ballycroy, Ballina, co. Mayo, where he had occupied an
extensive farm, Mr. T. J. Birch, Judge of the Norfolk County Court
circuit.  The second son of Mr. Wyrley Birch, of Wretham Hall, he was
born prior to the settlement of the family in the county.  He was
educated at Eton, and having graduated at Oxford, entered the Inner
Temple, and was called to the Bar on November 18th, 1831.  His first
official connection with the county was as a magistrate and joint
chairman of the Court of Quarter Sessions.  After the passing of the
first County Courts Act, the Liberal Government of the day appointed him,
in March, 1847, to the judgeship of the Norfolk district.  He was
succeeded in his appointment by Mr. William Henry Cooke, Q.C., Recorder
of Oxford.


MAY.


1.--Died at the South Kensington Hotel, London, Mr. Albemarle Cator, of
Woodbastwick Hall, aged 55.  He was one of the most prominent sportsmen
in the county, was a Conservative in politics, and was upon the
Commission of the Peace.  In the year preceding his death he served the
office of High Sheriff of Norfolk.

4.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, an address was
adopted congratulating the Queen upon the failure of the attempted
assassination of the Duke of Edinburgh.

25.--The Queen's birthday was observed at Norwich as a public holiday.
The Rifle Volunteers fired a _feu de joie_ in the Market Place, and the
Artillery Volunteers a salute on the Castle Hill.  The Mayor's _dejeuner_
at the Drill Hall was attended by 1,000 guests, and his entertainment at
the Corn Hall by over 1,000 of the aged poor, among whom were an old lady
aged 98 and her daughter aged 80.

30.--Died at Thetford, Mr. Leonard Shelford Bidwell, aged 86.  Mr.
Bidwell had several times served the office of Mayor, was upon the
Commission of the Peace for the county and for the borough, and was
senior Alderman of the Corporation.  In politics he was a Conservative,
and had always given his support and influence to the house of Baring in
the representation of the borough.


JUNE.


11.--Died at his residence, Burrator, Devon, Sir James Brooke, K.C.B.,
Rajah of Sarawak.

13.--The name of Lord Ranelagh, High Sheriff of the county, was brought
into unpleasant prominence at Bow Street Police Court, during the hearing
of a charge against Madame Rachel for fraudulently obtaining from a Mrs.
Borradaile the sum of 1,000, upon pretence of making her "beautiful for
ever."  Madame Rachel had informed her dupe that Lord Ranelagh had fallen
desperately in love with her, and was ready to marry her "providing he
had 1,400 for Volunteering purposes."  Lord Ranelagh emphatically denied
having had anything to do in the matter further than that he had received
letters from Mrs. Borradaile, and had suggested to her family that she
should be taken care of, believing that she was under delusions.

--Died at his residence, the Crescent, Norwich, in his 83rd year, Mr. J.
N. V. Cooper, who was for more than 56 years clerk to the Governors of
the Bethel Hospital.

18.--In the House of Commons it was agreed, on the motion of Mr. Howes,
that the three divisions of the county be thenceforth known as North,
South, and West Norfolk, instead of "North Eastern, South Eastern, and
West."

--The annual show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association commenced at
Downham Market, and was continued on the 19th.  Mr. W. Amhurst Tyssen
Amherst was President.

20.--The Norwich Volunteers attended the review held by the Queen in
Windsor Park.  The Rifles, under the command of Lieut.-Col. Black,
numbered 455; and the Artillery, under Capt. Barber, 111.  Both corps
mustered on Tombland at 5.30 a.m., left Thorpe Station at 6.15 a.m., and
returned from Windsor the same day.

27.--The 1st Administrative Battalion Norfolk Volunteers went into camp
at Hunstanton Park, 500 strong, and remained under canvas until July 2nd.
The battalion was inspected by Col. Boileau.

30.--The Norwich Electoral Union selected Mr. Jacob Henry Tillett as
Liberal candidate for the city, in view of the pending General Election.


JULY.


23.--A two days' cricket match commenced on the Lakenham Ground, Norwich,
between a team of "Aboriginal Australians" and the Carrow Club.  The
Australians showed surprising skill with the bat, and in the first day's
play made 177, against the Carrow score of 82.

26.--Died, Robert Monsey Rolfe, Baron Cranworth of Cranworth.  His
lordship was the eldest and only surviving son of the Rev. Edward Rolfe,
and was born December 18th, 1790.  His father, like his uncle,
grandfather, and great grandfather, was a plain country clergyman,
holding the livings of Cockley Cley and of Cranworth, and it was at the
rectory house of the latter parish that he was born, and from which he
selected his title just 60 years afterwards.  His mother was a Miss
Alexander, a granddaughter of Dr. Monsey, the physician of Chelsea
Hospital.  Having received his early education at Bury St. Edmund's, he
was transferred to Winchester College, and in due course proceeded to
Cambridge, took his B.A. degree as 17th wrangler in 1812, and was elected
to the Fellowship of Downing College.  He entered Lincoln's Inn, and was
called to the Bar in 1816.  One of his first public appointments was that
of Recorder of Bury St. Edmund's, and he more than once, as a Liberal,
contested the representation of the borough against the powerful interest
of the Marquis of Bristol.  In 1832 he obtained a silk gown, and in the
same year was returned to Parliament.  On becoming Solicitor-General, in
1834, he received the honour of knighthood, and at the close of 1839
accepted a puisne judgeship as one of the Barons of Exchequer.  In 1850
he was nominated a Vice-Chancellor, a post which, in the following year,
he exchanged for that of a Justice of Appeal in Chancery, which he
continued to hold until the Great Seal of the kingdom was entrusted to
his hands by Lord Aberdeen, on the formation of the Coalition Cabinet in
December, 1852.  In the same year he was raised to the Peerage, and as
Lord Cranworth again held the Great Seal in 1865-66.  His lordship
married Miss Carr, of Froghall Park, Hampstead.

27.--Mr. Simmons ascended in his large balloon from the Victoria Gardens,
Yarmouth, and descended at Caister.  On August 6th he made an ascent from
the Greenhill Gardens, Norwich, and descended in Horstead Park.  Mr.
Simmons, on August 13th, exhibited the balloon in Norwich Market Place,
where, in a captive state, it made several ascents.  The aeronaut,
accompanied by Mr. William Maris, then ascended to the height of 10,000
feet in the space of two minutes, when the balloon drifted away in a
north-easterly direction.  The passengers made a perilous descent near
the sea coast.  They narrowly escaped with their lives by jumping out of
the car, and the balloon, blown out to sea, fell into the water two and a
half miles off Sheringham.  The voyage from Norwich lasted only fifteen
minutes.

29.--A great Volunteer _fete_ and _al fresco_ entertainment took place in
the grounds of Quebec House, East Dereham, the residence of Capt. Bulwer.
The _fete_, which was attended by many hundreds of persons, was in aid of
the funds of the corps.

31.--Died at his residence, St. George's Middle Street, Norwich, aged 75,
the Rev. John Alexander, for nearly 50 years pastor of Prince's Street
chapel.  "He was honoured and loved by his congregation as a
kind-hearted, liberal-minded, and truly Christian gentleman."


AUGUST.


7.--The dismounted party of the B and C Batteries, Royal Horse Artillery,
arrived by rail at Norwich.  The mounted portion marched in on the 13th,
under the command of Major H. P. Bishop.

8.*--"The death, of Mr. George Cattermole, the well-known artist, is
announced.  He was born at Dickleburgh, near Diss, in 1800.  At an early
age he acquired proficiency as a draughtsman, and some of the most
elaborate drawings in Britton's 'Cathedrals' emanate from him."

--Chang, the Chinese giant, was exhibited at the Lecture Hall, St.
Andrew's, Norwich.  "He is between 8.5 ft and 9 ft. high, and his natural
suavity of manner is very agreeable to those he meets."

10.--The Grand English Opera and Ballet Company appeared at Norwich
Theatre.  The _artistes_, included Miss Annie Thirlwall, Miss Blanch
Cole, Miss Fanny Rowland, Mr. William Parkinson, Mr. Aynsley Cook, Mr.
Eugene Corri, Mr. Charles Durand, &c.  In the company's repertory were
"Un Ballo in Maschira," "Faust," and a _ballet divertissement_, in which
the sisters Louie and Marie Smithers appeared.

19.--The British Association for the Advancement of Science commenced its
thirty-eighth congress at Norwich.  The General Committee met at St.
Pater's Hall in the morning, and in the evening the President, Mr. J. D.
Hooker, F.R.S., D.C.L., delivered his inaugural address, at the Drill
Hall.  The various sections were presided over by the following
gentlemen:--Mathematical and Physical Science, Professor Tyndall, LL.D.,
F.R.S.; Chemical Science, Professor Frankland, F.R.S.; Geology, Mr. R. A.
C. Godwin Austen, F.R.S., F.G.S.; Biology, the Rev. J. M. Berkeley, M.A.,
F.R.S.; Geography and Ethnology, Capt. Richards, F.R.S., Hydrographer to
the Royal Navy; Economic Science and Statistics, Mr. Samuel Brown,
President of the Society of Actuaries; Mechanical Science, Mr. G. Bidder,
C.E.  On the 22nd the members were invited to Crown Point by Mr. R. J. H.
Harvey and Lady Henrietta Harvey.  The concluding meeting was held at St.
Peter's Hall on the 26th, after which excursions were made to Lynn,
Hunstanton, Wolterton, Walsingham, Burgh Castle, and Holkham Hall, where
the members were entertained by the Earl of Leicester.  The International
Congress of Prehistoric Archaeology, presided over by Sir John Lubbock,
was held simultaneously with the gathering of the British Association.
Its meetings took place at the Public Library.

19.--Died at his residence, Craven Hill Gardens, Bayswater, General Sir
George Petre Wymer, K.C.B., Colonel of the 107th Regiment.  He was a son
of Mr. George Wymer, of Reepham, where he was born on August 19th, 1788.
Educated at North Walsham, he entered the military service of the East
India Company in August, 1804, served in Lord Lake's campaign of 1805,
and throughout the Nepaul War in 1814-15.  In 1840 he joined the army
under Sir William Nott at Candahar, and was present during the investment
of that city.  He was appointed brigadier, and in command of the First
Brigade of the Candahar Force saw much active service.  In 1842 he was
appointed _aide-de-camp_ to the Queen, in recognition of his services in
Afghanistan, and in 1857 he was made a K.C.B. for his military services
in India.  His military career extended over 64 years.  General Wymer
married, in 1833, a daughter of Sir C. F. Crespigny.


SEPTEMBER.


4.--A new lifeboat, built at the cost of 1,000 subscribed to the National
Lifeboat Institution by Mr. Benjamin Bond Cabbell, of Cromer Hall, was
launched at Cromer.  Mr. Bond Cabbell also provided all the necessary
appliances, the transport carriage, and the boat-house.  The Bishop of
the diocese delivered an address at the launch, and the ceremony of
christening the boat by the name of Benjamin Bond Cabbell was performed
by Miss Buxton.

7.--Died, Francis Baring, third Baron Ashburton.  His lordship was second
son of Alexander, first Baron, by his wife Anne Louisa, eldest daughter
of Mr. W. Bingham, of Philadelphia.  He was born on May 20th, 1800, and
married in January, 1831, Mdlle. Claire Hortense, daughter of the Duke de
Bassano, by whom he left issue Alexander, his successor in the title, and
formerly Member of Parliament for Thetford, the Hon. Denzil Hugh Baring,
and an only daughter, Mary Louisa Anne, married to the Duke of Grafton.
Previously to his accession to the family honours, the deceased nobleman
represented Thetford in Parliament, namely, from 1832 to 1841, and from
July, 1848, to December, 1857.  He was a Conservative in politics, but,
like his father and brother, was moderate in his views, and generally
voted with the class of politicians formerly known as "Peelites."

10.--Died at Westgate House, near Bury St. Edmund's, Rear-Admiral Sir
William Legge George Hoste.  He was the eldest son of Sir William Hoste
(who was created baronet in 1814 for his naval services, but particularly
for the victory he gained over the combined French and Italian squadrons
off the island of Lessa in 1811), and Lady Harriett, third daughter of
Horatio, second Earl of Orford.  Born on March 19th, 1818, he succeeded
to the baronetcy on the death of his father, in December, 1828.  He was
Gentleman Usher to Queen Adelaide from 1845 to 1849, and was appointed
Groom-in-Waiting to Queen Victoria in 1860.


OCTOBER.


21.--Died, from the effects of an accident, caused by a fall from his
horse whilst riding from Cringleford to Earlham, Mr. Charles Evans,
barrister-at-law, and Chancellor for the Diocese of Norwich.  Mr. Evans
was born at Harrow in 1798, and was the eldest son of the Rev. Benjamin
Evans, formerly a Fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge, and for many
years assistant-master at Harrow School.  After remaining a short time at
Eton, he proceeded to Pembroke College, where he took his degree in 1819,
as twelfth wrangler, and was afterwards elected a Fellow.  On being
called to the Bar Mr. Evans joined the Norfolk Circuit, and in 1824
settled in Norwich, where he practised to the time of his death.  In 1845
he was appointed by Bishop Stanley to the Chancellorship of the diocese.
He was acting judge of the Court of Record, Chairman of the Board of
Guardians, to which office he was elected on the passing of the new Act
in 1863; president of the directors of the Norwich Union Office, a
magistrate of the city, chairman of the Governors of the Grammar School,
&c.  Mr. Evans married in 1829 Emily, daughter of Mr. George Morse, of
Catton, by whom he left eight children--five sons and three daughters.

31.--The Earl of Leicester presided at a meeting of the inhabitants of
the county and city, held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, "for the purpose
of bringing the affairs of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital before the
public."  Resolutions were adopted affirming that the resources of the
institution were inadequate to meet the annual expenditure, and as a
means of increasing the revenue it was desirable "that on one Sunday at
least in every year, as far as possible on the same Sunday, collections
be made for the benefit of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital in places of
worship throughout the diocese, where such collections shall not
interfere with the claims of other hospitals."  As the resources of the
Hospital were heavily drawn upon by casualty cases, a separate fund
called the Accident Fund was established.


NOVEMBER.


9.--Mr. Edward Kerrison Harvey was elected Mayor and Mr. John Robison
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

15.--For the second time since its erection in 1857-8, the Britannia pier
at Yarmouth was partially destroyed.  Built at the cost of 6,000, it was
originally 750 feet in length.  On October 25th, 1859, during a
tremendous gale, a sloop, driven from her anchors, was dashed upon the
pier and divided it into two portions.  It was deemed advisable not to
rebuild the severed portion, 80 feet in length, and the terminal portion
was subsequently removed.  During a heavy north-east gale on this date
the schooner Seagull, of Lynn, parted from her anchors, and, drifting
towards land, struck against the north side of the pier.  The crew of six
hands speedily scrambled upon the structure and escaped, but about 105
feet of the centre portion of the pier was completely torn away and
damage done to the amount of nearly 1,000.

16.--The nomination of candidates for Norwich, to be elected under the
new Reform Act, took place at the Guildhall.  The Liberal candidates were
Col. Sir William Russell, Bart., C.B., Charlton Park, Charlton Kings,
Gloucester, and Mr. Jacob Henry Tillett; and the Conservative candidates
Sir Henry Josias Stracey, Bart., of Rackheath, who had been selected
about a fortnight previously.  The show of hands was in favour of the
Liberals, and Sir Samuel Bignold demanded a poll, which was opened on the
17th "at 29 polling places most conveniently arranged in the different
wards."  The pronouncement of the electorate at this election was upon
the Irish Church, and at Norwich, as elsewhere, a severe contest
resulted.  The poll closed at four o'clock with the return of Sir William
Russell and Sir Henry Stracey, the figures being officially declared on
the 18th as follow:--Stracey, 4,521; Russell, 4,509; Tillett, 4,364.  Sir
Henry Stracey, accompanied by Lady Stracey, on the morning of the 18th
was escorted from Rackheath Park to Norwich, by his mounted tenantry, and
received at Magdalene Gates by an imposing procession of Conservative
electors, who, amid the playing of brass bands and the ringing of St.
Peter Mancroft bells, accompanied him to the Guildhall.  After the
declaration the procession, half a mile in length, marched through the
city.  Mr. Tillett, in an address to the electors, stated: "The Tory
party have, beyond all precedent, and in the most undisguised manner,
committed themselves to the disgrace involved in the wholesale purchase
of votes."  (_See_ January 14th, 1869.)

16.--The nomination of representatives to serve in Parliament for the
Western Division of the county took place at Swaffham, when Sir William
Bagge, Bart., and the Hon. Thomas de Grey were re-elected without
opposition.

17.--The nomination of candidates for the borough took place at King's
Lynn.  Lord Stanley and the Hon. Robert Bourke were nominated by the
Conservatives, and Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, Bart., by the Liberals.  The
poll was opened on the 18th, and resulted as follows:--Stanley, 1,265;
Bourke, 1,125; Buxton, 1,012.  (_See_ March 16th, 1869.)

--Died at his residence, Surrey Street, Norwich, in his 82nd year, Mr.
Thomas Brightwell.  A native of Ipswich, he married the only daughter of
Mr. W. M. Wilkin, of Costessey, and settled in Norwich, where he resided
for 60 years, and practised as a solicitor.  An earnest Nonconformist, he
joined the congregation which assembled at the Old Meeting in St.
Clement's, where to the close of his life he officiated as one of the
deacons.  He was the author of a work on the Pentateuch, and his
intellectual attainments and scientific pursuits gained him admission
into the circle which included William Taylor, Doctors Sayers, Martineau,
Rigby, and Barrow, Sir James Smith, and other Norwich celebrities.  Men
bearing historic names, and of widely different sentiments, had from time
to time been entertained beneath his roof--Williams, Dr. Gary, Moffat,
Doctors Philip and Wolff, of missionary fame; Joseph Kinghorn, the
eloquent Irving, Belzoni, the Egyptian explorer; Professor Sedgwick,
George Borrow, and many others who had done good service in the cause of
religion, literature, and science.  A close observer of nature, Mr.
Brightwell gave much of his time to entomology, and a fine collection of
insects in the Norfolk and Norwich Museum was formed by him.  But the
study to which, in his later years, he devoted especial attention was
that of Infusoria.  A treatise upon Infusoria, illustrated from drawings
by his daughter, was written by Mr. Brightwell and printed for private
circulation.  At the Norwich Congress of the British Association, of
which he was a vice-president, he was greatly amused by the anxious and
ineffectual endeavours made by several of the scientific men present to
procure copies of the work, then out of print.  In 1821 Mr. Brightwell
became a Fellow of the Linnaean Society, and he also rendered
considerable assistance in the formation of the Norfolk and Norwich
Literary Institution and of the Norfolk and Norwich Museum.

21.--The nomination of candidates for South Norfolk took place at the
Shirehall, Norwich.  The Conservative candidates were Mr. Edward Howes,
of Morningthorpe, and Mr. Clare Sewell Read, of Honingham Thorpe.  Mr.
Henry Lombard Hudson, of Harleston, was nominated by the Liberals.  The
polling, on the 24th, resulted as follows: Read, 3,097; Howes, 3,055;
Hudson, 1,679.

23.--The following gentlemen were nominated at Aylsham to contest the new
constituency of North Norfolk:--Sir Edmund Knowles Lacon, Bart., and the
Hon. Frederick Walpole, Conservatives; Mr. Edward Robert Wodehouse and
Mr. Robert T. Gurdon, Liberals.  The polling took place on the 26th, at
nine polling-places--Aylsham, Cromer, Holt, North Walsham, Ormesby,
Reepham, Stalham, Wells, and Yarmouth.  The official declaration was made
at Aylsham on the 28th, as follows:--Walpole, 2,630; Lacon, 2,563;
Wodehouse, 2,235; Gurdon, 2,078.  (_See_ May 17th, 1869.)


DECEMBER.


19.*--"A club bearing the name of the Norwich Football Club has been
started, and has already begun to play upon the Norfolk and Norwich
Cricket Ground.  Mr. Croker has been elected president, and Mr. Edward A.
Field treasurer and secretary."  The members made their public _debut_ on
February 5th, 1869, in a match against King Edward VI. School.  (This is
the first reference to football, as distinct from the old game of camp
ball, made in the columns of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE.)

26.--The pantomime produced at Norwich Theatre was entitled "The White
Fawn, or the Loves of Buttercup and Daisy and the Fairies of the Coral
Lake."  At Wombwell's Menagerie (then owned by Mr. Fairgrieve, of
Edinburgh) was exhibited, "Prince Bonta Workey, son of the late King
Theodore, who held levees in his grand state saloon at stated intervals
during the day."

--Died at his residence, Chapel Field Road, Norwich, Mr. Trivet Allcock,
in his 80th year.  "He was an active politician and staunch Liberal, and
had associated in his earlier life with men like William Taylor and
others, whose superior learning formerly made Norwich celebrated."



1869.


JANUARY.


1.--At the justices' room of the Mansion House, London, John Henry
Gurney, Henry Edmund Gurney, Robert Birkbeck, Henry Ford Barclay, Henry
George Gordon, and William Rennie, directors of Overend, Gurney, and
Company, Limited, were summoned for having, in July, 1865, and at divers
other times, conspired to defraud Dr. Adam Thom and others who became
shareholders in the company, of money to the amount of three millions
sterling.  The defendants, on the 27th, were committed for trial, and
were admitted to bail, each of them in the sum of 10,000, with two
sureties of 5,000 each.  The trial commenced in the Court of Queen's
Bench on December 13th, before the Lord Chief Justice, who summed up on
December 22nd, and the jury, after a few minutes' deliberation, returned
a verdict of not guilty.  Intense excitement prevailed in Norwich during
the trial, and on December 22nd, when the result was telegraphed to the
city, it was everywhere hailed with great satisfaction.  A remarkable
scene occurred at Norwich Corn Hall, where a sale was in progress when
the intelligence was received.  The proceedings were stopped by cheering,
the waving of hats, and other demonstrations of approval, and the
auctioneer, addressing the company, said, "The name of Gurney was an
honoured name in Norwich.  The Gurneys had ever been friends of the poor
and kind and good to all classes, and all were glad that the trial had
resulted in the honourable acquittal of all the defendants."

2.--At the Lambeth Police Court, William Sheward, aged 57, was charged
upon his own confession with the wilful murder of his wife, Martha
Sheward, at Norwich, on June 15th, 1851.  On the night of January 1st the
prisoner went to the Carter Street Police Station and said to the officer
in charge, "I have killed my wife.  I have kept the secret for years, but
I can keep it no longer."  In a further statement he said he had intended
to destroy himself, "but the Almighty would not let him do it."  He added
that he had cut up his wife's body, and that a portion was kept in
spirits of wine at the Guildhall at Norwich, by order of the magistrates.
At the Norwich Police Court, on January 4th, the Chief Constable (Mr.
Hitchman) detailed to the magistrates the particulars reported to him by
the London police, and stated that on June 21st, 1851, portions of a
human body were found in different parts of the city and deposited at the
Guildhall.  The magistrates issued a warrant for the apprehension of
Sheward, who, on January 7th, was brought to Norwich, and appeared before
the Bench on January 8th.  He was described as a licensed victualler, of
the Key and Castle public-house, St. Martin-at-Oak, and it was proved
that he married his first wife, a Norfolk woman, who formerly lived at
Wymondham, at Greenwich, on October 28th, 1836.  In 1838 he came to
Norwich, opened a pawnbroker's shop in St. Giles', and became bankrupt.
When living in Tabernacle Street, in 1851, his wife suddenly disappeared,
about the 9th or 10th of June.  Upon this evidence the prisoner was
remanded, and at subsequent hearings witnesses were called who deposed to
finding various portions of human remains in different parts of the city
and suburbs in the summer of 1851.  Relatives of the deceased woman
stated that the prisoner accounted for her disappearance by saying that
she had left Norwich for a time.  On February 1st the prisoner was fully
committed for trial.  At the Norwich Assizes, on March 29th, before Mr.
Baron Pigott, Sheward was placed upon his trial, and on the second day of
the hearing Mr. Metcalfe, Q.C., for the defence, contended that the
accused was labouring under delusions when he made the confession.  The
jury, after three-quarters of an hour private deliberation, returned a
verdict of guilty, and the prisoner, who had nothing to say, was
sentenced to death.  Immediately after the trial anonymous letters were
published in the London newspapers asserting the innocence of the
prisoner; similar letters were addressed to the Magistrates' Clerk at
Norwich, and one communication actually purported to have been written by
Mrs. Sheward herself.  Efforts were made to obtain a commutation of
sentence, on the ground of the long interval that had elapsed between the
perpetration of the murder and the trial of the accused.  These efforts,
however, were of no avail, and the capital sentence was carried out by
Calcraft at the City Gaol on April 20th.  This was the first private
execution that had taken place in Norwich.  It was announced that on
April 13th the culprit made a full confession of his crime, and gave
detailed particulars of the manner in which he had disposed of the body
of the murdered woman.  In a letter to his second wife he also admitted
his guilt.

14.--The trial of the election petition presented by Mr. Jacob Henry
Tillett against the return of Sir Henry Josias Stracey, Bart., as member
of Parliament for Norwich, commenced at the Shirehall, before Mr. Baron
Martin.  Counsel for the petitioner were Mr. Serjeant Ballantyne, Mr.
Keane, Q.C., and Mr. Simms Reeve; and for the respondent, Mr. Rodwell,
Q.C., Mr. Serjeant Sleigh, Mr. E. L. O'Malley, and Mr. J. C. C. Wyld.
Bribery, treating, personation, and other matters were alleged.  In his
opening address, Mr. Ballantyne asserted "that the bribery was most
profligate and most wholesale, and that houses were opened by persons of
apparent respectability for the mere purpose of carrying out this
bribery, and men of position who ought to have known a great deal better
were concerned in it."  After three days' hearing, the trial resulted in
the unseating of Sir Henry Stracey.  The learned judge, in his report to
the Speaker of the House of Commons, stated that although no corrupt
practice was proved to have been made with the knowledge or consent of
any of the candidates, and, further, it was proved to his entire
satisfaction that neither Sir Henry Stracey nor the other candidates at
the said election had any personal knowledge of or connection whatever
with bribery or any other illegal or corrupt practice, he had determined
that Sir Henry Stracey was not duly elected, and that his election was
rendered void by the acts of his agents.  The persons reported for being
guilty of corrupt practices were Robert Hardiment, Arthur Hunt, Robert
Callow, and Thomas Hutchings.  The first-named absconded after the
petition was presented.  It was also stated in the report that a number
of persons went to the poll in a gross state of drunkenness.  (_See_
April 1st.)

15.--A trout weighing 15 lbs. was captured in a drop net near the New
Mills, Norwich.

16.--Messrs. Jolly and Son, coachbuilders, Norwich, advertised that they
had "arranged to supply from a noted French maker the celebrated bicycle
velocipede, so much in vogue in Paris."  The price of the machine was
from 8 gs. upwards.  On the 30th there was an editorial announcement to
the effect that "an attempt is being made to introduce this latest
novelty in locomotive machinery, now so fashionable in Paris, to the
Norwich public, by Mr. C. Thorn, who has two at his establishment, for
the inspection of the curious."  The "first velocipede journey of any
considerable distance from Norwich" was performed on March 30th by Mr. B.
W. Jolly, who travelled from Norwich to Yarmouth, including a stoppage of
fifteen minutes at Acle, in 2 hours 30 minutes.  "The progress of the
traveller was considerably retarded by the roughness of the roads and a
powerful gale."  A short time previously Mr. G. W. Bellamy, of
Saxlingham, on a velocipede built by Messrs. Jolly and Son, but under
much more favourable conditions as to roads and weather, accomplished a
distance of 56 miles in 6 hours 25 minutes, exclusive of a short delay
midway on the journey.  A Norwich Velocipede Club was established in the
month of April, and on the 29th an exhibition of the machines was held at
the Corn Hall, under the management of Mr. Thorn.  On the same occasion
was exhibited "one of the old-fashioned dandy horses, the original or the
velocipede tribe," but, it was added, "the now velocipede is more easily
managed."  The first velocipede races took place at the athletic sports
of the Norwich Gymnastic Society, held on Newmarket Road Cricket Ground,
on May 24th.  A "slow race," ridden by Messrs. Jolly, Griffiths, and
Goldsmith, was won by the last-named.  A "plank race," in which the
bicycles were ridden upon a seventy yards' length of plank, was won by a
competitor named Ewing.  A one mile "fast race" was ridden in heats, the
first of which was won by Kent, of Beccles, and the second by Bellamy.
Kent was the winner of the final heat, in 4 minutes 49 seconds.  "He came
over on his bicycle from Beccles in the morning, and returned the same
way after the sports."  By the end of the year there was a marked
increase in the number of local cyclists.  Accidents to inexperienced
riders were frequently recorded, and many complaints were made by drivers
of the alarm occasioned to horses by the appearance of these new-fangled
machines.

16.--The so-called monastic chapel erected at Elm Hill, Norwich, by
Father Ignatius, was the subject of further discussion.  Miss Robinson, a
"lady preacher," had hired the "monastery," and named it the "Jehovah
Jireh chapel," whereupon Ignatius issued a notice warning her and others
concerned that he was the owner of the building.  On this date "Brother
Philip" and one or two other members of the confraternity came to
Norwich, under instructions from Ignatius, and demanded the keys of the
building from Mr. Liddlelow, who refused to give them up unless
authorised by his principal, Mr. Backhouse, surveyor, of Ipswich.  At
midnight on the 18th Ignatius, who had arrived in Norwich a few hours
previously, with other brethren, gained access to the old sanctuary by,
they asserted, miraculous intervention, and thence made their way to the
new chapel.  The police were sent for, and Ignatius was informed that he
had no right there; as he declined to leave the building, the police
refused to interfere.  Mr. Liddlelow, on the 19th, applied to the
magistrates for an order of ejectment, but as a question of right was
involved, they would have nothing to do with the matter.  On the same
evening Ignatius performed service in the chapel, and stated, in the
course of his address, that Miss Robinson had acted in the most
honourable manner, but had been misled by others.  He alluded to her as
his "sister in Christ," and Miss Robinson, who preached in the chapel on
the evening of the 20th, spoke of Ignatius as her "brother in Christ."
Ignatius addressed the congregation at the close of the proceedings, and
informed them that he should never allow the chapel to be used for any
other purpose than that of monastic worship.  "Although the members of
Father Ignatius' congregation and the members of Miss Robinson's flock
could not be more opposed in their mode of thought, yet the greatest
harmony prevailed, and at the close they offered up the Lord's Prayer in
perfect unison."

18.--The new Cemetery at Diss was consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich.
The total cost of the chapels, lodge, &c., was about 1,750, but this sum
was exclusive of the price of the land.


FEBRUARY.


5.--Died, in his 87th year, at Norwich, Thomas Hurry, church bell-hanger,
and for more than 50 years a member of the St. Peter Mancroft company of
ringers.

12.--A severe gale occurred on the Norfolk coast.  The barque Try Again
was lost off Yarmouth, and the crew saved by means of the rocket
apparatus.  Other vessels were wrecked, and several lives lost.

13.*--"We are sorry to learn that the Norfolk County Cricket Club has
been brought to an untimely end.  The officers of the club hold out no
hope that it can be carried on, as the persistent apathy of those who
call themselves members, many of whom have failed to pay their
subscriptions, has left the treasurer with a large amount of debts and no
hope of being able to meet them."  At a meeting held on the 17th, it was
agreed by the Dereham Cricket Club to hire the ground hitherto let to the
County Cricket Club.


MARCH.


5.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, a report was received from
the Sewerage and Irrigation Committee, stating that an intimation had
been made by the contractor for the construction of the intercepting
sewers that he would be unable to proceed with his contract unless the
Committee advanced him a sum of money.  As neither the Committee nor the
Board of Health had power to do so under the contract, proposals were
made to the contractor (Mr. Wainwright), which resulted in the Committee
taking possession of the works, materials, &c.  The opinion was expressed
that the Committee had acted with due consideration of the interests and
safety of the public, and at the same time with consideration for the
contractor, who appeared to have met with unforeseen difficulties in the
prosecution of that part of the works in course of construction at
Trowse, the soil there consisting of sand instead, as was supposed, of
chalk.  The Town Council, on March 16th, agreed that the contract with
Mr. Wainwright be cancelled, upon payment to the parties entitled thereto
of 2,800, in full satisfaction of all claims and for the purchase of
plant and materials.  On July 20th the Sewerage and Irrigation Committee
reported that, in consequence of the nature of the soil through which so
large a portion of the tunnelling had to be carried, and other unforeseen
circumstances, the original estimate would be exceeded, but the ultimate
cost of the works would not be more than 81,500, to be reduced to 78,500
by the sale of plant, &c.  A description of the sewerage works was
published on December 24th, from which it appeared that all the money
authorised to be raised by Act of Parliament, 75,000, had been borrowed,
and the greater part of it already expended.  The whole of the high level
sewer was completed on this date.  It extended from the Ipswich Road,
along Town Close Road, through Mount Pleasant Lane, across the fields and
under Mill Hill Lane to West Pottergate street, Bedford Street, Opie
Street, the Cattle Market, and King Street, to a point near Messrs.
Morgan's Brewery, where it joined the low level sewer, a distance of more
than two and a half miles.  Branch sewers had been laid in various
directions.  The low level sewer, from the New Mills, along Westwick
Street, Charing Cross, St. Andrew's, Prince's Street, Tombland, Upper
King Street, and along King Street to the gates had also been completed,
a few short distances excepted.  The work was carried out under the
direction of the engineer, Mr. Morant, and of the Sewerage and Irrigation
Committee, of which Mr. J. G. Johnson was chairman.  (_See_ October 1st,
1872.)

9.--Died at Torquay, Sir John P. Boileau, Bart., of Ketteringham Park.
The eldest son of Mr. John Peter Boileau, he was born in 1794, educated
at Eton and Merton College, Oxford, and in 1813 entered the Rifle
Brigade, from which he retired in 1818.  He married, in 1824, Lady
Catherine Sarah Elliot, daughter of the first Earl of Minto, by whom he
had two sons, Francis George Manningham, born in 1830, who succeeded to
the baronetcy, and Edward William Pollin, born in 1831, and five
daughters.  Sir John was a magistrate and Deputy Lieutenant for the
county of Norfolk, and served the office of High Sheriff in 1844.  As a
memorial to his wife, who died in 1862, he founded the Catherine ward in
the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  He was devoted to the pursuit of
science and the arts, was a vice-president of the Society of Antiquaries,
a Fellow of the Royal Society and of the Society of Artists, president of
the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society, vice-president of the
Norfolk and Norwich Museum, and a member of the committee of the Norfolk
and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival.

11.--Prince's Street chapel, Norwich, was re-opened, after having been
re-arranged and improved, under the direction of Mr. Edward Boardman,
architect, at the cost of 2,600.  As originally planned, in 1819, it was
a building of heavy and uninteresting appearance; the new designs by Mr.
Boardman gave to it an imposing facade.  The Rev. Newman Hall preached at
the opening services.

12.--A race took place between Joseph Tuck, a pedestrian, of Little
Snoring, and a trotting pony belonging to Mr. Gutteridge.  The match was
for 40, the distance 500 yards, and the start was from scratch.  Tuck had
the race in hand the whole way, and passed the winning-post thirty yards
ahead of the pony.

13.*--"Mr. Bunnett, of Norwich, has successfully undergone the necessary
preliminary of the searching examination in music by Professor Sterndale
Bennett.  As a corollary of the examination, the exercise of Mr. Bunnett
for the degree of Doctor in Music was performed in the chapel of Trinity
College, Cambridge, on the 8th instant, in the presence of Professor
Bennett, and produced a very good impression."

16.--The trial of the election petition against the return of the Hon. R.
Bourke, one of the Conservative members for the borough, commenced at
King's Lynn, before Mr. Baron Martin.  The petitioners alleged corrupt
practices, treating, and intimidation.  The hearing concluded on the
17th, when the Judge stated that he was clearly of opinion that the
object of the petition had failed, and it would be his duty to report to
the Speaker of the House of Commons that Mr. Bourke had been duly
elected.

27.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Baron Pigott, Francis Howard
Clare (42), shoemaker, was indicted for the wilful murder of his wife,
Ann Frances Clare, on October 16th, 1868.  The woman was found with her
throat cut, and it was alleged that the prisoner had inflicted the wound.
Mr. Metcalfe, for the defence, set up the theory of suicide, and the
jury, adopting that view, returned a verdict of not guilty.


APRIL.


1.--In the House of Commons a motion was agreed to for the appointment of
a Royal Commission to inquire into alleged corrupt practices at Norwich
at the last election of members to serve in Parliament.  (_See_ August
21st.)

14.--The Watton and Swaffham Railway Bill was considered by a Select
Committee of the House of Commons.  The company asked for powers to
extend from Watton in the direction of Thetford the line of railway
constructed between Swaffham and Watton.  The Committee decided that the
preamble had been proved.  On June 25th a Select Committee of the House
of Lords ordered the Bill to be reported to that House.  The estimated
cost of the construction of the line was 72,500; the capital proposed to
be raised under the Bill was 80,000--62,000 by shares, and the remaining
20,000 by borrowing powers.  The line to Roudham was opened for passenger
traffic on October 18th.

15.--The Committee appointed by the House of Commons to investigate the
condition of turnpike trusts considered the affairs of the Norfolk group.
The Committee decided that the New Buckenham, the Norwich, Swaffham, and
Mattishall, the Norwich and Watton, and the Thetford trusts be not
continued, and that the Aylsham and Cromer trusts be continued.


MAY.


12.--Died at King's Lynn, Mr. Charles Gill, "the well-known and highly
respected lessee and manager of theatres in the East Anglian district,
and talented comedian."  Mr. Gill had attained the age of 74 years, and
left a daughter with whom he was about to proceed to Australia.  In his
earlier days Mr. Gill performed with the great Kean and many other
eminent actors.

17.--Loveday's English Opera Company commenced an engagement at Norwich
Theatre.  Mdlle. Mariana and Miss Ella Collins made their first
appearance in Norwich.

--The hearing of the election petition against the return of the Hon.
Frederick Walpole and Sir E. H. K. Lacon, as members for North Norfolk,
commenced at the Shirehall, Norwich, before Mr. Justice Blackburn.  The
nominal petitioner was Mr. Edward Colman, merchant, of London, who
alleged bribery, treating, undue influence, employment of roughs, illegal
payment of travelling expenses, and, what was a novel feature in election
inquiries, the employment of canvassers.  Counsel for the petitioner were
Mr. Serjeant Ballantyne and Mr. Littler, and for the respondents Mr.
O'Malley, Q.C., Mr. Rodwell, Q.C., and Mr. Blofeld.  The trial concluded
on the 24th, when his lordship, in delivering judgment, said the petition
had completely failed.  Both members were duly elected, and in the
present case there was no reason for departing from the rule that the
petitioner must pay the costs.

24.--The Queen's birthday was observed in the usual manner at Norwich.  A
parade of the Royal Horse Artillery and the Volunteers took place.  The
event was officially observed on June 2nd, when the troops were reviewed
on Mousehold; the Mayor and Mayoress entertained the aged poor at the
Corn Hall, and gave a feast to the inmates of the Workhouse.

26.--The foundation-stone of the new church of St. James', Yarmouth, was
laid by the Dean of Norwich.  The church was partially opened on April
27th, 1870.


JUNE.


4.--A crane was shot at South Pickenham.  It was a young male, in good
condition, measured 64 inches in length, and weighed 10.5 lbs.; the
expanse of its wings was 93 inches.  On the 12th two were killed out of
four seen at Burnham, and about the same time another was shot on the
Thornham salt marshes.  The occurrence of so many cranes in one year was
remarkable, as not more than three or four specimens were known to have
been procured in Norfolk during the preceding half century.

8.--A great demonstration was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, in
opposition to the Irish Church Bill.  The meeting was convened by the
Norwich Conservative and Constitutional Association, and was presided
over by Sir Samuel Bignold.

9.--Died at Lugano, Switzerland, where he had gone for the benefit of his
health, Mr. Charles Cory, Town Clerk of Great Yarmouth, aged 57.  He was
a son of Mr. Robert Cory, solicitor, a former Mayor of the borough, and
was elected Town Clerk in 1851, in succession to Mr. J. Clowes.  Mr.
Charles Diver was elected to the vacant office on June 21st.

15.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, it was reported
that new governors had been appointed under the amended Grammar School
and Commercial School scheme.  The Town Clerk, it was stated, had
obtained for the Corporation the right of interfering in the trust, and
had procured the adoption of the lists furnished by the Council.  The
principle obtained was an important one--that no body of trustees
exercising a trust for the benefit of the city and neighbourhood should
be allowed to make enormous and various changes in their government and
management of the school, which was the property of the Council as much
as theirs, without the sanction of the representative body.

24.--The annual show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association commenced at
Attleborough, and was continued on the 25th.  The members' dinner took
place at the Corn Hall, and was presided over by the Hon. Thomas de Grey,
M.P.

26.--The annual camp of the 1st Administrative Battalion of Norfolk
Volunteers was formed at Hunstanton Park.  The Battalion was inspected by
Lieut.-Col. Elliott, and the camp was struck on July 2nd.


JULY.


7.--The new dock at Lynn, completed at the cost of upwards of 80,000, was
opened by the Prince of Wales, who was accompanied by the Princess of
Wales.  Their Royal Highnesses arrived by special train from London, and
were received at the railway station by the Chairman of the Dock Company
(Mr. L. W. Jarvis), the Mayor (Mr. J. Thorley), the members of Parliament
for the borough, and others.  Escorted by a troop of the 3rd (Prince of
Wales') Dragoons, from Colchester, the Prince and Princess proceeded to
the Town Hall, where an address was read by the Recorder.  After a visit
to the Grammar School, where his Royal Highness presented the medal
annually given by him to the head boy, the procession went to the Common
Staithe Quay, where the twin screw steamer Mary, of London, was lying
ready to receive the party on board.  The band of the Grenadier Guards,
under Mr. Dan Godfrey, played a selection of music as the vessel steamed
down the Estuary Channel.  Returning to the harbour, the Mary passed
through the lock gate into the Dock basin, amid the loud cheers of the
spectators, the playing of the National Anthem, and the ringing of the
church bells.  His Royal Highness having declared the Dock duly opened,
said that it would thenceforth be called the Alexandra Dock.  The Royal
visitors and a distinguished company next proceeded to the Town Hall for
luncheon.  The Prince and Princess afterwards left for Sandringham.  In
the evening the town was illuminated, and a display of fireworks was
given in the Tuesday Market Place.

8.--After lying high and dry for upwards of nine weeks, the large screw
steamer, Lady Flora, was launched from Caister beach.  She was a
first-class vessel, of 750 tons register, and 1,000 tons gross, 205 feet
in length, 29 feet beam, and was valued at 16,000.  On May 1st she ran
hard and fast on the beach, in close contiguity to the dangerous shoal
known as the Patch.  Early in June the services of Mr. T. B. Carr,
engineer, of Hull, were engaged by the underwriters, and efforts were
made to get her off.  The steamer had become embedded in the sand to the
depth of eight feet, but by the aid of very powerful hydraulic cranes and
other appliances, and assisted by 120 men, Mr. Carr succeeded in lifting
the vessel four feet above the beach.  In these operations upwards of
2,000 was expended.  Three thousand persons assembled to witness the
launch.  When the blocks were knocked away the vessel, by her own weight,
glided broadside off, and rolled in magnificent style into 4.5 feet of
water.  Her draught (empty) was eight feet; as the tide rose she floated
with it, and was towed to Hull for repair.  On November 20th it was
announced that the Lady Flora, which was then engaged in the Baltic
trade, had been lost at sea.

16.--In recognition of the great services he had rendered to the Norwich
Battalion of Rifle Volunteers during the five years it was under his
command, Col. Black was presented with a service of plate by the
officers, non-commissioned officers, and members of the corps.  Col.
Black was succeeded in the command of the Battalion by Col. G. M.
Boileau.

19.--Robertson's comedy, "Caste," which marked a new era in the character
of theatrical representation, was produced for the first time in Norwich,
by a company which appeared at the Theatre Royal, under the management of
Mr. Frederick Younge.  The transition from sensational drama and broad
farce to refined comedy was by no means appreciated by local playgoers,
and the attendance during the week was unusually small even for Norwich.
"School" was the other piece performed by the company, which comprised
Mr. Frederick Younge, Mr. Craven, Mr. J. W. Ray, Mr. G. Canninge, Mr.
Fortune, Mrs. E. Dyas, Miss Ada Dyas, and Miss Brunton.

21.--Died at Saham, Mr. Jonas Silvanus Wright, aged 71.  He was the
author of "The Prodigal Son," "Rambles in Wales," and other poems.


AUGUST.


12.--A two days' cricket match, between eleven of the South of England
and twenty-two of Norfolk and Norwich, commenced on the Newmarket Road
ground, Norwich.  Scores: South of England, 33--161; Norfolk and Norwich,
172--124.

13.--The advance party of the D Battery, Royal Horse Artillery, arrived
at Norwich, and on the 16th the B Battery marched _en route_ to Ireland.

19.--The Royal Commission appointed to inquire into the existence of
corrupt practices at the last election of members to serve in Parliament
for the city of Norwich commenced its sittings at the Shirehall, Norwich.
The Commissioners were Mr. George Morley Dowdeswell, Q.C., Mr. Horatio
Mansfield, and Mr. John Biron.  On September 4th (the fifteenth day) the
Court adjourned until the 27th, when the inquiry was resumed.  Sir Henry
Stracey was examined on October 9th (the 27th day), and Mr. J. H. Tillett
on October 11th (the 29th day).  The inquiry terminated on October 15th
(the 32nd day).  The Chief Commissioner acknowledged the assistance given
by the police and the Guardians.  "We feel," he said, "that these bodies
have rendered us most efficient and signal assistance, and we only wish
that other officials in this city had also offered us that assistance,
and that we had not experienced obstacles on their part.  We fear that
the encouragement which has been given by them to persons to withhold
information has led to many of those spectacles which have been to us a
source of signal pain in the course of our inquiry."  The Commissioners,
in their report, dated February 15th, 1870, stated that corrupt practices
did not extensively prevail in Norwich at the election in November, 1868;
that Sir Henry Stracey was returned through such practices; and that
corrupt practices did not extensively prevail at the election of 1865 or
that of 1860.  Several persons were scheduled for bribery and for
corruptly influencing voters by treating.  The Norwich Voters
Disfranchisement Bill, by which it was proposed to disfranchise 119
electors, passed its second reading in the House of Commons on May 2nd,
1870, and received the Royal assent on July 4th in the same year.  (_See_
January 31st, 1870.)

30.--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich, with an evening concert, at which the "Hymn of
Praise" and "Acis and Galatea" were performed.  The other works in the
programme were the following:--Wednesday morning, September 1st,
selection from "Hezekiah" and "The Fall of Babylon"; Thursday morning,
September 2nd, Sacred Cantata, by Horace Hill, "Messe Solennelle" (first
time of performance out of London), and the Dettingen Te Deum; Friday
morning, September 3rd, "The Messiah."  Grand miscellaneous concerts were
given on the evenings of August 31st and September 1st and 2nd.  The
principal vocalists were Mdlle. Tietjens, Mdlle. Ilma de Murska, Madame
Talbot Cherer, Madame Patey, and Madame Trebelli Bettini, Mr. Vernon
Rigby, Mr. Arthur Byron, Mr. W. H. Cummings, Signor Bettini, Signor Foli,
and Mr. Santley.  Mr. Benedict conducted.  A "dress ball" took place on
the evening of September 3rd.  Financially the Festival was a failure,
and the total receipts, about 4,000, barely covered expenses.


SEPTEMBER.


15.--A Conservative banquet was held at the Town Hall, Great Yarmouth, to
celebrate the return of the Hon. Frederick Walpole and Sir E. Lacon,
Bart., as members for North Norfolk.  Upwards of 1,000 electors of the
Flegg Hundreds were present, and presented to Sir Edmund Lacon a piece of
plate weighing nearly 900 ozs., in recognition of the services he had
rendered during the period he represented Yarmouth in Parliament.

20.--Blondin gave tight-rope performances at Norwich Theatre during the
week commencing on this date.

30.--An ascent was made from Norwich Market Place in a "fish balloon," by
Mr. Orton, accompanied by Mr. William Maris.  The descent took place at
Tuddenham, near East Dereham, a distance of fourteen miles from Norwich.


OCTOBER.


12.--Died at his residence, the Royal Mews, Buckingham Palace, Mr.
Bernard Bolingbroke Woodward, B.A. (Lond.), F.S.A., aged 53 years.  He
had for some years held the post of librarian to the Queen at Windsor
Castle, and was the eldest son of Mr. Samuel Woodward, of Norwich.

16.*--"The mansion that Sir Robert Harvey, Bart., is erecting on his
estate at Crown Point is approaching completion.  It has been built from
the designs of Messrs. Coe and Peake, architects, of London."

18.--The Prince of Wales, with his suite, passed through Norwich, on his
way to Gunton Hall, on a visit to Lord Suffield.

19.--A heavy gale took place at Yarmouth, where shipping casualties
occurred and several lives were lost.  The sea rose to within a few feet
of the houses on the Marine Parade.

--A week's festivities commenced at Holkham Hall, in celebration of the
majority of Viscount Coke, which his lordship attained in the previous
month of July.  The proceedings had been postponed in consequence of the
illness of the Earl of Leicester.

20.--Died at Thorpe Hamlet, in his 81st year, Mr. John Kitson, Registrar
of the Diocese of Norwich.  He had for 58 years held the office of
secretary to the Bishop, having been appointed in 1811 by Bishop
Bathurst, and continued in the office by his successors, Bishop Stanley,
Bishop Hinds, and Bishop Pelham.  Mr. Kitson was appointed Registrar in
1825, and was Chapter Clerk and Registrar to the Dean and Chapter, and
district registrar in her Majesty's Court of Probate.


NOVEMBER.


1.--That portion of Dereham Cemetery appropriated to the Church of
England was consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich.  The chapels were
designed by Mr. Brown, architect, of Norwich, and built by Mr. Hubbard,
of East Dereham.  "The old churchyard is said to have been used as a
burial-ground for 600 years."

9.--Mr. Augustus Frederick Coke Bolingbroke was elected Mayor, and Mr.
Henry Morgan appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

12.--A new self-righting lifeboat, 33 feet in length, was launched at
Wells-next-the-Sea.  It was purchased with the proceeds of "penny
readings" given in various parts of the kingdom.  The fund, which was
inaugurated by Mr. E. B. Adams, surgeon, of Bungay, amounted to the sum
of 500, and represented the contributions of eighteen different counties.
Of this amount Norfolk raised 161.  In the presence of several thousands
of spectators, the Countess of Leicester christened the boat the Eliza
Adams.  Luncheon was served at the Crown Hotel, under the presidency of
the Earl of Leicester, and in the evening a ball was held.

18.--Died at his residence, St. Clement's, Norwich, Mr. Henry Ladbrooke,
landscape painter.  He was a member of the accomplished family of Norfolk
artists and a pupil of the celebrated Crome, the influence of whose style
was apparent in his works.  After residing many years in Lynn, he removed
to Norwich.

20.*--"Mr. W. T. Bensly, LL.D., has been appointed by the Dean and
Chapter of Norwich to be Chapter Clerk, in the place of the late Mr.
Kitson."

25.--Mdlle. Christine Nilsson, Mdlle. Anna Drasdil, Madame Gilardoni,
Signor Foli, and Mr. J. M. Wheli, with Mr. Benedict as conductor,
appeared at a concert at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, on this and the
following evening, in aid of the local charities, which had suffered from
the non-success of the late Festival.  The concerts were arranged by Mr.
Howlett and Mr. C. S. Gilman, who handed to the charities a sum of nearly
200.

27.*--"The catch of herring last week was a most extraordinary and
exceptional one, not only as regards the present season, but also as
compared with those of the wonderful voyage of 1868.  The quantities of
herring delivered on Yarmouth fishwharf exceeded 2,400 lasts (13,200 fish
per last), a catch probably unprecedented.  Several of the smacks had
'made up' before the recent successes, being compelled to do so in
consequence of the terrible disasters that had befallen them."


DECEMBER.


7.--Lord Claud Hamilton and Mr. Richard Young were nominated candidates
for the representation of King's Lynn, rendered vacant by Lord Stanley's
succession to the Earldom of Derby.  The proceedings were of a most
tumultuous character, and the show of hands being in favour of the
Liberal candidate, the supporters of Lord Claud Hamilton demanded a poll.
In apprehension of a disturbance, detachments of the 4th and 8th Foot
were drafted into the town, and were stationed in the National
Schoolroom, St. Margaret's.  The polling took place on the 8th, and
resulted as follows:--Hamilton, 1,051; Young, 1,032.

13.--Died at Westacre, aged 64, Mr. Anthony Hamond.  He was the
representative of a Norfolk family of considerable antiquity, and
succeeded to the Westacre estate on the death of his father, Mr. Philip
Hamond, in 1824.  In 1828 he married Mary Anne, eldest daughter of Mr.
John Chaworth Musters, of Colwick, Notts.  He was succeeded in his estate
by his son Anthony, born in 1834, Mr. Hamond served the office of High
Sheriff in 1836, and twice unsuccessfully contested the representation of
the Western Division of the county--in 1847 and 1852; and in 1854
accepted an invitation to become a candidate for Norwich, in opposition
to Sir Samuel Bignold, by whom he was defeated.  Mr. Hamond took a great
interest in country pursuits, and was ever foremost in promoting
experiments for the advancement of agricultural science.

14.--Holkham church was re-opened after restoration by the Earl and
Countess of Leicester, at the estimated cost of 10,000, of which 7,000
was expended for wood carving alone.

27.--The Prince and Princess of Wales, with Prince Albert Victor and
Prince George, arrived at Holkham, on a visit to the Earl and Countess of
Leicester.  Their Royal Highnesses left on January 1st, 1870, for Gunton
Park.

--The pantomime at Norwich Theatre was produced by Mr. J. F. Young.  It
was entitled, "The King of the Peacocks."  Circus entertainments were
provided at Messrs. Henry and Adams' establishment on the Castle Meadow.



1870.


JANUARY.


31.--In the Court of Common Pleas, before Lord Chief Justice Bovill and
Justices Smith and Brett, Mr. Mellish, Q.C., showed cause against the
rule calling upon the Master to review his taxation of the costs in the
Norwich election petition.  The bill of costs of the petitioner (Mr. J.
H. Tillett) had been reduced from 3,015 7s. to 703 3s., and of the
respondent (Sir H. J. Stracey) from 793 14s. 2d. to 168 6s.  Four hundred
witnesses had been subpoenaed.  The Lord Chief Justice said the rule must
be discharged.  "Sir Henry Stracey," it was stated on March 19th, "has
this week paid to Mr. Tillett's solicitors 583 17s. 8d., which has been
accepted as payment in full for his costs in the matter.  The total
amount of the petitioner's costs was 3,800, and deducting Sir Henry's
contribution, it leaves upwards of 3,200 to be paid by the petitioner."
(_See_ March 31st.)


FEBRUARY.


1.--Died in Florida, while on leave of absence from Montreal,
Lieut.-General Sir Charles Ashe Windham, K.C.B., commanding the forces in
Canada.  He was the fourth son of Vice-Admiral Windham, of Felbrigg Hall,
who was the son of the Rev. George William Lukin, Dean of Wells, and who
assumed the name of Windham on succeeding to the estates of his
distinguished relative, the Right Hon. William Windham.  His mother was
Anne, daughter of Mr. Peter Thellusson, of Broadsmouth, Yorkshire, and
sister of the first Baron Rendlesham.  He was born at Felbrigg in 1810,
and married first, in 1849, Marianne Catherine Emily, daughter of Admiral
Sir John P. Beresford, Bart., K.C.B., who died in 1865; and secondly, in
1866, Charlotte Jane, eldest daughter of the Rev. Henry Des Voeux.
Educated at Sandhurst, he entered the Army in 1826, as ensign and
lieutenant in the Coldstream Guards, and served in Canada during the time
of the rebellion, from 1838 to 1842.  He continued with the regiment
until the outbreak of the war with Russia, when he accompanied the
Eastern Army as Assistant Quarter-master General of the 4th Division, and
served from September, 1854, to July, 1856, without a day's absence.  He
was present at the battle of the Alma, at Balaclava, and at the repulse
of the powerful sortie on October 26th, 1854, and was with Sir George
Cathcart when the latter was killed at the battle of Inkerman.  At the
second assault on the Redan, on September 8th, 1855, Windham (then
Colonel) greatly distinguished himself by his personal daring and
gallantry in command of the storming party of the second division, and
for his intrepid conduct was promoted Major-General.  In September, 1855,
he was appointed Governor of the British portion of Sebastopol, and in
the following month was entrusted with the command of the 4th Division.
For his services in the Crimea he received numerous clasps, medals, and
orders.  In 1857 General Windham proceeded to India and commanded a
division in the field, under Lord Clyde, during the advance to Kallee
Nuddee.  On June 17th, 1861, he was appointed to the command of the 46th
Regiment of Foot, and in October, 1867, became Commander of the Forces in
Canada.  On the return of General Windham from the Crimea, in July, 1856,
he was enthusiastically received at Norwich and presented with two
handsome swords, purchased by public subscription.  In April, 1857, he
was returned to Parliament for East Norfolk, and remained its member for
two years.

5.--A meeting of the Norwich Diocesan Church Association was held at the
Church Societies' Rooms, Norwich, for the purpose of discussing the
question of national education, a subject which was brought prominently
before the country during this year.  The Bishop of Norwich presided, and
the Dean moved, "That in any legislative enactments for promoting the
education of the children of the working classes called for by the
destitution in this respect of many places in England and Wales, the
inculcation of Christian truth ought to form an essential feature, and
that provision for this purpose can be best made under existing
circumstances through the medium of parochial and other schools attached
to the Church of England or to other religious communions."  A further
resolution was moved by the Hon. Frederick Walpole, M.P., "That the
present system, which has been successfully in operation during the last
thirty years, carried on by means of voluntary efforts, and maintained by
school fees, charitable contributions, and grants from the Consolidated
Fund, is capable of further extension and improvement, and is able, if
adequately assisted by the State, to supply the national wants of the
country without resorting to local taxation for the purpose, unless in
those extreme cases for which provision can be made in no other way."  A
third resolution was moved by Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., "That compulsory
education, except under especial circumstances, such as the case of
vagrant, criminal, and destitute children, would be an unnecessary
interference with the rights and responsibilities of parents, and unless
applied to all classes of the community, create an unjust and invidious
distinction between rich and poor, and its enforcement by pains and
penalties would cause a general feeling of hardship and discontent, while
its objects could be attained by other means, such as the extension,
under due restrictions, of the Factory Acts and of similar measures
regulating the employment of children's labour."  The final resolution
was moved by the Rev. Canon Heaviside, "That in the opinion of this
meeting it is expedient that the promoters of Church education should
consent that in schools aided by the Government grant provision should be
made for securing perfect liberty of distinctive religious teaching
combined with perfect liberty of declining it."  These resolutions were
adopted.  The Elementary Education Bill, introduced by Mr. W. E. Forster
on February 17th, was passed, and received the Royal assent on August
9th.  On October 11th a meeting of the clergy was held, under the
presidency of the Mayor (Mr. A. F. C. Bolingbroke), at the Girls' Model
School, Norwich, "for the purpose of consulting as to the steps to be
taken under the Elementary Education Act," and it was resolved to convene
a public meeting for the discussion of the question.  This meeting was
held on October 19th, at the Free Library, and was composed of "school
managers and supporters of Church education."  The Mayor again presided.
The Lord Bishop moved, "That, with the view of carrying out the objects
of the Elementary Education Act, 1870, in this city, steps be immediately
taken to supply and maintain sufficient, efficient, and suitable schools
on the voluntary principle, in order to secure in Church schools
religious education in accordance with the teaching of the Church of
England."  This was seconded by Mr. Henry Birkbeck.  The Sheriff (Mr.
Henry Morgan) moved, "That an immediate appeal be made to the citizens of
Norwich to provide funds on the voluntary principle for carrying out the
object of this meeting."  A further resolution was adopted, "That the
Bishop of the Diocese, with the clergy of the city, the managers of
Church schools, and such donors and subscribers as may be willing to act
be constituted a council, and shall appoint, as soon as possible, a
committee to carry out the former resolutions, and to report progress to
the council from time to time."  The body thus constituted was afterwards
known as the Church Education Council.  On November 28th the supporters
of voluntary education held a large meeting at St. Andrew's Hall, at
which were adopted resolutions framed on similar lines to the foregoing.
The supporters of unsectarian education held a meeting at the Free
Library on the 30th, under the presidency of Mr. Jacob Henry Tillett, at
which the Rev. G. S. Barrett moved, "That a request be sent to the Mayor
to convene a common hall, in order that steps may be taken immediately
for the formation of a School Board in the city."  The Rev. J. Hallett
seconded the motion, which was unanimously adopted, and a committee was
formed for the purpose of carrying it into effect.  The Church Education
Council, on December 13th, announced that sufficient subscriptions had
been obtained for providing necessary school accommodation in Norwich.
At a special meeting of the Town Council on December 20th, the return
made under the provisions of the Act to the Education Department of the
Privy Council was approved.  It stated that the estimated population of
the city was 82,000, the rateable value 212,129; the total number of
assessments, 21,397; and the number of voters on the municipal register,
10,909.  "The returns from elementary schools as being in operation were
93; the number of schools to which forms were delivered but refused to
fill them up was 27."  (_See_ February 28th, 1871.)

6.--Died at Bethel Street, Norwich, in his 78th year, Mr. Henry Browne.
He was the youngest son of Mr. Alderman John Browne, and a liberal
supporter of the charitable institutions of Norwich.  In his early days
of business life Mr. Browne was led to join in those well-intentioned but
unfortunately not permanently successful enterprises, the Yarn Company
and the movement for making Norwich a port by communication with the sea
at Lowestoft.

9.--Strong gales from the E. and E.N.E., accompanied by snow squalls,
prevailed off the Norfolk coast, and increased in severity until the
14th.  Several shipping disasters occurred.  On the 13th the screw
steamer Sea Queen, with her crew, was lost on the Scroby Sands, and the
American-built barque Victoria, 700 tons, bound from North Shields to
Barcelona, with a cargo of coals, went down.  Of her crew, several hands
were lost.

12.--The Assembly Rooms, erected in 1862, on the Victoria Esplanade,
Yarmouth, at the cost of 6,000, were destroyed by fire.

24.--Sir R. J. H. Harvey declined to accede to a memorial signed by 3,000
electors of Norwich, requesting him to allow himself to be adopted as
Conservative candidate for the city.

26.*--"Since January 1st several rare birds have been met with in the
neighbourhood of Swaffham, namely, a fork-tailed petrel, picked up at
Gooderstone; little gull (_Larus minutus_), in good condition, and
weighing only 3 ozs., shot at Beechamwell; stormy petrel, picked up at
Narborough; bittern, shot at Weeting; pied thrush, shot at Cockley Cley;
pied common partridge, shot at Didlington; dusky grebe, shot at
Castleacre; and a peregrine falcon, a fine old female bird weighing 43
ozs. and measuring 47 inches from tip to tip of its wings, shot at
Beechamwell."

28.--The organ at Yarmouth parish church was opened after restoration.
The instrument was built by Jordan, Bridge, and Byfield, in 1733,
repaired by England (Jordan's grandson) in 1812, and again in 1840 by
Gray.  It was finally restored and enlarged by Messrs. Hill, of London.


MARCH.


20.--A movement known as "The Church's Call" commenced in Norwich.  A
simultaneous and united effort was made at all the churches in the city;
"all seemed resolved to cast aside minor differences, and High Churchmen,
Low Churchmen, and Broad Churchmen apparently vied with each other in
doing the work set before them."

23.--Died at Warham All Saints, Margaret Green, aged 100 years.  "The
Thursford register testifies to her baptism in that parish on March 27th,
1769."

31.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Byles, Robert Hardiment,
tanner and fellmonger, was charged on five counts with bribing voters at
the last General Election to vote for Sir H. J. Stracey.  The
Attorney-General appeared for the prosecution, and the defendant was
found guilty.  His lordship remarked that this was a very serious crime,
and, as he was desirous that sentence should be pronounced by the highest
judicature of the country, judgment was reserved.  Another person, named
Banfather, charged with bribery at the same election, was acquitted.  On
April 1st, at the same Court, John Hughes Hulme was found guilty of
bribery, and sentence was reserved.  Edward Stracey, son of Sir Henry J.
Stracey, was next charged.  The Attorney-General conducted the case for
the prosecution, and Mr. A. Staveley Hill, Q.C., was specially retained
for the defence.  On April 2nd the jury returned a verdict of not guilty.
"No sooner was the announcement made than deafening cheers were raised in
the Court, and it was in vain that the officers tried to suppress them."
The defendant Hardiment was indicted, before Mr. Justice Blackburn, on
various counts, for committing acts of bribery at the Eighth Ward
Municipal Election, on November 1st, 1869.  On being found guilty, he was
sentenced to six months' imprisonment.  Joseph Stanley, solicitor, was
charged with unlawfully conspiring with Robert Hardiment and others to
induce, by means of bribes, certain persons to vote for Edward Bennett
and George Gedge, candidates at the municipal election in question.  The
jury acquitted the defendant.  Anthony Freestone, baker, and Henry Ellis,
shoe manufacturer, were also indicted for conspiring to bribe at the
municipal election, and were acquitted.  On April 8th Messrs. W. H.
Tillett and Co., solicitors, addressed a letter to the newspapers,
asserting that "the jury drew lots to decide what their verdict should be
in the cases of Freestone and Ellis."  They added, "The verdict is, of
course, bad, and we shall feel it our duty to lay the facts before the
committee of gentlemen who instructed us in the prosecutions."  No
further action was taken, however.  In the Court of Queen's Bench, on May
10th, before the Lord Chief Justice and Justices Blackburn, Mellor, and
Hannen, Hardiment and Hulme were brought up for sentence.  Mr. Bulwer,
Q.C., applied for mitigation of sentence in the case of Hardiment, on the
ground that he was then undergoing imprisonment for municipal bribery; in
the case of Hulme it was urged that imprisonment would be injurious to
his health.  The Court passed sentence of ten months' imprisonment upon
the first-named defendant, to run concurrently with the six months he had
received for municipal bribery, two months of which he had already
served, to be classed as a second-class misdemeanant, and to be fined
100.  Hulme was fined 100.  Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., subsequently presented
to the Home Secretary a memorial, signed by 1,500 citizens, praying that
Hardiment should be classed as a first-class misdemeanant.


APRIL.


4.--The Rev. Canon Greenwell, of Durham, "the well-known opener of the
Yorkshire wold tumuli," who had been making scientific investigations at
Weeting, opened one of the peculiar mounds known as "Grimes' Graves," and
discovered therein "two primitive picks _in situ_, with a splendid ground
axe, the skeleton of a bird, a chalk bowl or lamp, and other curious
relics."

18.--The Loveday Opera Company commenced an engagement at Norwich
Theatre.  The celebrated pantomimists and dancers, the Paynes, and Mdlle.
Esta, appeared with the company.

20.--Died at Aigle, Switzerland, the Rev. W. Beal, LL.D., vicar of
Brooke, aged 54.  Dr. Beal was the well-known originator of harvest
festivals.

21.--Died at Holkham, the Countess of Leicester.  Her ladyship was the
eldest daughter of Mr. Samuel Charles Whitbread, of Cardington,
Bedfordshire, and was married to the Earl of Leicester in 1843.

26.--The portrait of the Rev. John Gunn, F.G.S., painted by Capt. H. H.
Roberts, of Thorpe, was hung at the Norfolk and Norwich Museum, "in
acknowledgment of his munificent gift to the geological department of his
unrivalled collection of local mammalian remains."

28.--The south aisle of Yarmouth parish church was opened.  The Bishop of
Rochester and the Bishop of the Diocese were the preachers.

--Died, aged 84, William Gurney, compositor, of Norwich.  He had been for
seventy years in continuous employment at the NORFOLK CHRONICLE Office.

30.--Died at his residence, Horsforth Hall, near Leeds, in his 74th year,
Mr. John Marshall, who was Sheriff of Norwich in 1834 and Mayor in 1838
and 1841.  Mr. Marshall, who was an advanced Liberal, went to Leeds in
1843, and there took an active part in the affairs of that town.  His
remains were interred at the Rosary burial-ground, Norwich.


MAY.


8.--Died at Cholmondeley Castle, Cheshire, George Horatio Cholmondeley,
second Marquis and Earl of Cholmondeley.  He was the eldest son of George
James, the first Marquis, by his wife, Lady Georgina Charlotte Bertie,
second daughter of Peregrine, third Duke of Ancaster.  Born January 16th,
1792, he married, first, on October 20th, 1812, Caroline, second daughter
of Lieut.-General Colin Campbell, who died in October, 1815; and
secondly, on May 11th, 1830, Lady Susan Caroline Somerset, fourth
daughter of Henry Charles, sixth Duke of Beaufort, by whom he was
survived.  He succeeded to the marquisate on the death of his father, in
1827.

16.--Miss Heath, principal tragedienne of the Drury Lane, Haymarket, and
Princess' Theatres, London, supported by Mr. Wilson Barrett, commenced an
engagement at Norwich Theatre, in "East Lynne," "The Jealous Wife," "The
Bond of Life," and "Masks and Faces."  Mr. Wilson Barrett was described
as "a painstaking and conscientious actor."

24.--The Queen's birthday was celebrated at Norwich by a review of the
Royal Horse Artillery and the Volunteers on Mousehold Heath.  The Mayor
entertained a large party at the Drill Hall, and gave a dinner at the
Corn Hall to the indigent blind and to poor children; and the Norwich
Athletic Club held sports on the Newmarket Road Ground.


JUNE.


13.--At a meeting of 2,000 Liberal electors, held at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, Mr. Jacob Henry Tillett was adopted a candidate for Norwich.  A
meeting of the Whig party, convened by Sir William Foster, was held at
the Royal Hotel on the 14th, under the presidency of Mr. I. O. Taylor, at
which it was decided to adopt the candidature of Mr. Edward Warner.

17.--Died at Edgbaston, Birmingham, in his 72nd year, Mr. Robert
Martineau, brother of the Rev. James Martineau and Miss Harriet
Martineau.  He was a native of Norwich, but settled in Birmingham as a
manufacturer at an early period of his life, and took an active part in
the Reform agitation preceding the Bill of 1832.  For the last fourteen
years of his life he lived in retirement, owing to almost total
blindness.

23.--The annual show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association commenced at
Harleston, and was continued on the 24th.  Mr. Edward Howes, M.P.,
presided at the dinner.

--The Earl of Rosebery visited his Norfolk estate for the first time.
His lordship was met at the entrance to the village of Postwick by a
brass band, which preceded the carriage to the rectory, where he was
received by the Rev. W. and Lady Margaret Vincent, the Countess of
Buchan, Lord Cardross, and other guests.  The cottage tenants were
entertained at dinner, and "the orator of the village" proposed his
lordship's health, to which the Earl replied.  A dinner to the tenantry
was given in the school-room, at which his lordship presided, and the
festivities ended with a display of fireworks.


JULY.


1.--The first annual meeting of the Norwich Meteorological Society was
held at the Literary Institution.  After the visit of the British
Association to Norwich in 1868, the local committee, having defrayed all
the expenses, had a balance in hand of upwards of 300.  At a meeting of
subscribers, 100 of this balance was devoted to the purchase of
meteorological instruments, and on December 3rd, 1868, the society was
formed, with Mr. S. Gurney Buxton as president.

4.--Died at his London residence, Clapham, the Right Hon. William
Schomberg Robert Kerr, Marquis of Lothian.  He was the eldest of the four
surviving sons of John William Robert, seventh Marquis, by Lady Cecil
Chetwynd Talbot, daughter of Charles, second Earl Talbot.  Born on August
12th, 1832, he married, on August 12th, 1857, Lady Constance Harriet
Mahonesa Talbot, eldest surviving daughter of the Earl of Shrewsbury and
Talbot.  He succeeded to the marquisate on the death of his father, in
November, 1844.  Educated at Christchurch, Oxford, he took high honours,
having been first class in classics in 1853, and first class in
jurisprudence and modern history in 1854.  After he had finished his
University career, he went to India for a year, but the climate had an
injurious effect upon his naturally feeble constitution.  His lordship
died without issue, and the family estates in Scotland and Norfolk were
inherited by his brother, Lord Schomberg Kerr.

6.--The foundation-stone of St. Philip's church, Norwich, was laid by the
Mayor (Mr. A. F. C. Bolingbroke), who was accompanied by members of the
Corporation.  The church was consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich on
August 3rd, 1871.  The architect was Mr. Edward Power, of London, and the
builder Mr. J. Nelson, of Necton.  It was designed to seat 775 persons,
and the cost was estimated at about 3,575.

9.--The 1st Administrative Battalion Norfolk Rifle Volunteers went into
camp at Hunstanton Park.  The battalion was inspected by Col. Freer, 27th
Regiment.

11.--The nomination of candidates to fill the vacancy in the
representation of Norwich caused by the unseating on petition of Sir
Henry Josias Stracey, took place at the Guildhall.  Mr. Jacob Henry
Tillett was nominated by Mr. J. J. Colman, and seconded by Mr. Henry
Birkbeck; and Mr. John Walter Huddleston, Q.C., by Sir Samuel Bignold,
seconded by Mr. H. S. Patteson.  The show of hands was in favour of Mr.
Huddlestone, and a poll was demanded by the Liberals.  The polling took
place on the 12th, and resulted as follows: Tillett, 4,236; Huddlestone,
3,874.  Mr. Tillett, on the 14th, took the oath and his seat in the House
of Commons.  (_See_ August 3rd.)

15.--Great consternation was caused in Norwich by a report that Sir
Robert Harvey had committed suicide in his grounds at Crown Point.  As it
subsequently proved, the rumour was well founded.  Sir Robert was in his
shrubbery when two pistol shots were heard.  Two workmen employed upon
the premises, on proceeding to the spot, found Sir Robert in a sitting
posture, bleeding from a severe wound in the chest.  He was at once
removed into the house and placed in the library.  Mr. Nichols, the
family surgeon, and Mr. Cadge were summoned, and on arriving found Sir
Robert in a critical condition.  Dr. Copeman was subsequently called in,
and every effort was made to preserve life.  On the 16th the patient
rallied slightly, and on the 17th he was pronounced to be better, but on
the 18th he became worse, and was visited by the Dean of Norwich, who
prayed with him and afforded him spiritual consolation.  Later his
prostration increased, and he passed away in an unconscious state on the
19th.  With the report of the suicide was circulated the rumour that Sir
Robert had speculated and lost heavily, and having been unable to meet
his engagements, was posted a defaulter on the Stock Exchange.  At an
early hour on the 16th the following notice was exhibited upon the closed
doors of the Crown Bank: "Norwich Crown Bank.  In consequence of the
lamentable catastrophe which has happened to Sir Robert Harvey, it has
been determined by the other partners to suspend the business of the Bank
for the present."  This notice gave rise to increased anxiety.  Messrs.
Gurneys offered to afford every possible accommodation to the customers
of the Crown Bank, and a few hours later the National Provincial Bank
made a similar offer.  The affairs of the Crown Bank being inextricably
involved, Mr. Allday Kerrison, one of the partners, signed, on the 16th,
a declaration of insolvency, and on the same day the largest city
creditor, Mr. George Gedge, presented a petition for bankruptcy.  The
sale of the good-will and premises of the Bank was provisionally made to
Messrs. Gurneys and Co. on the 18th.  Mr. Allday Kerrison and his son,
gentlemen of unsullied honour, had their fortunes shattered by one dire
stroke, through the reckless speculations of their partner, speculations
of which they were entirely ignorant.  The inquest was held upon the body
of the deceased baronet at Crown Point on the 20th, by Mr. W. H. N.
Turner, one of the Deputy Coroners for the Liberty of the Dean and
Chapter of Norwich, and the jury returned the following verdict: "The
jury are of opinion that Sir Robert Harvey's death was caused by firearms
discharged by himself while in a state of temporary insanity."  A meeting
of the principal creditors was held at the Royal Hotel on the 21st, under
the presidency of the Mayor, and the following resolution was passed:
"That this meeting entirely approves of the steps taken by Messrs.
Kerrison in suspending the business of the Bank, the measures taken to
protect the assets of the Bank by the immediate filing of a petition in
bankruptcy and the negotiations for the sale of the goodwill and the
business and premises to Messrs. Gurneys and Co."  On the 27th a meeting
was held at the Royal Hotel for the purpose of considering and discussing
the best course to be taken in liquidating the estate of the bankrupts.
Mr. E. C. Bailey was appointed trustee of the estate, and the Mayor and
Messrs. F. E. Watson, H. S. Patteson, H. Woods, and C. Hornor a committee
of inspection.  The first general meeting of creditors was held on August
3rd, when it was reported that the total liabilities to rank for dividend
would be 1,600,321, and the total assets 910,187.  [Sir Robert John
Harvey Harvey was the eldest son of General Sir Robert John Harvey, C.B.,
K.T.S., of Mousehold House, Norwich, by Charlotte (his cousin), daughter
and heiress of Mr. Robert Harvey, of Walton, Suffolk.  Born in 1817, he
married, in 1845, Lady Henrietta Augusta, daughter of George, Viscount
Kilcoursie, and granddaughter of the eighth Earl of Craven.  He was High
Sheriff of Norfolk in 1863, and represented Thetford in Parliament from
July, 1865, to November, 1868, when the borough was disfranchised under
the new Reform Act.  His son and heir, Charles Harvey, was born at
Bracondale in 1849.]


AUGUST.


1.--The Grand English Opera Company, under the management of Mr. Henry
Corri, appeared at Norwich Theatre.  The principal _artistes_ were Madame
Ida Gilliers Corri, Miss Fanny Harrison, Mr. Henry Corri, and Mr. Haydn
Corri.

3.--In the Court of Common Pleas a petition was filed by Mr. Gardiner C.
Stevens against the return of Mr. Jacob Henry Tillett, as member for
Norwich.  In addition to the usual allegations of bribery and undue
influence at the last election, there was a special one of
disqualification on account of corrupt practices at the election in 1868.
On November 3rd Mr. Tillett obtained an order in the Court of Common
Pleas for the striking out of this clause, but leave was given to the
petitioner to move the full Court for a rule to show cause why the order
should not be rescinded.  On November 23rd motion was made accordingly,
and the Court unanimously ordered the clause which had been struck out to
be restored.  (_See_ January 5th, 1871.)

8.--Died at Great Yarmouth, in his 90th year, Mr. Edward Youell, a
partner in the banking-house of Lacons, Youell, and Co.  He retired from
the firm in 1863, after having been in the house nearly 70 years, for 42
of which he was a partner.  For several years he had been afflicted with
total blindness.

13.--A half-yearly meeting of the East Norfolk Railway Company was held
at Norwich.  This company was formed for the purpose of constructing a
railway from Norwich to North Walsham, and thence to Cromer.  After
commencing operations, it was unable to proceed from want of capital and
other circumstances.  It was reported that the estate of the contractor
was in the Court of Chancery, a further survey of the proposed line was
ordered, and steps were taken to ensure the resumption of the works.
(_See_ October 20th, 1874.)

30.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, a proposed tramway scheme
was discussed.  The Wensum Valley railway scheme, for which an Act of
Parliament was obtained in 1864, having been abandoned, it was considered
that a tramway taking its place would prove useful for conveying produce
from the several mills in the district to Norwich.  The estimated cost of
construction was 2,000 per mile, and the total estimated cost 14,000.
The matter was referred to the Paving Committee, and no further steps
were taken.


SEPTEMBER.


2.--Mr. Sothern appeared at Norwich Theatre as Lord Dundreary ("Our
American Cousin") and Hugh de Brass ("A Regular Fix").  On the 3rd he
played the part of Colonel John White ("Home"), and appeared in
"Dundreary Married and Settled," and "Whitebait at Greenwich."

3.--Mr. B. V. Winch was appointed Postmaster at Norwich, in place of Mr.
S. Base, retired.

15.--A three days' bazaar was opened at the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital,
in aid of a fund for converting the Hospital field into an ornamental
garden.  The sum of 462 was realised.

27.--An explosion took place on the premises of Mr. George Coe, firework
manufacturer, New Catton.  Two persons were severely injured, and removed
to the Hospital.


OCTOBER.


6.--Died at Landfort House, Portsmouth, Col. Edwin Wodehouse, C.B.,
commanding Royal Artillery in the Southern District.  He was the eldest
son of Vice-Admiral the Hon. Philip Wodehouse, and was born at Halifax,
Nova Scotia, on April 17th, 1817.  Entering the Army as lieutenant in the
Royal Artillery, on December 19th, 1834, he served in the campaign of
1854-55, was present at the battles of the Alma, Balaclava, and Inkerman
(where his horse was killed beneath him), at the siege and fall of
Sebastopol, and at the repulse and sortie of October 26th, 1854.  Col.
Wodehouse was three times mentioned in dispatches, and received the medal
with four clasps.

10.--The first number of the "Eastern Daily Press" was published.  A
rival newspaper, called the "Eastern Daily Journal," published at the
price of one halfpenny, was issued this month, and had but a very brief
existence.

31.--The first Diocesan Conference was held at Norwich.  At the
ruri-decanal meetings held in the spring of the year, the question
propounded by the Bishop for consideration was, "Is it desirable that
there should be held in this diocese a Diocesan Conference, in which both
the clergy and laity should be fully represented, for the purpose of
considering and eliciting the opinions of Churchmen upon matters
affecting the Church in general, or our own diocese in particular?"  A
large majority of the clergy and laity were in favour of the Conference,
and the Bishop, considering the large area of the diocese, decided that
the meetings should take place in five different centres.  The first
Conference was held at St. Andrew's Hall on this date; the second at
Fakenham Corn Hall, on November 1st; the third at Ipswich Public Hall, on
November 2nd; the fourth at Halesworth, on November 3rd; and the fifth at
Lynn Athenaeum, on November 4th.  At each Conference papers were read,
followed by the moving of resolutions and by discussions.


NOVEMBER.


9.--Mr. Frederick Elwin Watson was elected Mayor (for the second time),
and Mr. William Butcher appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

21.--The Prince of Wales arrived at Merton Hall, on a visit to Lord and
Lady Walsingham.

29.--The building known as the temporary church in the parish of St.
Bartholomew, Norwich, was opened by the Bishop of the Diocese.  It was
intended for the accommodation of 500 persons, and was erected at the
cost of 600.


DECEMBER.


14.--The Widow Steavenson, residing in St. Gregory's parish, Norwich,
completed her 101st year.  "Several of the parishioners called upon her,
congratulated her on the event, and supplied her with all the needful
viands and wine to enable her to entertain several old friends.  Her
daughter, now 77 years old, is a widow, having had to mourn the loss of
three husbands, but is on the point of marrying again."  (_See_ January
2nd, 1874.)

24.--Mr. Sidney produced his "farewell pantomime" at Norwich Theatre.  It
was entitled, "St. George, the Dragon, and the Seven Champions of
Christendom."

31.--The Prince of Wales, on his journey from Gunton to Sandringham,
lunched at the County Club, Norwich.  The party travelled from Gunton to
Norwich in sleighs and closed carriages, and his Royal Highness
afterwards proceeded by rail from Thorpe station to Wolferton.

--Died at Merton Hall, the Right Hon. Thomas, Lord Walsingham.  He was
the eldest son of Thomas, fourth Lord Walsingham, by his wife Lady
Elizabeth, fourth daughter of the Hon. and Right Rev. Brownlow North,
Bishop of Winchester, and was born July 5th, 1804.  On the death of his
father, on September 8th, 1839, he succeeded to the barony, and married,
on August 6th, 1842, Augusta Louisa, eldest daughter of Sir Robert
Frankland Russell, Bart.  Of this marriage he had issue a son, the Hon.
Thomas de Grey.  Lady Walsingham died in 1844, and his lordship married,
secondly, on October 25th, 1847, the Horn Emily Elizabeth Julia
Thellusson, eldest daughter of John, second Lord Rendlesham, by whom he
left issue three sons and three daughters.  His lordship was educated at
St. John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated M.A. in 1824, was
called to the Bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1827, and in 1842 was made LL.D. of
his University.  Although educated for the law, he devoted himself to
agriculture, the improvement of his estate, and of his cattle and sheep.
He was a member of the leading agricultural societies and of the
Smithfield Club, an excellent landlord, and one who carried out to the
fullest extent the motto of his house, "Excitari non hebescere."  His
lordship was succeeded in his title and estates by his son, the Hon.
Thomas de Grey, M.P. for West Norfolk, who was born in 1843.

--*"The December of 1870 has been no less remarkable for its cold than
its heat.  In the opening days of the month the temperature was unusually
high, and only a fortnight before winter made its appearance in stern
reality the thermometer registered in Norwich 55.  On the 21st there were
four degrees of frost, and on the 23rd the thermometer fell as low as
8.5.  On Christmas Eve the cold was so intense that the register on the
following morning was as low as 5.5.  Christmas Day was the coldest
experienced since Christmas Day, 1860, when the cold was more intense by
some two or three degrees."  There was a deep fall of snow throughout the
county.



1871.


JANUARY.


5.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, a memorial was received from the
Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture, affirming the necessity of the revision
and re-adjustment of the existing mode of assessment, and of inducing the
Government to contribute more largely to the rates levied under the
authority of Courts of Quarter Sessions.  Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., moved,
"That, inasmuch as many of the charges at present paid by county rates,
such as police, lunatic asylums, military stores, coroners, gaols, &c.,
are rendered necessary not for the benefit of any particular class or
locality, but of the community at large, it is both just and politic that
those charges should be much more liberally supplemented from the
National Exchequer, and that a petition from Quarter Sessions be
presented to the House of Commons to this effect."  The resolution was
seconded by Mr. Dalrymple, M.P., and agreed to.

5.--The trial of the election petition presented by Mr. Gardiner C.
Stevens against the return of Mr. Jacob Henry Tillett, as one of the
members of Parliament for Norwich, commenced at the Shirehall, Norwich,
before Mr. Justice Keating.  Mr. O'Malley, Q.C., and Mr. Griffits were
counsel for the petitioner, and Mr. Rodwell, Q.C., Mr. Serjeant
Ballantine, and Mr. Simms Reeve for the respondent.  The case for the
petitioner closed on the 6th, and on the 7th Mr. Rodwell commenced his
address on behalf of the respondent.  On the 10th Mr. Serjeant Ballantine
summed up the respondent's case, and on the same day Mr. O'Malley
replied.  His lordship gave judgment on the 11th, declaring the election
void, and stated that he should report to the House of Commons "the names
of everyone engaged with this shameful and disgraceful bribery."  (_See_
February 20th.)

18.--Died, in his 93rd year, at Alexandra Road, Norwich, Christopher
Bunting.  "He was present at the capture of the French ship Genereux,
whose ensign now hangs in St. Andrew's Hall.  In his early days he was a
steward in the Royal Navy, and not only saw the ensign strike to the
Foudroyant, but on the quarterdeck of that vessel saw it packed and
addressed to Robert Harvey, Esq., then (1800) Mayor of Norwich, little
imagining that he would subsequently reside in Norwich, and for more than
half a century have the opportunity of seeing the flag decorating the
walls of its principal building."

24.--Died, suddenly, at 2, Rectory Grove, Clapham, Mr. Henry Harrod,
F.S.A., aged 53.  Mr. Harrod was a native of Aylsham, and commenced
practice as a solicitor, at Norwich, where he resided some years.  He was
best known for his devotion to antiquarian pursuits and by his
contributions to the Transactions of the Norfolk and Norwich
Archaeological Society, of which he was an honorary secretary, in
conjunction with Mr. R. G. P. Minty.  His principal work was "Gleanings
from the Castles and Convents of Norfolk."  Possessed of remarkable skill
in deciphering old documents, his services in this respect were taken
advantage of by the Corporations of Norwich, Lynn, and other boroughs,
whose ancient records he undertook to arrange.  Mr. Harrod was local
secretary of the Society of Antiquaries, of which he was a Fellow, and of
the Archaeological Institute, and a corresponding member of the New
England Historic Genealogical Society.

27.--A new reservoir constructed by the Norwich Waterworks Company at
Lakenham, from designs by Mr. Thomas Hawkesley, C.E., of London, engineer
in chief to the company, was opened.  It cost between 6,000 and 7,000,
and was of 1,400,000 gallons capacity.


FEBRUARY.


4.--Died at Cambridge, Mr. Robert Steward, of Yarmouth.  He served the
office of Mayor of Yarmouth for four consecutive years, namely, from 1858
to 1861.  In addition to being a borough magistrate, he was upon the
Commission of the Peace for the county of Norfolk.

6.--A new type of traction engine (Thompson's patent) was tested in the
streets of Thetford by Messrs. Burrell, of the St. Nicholas Ironworks.
"The peculiarities of the engine consist of its wheels, three in number,
being fitted with a length of indiarubber, six inches thick and twelve
inches wide, covered with steel and kept on the wheels by endless chains.
The great use of these indiarubber tyres is to give elasticity."

8.--Mr. George William Perrepoint Bentinck, of Davies Street, Berkeley
Square, London, was, at Swaffham, returned unopposed to fill the vacancy
caused in the representation of West Norfolk by the elevation to the
Peerage of the Hon. Thomas de Grey.

10.--A storm of great violence swept over the Eastern coast, and strewed
the shores from Yarmouth to the Humber with wrecks and drifting spars.
"Off Yarmouth vessel after vessel went down bodily with all hands, and
left no clue as to their names or of the ports to which they belonged."
Six Lynn vessels were lost in the Deeps.  On this day large flocks of
wild geese and swans, with mallards and widgeon, were seen in the
neighbourhood of Yarmouth, and the stormy petrel was observed.

20.--The nomination of candidates to fill the vacancy caused in the
representation of Norwich by the unseating of Mr. Jacob Henry Tillett for
bribery took place at the Guildhall.  Sir Charles Legard, of Ganton,
Yorkshire, was the Conservative, and Mr. J. J. Colman, of Carrow House,
Norwich, the Liberal candidate.  The show of hands was in favour of the
latter, and a poll was demanded by Sir Samuel Bignold, on behalf of the
Conservative nominee.  The election took place on the 21st, with the
following result: Colman, 4,637; Legard, 3,389.

28.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, a report was received from
a special committee appointed on January 17th to consider the question of
the necessity of a School Board for the city.  The committee stated that
after communication with the Education Department of the Privy Council,
they considered the appointment of a School Board for the corporate
district to be inevitable.  Mr. Tillett moved the adoption of the report,
which was seconded by Mr. Youngs.  Mr. Priest moved, and Dr. Copeman
seconded, a resolution--"That, in the opinion of the Council, a School
Board is not at present desirable, and that they see no sufficient reason
why it should be inevitable."  Mr. Tillett's motion was carried, by 29
votes to 5.  (_See_ April 12th.)

--The Norwich Town Council authorised the Sewerage and Irrigation
Committee to borrow a further sum of 10,000 for the completion of the
drainage works.  On April 17th the works were used for the first time for
delivering sewage upon the land at Kirby Bedon.


MARCH.


3.--The foundation-stone of the new passenger station for the Great
Eastern, the Midland, and the Great Northern Railways, at King's Lynn,
was laid by the Mayor (Mr. E. E. Durrant).

8.--Died at his Norfolk seat, Melton Constable, Jacob Henry Delaval
Astley, twenty-third Baron Hastings.  His lordship, who was in his 49th
year, succeeded his father in 1859.  He married, in 1848, the Hon.
Frances Diana Manners Sutton, daughter of Viscount Canterbury.  He took
no part in public affairs, but he was much esteemed for his amiable
disposition, and deservedly popular in the county for the spirited manner
in which he promoted field sports, and for his courteous bearing as a
Master of Foxhounds.  Having no issue, his lordship was succeeded by his
brother, the Hon. and Rev. Delaval Loftus Astley, of East Barsham.

9.--At Norwich Police Court, Richard Hoskins, a clerk in the employment
of the National Provincial Bank of England, was charged with feloniously
stealing divers sums, amounting altogether to 1,835, the moneys of his
employers.  The magistrates consented to deal with the case summarily,
and, on the prisoner pleading guilty, he was sentenced to six months'
imprisonment, with hard labour.

10.--Mr. Henry Haigh's Opera Company, with Madame Haigh-Dyer as _prima
donna_, opened the Easter season at Norwich Theatre with a performance of
"The Grand Duchess."

15.--Died at his residence, St. Andrew's, Norwich, Mr. James Newbegin,
aged 51.  He was Chairman of the Norwich Board of Guardians, and was
possessed of considerable scientific attainments.  Mr. Edward Field was
elected to the chairmanship of the Board on April 17th.

21.--The marriage of Princess Louise was celebrated at Norwich by the
ringing of bells and by the partial decoration of the city.  The Town
Council, at a special meeting, adopted a congratulatory address for
presentation to the Queen, and in the evening the Scottish residents in
the city held a banquet at the Norfolk Hotel.  "Although a number of
their English friends were invited to join it, the gentlemen from North
of the Tweed assembled in sufficiently preponderating numbers to give a
distinctive character to the gathering, and the whole of the arrangements
were carried out by a committee of Scotchmen."  The "Number Twenty-Four"
Club also dined at the same hotel, and the event was similarly celebrated
at Yarmouth, Lynn, and Thetford.

26.--Died at Morningthorpe, Mr. Edward Howes, member of Parliament for
South Norfolk.  Born July 7th, 1813, he was the eldest surviving son of
the Rev. George Howes, rector of Spixworth, his mother being a daughter
of Mr. Robert Fellowes, of Shotesham Park.  From St. Paul's School he
proceeded to Cambridge, and came out high in the list of Wranglers of his
year (1835); in 1836 he was elected a Fellow of his College (Trinity),
and three years after was called to the Bar.  In 1859 Mr. Howes was
returned without opposition for the Eastern Division of the county, in
conjunction with Colonel Coke, and in 1865 he was again elected, with Mr.
Clare Sewell Read as his colleague.  In 1868, when the county was
subdivided, Mr. Howes and Mr. Read selected the Southern Division, and
were again returned.  Mr. Howes was appointed Chancellor of the Diocese
on the death of Mr. Chancellor Evans; he was a Chairman of Norfolk
Quarter Sessions, and one of her Majesty's Ecclesiastical Commissioners.
He married first, in 1842, Agnes Maria, daughter of Mr. Richard Gwyn, who
died in 1843; and secondly, in 1851, his cousin, the fourth daughter of
Mr. R. Fellowes, deceased, by whom he left a son and a daughter.


APRIL.


1.--Died, in his 88th year, Mr. George Samuel Kett, of Brooke House.  He
served the office of High Sheriff in 1820, and was a magistrate and
Deputy Lieutenant of the county.

4.--Died, suddenly, while on a visit to Norwich, Mr. G. Middleton, of
Wimbledon.  Mr. Middleton, who was a magistrate of the city, served the
office of Mayor in 1859.

11.--The dedication-stone of a new church at Harleston was laid by Mr.
Sancroft Holmes.  The building was designed to accommodate 400 persons,
and the contract amounted to 3,150, exclusive of fittings.  Mr. Phipson
was the architect, and Mr. Grimwood, of Weybread, the contractor.

--The nomination of candidates to fill the vacancy in the Southern
Division of the county, occasioned by the death of Mr. Howes, took place
at the Shirehall, Norwich.  Sir Robert Jacob Buxton, Conservative, and
Mr. Robert Thornhagh Gurdon, Liberal, were nominated.  The polling took
place on the 14th, and resulted in the return of the Conservative
candidate.  The official declaration was made at the Shirehall on the
17th, as follows: Buxton, 2,868; Gurdon, 2,547.

12.--The first School Board election took place at Norwich.  "There was a
total absence of excitement, and not much interest was shown."  The
following candidates were elected:--Mr. J. H. Tillett, Mr. H. Morgan, Mr.
H. Birkbeck, Mr. J. W. Dowson.  Mr. T. R. Pinder, Mr. R. A. Cooper, the
Rev. Hinds Howell, Mr. A. J. N. Chamberlin, Mr. C. J. Bunting, the Rev.
E. P. Costello (Roman Catholic), the Rev. A. C. Copeman, the Rev. J. W.
L. Heaviside, and Mr. J. C. Barnham.  The unsuccessful candidates were
Mr. John Youngs, Mr. F. Paul, the Rev. G. S. Barrett, and the Rev. A.
Jessopp.  On April 27th Canon Heaviside was elected Chairman, and Mr.
Barnham Vice-Chairman; and on May 22nd Mr. E. P. Simpson was appointed
Clerk.

15.*--"In consequence of the Purchas judgment, the clergy of Yarmouth
intend to wear the surplice in future instead of the black gown when
preaching.  This resolution was carried into effect during Passion week,
and on Easter Sunday at the various churches.  At St. John's, St. James',
and St. Andrew's churches the black gown has long been discarded."

18.--The sale of the stud and foxhounds of the late Lord Hastings, at
Melton Constable, attracted an enormous number of persons from all parts
of England.  About 4,000 was realised.  On the 19th the daily cows and
red and fallow deer were sold for 1,600.

21.--Died at his residence, the Crescent, Norwich, the Rev. Samuel
Titlow, vicar of St. John Timberhill and rector of St. Peter Hungate,
aged 78.  Mr. Titlow was a native of Harleston, and was seventh Wrangler
in the mathematical tripos of 1817.  Ordained deacon in the same year, he
was appointed curate of Broxbourne, and in 1818 received priest's orders.
He came to Norwich in 1819, as mathematical master at the Grammar School,
under Dr. Valpy, and held the curacy of St. Clement.  Mr. Titlow
afterwards opened a school in Pottergate Street, which he carried on for
several years with great success.  In 1831 he was appointed to the
vicarage of St. John Timberhill, and in 1839 the Lord Chancellor
presented him to the rectory of St. Peter Hungate.

22.--Died at his residence, Hellesdon House, Norwich, Mr. John Norgate, a
warm supporter of the benevolent and educational institutions of the
city, and a good judge of the fine arts.

27.--A great meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, under the
presidency of the Mayor (Mr. F. E. Watson), "for the purpose of
protesting against the Intoxicating Liquors (Licensing) Bill introduced
into the House of Commons by the Home Secretary, Mr. Bruce."  The
principal speakers were Sir Samuel Bignold, Mr. W. P. Nichols, Mr. S.
Gurney Buxton, and Mr. H. Patteson.  Resolutions were adopted affirming
that the Bill was unjust in its character and indefensible in its
confiscating the rights of property, and ought to be opposed by every
constitutional means, and that it was an undue interference with the
rights, liberties, and necessities of the working man, and inconsistent
with the true spirit of freedom.


MAY.


7.--Died, at Great Plumstead, Robert Maidstone, in his one hundredth
year.  For the last twenty years of his life he was postmaster of the
village, and had served for more than half a century the office of parish
clerk.

13.--The census returns for Norwich were published on this date.  The
number of houses inhabited was 18,328; uninhabited, 1,117; building, 181;
the total population was 80,382--males, 36,583; females, 43,799.

17.--Snow fell at Norwich, "and the weather was more like that of
midwinter than of the merrie month of May."

18.--The sale of the late Lord Walsingham's Merton herd was conducted by
Mr. John Thornton.  Forty-six cows realised 1,906 16s., and eleven bulls,
402 3s., a respective average of 41 9s. and 36 11s. 2d.  The total amount
was 2,308 19s.  The Southdown flock was sold by Mr. Thornton on June
29th.  The highest price paid for a yearling ram was 180 guineas, and the
total amount realised 5,489 15s.

21.--Died, at St. Augustine's, Norwich, Mr. John Sultzer, in his 69th
year.  Since the year 1839 he had carried on an extensive manufacturing
business; he was a magistrate of the city, a member of the Town Council,
and chairman of the Norwich Waterworks Company, and of the Board of
Management of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  Mr. Sultzer was a native
of Leicester, and at the age of 25 settled in Lichfield, of which city he
was Mayor at the time of the Coronation of Queen Victoria.  In politics
he was a Liberal.

24.--The Queen's birthday was celebrated in the customary manner at
Norwich.  The Royal Horse Artillery and Volunteers were reviewed on
Mousehold, and the Mayor and Sheriff, besides entertaining a large number
of guests at the Drill Hall, gave a dinner at St. Andrew's Hall to 1,200
of the aged poor.


JUNE.


7.--A rifle match between two teams of 22 men each, representing the
counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, took place on the Billingford range,
East Dereham, and was won by Norfolk by 589 points against 562.

20.--A fine barque, classed A 1 at Lloyd's for fourteen years, named the
Oleander, was launched from the shipyard of Mr. J. H. Fellows, at
Southtown, Yarmouth.  The vessel was 440 tons builder's measurement, and
386 tons register, 133 feet in length, and 27 feet beam, and was intended
for the South African trade.

21.--The annual show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association commenced at
East Dereham, and was continued on the 22nd.  It was the most successful
that the society had held.  Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., presided at the public
dinner, which took place at the Corn Hall.


JULY.


14.--Mrs. Elizabeth Watts, of Badding's Lane, St. Martin-at-Palace,
Norwich, attained her one hundredth year.

15.--The 2nd Administrative Battalion of Norfolk Volunteers and the 1st
Administrative Battalion of Suffolk Volunteers were encamped on the North
Denes, Yarmouth.  Major-General F. Murray inspected the battalions on the
20th.

18.--The projected establishment of a Norfolk County School for the
education of the middle classes "on similar principles to those which
have been successfully carried out in other counties," was discussed at a
meeting of the West Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture held at King's Lynn.
The movement, which was initiated by the Rev. J. L. Brereton, was deemed
worthy of support not only by the chamber, but by the county generally.
On September 30th the announcement was made that the school was being
experimentally conducted at Great Massingham.  (_See_ January 22nd,
1872.)

22.--The 1st Administrative Battalion of Norfolk Rifle Volunteers went
into camp at Holkham Park.  The North Walsham corps marched the whole
distance of thirty miles; they started the day before, and were billeted
for the night at Holt.  Lieut.-Col. Wilkinson inspected the battalion on
the 26th, and the camp was struck on the 29th.


AUGUST.


2.--The Eastern Counties Industrial and Fine Arts Exhibition commenced at
St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  It remained open for two months.

5.--At a special meeting of the Governors of the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital, the Centenary Committee appointed for the purpose of suggesting
a scheme for affording increased accommodation for in-patients, and for
soliciting donations and subscriptions to carry out the object, reported
that in consequence of conflicting opinions they had been unable to come
to a decision.  It was agreed by the Board that no additional building be
commenced not only until the necessary funds for completing the building
were provided, but until increased subscriptions for the maintenance of
additional in-patients were forthcoming.  (_See_ November 20th, 1876.)

7.--The first Monday in August falling upon this date, "the banks at
Norwich were closed, under the Bank Holiday Act."  At East Dereham "the
first of the holidays mentioned in the new statute was officially
observed by the various bank officials, for whose convenience the measure
was passed into law."  A meeting of the merchants, manufacturers,
traders, and others was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, on December 14th,
"to determine whether the holidays mentioned in the Bank Holiday Act
should be permanently adopted in this city."  Those present pledged
themselves to adopt the holidays.

15.--The Yarmouth Town Council voted an address to Sir James Paget, a
native of the borough, congratulating him upon the honour of a baronetcy
conferred upon him by the Queen.

22.--The D Battery, B Brigade, Royal Horse Artillery, marched from
Norwich for Aldershot, and were accompanied to the city boundary by the
bands of the Artillery and Rifle Volunteers.

26.--Died, Mr. James De Carle Sowerby, aged 84.  He belonged to a Norwich
family of naturalists, and was chiefly employed in drawing, engraving,
and colouring.  "There were few departments of natural history in which
his attainments were not considerable, and he published many papers on
shells and other subjects in the Transactions of the Geological and other
societies."


SEPTEMBER.


2.--Mr. Walter Montgomery, the well-known actor, committed suicide by
shooting himself at Shelly's Hotel, Stafford Street, London.  Only on the
30th of the previous month he married, at St. George's, Hanover Square,
Miss Laleah B. Bigelow, an American lady.  Mr. Montgomery, whose real
name was Richard Tomlinson, was a native of Norwich, and for some years
resided at Walsingham, where he was apprenticed to Mr. William Coker, a
grocer and draper.  At an early age he showed a predilection for the
stage, and after a series of recitals in private, made his first
appearance at Norwich Theatre, and subsequently played at Yarmouth, Bath,
Bristol, and other provincial towns.  He went to Birmingham in 1854, and
thence to the Theatre Royal, Manchester, where he became a great
favourite.  He performed also at Drury Lane and the Haymarket, and made a
tour in Australia, where he established for himself a high reputation.
Returning to England, he sustained heavy pecuniary losses by his
connexion with the Gaiety Theatre, and had resolved to emigrate to
America.  Mr. Montgomery was 44 years of age.

11.--Mdlle. Beatrice appeared at Norwich Theatre with "Frou-frou"
Company.  During the engagement, "The Happy Pair" and "The
Ticket-of-Leave Man," in which Mr. Horace Wigan sustained his original
character of Hawkshaw, the Detective, were produced.

27.--The All England and Norfolk Ploughing Matches commenced at Booton,
near Reepham, and were continued on the 28th.  There were seven
contests--three for implement manufacturers and four for Norfolk
ploughmen.  A public dinner was held at Hackford schoolroom on the
evening of the first day, when Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., presided, and
several local members of Parliament were present.


OCTOBER.


4.--The headquarters of the 7th Dragoon Guards arrived at Norwich, under
the command of Lieut.-Col. Peyton.  The Cavalry Barracks being under
repair, the officers took up their quarters at the Royal Hotel.

6.--Great excitement was caused at Diss by the closing of the doors of
Messrs. Fincham and Co.'s Bank.  In a circular issued shortly afterwards,
Mr. Simpson stated that he was compelled to adopt this course owing to
the continued strain upon his resources.  On the 7th it was announced
that arrangements were being made by which it was hoped the business of
the Bank would be carried on; and on the same day Messrs. Gurneys
intimated that they would afford banking facilities to the customers of
Messrs. Fincham and Simpson during the temporary suspension of business.
A meeting of the creditors was held on the 10th, and a committee
appointed; and representatives of the London and Provincial Bank carried
out negotiations which resulted in the Bank being re-opened on the 11th.
Another meeting was held on November 2nd, for the purpose of proving
debts and of realising the estate.  Payment to the creditors of 10s. in
the pound was arranged, it being understood that further dividends would
be paid as the estate was realised.  The liabilities were reported to be
87,305 5s. 6d., and the assets 54,491 18s. 2d.

13.--Sir Samuel Bignold, on the completion of his 80th year, was
presented by the clerks at the Union Offices with a silver inkstand and
an illuminated address.  Several of the Conservative Ward Associations
adopted congratulatory addresses, and, on the 17th, a resolution was
passed by the Town Council expressive of the congratulations of that
body.  On January 9th, 1872, the proprietors of the Norwich Union Fire
Office presented Sir Samuel with a service of plate and his portrait,
painted by Ventnor.

15.--Died at his residence, Buckingham Palace Road, London, Mr. Richard
Young, who, on the 13th inst., had been re-elected by the Livery of the
Corporation Sheriff of London and Middlesex.  Mr. Young, who was a
merchant and shipowner, and a director of the Great Eastern Railway and
other companies, was born at Scarning, in 1809, and was a self-made man.

16.--Died at the house of her nephew, Mr. H. Wilkin, West Pottergate
Street, Norwich, Sarah Nolbrow, aged 100 years.

17.--The Norwich Town Council accepted a portrait of Mr. Jacob Henry
Tillett, painted by Sandys, to be placed in St. Andrew's Hall.

--The Sanitary Committee reported to the Norwich Town Council that the
number of outbreaks of small-pox in the city was such as to occasion
considerable alarm.  It was stated that the necessary precautions had
been taken, and, in case of death, burial within forty-eight hours had,
as far as possible, been enforced, and arrangements made to prevent the
bodies of children being carried to the Cemetery in cabs.  Dr. Eade, at a
meeting of the Town Council on November 28th, referred to the alarming
spread of the disease, and urged the necessity of enforcing vaccination.
During this and the succeeding month several persons were prosecuted for
neglect of precautionary measures.  On December 19th it was reported to
the Town Council that the Marchioness of Lothian had munificently given
to the city a small-pox hospital.  (_See_ March 23rd, 1872.)

18.--A new Corn Hall, erected through the enterprise of Mr. J. W. Davey,
was opened at Yarmouth.  It was designed by Mr. J. B. Pearce, and built
by Mr. J. W. Lacey, at the cost of 3,800.  "For many years past the corn
merchants had met in all weathers in front of the Duke's Head Hotel,
without the slightest shelter, and transacted their affairs at great
inconvenience to themselves and to the annoyance of the general public."

26.--At Norwich Quarter Sessions, before the Recorder, Mr. O'Malley,
Q.C., Henry Brown Woolsey (36), formerly a clerk at Carrow Works, pleaded
guilty to feloniously embezzling 558, the monies of his employers, Mr. J.
J. Colman and others, and was sentenced to five years' penal servitude,
although recommended to mercy by the prosecutors.  Considerable comment
was made upon the disparity of the sentences in this and in the Hoskins
case (_q.v._ page 210).


NOVEMBER.


9.--Mr. Robert Chamberlin was elected Mayor, and Mr. Frederick Grimmer
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

23.--A telegram was received at Norwich announcing that the Prince of
Wales was suffering from an attack of typhoid fever at Sandringham.
"There are," it was added, "no unfavourable symptoms."  Later bulletins
were of a most alarming character, and the inhabitants of county and city
soon realised that his Royal Highness was in a critical condition.  The
Queen arrived from Windsor on the 29th, and was met at Wolferton station
by the Duke of Edinburgh, who escorted her to Sandringham.  This was her
Majesty's first visit to Sandringham, and her second to Norfolk.  [As
Princess Victoria, she, with her mother, the Duchess of Kent, visited Mr.
Coke at Holkham, in 1835.]  Her Majesty returned to Windsor on December
1st.  On the 8th his Royal Highness had a very serious relapse, and his
Royal mother, accompanied by the Duke of Edinburgh and Princess Louise,
hurried back to Sandringham.  On December 10th a special form of prayer
was used in all churches, and supplications were made at Nonconformist
places of worship.  Public suspense continued until the 14th, when a turn
for the better took place, and on the 19th her Majesty returned to
Windsor.  On the same day a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council
was held, at which, on the motion of Sir William Foster, seconded by Sir
Samuel Bignold, a resolution was adopted expressing to her Majesty and
the Princess of Wales the deep sympathy felt by the citizens during the
dangerous and painful illness of his Royal Highness.  Throughout this
trying period the newspaper offices in Norwich were besieged by anxious
crowds, eager to receive intelligence.  (_See_ January 4th, 1872.)

30.--A severe gale burst over the East coast, and was productive of the
most terrible disasters to shipping and the fishing fleet.


DECEMBER.


26.--The pantomime produced at Norwich Theatre, by Miss May Holt, was
entitled, "The Fair One with the Golden Locks, or Harlequin Zephyr and
the Peris' Paradise on the Jewelled Island."  At Charles Adams' Circus
was produced the equestrian pantomime, "Ride a Cock Horse to Banbury
Cross, or Harlequin Mother Goose."



1872.


JANUARY.


4.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, held at the Shirehall, Norwich, the
Earl of Kimberley moved an address to the Queen, conveying to her Majesty
the assurance that the magistracy and all her loyal subjects in the
county had felt the sincerest sympathy with her during the alarming
illness of the Prince of Wales; and Lord Sondes moved a congratulatory
address to his Royal Highness and the Princess of Wales.  The clergy of
the diocese, at a meeting held at the Palace on the 27th, adopted similar
addresses.  "Thanksgiving Day" was observed throughout the county on
February 27th.  At Norwich the principal business establishments were
closed, and services held at the Cathedral, the parish churches, and
other places of worship.

11.--The centenary of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital was celebrated by
an entertainment given at the institution.

22.--The Norwich, Costessey, and Taverham Tramway Scheme was considered
by the Board of Trade, to whose satisfaction the promoters proved that
the preliminary steps required under the Tramways Act, 1870, had been
complied with.

--The Norfolk County School Association held its first meeting at the
temporary school at Great Massingham, under the presidency of Sir
Willoughby Jones.  The Rev. J. L. Brereton reported that the Prince of
Wales had become a patron of the school, and the sum of 5,920 had been
subscribed by about seventy shareholders.  At a meeting held at the Earl
of Leicester's, house in Grosvenor Square, London, on April 24th, it was
decided to erect the school on Bintry Hill, near North Elmham.  (_See_
April 14th, 1873.)

24.--The Norwich Waterworks Company opened a second covered reservoir at
Lakenham, and, in celebration of the event, luncheon was served within
the works, under the presidency of the chairman of the company, Mr. H. S.
Patteson.  The reservoir was 128 feet in length and 120 feet in width.


FEBRUARY.


7.--Died at his residence, Notting Hill, London, the Right Rev. Samuel
Hinds, D.D., formerly Bishop of Norwich.  Born at Barbadoes in 1793, he
came at an early age to England, and was educated at a private school at
Ridland, near Bristol.  He entered Balliol College, Oxford, but migrated
to Queen's, where he took Second Class Honours in Classics and the
University Latin Essay.  After ordination by the Bishop of London, he
returned to Barbadoes as the first missionary to the negro population.
Soon afterwards the headmastership of Codrington College fell vacant, and
Dr. Hinds was appointed thereto by Bishop' Howley.  On returning to
England, he held a small living in Hertfordshire, and the rectory of
Castle Knock, near Dublin; in 1848 was appointed Dean of Carlisle, and in
1849, on the death of Bishop Stanley, he became Bishop of Norwich.  On
account of ill-health he resigned the See in 1857.  Bishop Hinds was the
author of "A Treatise on Logic," "A History of the Rise and Early
Progress of Christianity," "An Inquiry into the Nature and Extent of
Inspiration," and "Sonnets and Sacred Poems."  "His beautiful hymn, to
which Dr. Buck set such appropriate music, is familiar to every attendant
at our Cathedral services."


MARCH.


1.--Died at Gateley, Mr. Money Griggs, in his one hundredth year.

9.*--"Under the provisions of Mr. Cardwell's Army Organization Bill,
Yarmouth has been selected as the headquarters of the _depot_ of the 9th
East Norfolk Regiment of Foot."

11.--Died, at 21, Taviton Street, Gordon Square, London, Emily Taylor,
daughter of Mr. Samuel Taylor, of New Buckenham.  She was born April 8th,
1795, and for nearly fifty years resided in Norfolk.  At the age of five
her singing was said to be wonderful; before seven years of age she had
read the Iliad of Homer and made herself acquainted with many books of
history.  Among her writings were "Tales of the Saxons," "Tales of the
English," "The Ball I live on," "Poetical Illustrations," &c.  Her last
work was "Contemporary Poets," issued in 1868.  Miss Taylor, who was a
native of Banham, removed to London in 1858, and established the West
Central Collegiate School, Southampton Road, Russell Square.  Her remains
were interred in Highgate Cemetery, on March 14th, near the resting-place
of Miss Martineau.

14.--Died at his residence in Duke Street, Norwich, very suddenly, aged
51, Mr. Henry Rudd, chorus master of the Norfolk and Norwich Triennial
Musical Festival.  Mr. Rudd was originally a sawyer, but his taste for
music was observed by Mr. Taylor, organist of St. John's Roman Catholic
chapel, from whom he received his musical education.  For many years he
was a member of the Choral Society and of other musical associations,
held the situation of music master at the Diocesan Training Institution,
and was instrumental in forming the Norwich Gatehouse Choir.  On the
resignation of Mr. J. F. Hill, he obtained the post of director of the
Festival Choral Society.  Mr. Rudd was succeeded as chorus master by Mr.
James Harcourt.

20.--Died at Northrepps Hall, aged 88, Hannah, widow of the first Sir
Thomas Fowell Buxton, whom she survived twenty-seven years.  Lady Buxton
was sister of the well-known philanthropist, Elizabeth Fry, and of Mr.
John Joseph Gurney.

22.--Died at Burlingham Hall, Mr. Henry Negus Burroughes, aged 81.  He
succeeded to the family estates at an early age, and in 1815 served the
office of High Sheriff.  In 1837, in conjunction with Mr. Edmond
Wodehouse, he successfully contested the representation of East Norfolk
against Mr. W. H. Windham and Mr. R. H. Gurney, and he continued to
represent the division until 1857, having meanwhile stood a second
contest, in 1841, with Sir William ffolkes, and been twice re-elected, in
1847 and 1852, without opposition.  In 1857, however, he and his
colleague, Sir Henry Stracey, who had been elected in 1855, in the room
of Mr. Wodehouse, declined to come forward again, the then popularity of
their chief opponent, Major-General Windham, who had just returned
triumphant from the Crimea, rendering success doubtful.  Mr. Burroughes
had taken an active part in the public business of the county.

23.--In the week ending this date there was a marked decline in the
mortality from small-pox in Norwich.  The largest number of deaths in any
week was 37, and for several weeks the number was reported as 30.

30.--Died at Coltishall, in his 80th year, Mr. Nathaniel Palmer, of the
Inner Temple, barrister-at-law.  By his death the Recordership of
Yarmouth and the Judgeship of the Norwich Court of Record became vacant.
The first-named office was filled by the appointment of Mr. Simms Reeve,
and the latter by the election of Mr. Carlos Cooper.  Mr. Palmer was one
of the oldest of the Norwich magistrates, and for many years occupied a
leading position in the Liberal party.  Born in 1792, he was the son of
Mr. Nathaniel Palmer, Government contractor for the Navy and distributor
of stamps, and was articled to Mr. Worship, solicitor, of Yarmouth, in
which borough he practised as an attorney, with considerable success.  In
1827 he was called to the Bar by the Inner Temple.  He married Rachael,
only daughter of Mr. Thomas Hitchin, of Norwich, by whom he had five
children.  One of his sons was Mr. T. H. Palmer, registrar of the Norwich
County Court.


APRIL.


1.--Mr. Henry Leslie's Opera Bouffe Company commenced an engagement at
Norwich Theatre, in "Princess of Trebizonde."

13.--The agricultural labourers' agitation began in Norfolk with a
meeting held at Old Buckenham.  The movement was shortly afterwards taken
up in earnest in many parts of the county.  The principal object of its
supporters was to obtain an increase in the rate of wages.  (_See_
February 20th, 1873.)

22.--Died at Norwich, aged 50, Mr. Frederick Simpson, for many years City
Treasurer.  Mr. T. Hancock, a member of the Town Council, resigned his
seat, and on May 3rd was elected to the vacant office.


MAY.


1.--The arbitration case, Coaks _v._ Tillett, was opened at the
Shirehall, Norwich, before Sir Willoughby Jones, Bart.  The inquiry had
reference to a claim made by Mr. I. B. Coaks against Mr. J. H. Tillett,
arising out of the winding-up of the affairs of the East of England Bank.
An action was originally brought in the Court of Queen's Bench, and was
intended to have been heard at the previous Norwich Assizes, but by
consent of both parties the matter in dispute was referred to the
arbitration of Sir Willoughby Jones.  Mr. Merewether appeared for Mr.
Coaks, and Mr. Tillett conducted his own case.  The amount claimed was
2,160, and the arbitrator, after an exhaustive inquiry was due
consideration, awarded 1,881 4s. 5d.

8.--In the Court of Queen's Bench, the Attorney-General moved for a rule
_nisi_ calling upon the Town Council of Norwich to show cause why a
_mandamus_ should not issue directing them to build a new asylum for
pauper lunatics.  The question had been in abeyance since 1863, and
various reasons were urged why the asylum should not be erected.  The
Court granted the rule _nisi_.  On the 17th it was resolved, at a meeting
of the Town Council, to write to the Secretary of State, pointing out
that on April 17th a resolution was passed in the House of Commons
affirming that occupiers in counties and boroughs should be relieved
either in whole or in part of charges imposed for lunatics, the
expenditure for such purpose being almost entirely independent of local
control.  The Home Secretary was asked whether he felt it imcumbent by
compulsory measures to force upon the local rates of Norwich an
expenditure estimated at between 40,000 and 50,000.  On the 21st the Town
Council sent a memorial to the House of Commons, asking them "to
intervene for the protection of this municipality, or at least obtain a
postponement of the threatened proceedings until Parliament shall have
definitely settled by whom the cost of maintaining lunatics shall be
permanently borne."  The Court of Queen's Bench, on June 10th, made the
rule absolute against the Corporation, and on June 18th the Corporation
decided, by 33 votes to 7, to offer continued resistance to the
_mandamus_.  (_See_ January 15th, 1873.)

14.--A meeting, presided over by Colonel Hugh FitzRoy, was held at the
Town Hall, Aylsham, to discuss the feasibility of constructing a narrow
gauge railway between Norwich and Aylsham, and thence to Aldborough and
Beeston.  Mr. Minshull, engineer, estimated the cost of construction at
5,000 per mile.  The meeting was in favour of the scheme, and appointed a
committee to consider details.

16.--The first stone of Christ church, Eaton, was laid by the Mayor of
Norwich (Mr. R. Chamberlin).  The church was opened on November 4th,
1873, by the Bishop of Norwich.  Mr. H. Bolingbroke gave the site; the
architects were Mr. J. H. Brown and Mr. J. B. Pearce, and the contractors
Mr. W. Wright and Mr. J. W. Lacey.  "It is said that the bell fixed in
the turret was formerly the sanctus bell at the Cathedral."

20.--The Queen's birthday was celebrated at Norwich on this day
(Whit-Monday).  "It was a demonstration of regard towards the person of
her Majesty and of joy that his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales had
recovered from his illness."  The streets of the city were decorated, a
military review took place on Mousehold, civic entertainments were given,
and the festivities terminated with a display of fireworks on the Castle
Meadow.

21.--Captain Bates, the Kentucky Giant, and Chrissie-Millie, better known
as the "Two-headed Nightingale," appeared at the Lecture Hall, St.
Andrew's, Norwich.  Of this mulatto girl it was said, "Chrissie and
Millie are fairly educated, and sing either solos or duets with ease and
effect."

23.--Died at Naples, the Right Hon. Henry Lytton Earle Bulwer, Baron
Dalling and Bulwer.  Born in 1804, his lordship was the second son of
General William Bulwer, of Heydon Hall and Wood Dalling, by Elizabeth
Barbara Lytton, sole heiress and last descendant of the Lyttons of
Knebworth in Hertfordshire.  His career as a diplomatist is familiar to
every student of history.  His lordship was the author of "Historical
Characters," which appeared in two volumes in the winter of 1867, and
rapidly ran into a sixth edition; and of a "Life of Lord Palmerston,"
published in 1871.  The remains of the deceased nobleman were interred at
Heydon on June 25th.

27.--A one hundred yards' race took place on the West Winch Road, Lynn,
between Thomas Akers and a horse belonging to Mr. W. L. Proctor.  "Akers
led off, the horse not starting directly the signal was given, but he had
not proceeded far when he was overtaken by the animal and beaten by about
ten yards."

29.--The tower of the church of Beeston-next-Mileham was struck by
lightning.  "The Litcham fire-engine was taken into the church, but the
molten lead and burning timber fell so rapidly that nothing could be
done, and the tower was entirely destroyed."

--A remarkable mirage was witnessed at Yarmouth.  "The weather was
exceedingly sultry, with heavy banks of clouds towards the east and
south-east, just opposite Yarmouth, and extending from the Scroby to the
Corton Sands there appeared a sharply-defined and magnificent outline of
Gorleston and Corton cliff, with the entrance to the harbour and even the
white sands.  A stranger visiting the locality for the first time would
have supposed that Yarmouth was embayed by a narrow peninsula."


JUNE.


3.--Mr. G. B. Loveday's Gaiety Operetta Company, under the direction of
Mr. John Hollingshead, appeared at Norwich Theatre.

6.--The Prince of Wales visited Yarmouth for the first time.  His Royal
Highness, accompanied by the Earl of Leicester, arrived at Southtown
station, and was received by the Mayor (Mr. E. H. L. Preston), the
members of the Corporation, and the Recorder (Mr. Simms Reeve), who read
an address of welcome.  The Militia Artillery and the Rifle Volunteers
formed guards of honour, and the Royal carriage was escorted from the
station to the Town Hall, by the 7th Dragoon Guards from Norwich, under
the command of Colonel Peyton.  After luncheon at the Town Hall, his
Royal Highness proceeded to the newly-erected Grammar School, at the
junction of Trafalgar Road and Apsley Road, and declared the buildings
open; in the evening he dined at the Artillery mess and attended a
performance in which Mr. Toole appeared, at the Regent Hall.  On the 7th
the Prince was present at a review of the Artillery Militia, of which he
was honorary colonel, and on the 8th returned by special train to London.

10.--Mr. J. L. Toole and Miss E. Farren appeared at Norwich Theatre on
this and the succeeding evening in "Dearer than Life," "The
Steeplechase," "The Weavers," scenes from "Paul Pry," and "Ici on parle
Francais."

19.--The show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association, of which the
Prince of Wales was this year President, commenced at King's Lynn, and
was attended by his Royal Highness, who was accompanied by the Princess
of Wales.  The Prince presided at the luncheon, which, for the first
time, took place in a marquee erected in the showground, and was attended
by upwards of 900 guests.  In addition to the Prince of Wales, the
speakers at the gathering included the Earl of Leicester, the Bishop of
Norwich, Lord Sondes, Lord Suffield, Admiral Sir Henry Keppel, the Hon.
R. Bourke, M.P., Sir W. Bagge, M.P., Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., Mr. G. W. P.
Bentinck, M.P., &c.


JULY.


2.--Died at the Roman Catholic Presbytery, Willow Lane, Norwich, the Rev.
Edmund Costello, S.J., aged 44.  Father Costello had been in ill-health,
and his death was accelerated by his devoted ministrations among the poor
when the small-pox epidemic was at its height.  He was a son of Mr. James
Costello, of Eyre Square, Galway, was educated at the Irish College,
Paris, at Maynooth, and at Stonyhurst, and entered upon the Norwich Roman
Catholic Mission in 1868.

27.--The 3rd Norfolk Rifle Volunteers (formerly the 1st Administrative
Battalion), commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Duff, went into camp at
Ketteringham Park.  The North Walsham corps marched from that town to the
camp, a distance of twenty-two miles.  The 2nd Battalion, commanded by
Lieut.-Colonel R. T. Gurdon, was brigaded with the 3rd Battalion.  The
camp was struck on August 2nd.

29.--The sale of Crown Point and Whitlingham estate took place at the
Royal Hotel, Norwich, by order of the Court of Chancery.  Messrs. J. and
J. Colman were the purchasers, at 55,700.

30.--Sir Henry Stracey was presented, at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, by
the Conservatives of the city, with a valuable piece of plate, as "a mark
of their appreciation of his political conduct during the recent
contests, and their admiration of his example as a straightforward
English gentleman."  Lady Stracey received from the ladies of Norwich a
diamond bracelet, and silver bouquet-holders were presented by
working-men to the Misses Stracey.


AUGUST.


5.--The High Sheriff (Mr. Angerstein) was fined 50 by the Judge of Assize
at Norwich.  (Mr. Justice Keating), for non-attendance with his carriage
at the Judge's lodgings.  His lordship had driven to the court in a cab,
which he considered to be "a way not fitting her Majesty's Judges."  The
High Sheriff subsequently explained that a mistake had been made as to
the time fixed for the sitting of the court, and having tendered an
apology, the fine was remitted by his lordship.

5.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Byles, James Johnson, of
North Walsham, sought to recover from Mr. W. H. Cooke, Q.C., Judge of the
Norfolk County Court, damages for false imprisonment and assault.  It was
alleged that the defendant wrongfully imprisoned the plaintiff for thirty
days; when the plaintiff left Norwich Castle he personally served the
Judge, as he was leaving the court, with a notice of action for false
imprisonment, and his Honour, mistaking the man's intention, seized him
by the collar, and a second time ordered his arrest.  For the defendant
it was alleged that he had acted within his jurisdiction.  After two
days' trial the jury returned a verdict for the plaintiff, damages one
farthing.

8.--An alarming flood occurred at Walsingham.  Owing to heavy rains, the
stream in the vicinity overflowed its banks, and the low-lying part of
the town was submerged.  Forty women and children were rescued from the
upper rooms of the cottages by means of ladders, and conveyed in boats to
a place of safety.  On the 9th a temporary dam was erected, which had the
effect of diverting the flow of water.  The village of East Barsham was
also flooded, and the high road at West Barsham was under water.

10.--At a meeting of the Norfolk Central Committee, held at the
Shirehall, Norwich, it was reported that foot-and-mouth disease had
spread to an alarming extent among cattle and sheep.  On the motion of
Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., it was ordered that markets for fat stock be held
under the same restrictions that were in force during the time of the
cattle plague, and that similar regulations should govern the movements
of store stock as were then in force.  In Norfolk alone during the
previous five weeks the loss to stockowners from foot-and-mouth disease
was estimated at 22,500, in respect of 10,000 cattle and 5,000 sheep.
The committee sent a memorial to the Privy Council to prohibit the
opening of all fairs and markets for the period of six weeks.

12.--Died suddenly, at Hills Road, Cambridge, Mr. George Kett.  He was
born at Suton, near Wymondham, on June 26th, 1809, and commenced life in
a small way of business as a wood carver at Wymondham.  After copying
poppyheads at Wymondham church, he undertook the carving of the seats for
Ketteringham and Mulbarton churches.  He then removed to Norwich, where
he was engaged upon the restoration of the Cathedral stalls and canopies.
Whilst he was working there Mr. James Rattee was placed under him as an
apprentice, and the two afterwards became partners.  Mr. Kett was next
offered employment upon the works for the new Houses of Parliament.  In
1845 he removed to London, where he was principally employed under the
immediate direction of Sir Charles Barry, in supplying designs for the
wood carving.  Among other portions of the work on which he was specially
engaged were the Royal Arms at the back of the Throne in the House of
Lords.  Mr. Rattee, in 1848, consulted him upon an estimate for the
restoration of the choir of Ely Cathedral, and Mr. Kett agreed that if
the tender were accepted he would remove to Cambridge and assist him in
carrying it out.  The business partnership thus commenced continued after
Mr. Rattee's death, in 1854, with his widow, under the style of Rattee
and Kett.  Mrs. Rattee died in 1866, when Mr. Kett assumed sole control
of the establishment, and was largely engaged in the work of church
restoration in all parts of the United Kingdom.

15.--Died at Felbrigg Park, Mr. John Ketton, in his 61st year.  Mr.
Ketton was a native of Norwich, where for many years he was engaged in
commercial pursuits.  His success enabled him, when Mr. Windham's affairs
became embarrassed, to purchase the Felbrigg estate, where he resided
until the period of his death.

--Died at Reigate, Surrey, from the effects of injuries inflicted upon
himself, Mr. Benjamin Land, better known as "Ben Land," a sporting
character of great celebrity in his day.  Mr. Land began life as a
Norfolk farmer, and gave great encouragement to steeple-chasing in the
county, upon the introduction of that sport in the first half of the
century.  One of his earliest winning mounts was in 1836, a horse named
Predictor.  Then he owned a very useful nag called Neewood, and another,
Lottery, an exceedingly clever animal over a country.  Land made himself
further known by his doings on Jim Crow, Faith, the Novice, Yellow Dwarf,
Little Nell, Victoria, and Wonder, who could all run and jump a bit, and
sad teasers they were to other Norfolk sportsmen.  While still holding on
his farm, Land hunted a pack of staghounds, but he gradually got out of
business as an agriculturist, and took to riding and training as a
profession.

17.--The provisions of the new Licensing Act came into operation in
Norwich.  A notice had been issued by the Chief Constable that on Sunday,
Christmas-day, and Good Friday, licensed houses were not to open before
12.30 at noon and to close at 2.30 in the afternoon; not to open again
before six in the evening, and to close at ten o'clock.  On week-days
they were not to open until six in the morning, and to close at eleven
o'clock at night.  "This application of the Act came on the city suddenly
and unexpectedly, the general opinion having prevailed that everything
would go on as usual until the next annual licensing-day.  In Union Place
and King Street many people determined to have their own way as far as
they could, and accordingly just before closing time they made a great
demand upon the can accommodation of the houses.  Large cans and small
cans, when filled with beer, were borne off in triumphant defiance to the
pavement outside, or to the men's private gardens or houses, where friend
and neighbour remained drinking, and, in some cases, singing, together
long after the lights of the various public-houses had been extinguished.
In two or three instances some ill-advised publicans persisted in keeping
their houses open."  Several licensed victuallers were fined for
infringing the regulations of the new Act, and in the early days of its
operation the Norwich magistrates were very liberal in granting
extensions of time on the occasion of the Christmas, Easter, and Whitsun
holidays.  At East Dereham the justices permitted the public-houses to
remain open until twelve o'clock during four months of the year.

19.--The first really notable journey upon a bicycle was performed by
Percy Everett, of Ryburgh, a lad aged 16.  He started at 4.45 a.m. from
Ryburgh station, and rode to Newmarket, where he had breakfast; thence to
Whittlesford, where he lunched; and at 5.30 p.m. he reached Ware, in
Hertfordshire, having accomplished the distance of 110 miles in about
12.5 hours.  Everett rode one of the first of the rubber-tyred
bicycles--a machine of Coventry make, known as the "Aeriel."

20.--Died, Mr. Edmund Harbord Lushington Preston, Mayor of Great
Yarmouth.  Mr. Preston was born in 1806, at the period when the Hon. E.
Harbord (second son of the then Lord Suffield) and Mr. Stephen Lushington
were returned to Parliament as members for Yarmouth--hence two of his
Christian names.  After the passing of the Municipal Reform Act, he was
one of the first burgesses returned to the Town Council on Conservative
principles, and, with the exception of a short period, from November,
1868, to November, 1869, he continued to be a member of the Corporation.
Mr. Preston was for twenty years one of the magistrates of the borough,
and a member of the Port and Haven Commission.

27.--The Blake-Bignold incident occurred at the Norwich Police-court.
Mr. Blake, on September 2nd, was charged with assaulting a publican, and
fined, and, on his leaving the court, was followed by a mob, who
endeavoured to overturn the cab in which he had taken refuge.

28.--Lord Walsingham, while shooting on Blubberhouse Moor, Yorkshire,
killed with his own gun 842 head of grouse, between the hours of 5.30
a.m. and 3 p.m.  The birds were driven, and before one o'clock 550 had
been bagged.

29.--A portion of the Reserve Squadron, consisting of nine ironclad war
vessels, under the command of Admiral Randolph, entered Yarmouth Roads,
and sailed on the 30th for the Nore.  The officers and men numbered
4,500.

--A 300 yards swimming match took place at Thorpe, between John Morris,
ex-champion of England, and "Victor Natator, the champion under-water
performer," for 10 a side.  "Natator" received ten yards' start, and,
after an exciting race, was beaten by three yards.


SEPTEMBER.


2.--Died at Slough, Buckinghamshire, aged 95 years, Mrs. Anne Rigby,
widow of Dr. Rigby, of Norwich, whom she survived 51 years.

5.--The Norwich Board of Guardians, after a long and acrimonious
discussion, agreed, on the motion of the Rev. A. C. Copeman, seconded by
Dr. Bateman, to accede to the request of Professor Humphrey, of
Cambridge, that he be supplied, for the purposes of dissection, with the
unclaimed bodies of persons who died in the Workhouse.  At a meeting on
October 3rd an attempt was made to rescind the resolution, which,
however, was confirmed by 16 votes against 12.  On December 12th a third
debate resulted in the rescission of the original motion by one vote.

9.--The first election in the Eastern Counties under the new Ballot Act
took place at Great Yarmouth, when a councillor was returned to fill in
the Town Council the vacancy occasioned by the death of Mr. Preston.

10.--Lord Walsingham was presented by his Merton tenantry with an address
of welcome upon his return after a prolonged visit to America.

16.--Norwich Theatre was opened for the winter season, under the
management of Mr. G. H. Chaplin.  "It has been our lot to witness some
very indifferent acting upon the Norwich boards, but we never remember
having seen a whole company (with the exception of Mr. Chaplin) so
thoroughly destitute of histrionic talent, or so wretchedly poor in the
dresses whereby to represent the characters."

--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced with an
evening performance of the "Festival Te Deum" (composed in celebration of
the recovery of the Prince of Wales) and of "The Creation."  The morning
performance on the 18th was "Elijah," on the 19th "St. Peter" (first time
of performance in Norwich); and on the 20th "The Messiah."  On the
evening of the 17th a grand ballad concert took place, and on the 18th
and 19th miscellaneous concerts.  The principal vocalists were Mdlle.
Tietjens, Mdlle. Florence Lancia, Mdlle. Albani, Madame Patey, Madame
Trebelli-Bettini, Mr. W. H. Cummings, Mr. Edward Lloyd, Mr. Kerr Gedge,
Mr. J. G. Patey, and Mr. Santley.  Sir Julius Benedict conducted.  The
Festival ball was held on the night of the 20th.

25.--Great rejoicings took place at Gunthorpe, in celebration of the
return of Mr. and Mrs. E. Bowyer Sparke, from their wedding tour.  The
squire was presented by the tenantry with an illuminated address.

27.--Died, Mr. John Longe, of Spixworth Park.  He was the second son of
the Rev. John Longe, vicar of Coddenham, Suffolk.  Educated at Norwich
Grammar School, under Valpy, and subsequently at Cambridge, he succeeded
to the estate in 1828, on the death of the widow of his cousin, Mr.
Francis Longe, who was High Sheriff in 1786.  He married, in 1829,
Caroline Elizabeth, eldest daughter and co-heiress of Lieut.-Colonel
Warnford, of Warnford Place, Wilts., and niece of Henry, fourth Viscount
Ashbrook.  As a Valpeian, Mr. Longe always took the greatest interest in
the success of the Norwich Grammar School, of which he was a governor.
He was a Deputy-Lieutenant of the county, and for some years captain in
the East Norfolk Militia, and was succeeded in his estates by his
brother, the Rev. Robert Longe, vicar of Coddenham, who was born in 1800.

--A heavy gale prevailed off the East coast, and many shipping casualties
were reported.

28.--Died at his seat, Melton Constable, the Right Hon. and Rev. Delaval
Loftus, ninth Baron Hastings, in his 48th year.  His lordship had been
summoned from Wiesbaden, in consequence of the alarming illness of Lady
Hastings.  He was at the time recovering from a severe attack of gout,
and little fitted to undertake a long journey.  On reaching Melton
Constable he was seized with an illness which proved fatal.  Lord
Hastings was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, and, on taking holy
orders, was appointed to the family living of Foulsham, and subsequently
to that of East Barsham and Little Snoring.  He married, in 1848, the
Hon. Frances Diana Manners Sutton, daughter of the first Viscount
Canterbury, by whom he left three sons and a daughter, and succeeded to
the title and estates on the death of his brother, in March, 1871.  His
successor was the Hon. Bernan Edward Delaval Astley, who was born in
1855, and was, at the time of his father's death, completing his term at
Eton.


OCTOBER.


1.--The Norwich Town Council decided to purchase, for sewerage and
irrigation purposes, a portion of the Crown Point estate, for 27,000.
(_See_ February 11th, 1873.)

--Died at his residence, Cambridge House, Westling-on-Trym, Bristol, in
his 77th year, the Rev. William Charles Wollaston, for upwards of thirty
years rector of East Dereham.  "Mr. Wollaston was the thirty-seventh and
last of the sinecure rectors of Dereham, and the exceptional custom of
tolling the muffled bell, which had long been held in this parish when
any of its rectors or vicars died, was observed."

14.--The ceremony of laying the first rail of the East Suffolk Tramway
was performed at Yarmouth by Sir E. H. K. Lacon, M.P. for North Norfolk.
As originally planned, the tramway was to extend from Southtown Railway
station to Gorleston, and thence to Lowestoft and Southwold, and
eventually to form a junction with Halesworth.  On March 22nd, 1873, it
was announced: "From present appearances, it would seem that the East
Suffolk Tramway scheme has been abandoned.  The works have been wholly
stopped for months past, and the Southtown Road has been restored to its
former state."  (_See_ April 1st, 1875.)

19.--At a meeting of the Governors of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital,
the thanks of the Board were accorded to Mr. William Peter Nichols "for
his able, humane, and successful services as surgeon to the charity
during the last 21 years, and for the active and zealous part he has
taken during the same period in promoting the general interests of the
Hospital."  Mr. Nichols afterwards became honorary consulting surgeon to
the institution, and on March 22nd, 1873, was presented by public
subscription with a valuable, silver centrepiece, in recognition of his
eminent services.  Mr. T. W. Crosse was elected to the office rendered
vacant by the resignation of Mr. Nichols.

23.--The second Diocesan Conference was held at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich,
and was continued on the 24th, whereby the meeting in the Fakenham
district was dispensed with.  The remaining meetings were held at Lynn on
the 25th, Ipswich on the 30th, and Halesworth on the 31st.

28.--The ceremony of opening the first school built by the Norwich School
Board--the Mariners' Lane School--was performed by the Rev. Canon
Heaviside, chairman of the Board.  It was intended for the accommodation
of 125 boys.

31.--Died at Costessey, where he laboured as a Roman Catholic priest for
more than fifty years, the Very Rev. Frederick Charles Husenbeth, D.D.,
President of the Brotherhood, Provost of the Chapter of Northampton, and
Vicar-General of the Roman Catholic Diocese.  Dr. Husenbeth, who was in
his 77th year, was a frequent contributor to "Notes and Queries," and was
the author of many works, the best known of which was "Emblems of the
Saints."


NOVEMBER.


1.--The municipal elections were, for the first time, conducted under the
provisions of the Ballot Act.  At Norwich, where fourteen out of a
possible sixteen Conservative candidates were returned, the elections
were rendered noteworthy by all the members of the firm of Messrs.
Bullard and Sons intimating that in future it was their intention to
adopt Conservative principles.

4.--The Prince and Princess of Wales passed through Thetford, on their
way to Elveden, on a visit to the Maharajah Duleep Singh, and were
received with great enthusiasm by the inhabitants of the borough.

--Mr. George Grossmith, "of the Temple, London," made the first of his
visits to Norwich, and appeared at Noverre's Rooms in an entertainment
entitled, "The Comic Side of Life."

9.--Sir Samuel Bignold was, for the fourth time, elected Mayor of
Norwich; Dr. Frederic Bateman was appointed Sheriff.

10.--Hospital Sunday was, for the first time, observed in Norwich.  The
amount collected was 454 6s., 3d.

14.--The new schools of St. Philip, Heigham, Norwich, completed through
the munificent donation of Mr. James Harford and his late sister, and the
voluntary efforts of the friends of Church of England education, at the
cost of 2,000, were opened by the Bishop of Norwich.  The architect was
Mr. Edward Power, of London, and the builder Mr. James Youngs.

18.--Died, in his 60th year, Mr. Henry Kett Kett-Tompson, of Brooke House
and Witchingham Hall.  He was the last representative of an old Norwich
family, whose connection with the city dated back more than three
centuries, and who during nearly two centuries were extensive brewers in
King Street.  Messrs. Morgan, in 1846, purchased the business of Mr.
Kett-Tompson and his brother, their landed property in the county
rendering it unnecessary for them to continue the brewery.  Mr.
Kett-Tompson was one of two sons of Mr. Charles Tompson (High Sheriff in
1827), by Juliana, second daughter of Thomas Kett, of Seething Hall, and
sister and co-heiress of George Samuel Kett, of Brooke House.  His
grandfather was Timothy Tompson, formerly of Denton, and afterwards of
Witchingham Hall.  He was born in 1813, and married, in February, 1843,
Margaret Amelia, second daughter of Rear-Admiral the Hon. Frederick Paul
Irby, C.B., of Boyland Hall, and second son of the second Lord Boston.
The name of Mr. Kett-Tompson stood first upon the list of gentlemen to
fill the office of High Sheriff of Norfolk in 1873.

19.--Died, Elizabeth Harvey, widow of James Harvey, of Rollesby, in her
102nd year.

20.--A heavy gale occurred.  Several vessels were lost off Yarmouth, and
a ship wrecked at Wells.

21.--A grand fancy dress ball, attended by representatives of the
principal families in Norfolk, was held at Hillington Hall, in
celebration of the twenty-fifth birthday of Sir William ffolkes, Bart.

24.--Died at his residence, Heigham Grove, Norwich, aged 73,
Major-General Burton Daveney, formerly of the Royal Scots Regiment.  He
was born at Colton, in December, 1799, and obtained his commission as
ensign in the 57th Regiment.  In 1825 he went to Australia as lieutenant
in command of a detachment which had charge of nearly 200 convicts.  On
the voyage small-pox broke out, and the vessel was placed in quarantine.
The young lieutenant throughout a period of the greatest difficulty
discharged his duties with conspicuous success.  In 1830 he exchanged
into the 1st Royals (afterwards the Royal Scots), and served in one or
other of the battalions of that regiment for thirty-one years.  He passed
through the Canadian Rebellion in 1837, was present at the affairs of St.
Charles and St. Eustache, and returned to England in 1841.  In the
Crimea, as commandant at Balaclava, his duties were so arduous that when
he left, completely broken down in health, in January, 1855, the work was
divided among three officers.  In the absence of the colonel he brought
the regiment to Aldershot, and afterwards had the honour of dining with
her Majesty, to whom he was presented by the Prince Consort.  He next
sailed to India, and assisted in quelling the Mutiny, and returned in
1862, when he retired on full pay, with the rank of Major-General.  He
had seen forty-one years of active service without passing a single day
on half-pay.  General Daveney was the possessor of three clasps for the
Crimea, the Order of the Medjidie, and several other decorations
presented by the Sultan to British officers who had served in the war
against Russia.


DECEMBER.


8.--A fearful storm swept over East Anglia.  At Norwich and other towns
in the county great damage was done to buildings; in the country trees
were uprooted and stacks overturned; and on the coast there were many
shipping casualties.

21.--Mr. James Bacon was elected secretary of the Norfolk Agricultural
Association, in place of Mr. Cross, resigned.  Mr. E. C. Bailey resigned
the office of honorary director.

--A conference was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, at which
representatives of the sanitary authorities in city and county discussed
the best method of carrying out the provisions of the new Public Health
Act, more particularly as to the appointment of medical-officers of
health and inspectors of nuisances.  It was suggested that the county be
divided into seven districts, exclusive of the city of Norwich; that a
medical-officer of health be appointed to each district, the election to
be made by representatives of the sanitary authorities; and that a
similar course be adopted in regard to inspectors of nuisances.  Mr. T.
W. Crosse, on January 23rd, 1873, resigned his seat in the Norwich Town
Council as a representative of the First Ward, and was appointed
Medical-Officer of Health for the city, at the salary of 200 per annum.

26.--A pantomime (titled not stated) was produced at Norwich Theatre by
Mr. G. H. Chaplin.  "The transformation scene," it was stated, "has not
been surpassed for gorgeous beauty on our stage."  Edmonds' (late
Wombwell's) Menagerie was exhibited on the Castle Meadow.

30.--The Prince and Princess of Wales arrived at Holkham, on a visit to
the Earl of Leicester.

31.--Colonel Peyton and officers of the 7th Dragoon Guards gave a grand
invitation ball at the Crown Bank building, Norwich.  It was attended by
many of the leading families of the county.



1873.


JANUARY.


2.--Died at his residence, Thorpe Hamlet, Norwich, Mr. Claude L. Nursey,
artist, the painter of the well-known pictures illustrating scenes in the
early days of the local Volunteer movement.  He was a son of Mr. Perry
Nursey, of Little Bealings, Suffolk, and was in his 54th year.

15.--The Norwich Town Council received a letter from Whitehall,
intimating that as Mr. Secretary Bruce had received no information that
any steps had been taken by the Corporation for erecting a pauper lunatic
asylum, he had instructed the Solicitor to the Treasury to proceed in the
matter of the _mandamus_.  (_See_ July 21st, 1874.)

21.--The resignation of Mr. A. W. Morant, City Engineer, and the author
of the first sewerage scheme, was received by the Norwich Town Council,
on his appointment as engineer to the borough of Leeds.  On March 25th
Mr. Christopher Thwaites, C.E., of London, was appointed to the vacant
post.

27.--Died at Trinity College, Cambridge, the Rev. Adam Sedgwick, LL.D.,
aged 87, Woodwardian Professor of Geology.  He came of a North country
family, and was born at Dent, in Yorkshire.  In due course he entered at
Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took his Bachelor's degree in 1808,
as fifth wrangler.  In 1810 he was elected to a Fellowship in his
College, of which at his death he was the senior member.  He succeeded,
in 1818, Professor Hailstone in the chair of Geology, founded at
Cambridge by the celebrated Dr. John Woodward.  Professor Sedgwick had
been a Canon of Norwich Cathedral since 1834.


FEBRUARY.


11.--A Local Government Board inquiry was held at the Guildhall, Norwich,
by Mr. R. Morgan, C.E., as to an application made by the Town Council to
borrow the sum of 32,500, for the purchase of a portion of the Crown
Point estate, for sewerage and irrigation purposes.  The amount required
for the purchase of the land was 27,500, for legal and other charges,
500, and the remainder was for erecting buildings, &c.  The application
was opposed by the Norwich Ratepayers' Protection League.  Another phase
of the sewerage question occupied the attention of the Town Council at a
special meeting on May 13th, when the City Engineer presented a report
stating that serious defects existed in the low-level sewer, and part of
the works had given way.  It was resolved to borrow 20,000, at four per
cent., on mortgage of the sewerage farm, as a permanent loan for ten
years.  On August 19th the City Engineer submitted to the Council three
alternative plans for dealing with the difficulty--(1) By plating the
sewer, at a cost of not less than 17,178; (2) by reconstruction, at a
minimum cost of 25,000; and (3) of providing a new lining at not less
than 33,000.  Up to that time the total expenditure on the works amounted
to 113,000.  On October 21st the Council decided to consult Messrs.
Hawkesley and Bazalgette, who, on December 16th, presented a report
suggesting that certain remedial works be carried out at an approximate
cost of 34,000.  (_See_ January 20th, 1874.)

20.--In consequence of the demand by agricultural labourers for increased
wages, an important meeting of employers resident in the district of the
Wayland Agricultural Association was held at Watton, under the presidency
of Lord Walsingham, when resolutions were adopted whereby the meeting
pledged itself to decline to recognise the system of compulsion exercised
by the Labourers' Union, and to refuse any demand for higher wages made
by those who were members of the Union, "although willing to give
favourable consideration to any request made in a proper manner whenever
circumstances might be found to justify it."  It was further decided to
invite co-operation from a larger area, and to form a society to be
called the Wayland Farmers' Defensive Association.  Similar action was
taken by employers in the North Walsham district, at Swaffham, and in the
Blofield and Taverham Hundreds.  (_See_ March 14th, 1874.)


MARCH.


25.--The Sheriff of Norwich (Dr. Bateman) and the Mayor (Sir Samuel
Bignold) attended at the Shirehall, on the conclusion of the Norfolk
Assizes, when the former, addressing Mr. Baron Martin, presented his
lordship with a pair of white kid gloves, in commemoration of the fact
that for the first time in forty-three years the city of Norwich had had
a maiden Assize.  The Mayor corroborated the statement, and said that in
that year, 1830, he happened to be Sheriff of the city.  His lordship
remarked it was extremely creditable that a city of 80,000 inhabitants
should have no cases for trial at the Assizes.

29.--Two meetings were held at Norwich, in furtherance of an effort to
secure a visit of the Royal Agricultural Society to the city in 1874.
The Norfolk Agricultural Association agreed to suspend its own show, and
to vote 500 to the funds of the Royal; and a gathering of county and city
gentlemen promised subscriptions to the amount of 1,100.  The Mayor
authorised the secretaries to guarantee the full amount required--2,000.

29.--A fire occurred at Mr. Darken's music warehouse, Norwich, and damage
was done to the amount of 1,500.


APRIL.


2.--The Docking Union Association, founded in 1839 for the purpose of
promoting habits of industry and frugality and of rewarding good conduct
amongst labourers, was dissolved, and the balance of 87 paid to the funds
of hospitals in the county.

4.--Died at Southtown, Great Yarmouth, aged 82, Commander George Jenner,
R.N.  He entered the Navy in 1806, and served on board the Milan; in 1810
he joined the Desire, was at the taking of San Sebastian, and was awarded
the medal for gallant service.

12.--At the All England Champion Athletic meeting, held at Lillie Bridge
Grounds, London, A. R. Upcher won the quarter-mile and H. K. Upcher the
120 yards hurdle race.  "This makes seven championships won by Norfolk
men, namely, the walking, in 1868, by W. Rye; the four miles, in 1870, by
H. C. Riches; the quarter-mile, in 1870-71-73, by A. R. Upcher; the pole
jump, in 1872, by H. C. Fellowes; and the hurdle-race, in 1873, by H. K.
Upcher."

14.--The foundation-stone of the Norfolk County School was laid by the
Prince of Wales.  His Royal Highness, with whom was the Princess of
Wales, left Wolferton station by special train, and was accompanied by
the Bishop of Norwich, Lord and Lady Suffield, and Viscount Newry.  At
Holkham the Royal party was joined by the Earl of Leicester and Lady Anne
Coke, and other members of the family.  At Elmham station the Prince and
Princess were received by Lord and Lady Sondes.  A detachment of picked
men of the 3rd Norfolk Rifle Volunteers, under the command of Captain
Bulwer, formed a guard of honour at the entrance to the enclosure on the
school site.  After an address had been read to their Royal Highnesses by
Prebendary Brereton, chairman of the Board of Directors, the Prince laid
the stone, inscribed, "Albert.  Edward, Prince of Wales, April 14, 1873."
The Lord Bishop offered prayer, and a hymn was sung, after which a large
and distinguished company, presided over by the Earl of Leicester,
partook of luncheon in a marquee.  Their Royal Highnesses, after taking
tea with Lord and Lady Sondes, at Elmham Hall, returned to Wolferton by
special train.  The school was opened on September 16th, 1874, when an
inaugural luncheon was held, and an address delivered by the Right Hon.
Earl Fortesque.

--Mr. Henry Leslie's Opera Bouffe Company commenced an engagement at
Norwich Theatre.  The pieces produced included "Lischen and Fritzchen,"
"Genevieve de Brabant," "The Princess of Trebizonde," and "The Brigands."

28.--The headquarters of the 7th Dragoon Guards marched from Norwich for
Manchester.  On the regiment reaching the Market Place, the officers
adjourned to the Royal Hotel, where the Mayor, on behalf of the traders
of the city, presented to Colonel Peyton and the officers a massive
silver cup and an illuminated address.  The cup was filled with
champagne, and the officers drank "Health end Prosperity to the City of
Norwich."  At Costessey Park the regiment was entertained by Lord
Stafford.


MAY.


6.--The depot of the 51st Regiment, from Yarmouth, arrived at Norwich and
took over the Cavalry Barracks.

24.--The Queen's birthday was observed at Norwich with the customary
festivities.  The event was further marked by the presentation to the
Mayor and Sheriff of a set of official robes, purchased by public
subscription.

26.--A specially-organized company, under the management of Mr. Craven
Robertson, performed the comedy of "Caste" at Norwich Theatre.  "School"
was also produced during the six nights' engagement.  On this occasion
the favourite actress, Miss Fanny Addison, made her first appearance in
Norwich, and Mr. J. F. Young was a member of the company.

30.--A detachment of the Honourable Artillery Company, numbering 64
officers and men, arrived at Yarmouth by train, and on the 31st marched
for Norwich.  At Blofield the detachment was met by the band of the
Norwich Artillery Volunteers, and at Brundall the men boarded the
Alexandra steamer, by which they performed the remainder of the journey
to Norwich.  Headquarters were established at the Royal Hotel.  On
Sunday, June 1st, the Honourable Artillery Company and the Norwich
Artillery Volunteers attended service at the Cathedral, and on June 2nd
the Norwich corps accompanied the London men on their march to Wymondham.
The London corps proceeded to Attleborough, where they took train for
London.


JUNE.


9.--Mr. and Mrs. Rousby commenced an engagement at Norwich Theatre, in
"Twixt Axe and Crown."  On subsequent evenings, "The School for Scandal,"
"Romeo and Juliet," and "Joan of Arc," were produced.

19.--The annual show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association commenced at
Thetford.  Mr. Angerstein presided at the members' luncheon.

30.--The Earl of Leicester was invested by the Queen with the Riband and
Badge of the Garter.  His lordship previously received the honour of
knighthood.


JULY.


10.--Mr. J. L. Toole commenced an engagement at Norwich Theatre, during
which he appeared in a round of his favourite characters.

19.--The 3rd Norfolk Rifle Volunteers went into camp at Heacham Park, and
on the 23rd were inspected by Colonel Knox, C.B., commanding the 31st
Depot.

21.--A company, under the management of Captain Disney Roebuck (late
Royal Welsh Fusiliers), commenced an engagement at Norwich Theatre.  The
repertory included "David Garrick," "Society," "The School for Scandal,"
"East Lynne," and the bouffe burlesque, "The Rows of Castille."

21.--Mr. David Fisher gave a dramatic reading at North Walsham.  "Since
the closing of the theatrical circuit under the management of the Fisher
family, no member had visited it until Mr. David Fisher, now of the
London theatres, and known to us first as a boy actor with his father and
grandfather, came to read 'The School for Scandal.'  Mr. David Fisher in
London has carried out the promise of his early life, and in coming upon
scenes of his boyhood finds those who tell him tales of former years, and
pleasure no doubt arises on the other side from the opening up of old
associations.  We have spoken of Mr. Fisher's reading--he does not read,
he acts two-thirds of the whole play from memory; every character is
given with perfect clearness.  He visits all the towns where formerly
theatres stood under the management of his family."  On this tour Mr.
Fisher was accompanied by his daughter, Miss Mary Fisher, who displayed
her musical abilities.

30.--The valuable collection presented to the Norfolk and Norwich Museum
by Mrs. E. P. Clarke, of Wymondham, was opened to the public.  This
collection was formed by Mr. Edward Lombe, of Great Melton, and set up by
the first taxidermist of his day, the elder Leadbeater, of London.
Regret was expressed at the absence of any memoranda of dates and
localities.  The British birds alone numbered 551 specimens, representing
280 distinct species.

--The headquarters and six troops of the 3rd Dragoon Guards marched into
Norwich, under the command of Colonel Conyers Tower, C.B.

--A new iron bridge over the River Ouze, constructed in place of the
wooden structure known as the Free Bridge, near Lynn, was formally opened
by Mr. E. Fellowes, M.P., chairman of the Ouze Outfall Commissioners.  It
was designed by Messrs. Brunlees and McKerrow.


AUGUST.


14.--An extensive fire occurred at the engineering works of Messrs.
Holmes and Sons, Cattle Market, Norwich.  The damage was estimated at
10,000.  Effective assistance was rendered to the fire brigade by three
troops of the 3rd Dragoon Guards, and by members of the Norwich Rifle
Volunteers.

18.--Mr. Charles Wyndham's company appeared at Norwich Theatre in the
political and satirical burlesque, "The Happy Land."  The piece was
interdicted by the Lord Chamberlain on its production at the Court
Theatre, London, on account of its caricature of three Liberal
Ministers--Mr. Gladstone, Mr. Lowe, and Mr. Ayrton.  It was played at
Norwich, it was announced, with the excised portions restored.

26.--At Norwich Brewster Sessions, the licensed victuallers of the city
applied for an alteration of the hours of closing, namely, an extension
of the time from 11 to 12 on week-days, and from 10 to 11 o'clock on
Sunday.  A memorial in favour of the alteration, signed by 7,000 persons,
was presented.  The Dean of Norwich handed in a memorial containing 7,925
signatures against the alteration.  The magistrates declined to alter the
hours of closing.

2.--The marriage took place at Holkham of Lady Winifred Coke, fifth
daughter of the Earl of Leicester, and Mr. Robert Clements, only son of
the Hon. and Rev. Francis Nathaniel Clements, vicar of Norton, Durham,
and heir to the Earldom of Leitrim.

11.--The ceremony of laying the foundation-stone of the new
Congregational chapel, built on the site of Cowper's house, at East
Dereham, was performed by Mr. Henry Wright, of Kensington.  The building,
which was erected by Mr. Hubbard, of Dereham, from designs by Mr. Edward
Boardman, architect, Norwich, at the cost of 3,500, was intended for the
accommodation of 500 worshippers.  It was opened for public worship on
September 24th, 1874.

12.--Mr. Charles Durand's English Opera Company appeared at Norwich
Theatre, and on the 19th produced, for the first time in the city,
Meyerbeer's opera, "L'Africaine."

19.--Died at Caldecot, near Botley, Hampshire, Dr. Dalrymple, M.P.  He
was born in 1814, and was the fourth son of Mr. William Dalrymple, an
eminent surgeon, of Norwich.  He married a daughter of Mr. T. O.
Springfield, on whose death he was placed in possession of an ample
fortune.  Dr. Dalrymple then relinquished his practice in favour of his
partner, Mr. Cadge.  In 1862 he made a tour through Egypt and Palestine,
and on his return published a work on "The Climate of Egypt."  On the
invitation of the Liberal electors of Bath, he, in 1868, contested the
representation of that city, and was returned.  His chief Parliamentary
labours were most conspicuous in connection with his well-known Habitual
Drunkards Bill, a measure which, while not in accordance with the spirit
of English legislation, evinced that devotion to philanthropic objects
which was the characteristic of Dr. Dalrymple's life.  He served the
office of Sheriff of Norwich in 1860-61, was a director of the Norwich
Union Fire Office, chairman of the Governors of King Edward VI. School,
and at various times had taken part in the management of the local
charitable and scientific institutions.  Dr. Dalrymple was a magistrate
and Deputy-lieutenant of the county.

21.--Died at Ipswich, Mr. Henry Bright, the well-known artist.  He was
born at Saxmundham, in June, 1814, and, after serving his apprenticeship
to a chemist and druggist at Woodbridge, removed to Norwich, where he
acted as dispenser to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  An acquaintance
with Crome, Cotman, the elder Ladbrooke, Stark, Vincent, and others of
the Norwich School of Artists, stimulated him to work with his pencil.
Proceeding to London, he devoted himself entirely to art, and, by
teaching drawing and painting, realised nearly 2,000 a year from that
branch of his profession.  For splendid sky effects Bright is second only
to Turner, and his crayon drawings are almost unequalled.


OCTOBER.


1.--Miss E. Farren and Mr. Lionel Brough, supported by the London Gaiety
Company, commenced an engagement at Norwich Theatre.  The productions
included, "A Nice Girl," "The Rough Diamond," "Good for Nothing," "Stage
Struck," "Betty Martin," "Lischen and Fritzchen," &c.  The company made a
return visit on November 25th.

1.--The Social Science Congress commenced its proceedings at Norwich,
under the presidency of the Right Hon. Lord Houghton, D.C.L., F.R.S.  The
meetings terminated on the 8th.

13.--The eighty-second birthday of Sir Samuel Bignold, Mayor of Norwich,
was celebrated.  The Cathedral choristers, under Dr. Buck, assembled in
the garden of Sir Samuel's residence in Surrey Street, at eight a.m., and
sang "Lift up thine eyes" (Handel), "The Old English Gentleman," and the
_Nunc Dimittis_.  The bells of St. Peter Mancroft were rung, the boys of
the Grammar and Commercial Schools were granted a holiday, the inmates of
the Boys' Home and the Girls' Home were entertained at St. Andrew's Hall,
and a feast was given to the paupers in the Workhouse.

20.--Died at the Charterhouse, London, Mr. James S. Garthon, aged 74,
formerly a surgeon in Norwich.  He was the son of a farmer at Costessey,
and was himself originally in business as a corn dealer.  It was not
until he was well advanced in life that he entered the medical
profession.  In addition to his private practice, he undertook the duties
of surgeon to the Norwich police force.  Mr. Garthon was a Liberal in
politics.

23.--The Sheriff of Norwich (Dr. Bateman) delivered a lecture to the
members of the Churchman's Club, on "Darwinism tested by Scientific
Researches in Language."  The Dean presided.


NOVEMBER.


3.--The Prince of Wales passed through Thetford, on his way to Elveden
Hall, to visit the Maharajah Duleep Singh.

10.--Mr. Samuel Gurney Buxton was elected Mayor, and Mr. Alexander Robert
Chamberlin appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

--The Prince of Wales arrived at Merton Hall, on a visit to Lord
Walsingham, and left on the 15th.

18.--Died at Bournemouth, Mr. Thomas Baring, member of Parliament for
Huntingdon.  Mr. Baring, who was 73 years of age, was second son of Sir
Thomas Baring, second baronet, nephew of the first Lord Ashburton, and
brother of the first Lord Northbrooke.  At the General Election in 1835
he successfully contested Great Yarmouth in the Conservative interest,
but in 1837, 1838, and 1841 he was defeated.  Elected for Huntingdon in
1844, without opposition, he held undisputed possession of the seat for
nearly thirty years.  Mr. Baring was head of the great house of Baring
Brothers and Co.  He twice refused the Chancellorship of the Exchequer,
and twice declined the offer of a peerage.


DECEMBER.


2.--A meeting of the creditors of the Crown Bank was held at the Royal
Hotel, Norwich, under the presidency of Sir Samuel Bignold, to receive an
account of the receipts and payments of the trustee in bankruptcy to
November 15th, and to consider the question of the remuneration of the
Committee of Inspection.  It was reported that the estate, under
judicious management, had produced 11s. 6d. in the pound.  The
solicitors' law costs amounted to upwards of 10,000, and it was decided
that 8,000 be paid as remuneration.

15.--The death took place, at Yarmouth, of Samuel Brock, aged 69, who, on
October 6th, 1835, performed the remarkable feat of swimming fourteen
miles after the wreck of the Young Company's yawl Increase, of which he
was one of the crew (_q.v._ Vol. I., p. 344).

23.--The first annual meeting of the Norwich Hospital Sunday Fund was
held at the Guildhall, under the presidency of the Sheriff (Mr. A. R.
Chamberlin).  It was reported that the Sunday collection amounted to 670
8s. 11d., and the Saturday collection to 188 16s. 3d.

26.--The pantomime of "The Babes in the Wood, or Harlequin Robin Hood and
the Fairies of the Forest," written by Mr. F. Robson, was produced at
Norwich Theatre by Mr. Richard Younge's company.  "Jack the Giant Killer"
was the Christmas attraction at Batty's Circus.



1874.


JANUARY.


2.--Died at Neal's Square, St. Benedict's Church Alley, Norwich, Susannah
Steavenson, in her 105th year.  "A few days ago she repeated no less than
thirty verses which she had learnt at school 95 years ago.  She attended
the Mayor's feast, given to the aged poor last Whit-Monday, and was
accompanied by her daughter, aged 79.  Mrs. Steavonson was born December
14th, 1769, and, according to a certificate given in 1836 by the Rev. W.
F. Blakewell, the then minister at the Octagon chapel, was baptised there
on December 24th, 1769.  She was the daughter of Joshua Sabberton,
chairmaker, in St. George's Colegate."

7.--Died at Saxlingham Hall, Mr. Edward Steward, aged 67.  He was the
last Tory Alderman elected under the old Corporation, and, owing to his
youth, was known as "The Boy Alderman."  In 1832 he fought a severe
contest with Mr. (afterwards Sir William) Foster, for the office of
Freemen's Sheriff, and was defeated by seven votes only.  In the
following year he was elected without opposition, and served in
conjunction with Mr. W. J. Utten Browne.  Mr. Steward was president of
the Norwich Union Fire Office.

13.--Died at his residence, St. Giles' Street, Norwich, Mr. John Godwin
Johnson, in his 77th year.  Born November 26th, 1797, he was the youngest
son of Mr. John Johnson, for many years Governor of Norwich Castle.  He
became a pupil of Dr. Rigby, and afterwards joining Mr. Page Scott,
commenced a long and successful career as a medical practitioner.  Mr.
Johnson was a member of both the old and "reformed" Corporations, was
elected Mayor in 1855, and for twenty-five years was on the Haven and
Pier Commission.  He took a prominent part in founding the Jenny Lind
Infirmary for Sick Children.

13.--Died at Amelie les Bains, Mr. Charles Mends Gibson, F.R.C.S., aged
65.  He was for many years resident medical-officer of the Norwich
Bethel, devoted much of his time to scientific pursuits, was a member of
the Royal Microscopical and other societies, and a warm supporter of the
Norfolk and Norwich Museum and Literary Institution.

--At a meeting of the Norwich Union Fire Insurance Society, Sir Samuel
Bignold was presented by the proprietors with his portrait (painted by
Sandys), in recognition of his long and successful services as secretary.

16.--The marriage of Lady Anne Coke, second daughter of the Earl of
Leicester, with Lieut.-Colonel Edmund Manningham Buller, of the Rifle
Brigade, second son of Sir Edward Manningham Buller, of Dilhorn Hall,
Staffordshire, was solemnised at Holkham church.

20.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, the report of Mr.
J. W. Bazalgette on the condition of the low-level sewer was adopted, and
it was agreed to consult Sir John Hawkshaw and Mr. J. F. Bateman.  On
July 21st it was decided, on their recommendation, to line the sewer with
cast-iron tubing; and on November 17th the Council passed a resolution in
favour of applying to the Local Government Board for powers to raise for
the purpose a sum not exceeding 25,000, on mortgage of the General
District Rates.

23.--The marriage of the Duke of Edinburgh was celebrated in Norwich by
the partial decoration of the city.  The 3rd Dragoon Guards and the
Volunteers paraded in the Market Place and fired a _feu de joie_, and at
a special meeting of the Town Council congratulatory addresses were
adopted and the loving-cup passed round.  At night a display of fireworks
took place on the Castle Meadow, and on the 27th the Mayor gave a
_soiree_ at St. Andrew's Hall.

31.--The General Election, the first contested under the Ballot Act,
commenced in Norfolk, with the unopposed return for the Northern Division
of the Hon. Frederick Walpole and Sir Edmund K. Lacon, Bart.

--King's Lynn election took place.  The candidates were the Hon. R.
Bourke, 1,163 votes; Lord Claud Hamilton, 1,093; Sir William ffolkes,
Bart., 999; and Mr. E. R. Wodehouse, 895.


FEBRUARY.


2.--Sir William Bagge, Bart., and Mr. G. W. P. Bentinck were returned
unopposed for West Norfolk.

4.--Polling took place at Norwich, "when, owing to the operation of the
Ballot Act, there was less excitement than usual."  The votes were
counted on the 5th, and the poll was declared at five o'clock, as
follows: Mr. J. J. Colman, 6,138; Mr. J. W. Huddleston, Q.C., 5,823; Mr.
J. H. Tillett, 5,776; and Sir H. J. Stracey, Bart., 5,290.  The number of
votes polled was 11,786, and the time occupied in counting, eight hours.
(_See_ August 16th, 1875.)

10.--The South Norfolk election took place.  The votes were counted at
the Shirehall, Norwich, on the 11th, and the result was declared as
follows: Mr. C. S. Read, 3,146; Sir R. J. Buxton, Bart., 3,010; Mr. R. T.
Gurdon, 2,699.  Mr. Read, M.P., and Sir R. J. Buxton, M.P., were, on
April 9th, entertained at a banquet given at Wymondham by the
Conservatives of the district, when Mr. H. W. B. Edwards, chairman of the
South Norfolk Conservative Registration Association, presided.

14.--Died at Snetterton, Sarah Edwards, aged 100 years.

15.--Died at St. John Maddermarket, Norwich, the Rev. John Dalton, canon
of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Northampton, in his 60th year.  Canon
Dalton was of Irish parentage, and passed the early years of his life at
Coventry.  After his ordination, he was employed on missions at
Northampton, Lynn, and Norwich.  In 1858-59 he resided at St. Alban's
College, Valladolid, in Spain.  He returned to that country in 1866, to
collect subscriptions towards the erection in London of a cathedral in
memory of the illustrious Cardinal Wiseman, who was himself born in
Spain; his mission was, however, unsuccessful.  Canon Dalton was the
author of several theological works.  "Amiable, genial-hearted,
charitable, and good, no sectarian difference was ever suffered to affect
that thorough respect and esteem which was extended to him from the
representatives of all creeds."

28.--At a meeting of the Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture, held at the
Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, a resolution was adopted expressive of
satisfaction on the appointment of the President, Mr. C. S. Read, M.P.,
as Parliamentary Secretary of the Local Government Board.


MARCH.


14.--A meeting of the agriculturists of the county, whose interests were
affected by the action of the Labourers' Union, was held at the Norfolk
Hotel, Norwich, "to take action with reference to the demands now being
pressed upon the occupiers of the soil."  It was decided to form a
Norfolk Farmers' Labour Defence Association.  Another meeting took place
on April 25th, for promoting the objects of the association.  Many
meetings were held throughout the county by the Labourers' Union during
this year, and much strong feeling was manifested.  At the Norfolk Lent
Assizes, on March 28th, before Mr. Justice Blackburn, the Rev. John
Spurgin, vicar of Hockham, brought an action against Mr. John Edward
Matthew Vincent, of the "Labourers' Union Chronicle," for publishing a
false and malicious libel, "whereby he was injured in his credit and
reputation as a clergyman."  The paper, which was published at
Leamington, alleged that the "reverend divine" claimed tithe on charity
coals supplied to the poor parishioners, and "had two tons out of the
twenty carted to his divine rectory, for his own consumption."  The
defendant afterwards expressed deep regret for publishing the imputation,
and the jury found a verdict for the plaintiff--damages 100.


APRIL.


19.--Died, while on a visit to Norwich, Mr. Robert Seaman, of Tunbridge
Wells, aged 63.  He served the office of Sheriff in 1856-57, and was a
magistrate for the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk.


MAY.


2.--The marriage of Lady Margaret Coke, sixth daughter of the Earl of
Leicester, with the Hon. H. Strutt, eldest son of Lord Belper, took place
at Holkham church.

5.--Died at his residence, Newmarket Road, Norwich, Mr. John Robison.  He
was born in Norwich in November, 1809, was for many years a partner in
the firm of Grout and Co., and in 1868 served the office of Sheriff.

9.--Died in London, Lieut.-General Sir Archdale Wilson, G.C.B., Colonel
commandant Royal Artillery.  Born in 1803, he was a son of the Rev.
George Wilson, of Kirby Cane (uncle of Lord Berners), by a daughter of
the Rev. C. Millard, Chancellor of Norwich.  He entered the service of
the East India Company, and went through some of the earlier campaigns in
India.  For his eminent services during the Indian Mutiny he received the
thanks of both Houses of Parliament, and was nominated in succession
Companion, Knight Commander, and Knight Grand Cross of the Most
Honourable Order of the Bath.  General Wilson was granted a pension of
1,000 a year by the East India Company, and created a baronet.  He was a
brother of Mr. Philip Wilson, a Lynn solicitor, with whom he resided for
some time after his return from India, and was succeeded in the baronetcy
by his nephew, Mr. Rowland Knyvett Wilson, Fellow of King's College,
Cambridge.

15.--Died at his residence, Unthank's Road, Norwich, Mr. John Briggs, who
for many years was connected with the firm of Messrs. Bullard and Sons.
Early in life Mr. Briggs married a sister-in-law of Mr. Richard Bullard,
and sailed for America, where he landed with only a few shillings in his
pocket.  He offered his services as an assistant in a lithographic
establishment, and though practically unacquainted with the business
beyond a taste for drawing, he not only secured the appointment, but in a
short time acquired sufficient knowledge of the art to earn a fair
competence for himself.  Amongst other work which subsequently came into
his hands was the drawing of plans for many of the streets and blocks of
buildings in Chicago, of which the chief part were destroyed in the great
fire.  Mr. Briggs made several remunerative purchases of land in the
United States.  Ill-health compelled him to return to England, and,
settling in Norwich, he joined his brother-in-law in the Anchor Brewery,
the success of which was greatly promoted by his active business habits.

19.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, certain members expressed
strong disapproval of the action of the City Committee "in ordering the
destruction of the chapel of Thomas a Becket, one of the archaeological
gems of the city."  Several members stated that they had never heard of
the place, and the Town Clerk informed the Council that the chapel was "a
vault at the back of the Dutch church," and had been converted into a
place of storage.  The subject was discussed at a meeting of the Norfolk
and Norwich Archaeological Society, on the 20th, when Mr. Gunn referred
to the members of the Town Council as "a pachydermatous set," and Sir
Francis Boileau described them as "ruthless Goths."

25.--The Mayor and Sheriff of Norwich entertained, at St. Andrew's Hall,
1,600 of the aged poor of the city, in celebration of the Queen's
birthday.


JUNE.


3.--Died, aged 69, Mr. John Oddin Taylor, of Norwich.  He was an Alderman
of the city, "and the grand Cattle Market and Prince of Wales Road, for
which we are mainly indebted to him, are monuments of his far-seeing
judgment and untiring zeal."  Descended from a long line of Norfolk
yeomen, Mr. Taylor was born at Thuxton, on April 26th, 1805, and in due
course was articled to Mr. T. Bignold and Mr. T. Brightwell.  In politics
he was one of the old school of Whigs, and on the passing of the
Municipal Reform Act in 1835 became a member of the Corporation.  Mr.
Taylor was one of the Liberals who protested against the displacement of
the old Corporation officials.  He served the office of Mayor in 1861-62;
was made a Deputy-Lieutenant of the county in acknowledgment of his
political services as Liberal agent, and was a trustee of the Grammar and
Commercial Schools, and an active member of the Committee of the Norfolk
and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival.  Mr. Taylor married the eldest
daughter of Mr. Brewer, of Mile End House, Norwich, and of the marriage
there were two sons and three daughters.

15.--A fire took place on the premises of Mr. Dixon, silversmith and
jeweller, of London Street, Norwich, and did damage to the amount of
2,000.

17.--The annual show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association commenced at
Norwich.  It was held upon the grounds of the Sheriff (Mr. A. R.
Chamberlin), on Ipswich Road, and the luncheon was under the presidency
of Mr. J. J. Colman, M.P.

18.--A meeting of the Norfolk and Norwich Provident Building Society was
held at the Bell Hotel, Norwich, under the presidency of Mr. H. S.
Patteson, when it was reported that the secretary, Mr. Josiah Buttifant,
had left the city on the 2nd inst., ostensibly for the purpose of taking
a holiday; but it was afterwards discovered that he had committed
defalcations to the amount of about 5,000.  A committee was appointed to
consider the best course to be adopted, and soon afterwards a petition
was presented for the winding-up of the society, and a warrant issued for
the apprehension of Buttifant.  On July 6th William Frederick Fish, a
clerk in the employment of Buttifant, was taken into custody, on the
information of Samuel Beckett Hook, a shareholder in the society, on the
charge of cheating and defrauding Agas Goose and others, trustees, of the
sum of 10 7s., and on other days of divers other sums, amounting in the
whole to 10,000.  The accused was finally committed for trial on July
20th; and on July 27th Mr. Justice Blackburn granted an application for a
writ of _certiorari_ to remove the trial of Fish to the Central Criminal
Court.  On August 14th a telegram was received in Norwich, announcing
that Buttifant had been arrested at Valentia.  The arrest was effected on
August 7th, by Detective Williamson, of the Norwich police.  Buttifant
and his son Archibald were staying, under the name of Biron, at the Hotel
de Ville Madrid, Valentia.  He was brought to England, _via_ Marseilles,
reached Norwich on August 14th, and underwent his preliminary examination
before the magistrates on the 15th, on charges of forgery and
embezzlement.  After several remands he was committed for trial at the
Norwich Assizes.  At the Central Criminal Court, on November 25th, Fish
was placed upon his trial, on the charge of stealing 39 2s., and of
aiding and assisting Buttifant in the embezzlement, and was sentenced by
Mr. Baron Pollock to sixteen calendar months' imprisonment, with hard
labour.  (_See_ March 25th, 1875.)


JULY.


6.--The first prize-day was held at the resuscitated Grammar School at
North Walsham.  In 1606 Sir William Paston founded a free Grammar School
in the town for forty boys, sons of inhabitants of the Hundreds of
Tunstead, North Erpingham, Happing, and East and West Flegg.  The school
gradually decayed until only the head-master remained.  In 1871 Mr.
Robert Wortley called attention to the fact that the endowment was lying
perfectly useless; an appeal was made to the Endowed School Commission to
take action, and finally the Committee of Council on Education adapted a
scheme for the management of the school.  New governors were appointed,
with Lord Suffield as president, the school house and master's house were
restored, and the Rev. F. R. Pentreath, formerly master of Retford
Grammar School, appointed head-master.  The school was re-opened in
February, 1874.

8.--The foundation-stone of the Baptist church in Unthank's Road,
Norwich, was laid by Mr. J. J. Colman, M.P.  The building, which was
designed by Mr. Edward Boardman, and was estimated to cost 5,000, was
opened for public worship on July 8th, 1875.

11.--During the week ending this date the 3rd Dragoon Guards marched from
the Cavalry Barracks, Norwich, _en route_ to York.

18.--The 3rd Norfolk Rifle Volunteers went into camp at Hunstanton Park,
and were inspected on the 23rd by Colonel T. E. Knox, C.B.

21.--The Norwich Town Council, at a special meeting, decided to comply
with the order of the Home Secretary, directing them to build a new
asylum for the reception of pauper lunatics; and a memorial was adopted
praying the Public Works Loan Commissioners to grant the necessary loan
at 3.5 per cent., repayable in fifty years.  (_See_ February 5th, 1875.)

24.--At a meeting of the Church Missionary Society, held at Wymondham
Vicarage, Mr. Edward Hutchinson, lay secretary of the society, presented
to Jacob Wainwright, one of the Nassick boys in attendance upon Dr.
Livingstone in his last journey, the bronze medal of the Royal
Geographical Society.  Wainwright, who addressed the meeting in very good
English, described how they preserved the body of Livingstone and
conveyed it to Zanzibar.

25.--A new lifeboat, presented to the Royal Lifeboat Institution by Mrs.
Boettefure, was launched at Brancaster.  It was christened by Mrs. Simms
Reeve, in the name of the Joseph and Mary.

27.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the presidency of
the Mayor, it was decided to establish a branch of the Girls' Public Day
School Company, and the Rev. W. Vincent was appointed local secretary.

--A mulatto woman, known as Madame Angelo, was credited with completing
the feat of walking, at the Hoppole Gardens, Norwich, one thousand miles
in one thousand hours.  "Although the greatest vigilance has been
exercised," says the report, "it has not yet transpired that she has ever
failed to come to the scratch at the appointed times.  During the last
week she showed signs of flagging, her limbs swelling, and considerable
difficulty was experienced in keeping her awake.  It was announced that
she would walk the last mile with her infant baby in her arms, but it was
evident from her appearance that this would be too much for her, and her
infant was handed to her when she had only four laps to walk."


AUGUST.


3.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Keating, Frederick Sutton,
formerly medical-officer of the Norwich Pauper Lunatic Asylum, and Emma
Styggles, head female attendant, were charged with conspiring to cheat
and defraud the Mayor, aldermen, and citizens of the sum of 3 10s. 6.5d.,
in the month of January.  Sutton was sentenced to one calendar month, and
Styggles to seven days' imprisonment.

5.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Keating, Frederick Wales,
aged 21, a labourer, was charged with the wilful murder of Thomas
Pettingill, at Raveningham, on July 16th.  He was found guilty of
manslaughter, and ordered to be kept in penal servitude for the term of
his natural life.

7.--Mr. J. R. Bulwer, Q.C., M.P., and Mr. William Graham, Crown
Commissioners, opened an inquiry at the Royal Hotel, Norwich, into the
circumstances of what was known as the Creak case (_q.v._ Vol. I., p.
485; Vol. II., p. 18).  A special jury was empanelled.  Miss Margaret
Creak was an eccentric person, who died in 1850.  It transpired at the
trial of certain actions brought in 1866 by Mr. Kent, solicitor, that the
deceased's property in the parishes of St. Andrew and St. George Colegate
had been purchased by Margaret Creak's mother during her widowhood.
Margaret Creak having died without leaving legal heirs, it was held that
her property devolved upon the Crown, for a strange will made by her had
been decided to be void and of no effect.  Since her death the property
had been held by different individuals, some of whom had exercised the
rights and enjoyed the profits of landlord, whilst others had lived upon
the property rent free.  The Crown, on being informed of these facts,
issued a Commission under the Great Seal to ascertain (1) what property
Margaret Creak possessed at the time of her death, and (2) what had
become of her brothers and sisters.  The jury, on the 8th, found that
Margaret Creak was seised of the fee simple of three lots of property;
that she left no heir thereto; that the property was of the yearly value
of 330 at the time of her death; and that as the property was holden of
the Crown in common socage, it devolved to her Majesty, in virtue of her
prerogative Royal.  The jury further said that mesne profits amounting to
7,920 had accrued since the death of Margaret Creak, of which about 2,000
had been received by Jonathan Flowers, of Gressenhall, and various sums
by other persons.  The Commissioners thereupon seized the property into
the hands of her Majesty, and ordered the inquisition to be returned to
the Court of Chancery.  (_See_ July 24th, 1876.)

11.--The forty-second annual meeting of the British Medical Association
commenced at Norwich, under the presidency of Sir William Fergusson,
Bart., Serjeant Surgeon to the Queen.  The President-elect was Dr. Edward
Copeman.  During the proceedings, which concluded on the 14th, addresses
were delivered by Sir James Paget, Dr. Eade, Mr. Cadge, &c.  A prominent
feature of the visit was an exhibition at St. Andrew's Hall of the works
of deceased and living Norfolk and Suffolk artists.  This remarkable
collection included examples by Old Crome and his sons, Stannard, Stark,
the Cotmans, Thirtle, Opie, Vincent, Colkett, and others.  (_See_
December 9th.)

12.--The 7th Hussars arrived at Norwich.  The Duke of Connaught was an
officer of the regiment, and his Royal Highness was welcomed by the
citizens with great enthusiasm.  At the south entrance to the Guildhall,
Lieut.-Colonel Hale and the officers were received by the Mayor (Mr. S.
Gurney Buxton), the Sheriff (Mr. A. R. Chamberlin), the Deputy-Mayor (Sir
Samuel Bignold), the magistrates, and members of the Town Council.  An
adjournment was then made to the Council Chamber, where the loving cup
was passed round, and the proceedings were concluded by the Duke of
Connaught proposing the health of the Mayor.

17.--A great Liberal demonstration was held at Whitlingham, at which
addresses were delivered by Mr. J. J. Colman, M.P., Mr. Henry Birkbeck,
Mr. J. H. Tillett, and other prominent local leaders of the party.


SEPTEMBER.


10.--A terrible railway collision occurred at Thorpe.  The mail train
leaving Yarmouth at 8.46 p.m. was joined at Reedham by another train from
Lowestoft.  The combined train proceeded to Brundall, where, owing to the
existence of only a single line, it had to wait until the arrival of the
express train from Norwich to Yarmouth, or until permission should be
given to the engine-driver to proceed.  The accident was caused by the
down express being allowed to leave Norwich while the mail train was
permitted to come on from Brundall.  The telegraphic message to Brundall,
which had been written by Night-Inspector Alfred Cooper, but not signed,
was sent through some mistake by the telegraph clerk, John Robson.  A few
minutes later the inspector, not knowing that the message had gone,
allowed the down express to proceed.  Hardly had he done so when the
fatal error was discovered.  A second message was immediately dispatched
to Brundall to stop the mail, if possible, but the answer came back,
"Mail gone," and nothing remained but to make arrangements for dealing
with the inevitable catastrophe.  Both drivers had reason for putting on
increased speed, believing, as they did, that each train was waiting for
the other.  The speed of the up mail, which consisted of thirteen
carriages, was from thirty to thirty-five miles an hour, while the rate
of the down express of fourteen carriages was from twenty to twenty-five
miles.  The trains met near Thorpe village, the impact producing a
terrific crash which resembled a peal of thunder.  The drivers and
firemen of the locomotives were killed, eighteen passengers were killed
on the spot, and about fifty were severely wounded, of whom five died in
the course of a few days, making a total of twenty-five killed.  The dead
and dying were removed to Field's boathouse and to the Tuns Inn, and the
injured were taken to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  On the following
morning the scene of the catastrophe was visited by many hundreds of
persons, among whom was the Duke of Connaught, then stationed in Norwich
with his regiment, the 7th Hussars.  The City Coroner (Mr. E. S. Bignold)
opened an inquest on the bodies of two persons who had died at Thorpe
station, and, after formal evidence, adjourned the inquiry to the 25th,
when the jury found that the accident was due to the negligence of Robson
and Cooper, against whom they returned a verdict of manslaughter.  The
County Coroner (Mr. E. Press), on the 12th, held an inquest on the bodies
lying at Thorpe, and adjourned the inquiry to the Shirehall.  On October
5th the jury returned a verdict of manslaughter against Robson only.  The
Board of Trade inquiry commenced at the Guildhall, before Capt. Tyler,
R.E., and Mr. Ravenhill, on September 21st, and on the 22nd was adjourned
_sine die_.  It was resumed on October 5th, and again adjourned.  (_See_
February 23rd, 1875.)

15.--Madame C. Nilsson, assisted by Madame Patey, Mr. E. Lloyd, Signor
Foli, &c., gave a concert at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, in aid of the
endowment fund of the Jenny Lind Infirmary.  A second concert was given
on the 16th.  Sir Julius Benedict conducted on both occasions.  Madame
Nilsson was presented with an address by the Mayor and Corporation, in
acknowledgment of her valuable services to the institution.

17.--The memorial stone of the Norwich Presbyterian church was laid by
Mr. C. E. Lewis, M.P., and at a public meeting subsequently held at St.
Andrew's Hall an address was delivered by the Rev. Dr. Chalmers, of
London.  The estimated cost of the church was 3,600.  It was designed by
Mr. Edward Boardman, architect, of Norwich, and built by Mr. Samuel Hall.
Efforts to establish a Presbyterian church in the city were made in 1866,
when a "station" was opened and meetings for worship were held at the
Lecture Hall in St. Andrew's.  A communion was formed, and in 1867 St.
Peter's Hall, Theatre Street, was purchased by the congregation.  The
church, which is built upon a site adjoining the hall, was opened for
public worship on June 23rd, 1875, by the Rev. John Matheson, the
Moderator, and the Rev. Dr. Fraser.

20.--Three war vessels, the Northumberland, the Sultan, and the Monarch,
forming part of the Channel Fleet, entered Yarmouth Roads, under the
command of Rear-Admiral Hancock.  On the 22nd the Mayor and Corporation
gave a ball at the Town Hall, at which the officers were present.  The
vessels sailed for Spithead early on the morning of the 23rd.

20.--Died, from injuries received in the Thorpe collision, Mr. Bransby
Francis, surgeon, of Norwich, aged 59.  Mr. Francis, who was a native of
Bungay, was an excellent botanist and naturalist.

26.--At a general meeting of the members of the Norfolk Cattle Plague
Association, held at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, it was agreed, "That
this meeting recommend the presentation of a testimonial to the chairman,
Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., out of the funds of the association, in
acknowledgment of the great services rendered by him to the association."
It was also decided to present Mr. C. R. Gilman, secretary to the
association, with a testimonial of the value of 50.


OCTOBER.


7.--Died at Langley Park, Sir Thomas W. H. Proctor Beauchamp, Bart., in
his 60th year.  Educated at Eton, he entered the Royal Horse Guards in
1836, and in 1852 married the Hon. Catherine Esther Waldegrave, daughter
of Admiral Lord Radstock.  On the death of his father, Admiral Sir
William Beauchamp Proctor, third baronet, he succeeded to the baronetcy
in 1861.  A Liberal in politics, Sir Thomas consented, at the request of
the party, to contest the representation of the Eastern Division of the
county in 1865, in conjunction with Colonel Coke, but was unsuccessful.
Upon the commencement of the Volunteer movement, he gave it his active
support, and was for some years Lieutenant-Colonel of the 2nd
Administrative Battalion.  He served the office of High Sheriff in
1869-70, and was a Deputy-Lieutenant and magistrate of the county.  Sir
Thomas was a warm supporter of local charities, and shortly before his
death gave a donation of 1,000 to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  He
was succeeded by his eldest son, Reginald William, who was born in 1853.

9.--Died at Costessey Hall, the Hon. Francis Stafford Jerningham, aged
59.  He was the youngest brother of Lord Stafford, and formerly an
examiner in the Audit Office.  For many years he took an active part in
the management of the Costessey estate.

11.--Died, Mr. Edward Freestone, solicitor, of Norwich.  The youngest son
of Mr. Anthony Freestone, he was born at South Elmham St. Margaret, and
educated at Mr. Brewer's school at Norwich.  After serving his articles
with Mr. Crabtree, at Halesworth, he was admitted an attorney and
solicitor in 1825, and commenced practice in Norwich and Bungay, in
partnership with Mr. J. C. Copeman.  In politics Mr. Freestone was a
Liberal, but systematically declined to take part in municipal affairs.
He, however, held several important public appointments.  The Freestone
family lived and owned property at South Elmham for nearly 200 years.
For three generations, ranging over the long period of 150 years, they
hunted their own hounds.  Mr. Freestone's only sister married the
celebrated botanist, Dr. Lindley and was mother to Mr. Lindley, Q.C., the
eminent equity barrister.

16.--An operetta, in two acts, by Mr. J. Arthur Harcourt, entitled, "The
Science of Love," was performed for the first time by a company of
amateurs at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich.

20.--The East Norfolk Railway, from Norwich to North Walsham, was opened
for traffic.  The line was constructed by Messrs. Lucas Bros., from plans
by Mr. E. Wilson, C.E.

22.--Mr. W. H. Cooke, Q.C., Judge of the Norfolk County Court, resigned
his appointment.  He was succeeded by Mr. Edwin Plumer Price, Q.C.,
Recorder of York.

23.--Died at Chapel Field Road, Norwich, Mr. Henry Ninham, aged 82.  He
was the son of John Ninham, who, in 1792, at the request of Mr. William
Stevenson, F.S.A., drew, with the assistance of the _camera obscura_, the
ancient gates of Norwich, then about to be demolished.  He succeeded to
his father's business as an heraldic painter and copper-plate printer,
and was for many years employed by the principal coachbuilders of the
city to paint armorial bearings on their patrons' carnages.  A few days
prior to his death, he completed, for the Very Rev. Dr. Goulburn, a large
painting of the arms of the Deans of Norwich.  Mr. Ninham was a frequent
contributor to the Norwich exhibitions, both in oil and water-colours,
and made many careful and truthful delineations of picturesque old houses
and churches in the city and its neighbourhood.  A good etcher, he
published (without letterpress) "Eight Etchings of Antiquities of
Norwich," including the Strangers' Hall, Sir Benjamin Wrenche's Court,
&c.; and afterwards "Views of the Gates of Norwich," from drawings made
by Kirkpatrick about the year 1720.  For private circulation only, he
etched a series of small but spirited plates, principally views in
Norwich and Norfolk.  The illustrations of Bloom's "Castle Acre," and
Grigor's "Eastern Arboretum," were also etched by him.  The well-known
works, "Remnants of Antiquity in Norwich," and "Norwich Corporation
Pageantry," were illustrated in lithograph by Ninham from his own
drawings.  He was a large contributor of illustrations to "Norfolk
Archaeology" and other local antiquarian works.

24.--Mr. Paynton Pigott, barrister-at-law, of the Oxford Circuit, and
revising barrister of the Western Division of Staffordshire, a nephew of
Mr. Baron Pigott, was admitted to the office of Deputy Chief Constable of
Norfolk.

30.--Died at his residence, Tombland, Norwich, Mr. Thomas Hancock, City
Treasurer.  Mr. Hancock, who made himself prominent by his efforts to
revive the ancient office of City Chamberlain, took an active part in
many public movements, and is said to have fallen a victim to over-work.
Mr. Edwin Syder Steward was, on November 9th, elected to the vacant
office of City Treasurer.

31.--Died at Topcroft Rectory, the Rev. Edward Wilson, aged 75.  Mr.
Wilson, early in life, wrote "The Martyr of Carthage" in "Burns's
Englishman's Library."  Soon afterwards, his mind, unhappily, became
clouded, and his services were lost to the Church for over twenty years.
When at length a surprising recovery restored him to his friends, he
returned to the study of theology and the arts with a vigour and
perseverance that would have been remarkable in a young man of unbroken
health.  In his youth Mr. Wilson was no mean poet, and his unpublished
verses received the warm praise of Wordsworth.  He had, too, the makings
of a great painter, and some of his best efforts in colouring were
executed only a few weeks before his death.  Mr. Wilson was brother of
Sir Archdale Wilson, Bart., of Delhi, and first cousin to Henry Wilson,
Lord Berners, at whose decease the barony, one of the oldest in England,
passed, through an heiress, into another name.  The family was descended
from Bourchier, Lord Berners, the translator of Froissart, and through
him from Bourchier, the Earl of Essex and his wife, a granddaughter of
Edward III.


NOVEMBER.


6.--Died at Lynn, Mr. F. Reynolds, formerly of Newton next Castleacre, at
an advanced age, and in very reduced circumstances.  "The deceased for
many years was known by the sobriquet of 'The Marquis,' which was given
him when he kept a pack of harriers at his own expense, and with which he
had good sport.  Once in pursuit of a stolen horse, for a neighbour, he
drove one of his hunters, a bay blood horse, 100 miles in ten hours, only
stopping once, namely, at Six Mile Bottom, near Newmarket, where he gave
his horse some corn from his own bag, and fetched him water in his hat
from a brook.  One of his first, and, perhaps, best hunters, that he
trained to such perfection, was a bay thoroughbred mare by Old Whisker,
bred by Chifney, the celebrated jockey.  She became a distinguished
hunter with the Marham Staghounds.  For Chip he gave but 8, and this
horse was afterwards sold by Mr. Anderson for 500 guineas.  Grey Tail,
too, was sold by Mr. Taylor for 400 guineas, and Sweep, bought for 10,
was sold by Mr. Percival for 300 guineas; whilst poor old Hawk struggled
on with him in his decline, winning him a few pounds at country races by
his indomitable pluck, and carrying him miles and miles when other people
were at rest.  Although Mr. Reynolds had his failings, no one could
impeach his honour.  He possessed such peculiar blandness, free from
haughty and unkind feeling, that he was always regarded with something
more than the common courtesy of life.  He received, in his dying
illness, the greatest attention from his old servant Peter, his former
whip."

7.--The Prince and Princess of Wales arrived at Sandringham, from
Coventry, accompanied by Prince Albert Victor and Prince George, and by
the Czarewitch of Russia, Prince Wolkonsky, Prince Bariatinsky, &c.  It
was on this occasion that the new railway-station erected at Wolferton
was formally opened.  On the 20th a grand county ball was given at
Sandringham.

9.--Mr. Edward Kerrison Harvey was elected Mayor, and Mr. John Youngs
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

18.--Died in London, the Hon. George Sulyarde Stafford Jerningham, C.B.,
formerly Minister Plenipotentiary to the Court of Sweden, aged 69.  He
was third son of the eighth Lord Stafford, and was born February 17th,
1806.  Mr. Jerningham was attached to the embassies at St. Petersburg and
the Hague in 1826, was appointed an attache at the Hague in 1832, and
Secretary of Legation in 1833, and was _charge d'affaires_ there until
1836, when he was sent as secretary of legation to Turin, where he was
_charge d'affaires_ in 1838.  He subsequently filed similar offices at
Madrid and Paris.


DECEMBER.


2.--Died at his residence, St. Giles' Street, Norwich, Sir William
Foster, Bart., aged 76.  For half a century he had taken a prominent
position in Norwich in all matters connected with its municipal and
charitable institutions, and, as the head of one of the oldest legal
firms in the city, was greatly esteemed in his professional career.
Under the old Corporation he served the office of Sheriff in 1832, and in
1838 was created a baronet.  Sir William was elected Mayor of Norwich in
1844.  In politics he was a warm supporter of Liberal principles, and was
for many years the recognised leader of the old Whig school in Norwich.
He was succeeded by Capt. William Foster, formerly in the 11th Hussars.

6.--Died at Golding Street, Heigham, Norwich, Mrs. Winifred Johnson, aged
101 years.

9.--Died at 39, Chapel Street, Marylebone Road, London, Mr. Benjamin Bond
Cabbell, F.R.S., F.S.A., of Cromer Hall, in his 94th year.  Educated at
Westminster and at Exeter College, Oxford, and called to the Bar in 1816,
he was a Bencher of the Middle Temple, a justice of the peace and
Deputy-Lieutenant for Middlesex and Norfolk, and Provincial Grand Master
of Freemasons in the latter county.  In 1846 he was returned to the House
of Commons for St. Alban's, and represented Boston from 1847 to 1857.  On
purchasing the Cromer Hall estate, Mr. Bond Cabbell became identified
with Norfolk, presented to Cromer a fully-equipped lifeboat, and
contributed largely to the restoration of the parish church.

--A remarkable charge of cruelty to dogs was preferred at Norwich
Police-court, against Dr. Eugene Magnan, of London, Mr. Haynes S.
Robinson, Mr. John Ballard Pitt, Mr. Richard Wentworth White, and Mr.
Horace Turner, well-known medical men residing in Norwich.  It was
alleged that on the occasion of the visit of the British Medical
Association to Norwich, application was made by a committee of gentlemen
that a certain experiment, namely, the injection of alcohol and absinthe
into the veins and bloodvessels of dogs, should be made.  Dr. Magnan
performed the operation, and the other defendants took part.  Among the
witnesses called for the prosecution was Dr. Tuffnell, President of the
Royal College of Surgeons of Ireland, who said the experiment was cruel
because unnecessary, and similar evidence was given by Sir William
Fergusson, Professor William Pritchard, R.C.V.S., Professor Varnell,
R.C.V.S., Mr. G. Fleming, Examining Member of the Council of Veterinary
Surgeons, and one of the editors of the "Veterinarian," and others.  For
the defence it was denied that Dr. Magnan performed the experiment simply
for the amusement of those present, and Dr. Beverley, Dr. Bateman, Dr.
Eade, Dr. Copeman, Mr. Cadge, Mr. W. P. Nichols, Mr. G. W. W. Firth, Mr.
Joseph Allen, and others were called to prove that the operation was
justifiable.  The magistrates dismissed the charges, but expressed the
opinion that the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
were justified in bringing the case.

10.--Died at 7, Lowndes Street, London, Mr. Peter Frank O'Malley, Q.C.,
last surviving son of Mr. Charles O'Malley, of Castlebar, co. Mayo.  Born
in 1804, he was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated
M.A. in 1828, and was called to the Bar at Lincoln's Inn in May, 1834.
He married, in August, 1839, Emily, second daughter of Mr. William
Rodwell, of Woodlands, Suffolk, sister of Mr. B. B. Hunter Rodwell, M.P.,
Q.C.  In 1850 he was appointed Queen's Counsel and made a Bencher of the
Middle Temple.  On the elevation of Mr. Serjeant Byles to the Bench, in
1858, Mr. O'Malley succeeded to the leadership of the Norfolk Circuit,
and in the following year was appointed to the Recordership of Norwich.
In politics he was a Conservative, and, as an advocate, was remarkable
for his eloquence, earnestness, and zeal.  Mr. O'Malley was succeeded as
Recorder of Norwich by Mr. W. J. Metcalfe, Q.C.

15.--The Duke of Connaught presented the prizes at Norwich Grammar
School.

--Died at Bracondale, Norwich, Mr. Samuel Jarrold, in his 69th year.  Mr.
Jarrold, who was head of the wall-known firm of publishers, was an ardent
temperance reformer, and one of the earliest advocates of the cause in
Norwich.

17.--Died at his Norfolk seat, Elmham Hall, George John Milles, fourth
Baron Sondes.  The deceased nobleman had almost attained his 81st year.
The second son of Lewis Thomas Watson, second Lord Sondes, by Mary
Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Milles, of North Elmham, he succeeded to
the title on the death of his brother, in 1836.  He was educated at Eton
and at Christ Church, Oxford, and entered the Royal Horse Guards, in
which regiment he served in the Peninsular War, and was present at the
battle of Waterloo.  In 1823 he married Eleanor, fifth daughter of Sir
Edward Knatchbull, Bart., and in 1824, on succeeding to the Elmham
estate, assumed the name of Milles in lieu of that of Watson.  After his
retirement from military service, he took great interest in agricultural
pursuits, and was very successful in his efforts to improve the breeds of
cattle and sheep.  The Elmham herd of red polled cattle and flock of
Southdowns attained universal reputation.  His lordship was High Steward
of Great Yarmouth, to which office he was elected in 1854.

26.--The pantomime at Norwich Theatre was "Dick Whittington and his
Wonderful Cat."  At the Prince Arthur Royal Circus, on Castle Meadow, the
pantomime, "King Bombast, or Harlequin Reckless Ralph and his Lilliputian
Army," was produced.



1875.


JANUARY.


2.--The frost, which, during the preceding week, had been very severe,
suddenly broke up, and, under the influence of a south-west wind, a rapid
thaw set in.

--Died at his residence, Surrey Street, Norwich, Sir Samuel Bignold.  He
was the third son of Mr. Thomas Bignold, of Westerham, Kent, who came to
Norwich towards the close of the eighteenth century, and established the
Norfolk and Norwich General Assurance, "for the insurance of houses,
stock, and merchandise from fire."  The office was in the Market Place,
where Mr. Bignold also carried on the business of a wine and spirit
merchant until the end of 1807.  Mr. Samuel Bignold was elected
Corporation Sheriff on August 9th, 1830, and in 1831 succeeded Mr. John
Patteson as Alderman of the Great Mancroft Ward.  In 1832 he was
instrumental in introducing to the city Lord Stormont and Sir James
Scarlett, as candidates for its representation in Parliament.  During his
Mayoralty in 1833 he wrote a letter to the Governor of the Court of
Guardians, suggesting the establishment of a joint stock company for
spinning yarn, in order to give employment to the poor.  The result was
the formation of the Norwich Yarn Company, and the first stone of their
factory was laid by Mr. Bignold on December 1st, 1836.  This undertaking
was commenced with every indication of success, but it finally succumbed
to the powerful competition of the North.  In 1848 Mr. Bignold was a
second time elected Mayor, and was chosen a third time for the office in
1853.  On May 3rd, 1854, having been requested by the Corporation to
present to the Queen an address pledging its loyal support to her Majesty
in the prosecution of the Crimean War, he received the honour of
knighthood, and his portrait was painted by public subscription, by J. P.
Knight, R.A., and placed in St. Andrew's Hall.  In the same year Sir
Samuel was returned as member of Parliament for the city, in opposition
to Mr. Anthony Hamond, the Liberal candidate.  On seeking re-election, in
1857, he was defeated by Lord Bury and Mr. Schneider, and again in April,
1859, by the same gentlemen; but that election was declared void.  In
June, 1859, when Lord Bury sought re-election, having vacated his seat by
accepting the appointment of Comptroller of her Majesty's household, Sir
Samuel was again defeated, and Lord Bury was a second time unseated on
petition.  In all subsequent elections, although not a candidate himself,
Sir Samuel Bignold continued to take an active part.  He was associated
with many public companies and charitable and other institutions.  After
the passing of the Municipal Reform Act, he was elected a Councillor for
the Fifth Ward, which he continued to represent until his death.  He was
placed on the Commission of the Peace for the County in 1835, and became
a Deputy-Lieutenant, and was appointed a city magistrate in 1841.

4.--The Norwich Choral Society, founded by Professor Taylor, in 1824, for
the performance of choral and orchestral music, was voluntarily dissolved
by the few remaining members.

--The Prince and Princess of Wales arrived at Holkham, on a visit to the
Earl of Leicester.

20.--Died at her residence, Thorpe St. Andrew, in her 69th year, Miss
Mary Ann Bacon, third daughter of Mr. R. M. Bacon, of Costessey.  She
possessed varied accomplishments and poetical talent.  Early in life she
assisted her father by translating and writing several valuable articles
for the "Musical Review"; and she was associated with Mr. Owen Jones in
the production of some volumes of combined art and poetry which attracted
much attention at the time of their appearance.  Miss Bacon was
particularly happy in her metrical translations of German, French, and
Italian songs, and the books of the Norwich Festivals for many years
attested her ready talent in giving the spirit of those languages when
combined with music.  She contributed many fugitive verses and serial
tales in prose to the "People's Journal" and other periodicals and
magazines.


FEBRUARY.


3.--A special meeting of the Norwich Town Council was held for the
purpose of considering and passing resolutions authorising the Council to
petition Parliament against the Norwich Gas Bill, by which the British
Gaslight Company sought to acquire additional lands and to raise further
capital.  It was decided to oppose the Bill, and the action of the
Council was confirmed at a common hall held on the 4th.

--Died at 26, Highbury Place, London, the Rev. Luke Hoult Wiseman, aged
53.  He was a son of Mr. Samuel Wiseman of Norwich, so well known for his
long and devoted services to the British and Foreign Bible Society.  He
became private secretary to Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, and afterwards
entered as a candidate for the Wesleyan Methodist ministry.  A popular
and powerful preacher, he was appointed, in 1868, one of the general
secretaries of the Wesleyan Missionary Society.  In 1871 he was elected
secretary to the Conference, and in 1872 was appointed its president.
Mr. Wiseman wrote much for the Press, and all his writings bore the
impress of a clear and vigorous intellect.  His best known works were
"Christ's Temptation in the Wilderness" and "Men of Faith."

4.--A fire, which resulted in the destruction of the treadmill-house and
of a small storage building, occurred at the City Gaol, Norwich.  An
alarming rumour of an attempted escape of the prisoners was circulated,
and a detachment of the 7th Hussars was summoned from the Cavalry
Barracks.  The prisoners, however, were safely removed from the south to
the north side of the gaol, the fire was extinguished by the city police,
and the cavalry were ordered back to quarters.

5.--The Norwich Town Council discussed the question of the proposed site
for the new pauper lunatic asylum, and decided to erect the building at
Hellesdon.

23.--The Sheriff of Norwich (Mr. J. Youngs) and the Under-Sheriff (Mr. F.
Foster) opened a court at the Shirehall for the assessment of damages in
the claims brought against the Great Eastern Railway Company by the
relatives of certain persons who had been killed or injured in the Thorpe
collision.  At Norwich Assizes, on April 6th, before Mr. Justice
Blackburn, Alfred Cooper, formerly night inspector, and John Robson,
formerly telegraph clerk at Thorpe railway station, were indicted for
feloniously killing and slaying George Robert Womack, on September 10th.
Mr. Womack was one of the victims of the collision.  The jury acquitted
Robson, and returned a verdict of guilty against Cooper, who was
sentenced to eight calendar months' imprisonment.  At the same Assizes, a
special jury tried the civil action, Morse _v._ the Great Eastern Railway
Company, in which the Rev. Charles Morse sued the company for
compensation for injuries sustained in the collision.  The jury awarded
plaintiff 2,050 damages.  On April 17th it was announced: "It is now
expected that the amount of compensation claims will not exceed 40,000.
About 10,000 has been paid in the amicable adjustment of minor claims,
and juries have awarded some 15,000 more."  At the Summer Assizes, on
August 6th, before Mr. Baron Bramwell, a special jury awarded Mr. C. R.
Gilman the sum of 6,497 3s. 8d. for damages, medical attendance, and
extra expenses consequent upon injuries received by him in the collision.


MARCH.


1.--Mr. Craven Robertson's company commenced an engagement at Norwich
Theatre.  "Caste," "School," "Ours," and "M.P." were produced.

5.--An election to fill the vacancy caused in the representation of
Norwich by the elevation to the judicial bench of Mr. Huddleston, Q.C.,
took place.  The candidates were Mr. J. H. Tillett and Colonel Josiah
Wilkinson, Southampton Lodge, Highgate.  The result was declared as
follows: Tillett, 5,877; Wilkinson, 5,079.  On April 2nd a petition
against the return of Mr. Tillett, M.P., was filed in the Court of Common
Pleas, by Frank Ames, a workman at Messrs. Barnard and Bishop's
Ironworks.  (_See_ May 6th.)

7.--Died at Brighton, Mr. Edward Warner, of Hingham Hall, Woodford,
Essex, formerly member of Parliament for Norwich.  He was first returned
in 1852, in conjunction with Sir Morton Peto, and in opposition to the
Marquis of Douro and Lieut.-Colonel Dickson; and sat in the House of
Commons until the dissolution in 1857, but did not present himself for
re-election.  In 1860 he again came forward, with Sir William Russell,
with whom he was returned, defeating the Conservative candidates, Mr. W.
Forlonge and Mr. W. D. Lewis.  In 1865 he and Sir William Russell were
unsuccessfully opposed by Mr. A. Goldsmid and Mr. R. E. Chester Waters.
After the passing of the new Reform Act, the advanced Liberals selected
Mr. J. H. Tillett as their candidate, and the Whigs adhered to Sir
William Russell.  In 1870 Mr. Warner took the field in opposition to Mr.
Tillett, but, after consulting the electors, he decided to retire from
the contest.  Thereafter he lived in comparative retirement.

11.--A severe gale raged on the East Coast.  The schooner Elizabeth,
belonging to Messrs. Bessey and Palmer, of Yarmouth, struck on the Barber
Sand, and the crew of four hands were drowned.  Several other casualties
occurred.

25.--Application was made in the Court of Common Pleas, on behalf of
Josiah Buttifant, charged with the building society frauds at Norwich,
for an order that a writ of _certiorari_ might issue to remove the
indictments into the Court of Queen's Bench.  The order was granted, and
the case came for trial before Mr. Justice Archibald, on May 6th, when it
was stated that the prisoner's defalcations amounted to 20,000.
Buttifant pleaded not guilty to the charge of forging certain documents,
but guilty to embezzling various sums.  A jury was sworn to try the
charge of forgery, and returned a verdict of guilty.  The prisoner was
sentenced to fifteen years' penal servitude.

31.--St. Margaret's church, Lynn, which had been restored at the cost of
7,000, as an act of thanksgiving for the recovery of the Prince of Wales
from his severe illness, was re-opened for Divine worship.  The sermon
was preached by the Lord Bishop, and a distinguished company assembled
for luncheon at the Town Hall, under the presidency of the Mayor (Mr. E.
E. Durrant).  The Prince and Princess of Wales attended afternoon service
at the church on Sunday, April 18th, and were received by the Mayor and
Corporation.  The work of restoration was carried out under the direction
of Mr. Ewan Christian and Sir E. Gilbert Scott.

--A new organ, erected at North Walsham church, by Messrs. Hill and Son,
of London, at the cost of 487, was opened by Mr. James Turle, organist of
Westminster Abbey, at a special service, at which the sermon was preached
by the Dean of Norwich.


APRIL.


1.--The Yarmouth and Gorleston tramway was formally opened by the Mayor
of Yarmouth (Mr. R. D. Barber).

5.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Grove, William Sillis, 25,
labourer, was found guilty of feloniously assaulting Miss Ann Elizabeth
Blyth, at Great Massingham, on October 12th, 1874, and was sentenced to
eighteen years' penal servitude and twenty lashes of the "cat."  The
whipping was inflicted at Norwich Castle on April 20th.  "The prisoner's
back having been bared, he was securely fastened by the hands and feet to
the whipping-post and the flagellation duly administered by Mr. Pinson,
the Governor, with a 'cat' having nine tails of braided whipcord.  When
the third lash had been given the prisoner turned his head round and
implored, 'For God's sake, don't hit twice in the same place,' and,
howling and wincing, threatened to break down at the eighth lash; but the
whipping proceeded until the punishment was completed.  When released
from the post he appeared faint, and required assistance to get on his
shirt.  'A poor devil had better be hanged than punished like that,' he
said."

9.--At a military tournament given by the 7th Hussars at Norwich, the
"cavalry ride," now known as the "musical ride," was performed for the
first time.  It was introduced by the bandmaster, Van Der Huevil, who was
afterwards transferred to the Household Cavalry, and under his direction
the display became one of the most prominent features of the Royal
Military Tournament.

17.--Died at her residence, Surrey Street, Norwich, Miss Cecilia Lucy
Brightwell, eldest daughter of Mr. Thomas Brightwell.  For nearly forty
years she was the devoted and inseparable companion of her father.  Miss
Brightwell was a voluminous writer, and more than twenty works of hers
had issued from the press, the first of which was a biography, the only
one extant, of her old friend, Amelia Opie, whose diary and
correspondence she had access to through her father, Mrs. Opie's
executor.  Amongst her other works was a "Life of Linnaeus," "Early Lives
and Doings of Great Lawyers," "Annals of Curious and Romantic Lives,"
"Palissy, the Huguenot Potter," "Footsteps of the Reformers," "Heroes of
the Workshop," "Men of Mark," "Annals of Industry and Genius," &c.
Proficient in the use of the etching needle, she illustrated her father's
works on "Infusoria."  "A singular evidence of Miss Brightwell's skill in
etching may be found in the British Museum, where, side by side with the
work of Rembrandt, known as 'The Long Landscape,' is a copy by her which
the gentleman then in charge of that department could not believe to be
such until vouched for by others."


MAY.


6.--The hearing of the election petition against the return of Mr. Jacob
Henry Tillett as member of Parliament for the city commenced at the
Shirehall, Norwich, before Mr. Justice Lush.  Mr. Giffard, Q.C., was
leading counsel for the petitioner, and Mr. Hawkins, Q.C., for the
respondent.  It was alleged on the part of the petitioner that a large
number of voters had received employment of a colourable character.
"Wherever possible a voter was made a messenger, clerk, or something.
The majority for Mr. Huddleston at the General Election was between 40
and 50, but by this kind of device the Conservative majority was
converted into a minority of one under 800."  The inquiry proceeded, and
on the 15th Mr. Hawkins announced that "Mr. Tillett had come to the
conclusion it had been sufficiently established that a great number of
the lower class voters were employed unjustifiably in his behalf, and he
felt he could not struggle further to retain the seat."  After hearing
the evidence of Mr. Tillett and a few other witnesses, his lordship said:
"The result is the respondent has become disqualified by reason of this
corruption by his agents, and I have nothing more to do than to declare
the election void and award costs to the petitioner."  (_See_ August
16th.)

13.--The centenary of the banking house of Messrs. Gurneys and Co. was
celebrated by a dinner given at Stoke Holy Cross, the seat of Mr. Henry
Birkbeck.  "The original founders of the Bank were John and Henry Gurney,
who, in addition to their ordinary trade, that of merchants, carried on a
banking business, first in Pitt Street, and afterwards in Magdalen
Street.  They were the sons of John Gurney, who earned the title of the
'Weavers' Friend,' by reason of his advocacy of their cause.  The Gurneys
having, in 1779, devoted themselves exclusively to banking, the business
was transferred to Bartlett Gurney (son of Henry Gurney), who removed to
the present premises on Bank Plain, having as a partner his uncle, John
Gurney.  Bartlett Gurney died in 1803, and John Gurney was left sole
proprietor, being joined shortly by his cousins, Richard and Joseph
Gurney.  John Gurney lived at Earlham Hall, Richard Gurney at Keswick,
and Joseph Gurney at Lakenham.  Changes from time to time occurred, and
Hudson Gurney, Richard Hanbury Gurney, James John Gurney, Henry Birkbeck
(the father of the present head of the firm), and Simon Martin became at
subsequent periods partners in the great banking house.  The panics of
the years 1792 and 1825, which caused the failure of many banking houses,
only resulted in establishing the Gurneys on a firmer and more prosperous
basis, for they not only survived these financial disasters, but assisted
others to tide over their difficulties.  The year 1866 will be remembered
as one which tested the stability of the house.  The run on the Bank in
that and the following year was as remarkable for its intensity as it was
lasting.  The run having ended, the business was further extended in 1870
by the addition of that of Harveys and Hudsons, the goodwill of which was
purchased, and, by the liberality of the firm, that which might have
ended in a catastrophe for Norfolk was averted.  It is now by far the
largest private banking house in the provinces."


JUNE.


5.--The Reedham Hall estate was sold by auction by Messrs. Spelman, at
the Rampant Horse Hotel, Norwich, for 31,568.  The purchaser was Mr. John
Rose.

8.--Mr. Frank Buckland, Inspector of Salmon Fisheries, opened an inquiry
at Yarmouth, at the request of the Home Secretary, into the crab,
lobster, and other sea fisheries on the Norfolk coast, with the view of
ascertaining the expediency of adopting regulations for the prevention of
waste and the preservation of fish.  Similar inquiries were held at Lynn,
Wells, and Cromer.

16.--The annual show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association opened at
Fakenham, and was continued on the 17th.  Mr. Anthony Hamond was
president for the year.

19.--An important meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, for the
purpose of conferring with Mr. Frank Buckland as to the possibility of
extending legislative protection to the fishing in the rivers and broads
of Norfolk.  Mr. Buckland expressed his full concurrence in the necessity
of an Act of Parliament, for placing restrictions on the fishing, and
resolutions to that effect were adopted.  (_See_ January 22nd, 1876.)

21.--The centenary of the opening of the bells of St. Peter Mancroft,
Norwich, was celebrated by the ringers of that church.


JULY.


3.--Extracts from an article in the "Natal Mercury" of May 11th, on the
life and labours of Mr. Thomas Baines, F.R.G.S., "just then deceased,"
were published.  Mr. Baines was a native of King's Lynn, where he was
born in 1822.  At an early age he gave evidence of artistic instincts,
and of his love of travel and adventure.  His first experiences of the
kind were in South Australia.  When little more than a youth, he took
part in an expedition which traversed a then unpenetrated portion of the
Continent.  He and his companions carried their lives in their hands, and
many were the hairbreadth escapes from the perils of both sea and
savages.  Baines arrived in South Africa about the year 1848, and took an
active part in the Kaffir wars of 1850-51-52.  In 1860 he joined Dr.
Livingstone's expedition to Zanzibar, but differences arose between him
and his illustrious chief.  The next few years were spent in devious
travel, and in 1866 he returned home and published several important
works.  He subsequently went to Natal as leader of a party sent out by
the South African Gold Fields Exploration Company, and it was at Natal
that he spent a large portion of the last few years of his life.

8.--Died at Mulbarton, Mary Ann Todd, aged 100 years.

22.--The Norfolk polled cattle and flock of pure Southdown sheep on the
North Elmham estate were sold by Messrs. Thornton and Long.  The total
amount realised was 4,953 5s.

23.--The last detachment of the 7th Hussars left Norwich for Manchester
by special train; and on the 24th the dismounted party of the 6th Dragoon
Guards (Carabiniers), from Shorncliffe, took over the Cavalry Barracks.


AUGUST.


2.--A vessel named the Ponda Chief, intended for trading between this
country and Port Natal, was launched from the shipyard of Messrs. J.
Fellows, at Southtown, Yarmouth.  She was 140 feet long, 26 feet beam, 14
ft. 6 in. deep, and 416 tons register.  This was one of the largest
vessels ever built at the port.

3.--H.M.S. Favourite, an armour-plated corvette of 2,094 tons and 490
horse-power, ran upon the south spit of Scroby Sand, when endeavouring to
make the gatway.  At the flood tide the vessel floated off and steamed
out to sea.

9.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Mellor, William Harper
Stewardson, printer, of Norwich, was charged with publishing in a
newspaper called the "Herald and Dispatch," a malicious and defamatory
libel of and concerning Frederick Lawrence Phillips, editor of the
"Norwich Argus."  The jury returned a verdict of guilty, and the
defendant was fined 20, and ordered to enter into his own recognisances
of 100 to be of good behaviour for twelve months.

16.--A Royal Commission, issued in consequence of the report of Mr.
Justice Lush, "that he had reason to believe corrupt practices
extensively prevailed at the election which took place in Norwich on
March 5th, on the elevation to the Bench of Mr. Baron Huddleston,"
commenced its proceedings at the Shirehall, Norwich.  The Commissioners
were Mr. John Morgan Howard, Q.C., Mr. Patrick MacMahon, and Mr. Gabriel
Prior Goldney, with Mr. Tyndal Atkinson as secretary.  On the 43rd day,
Wednesday, October 28th, the court terminated its sittings in Norwich,
and the inquiry was resumed in the House of Lords on November 8th.  The
fiftieth day was reached on December 3rd, when a further adjournment took
place.  (_See_ March 15th, 1876.)

26.--The marriage was solemnised, at Latimer, of the Earl of Leicester
and the Hon. Georgiana Cavendish, eldest daughter of Lord and Lady
Chesham.


SEPTEMBER.


20.--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced with an
evening performance of "Elijah."  The morning performances were as
follow: 22nd, "Hymn of Praise" and selection, "Jerusalem"; 23rd, "Stabat
Mater" and "Woman of Samaria"; 24th, "The Messiah."  Miscellaneous
concerts were given on the evenings of the dates named, except on the
24th, when a dress ball took place.  The principal vocalists were Mdlle.
Albani, Mdlle. Mathilda Enequist, Madame Lemmens Sherrington, Mdlle. Anna
de Belocca, Miss Enriquez, Madame Patey, Mr. Edward Lloyd, Mr. H. J.
Minns, Mr. Henry Guy, Mr. J. L. Wadmore, and Signor Foli.  Sir Julius
Benedict conducted.

26.--Died at his residence, Bracondale, Norwich, Mr. Frederic Brown, aged
67.  He served the office of Sheriff in 1863-64, was a magistrate of the
city, and a director of the Norwich Waterworks and Corn Exchange
Companies.


OCTOBER.


4.--Don Edgardo Colona, a Mexican tragedian, appeared at Norwich Theatre,
and during a week's engagement played a round of Shakesperian and
classical characters.

9.--The foundation-stone of Yarmouth Aquarium was laid by Lord Suffield.
The building was opened on September 5th, 1876.

16.*--"Her Majesty has been graciously pleased to approve the Norfolk
Regiment of Artillery Militia being in future designated the Prince of
Wales' Own Norfolk Artillery Militia, and of the officers,
non-commissioned officers, and men of the regiment being permitted to
wear, as a distinctive badge, on the collars of the tunics, the Prince of
Wales' plume and the motto, 'Ich Dien.'"

20.--During a severe gale, the barque Young England, of Middlesbrough,
371 tons (Captain Brown), bound from the Baltic to London with deals,
drifted on the Cockle Sand.  The crew of twelve men and a boy took to the
boat, which was capsized, and all, with the exception of the boy, were
drowned.

26.--A public meeting was held at Yarmouth, to consider a project for
constructing a railway from that town to Stalham, _via_ Caister, Ormesby,
Martham, Potter Heigham, and Catfield.  Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., M.P.,
presided, and resolutions were adopted affirming the desirability of the
undertaking, which was estimated to cost 70,000.  (_See_ August 7th,
1877.)

28.--A preliminary meeting of landowners and others interested in the
construction of a new line of railway from March to Wymondham, to be
known as the Central Norfolk Railway, was held at the Crown Hotel,
Watton, under the presidency of Mr. W. A. Tyssen-Amherst.  Mr. A. F.
Jerningham, C.E., described the proposed route, and it was agreed that
the railway was desirable.  Its cost was estimated at 450,000, or 10,000
per mile.  A Bill for the promotion of the undertaking was introduced in
Parliament, but was withdrawn in January, 1876.


NOVEMBER.


5.--Mr. Charles Tadman, for many years manager at Norwich Gasworks,
committed suicide by shooting himself with a revolver.

8.--Mr. Anthony Hamond, Master of the West Norfolk Hunt, was presented
with his portrait, painted by Mr. Graves, R.A.  Sir William ffolkes,
Bart., made the presentation, on behalf of 400 subscribers.

9.--Mr. Jacob Henry Tillett was elected Mayor, and Mr. Henry Stevenson
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

10.--The first Poor-law Conference, attended by delegates from twenty-two
Norfolk unions, was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the presidency
of Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., "to take counsel on the important point of the
more uniform administration of poor relief."

13.--Died at St. Leonard's, the Rev. Dr. William Brock.  Dr. Brock, who
was upwards of 70 years of age, was formerly minister of the Baptist
congregation, in Norwich, and resigned that post about twenty-five years
previously, and became minister of Bloomsbury chapel, London, then
recently built.  There he remained until he retired from the ministry.
Dr. Brock was one of the most popular ministers in the Baptist
denomination, and took an active part on the Liberal side in many of the
political movements of his time.

--An extremely high tide occurred at Lynn, owing to heavy rains and
strong gales.  On the 15th Denver Sluice was in jeopardy, and large
numbers of men were employed to strengthen the banks.  At Hunstanton
great masses of cliff were washed away; on the 19th railway traffic
between Brandon and Ely was suspended, owing to the floods, and
considerable damage was done to the line between Reedham and Haddiscoe by
the overflow of water.

17.--Sir William Bagge, Bart., M.P., presided at a luncheon at Downham
Market, held in celebration of the opening of the new Public Hall.  The
building was converted from the old Theatre by a company formed for the
purpose of carrying out the project.

18.--At the adjourned Norfolk Quarter Sessions, held at the Shirehall,
Norwich, a report was received on the advisability of amalgamating the
county prisons and of transferring the Governor of Swaffham Prison to
Norwich Castle, the Governor of the latter prison, Mr. Pinson, having
given notice of his resignation of office.  The report recommended that
Swaffham Prison be discontinued from January 13th, 1876; that the
prisoners at the time under detention be removed to Norwich Castle; and
that Mr. Duncan Stuart, Governor of Swaffham Prison, be appointed to
succeed Mr. Pinson at Norwich.  The report was adopted.  Mr. Stuart took
over the governorship of Norwich Castle in January, 1876, but resigned
office in the following month, when he was succeeded by Mr. Miles Joseph
Walker.

19.--A gale, the severity of which had been unequalled for many years
previously, visited the coast of Norfolk.  Several wrecks occurred off
Yarmouth and Caister, and many lives were lost in the Wash.  The Scotch
fishing fleet suffered terrible privations.  Five bodies of the crew of
the smack Beautiful Star, of St. Monance, Fifeshire, were picked up at
the entrance to Lynn Well, and at a subsequent date the bodies of other
unfortunate fishermen from the North were discovered in the same
locality.

20.--The Hon. Frederick Walpole, M.P., F.R.G.S., was installed Grand
Master of the Norfolk Provincial Grand Lodge of Freemasons, in place of
Mr. Benjamin Bond Cabbell, deceased.

21.--On this day (Sunday) a mad freak was perpetrated at Yarmouth by a
Scotch fisherman, named Watson.  Having gained admittance to the Nelson
column, he climbed the figure of Britannia and clasped his arms about its
neck.  He then came down to the platform, and, dangling his legs over the
edge of the capital, took off his shoes and proceeded to descend by the
lightning conductor which runs down the outside of the column.  The
conductor was only seven-eighths of an inch in diameter, and placed close
to the stone work, "and how he managed to get over the edge of the
projecting capital was a marvel."  The man, however, reached the ground
in safety; but his hands were terribly lacerated, "as in several
instances he had to pull the conductor from the wall to get his fingers
in.  He was under the influence of drink when he performed the feat."

30.--Died, in his 75th year, Mr. Francis John Blake, solicitor, for forty
years treasurer of the Norfolk County Lunatic Asylum, and thirty-eight
years Superintendent Registrar for the city of Norwich.  Mr. Blake was
for many years treasurer of the Norwich Musical Festival, and a director
of several public companies.

--St. Andrew's Day was celebrated in Norwich by the members of the
newly-formed St. Andrew Society dining at the Maid's Head Hotel.  Mr. T.
Muir Grant, the founder and president of the society, was in the chair,
and Dr. Waddell, the vice-president, officiated as croupier.

--A suit, the Archdeacon of Norwich _v._ William Delph and William Thomas
Gilbert, churchwardens of St. Augustine, which came before the Consistory
Court at Norwich, excited much public comment.  The case was heard
originally in November, 1874, when the Chancellor decreed that the
respondents, who had desecrated the churchyard by throwing a portion of
it into the public road, should, by placing certain stones in the pathway
and wall, mark the ancient boundary of the churchyard.  The respondents
not having obeyed the decree of the court, application was made on
October 5th by Mr. Walter Overbury, as Proctor for the Archdeacon, that
they might be pronounced contumacious.  The case was adjourned until this
date, and the decree not having been obeyed, the Chancellor pronounced
the respondents contumacious, and issued a certificate to her Majesty in
the High Court of Justice, in order that an attachment might forthwith
issue against them.  This action resulted in the arrest and imprisonment
of Mr. Gilbert.  At a meeting of the Town Council, on December 21st, Mr.
J. D. Smith called attention to the case, and stated that Mr. Gilbert was
imprisoned for alleged contempt of court in not paying the costs of the
suit.  He moved a resolution expressing regret that the ecclesiastical
authorities should have instituted the prosecution, and urging that the
Parliamentary and Bye-Laws Committee confer immediately as to the best
steps to be taken to obtain the release of the prisoner.  The motion was
carried by 27 votes against 1, "the Conservatives having vacated their
seats, leaving only Mr. H. W. Stafford, who voted against the motion."
Mr. Gilbert was liberated on December 24th, an undertaking having been
given on the part of Mr. Delph that the decree of the Consistorial Court
should be carried out.


DECEMBER.


4.--A heavy gale prevailed on the coast of Norfolk, and continued until
the 6th.  There were many shipping casualties, and much loss of life.

7.--At the annual dinner of the Farmers' Club, held at the Salisbury
Hotel, London, Mr. Clare Sewell Read announced that he would no longer
continue a member of the Government.  He took office, he said, on the
stipulation that he should have perfect freedom to speak upon all
agricultural matters, and that if he believed the interests of
agriculture were neglected by any department of the Government he should
resign.  "I believe," he added, "that the interests of the stockholders
of this country have been persistently ignored by the Veterinary
Department of the Privy Council, and that being the case, I have to
inform you that I am no longer the Secretary of the Local Government
Board, and that I only hold office until my successor be appointed."  Mr.
Read further said that, to a tenant-farmer whose principal income was
derived from the occupation of 600 or 700 acres of land, 1,500 a year was
an extremely convenient addition to his income; but he was quite sure
that all present would approve of what he had done.  During the Cattle
Show week it was announced that some suitable recognition would be made
of Mr. Read's services to agriculture, and, at a large meeting of the
agriculturists of the county--Conservative and Liberal--held at the
Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, on December 18th, a deputation was appointed to
attend a meeting at the Salisbury Hotel, on the 20th, in support of the
testimonial fund which was forthwith inaugurated.  (_See_ January 1st,
1876.)

13.--A dreadful tragedy occurred at the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  A
weaver, 42 years of age, named Robert Edwards, who resided at Marsham,
had been admitted to the Hospital on an indoor recommendation obtained
from the Rev. J. Gunton, rector of the parish.  The physician who
examined him prior to admission believed that he was suffering from some
bodily ailment of a dyspeptic character.  Ten or twelve weeks previously
his case was regarded as one of insanity; he had been restless and
violent at times, and his friends had placed him under surveillance.
Early on the morning of this date, Edwards, in a fit of homicidal mania,
escaped from the Catherine ward, and, finding his way to the children's
ward, seized a pair of tongs from the fireplace, and, before he could be
secured, made a murderous assault upon some of the unfortunate young
patients, which resulted in two being slain outright, a third died
shortly afterwards, and grievous injuries were inflicted upon two others.
Edwards was disarmed by Mr. Baumgartner, the house surgeon, taken into
custody, and charged on the 14th, at Norwich Police Court, with
feloniously killing William Martin, aged 14, of Ryburgh; John Lacey, 10,
of Griffin Yard, Pockthorpe; and Joseph Colman, 11, of Barton Turf.  A
fourth lad, Alfred Clarke, aged 9, died on February 20th, 1876.  On the
18th the magistrates committed him for trial at the Assizes, but
meanwhile he was certified to be insane and incapable of pleading, and
was sent to Broadmoor Criminal Lunatic Asylum.  At the Coroner's inquest,
held on December 18th, a verdict of wilful murder was returned, and the
jury expressed, in the strongest terms, their disapproval of the
circumstances under which Edwards had been admitted to the institution,
and their high opinion of the courageous conduct of Mr. Baumgartner.

22.--Died at Bombay, Bernard Edward Delaval Astley, tenth Baron Hastings,
aged 20.  His lordship left England early in October, for India,
accompanied by Viscount Ebrington, and, after staying with Sir Philip
Wodehouse, the Governor, at Parell, during the Prince of Wales' visit
there, he proceeded to Calicut, and thence to the Annamally Hills, for
shooting.  He there fell a victim to jungle fever.  Born September 9th,
1855, his lordship was eldest son of the Rev. Delaval Loftus Astley, some
time vicar of East Barsham, and afterwards ninth Lord Hastings, and
grandson of Jacob Astley, Lord Hastings, better known by his former name
of Sir Jacob Astley, M.P.  He was educated at Eton, and succeeded to the
family honours in 1872.  The title passed to his next brother, the Hon.
George Manners Astley, who was born in April, 1857.

26.--The Christmas pantomime produced by Mr. George H. Chaplin, at
Norwich Theatre, was entitled, "Bluff King Hal the Bluffer and his
Crippled Guy, or Harlequin Darnley, the Pet of the Court."



1876.


JANUARY.


1.--At a meeting of Norfolk agriculturists, held at the Norfolk Hotel,
Norwich, it was decided to support the national movement for presenting
Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., with a testimonial in recognition of his services
to agriculture.  Upwards of 600 was subscribed in the room, the Earl of
Leicester, Lord Lieutenant of the county, heading the subscription-list
with a handsome donation.  The presentation was made at the Cannon Street
Hotel, London, on May 2nd, at a banquet presided over by Mr. Charles
Howard, of Bidenham, and attended by 160 of the leading agriculturists of
the three kingdoms.  The testimonial consisted of a massive silver salver
weighing 115 ozs., and inscribed, "Presented, the 2nd May, 1876, to Clare
Sewell Read, M.P. for Norfolk since 1865, with a cheque for 5,500, in
testimony of his valuable services to Agriculture."

19.--The first of the entertainments known as "Spelling Bees" was given
at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich.  It was claimed that they "served the
twofold purpose of testing the orthographical and philological knowledge
of the competitors and of providing amusement for the public."  The Mayor
(Mr. J. H. Tillett) presided.  The referees were Mr. Carlos Cooper, the
Rev. A. C. Copeman, and Mr. A. Master, and their decisions were in
accordance with the Imperial, Richardson's, and Walker's dictionaries.
Mr. T. Richmond Pinder was interrogator.  "Spelling Bees" enjoyed for
some months the same popularity as their precursors, "Penny Readings,"
and every town and village in the county took up the movement, which,
however, was very short-lived.

22.--The members of the Yare Preservation Society and the riparian owners
of the county adopted a memorial to the Home Secretary, praying for the
legislative protection of local sea and inland fisheries.  A deputation,
which included the members of Parliament for the county and city,
approached the Home Secretary upon the subject on February 1st, and
received the assurance that "if the Government could see their way they
would take the matter up at some future time."  (_See_ February 2nd,
1877.)

29.--Died at his residence, Unthank's Road, Norwich, Mr. Abel Towler, one
of the senior magistrates of the city, aged 83.  He was head of the firm
of Towler, Allen, and Co.  In politics Mr. Towler was "a Liberal of the
old school."


FEBRUARY.


1.--A fire occurred at the works of Messrs. Riches and Watts,
agricultural engineers, Duke's Palace, Norwich.  The damage amounted to
between 3,000 and 4,000.

12.--Died at his residence, the Depperhaugh, Diss, Admiral Sir John
Baldwin Wake Walker, Bart., K.C.B.  Born in 1803, he entered the Navy in
1812, and saw much service.  In 1847 he was appointed Surveyor to the
Navy; in 1861 he assumed command of the Cape of Good Hope station, and
attained the rank of Admiral in 1870.  He was created a baronet in 1856.

16.--Died at his residence, Drayton Lodge, near Norwich, Mr. James
Winter, aged 79.  He was the last member but one of the old Corporation,
in which he held the important office of Speaker.  Mr. Winter remained a
member of the new Corporation from its formation in 1835 until a few
years before his death.

19.--An outbreak of small-pox was announced to have taken place amongst
the prisoners confined in Norwich Castle.  There were twelve cases, two
of which were serious, but no deaths occurred.

27.--Died at his residence, Surrey Street, Norwich, Mr. John Harwell, in
his 78th year.  His mother was a daughter of John Samuel Sedley, of
Barford and Morley, a lineal descendant of Sir Charles Sedley, the wit
and poet.  Mr. Barwell married, in 1824, the eldest daughter of Mr.
Richard Mackenzie Bacon, proprietor and editor of the "Norwich Mercury."
He succeeded his father in his wine merchant's business, was for many
years an alderman for the Mancroft Ward, and served the office of Sheriff
in 1839-40.  On the occasion of the marriage of Queen Victoria, he was
one of the deputation who presented, on behalf of the city, an address of
congratulation to her Majesty and the Prince Consort.  Mr. Barwell
engaged largely in artistic pursuits, and was an accomplished musician
and vocalist.  A skilful amateur artist, he painted a portrait of Miss
Julia Smith, daughter of Mr. William Smith, M.P., and aunt of Florence
Nightingale, which was exhibited at the National Portrait Gallery, South
Kensington, in 1868.  He did much to promote art in Norwich, and, in
conjunction with Cotman, Crome, and other Norwich artists, established a
drawing academy.  Many years later he had the satisfaction of seeing his
views carried out by the establishment of a Science and Art Department of
the Government, and by the opening of Schools of Science and Art in
Norwich and most of the principal towns in the kingdom.  With the
assistance of Mr. Burt, he established the Norwich Cricket Club, and, in
co-operation with Bentley, and afterwards with Fuller Pilch, formed the
Cricket Ground at Lakenham, which was one of the best in England.  Mr.
Barwell was a Liberal in principle, but always refrained from taking an
active part in local politics.


MARCH.


6.--Mr. Craven Robertson's "Caste" Company commenced an engagement at
Norwich Theatre, and produced, for the first time there, Mr. T. W.
Robertson's latest comedy, "Play."

14.--In the House of Commons, Mr. C. S. Read called attention to the
report of the Contagious Diseases (Animals) Act Committee, 1873, and
moved, "That, in the opinion of this House, the general orders and
regulations for the stoppage of disease should cease to be varying or
permissive, and should be uniform throughout Great Britain and Ireland."
On an assurance from Viscount Sandon that the Government accepted the
principle of uniformity, Mr. Read said he would not be justified in
asking the House to divide, and withdrew the motion.

15.--The Norwich Election Commissioners issued their report.  They found
that corrupt practices extensively prevailed in Norwich at the election
in March, 1875, and in February, 1874.  The number of persons scheduled
was as follows: Schedule I., persons guilty of bribery at the election of
1874 or 1875, 72; Schedule II., persons bribed at the election of 1874 or
1875, 31; Schedule III., guilty of personation, 1; Schedule IV., persons
guilty of procuring personation, 2.  In the House of Commons, on May
29th, the Attorney-General announced that the scheduled voters were to be
disfranchised, and the writ for the vacant seat suspended during the then
Parliament.  At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, on February 26th,
1878, the Lords Commissioners of her Majesty's Treasury requested payment
by the city of 3,943 19s. 2d., the cost of the Commission.  This charge
was equal to a rate of 5d. in the pound.


APRIL.


1.--Died at Dean Street, Park Lane, London, the Hon. Frederick Walpole,
M.P.  He was third son of Horatio, third Earl of Orford, by Mary, eldest
daughter of Mr. W. Fawkner, and was born September 18th, 1822.  In 1837
he entered the Royal Navy, became Lieutenant in 1845, and retired from
the service in 1864, as Commander.  He served in the first China War, in
India, and in the campaign on the Danube.  Mr. Walpole unsuccessfully
contested King's Lynn at the General Election in November, 1865, when Sir
Thomas Fowell Buxton and Lord Stanley (afterwards Earl of Derby) were
returned.  At the General Election in November, 1868, he was elected one
of the members for the Northern Division of Norfolk, and at the next
General Election was returned unopposed.  Mr. Walpole was the author of
"Five Years in the Pacific," "The Ansayrii, or Further East," and a
novel, "May and December."  He was a Fellow of the Royal Society of
Antiquaries and of the Geological Society.  Mr. Walpole also served in
the West Norfolk Militia, of which he was Major, and shortly before his
death received the honorary rank of Lieut.-Colonel.  He married, on
February 12th, 1852, his cousin, Laura Sophia Frances, only daughter of
Mr. Francis Walpole, by whom he left issue two sons and a daughter.  Amy
Rachael, who married the Hon. Henry Charles Manners Sutton, eldest son of
Viscount Canterbury.  One of the last acts of Mr. Walpole's Parliamentary
career was the introduction of the Bill for the protection of the crab
and lobster fisheries on the Norfolk coast.

3.--A serious disturbance took place at Hethersett, on the occasion of
the Norfolk and Norwich Steeplechases.  A large number of roughs from
Norwich had planned the robbery of the tills of the person who had
received the gate-money and had charge of the refreshment department.  An
effort was made to unhorse Hickman, Mr. Angerstein's huntsman, who was
engaged in keeping the course, and in the _melee_ which ensued an officer
of the Carabiniers brought up at the trot a mounted detachment on duty at
the races, and speedily quelled the disturbance.

5.--The Norwich Town Council, on the recommendation of the Executive
Committee, decided to proceed with the work of widening London Street,
from the Market Place to Castle Street, at a cost not exceeding 22,000,
and appointed a committee to negotiate with owners of property and to
inquire into the best mode of carrying out the improvement.  The subject
was discussed in detail at various meetings during the year.  (_See_
April 7th, 1877.)

10.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Baron Cleasby, Henry Webster,
aged 61, a labourer, was found guilty of the murder of his wife, Sarah
Webster, aged 53, at Cranworth, on September 17th, 1875.  Sentence of
death was passed, and the culprit was executed at Norwich Castle on May
1st.  Marwood was the executioner.

17.--Mr. Charles Durand's Grand English Opera Company commenced an
engagement at Norwich Theatre, in Rossini's comic opera, "Cinderella, or
the Fairy of the Glass Slipper."  Miss Florence St. John was a member of
the company.

18.--At an early hour in the morning the emigrant ship Humboldt, of
Hamburgh, 729 tons register, bound from Hamburgh to the Brazils, with 349
emigrants on board, ran ashore on Winterton beach.  With the assistance
of tugs the vessel was got off and taken to Yarmouth Roads for repair.
The master, Henrisch Detlof Busch, had lost his bearings, and believed
himself to be off the coast of France!

20.--The first Starr-Bowkett Building Society was established at Norwich,
by Mr. Starr, one of the originators of the system.

--The nomination of candidates for the election in the Northern Division
of the county, consequent upon the death of the Hon. Frederick Walpole,
M.P., took place at Aylsham.  The candidates were Lieut.-Colonel James
Duff, of Westwick House, and Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, Bart., of Warlies,
Waltham Abbey.  The polling, which took place on the 21st, resulted as
follows: Duff, 2,302; Buxton, 2,192.  Colonel Duff, during the election
campaign, was confined to his house by sickness.

29.--A meeting of gentlemen interested in the field sports of the county
was held at the Royal Hotel, Norwich, to consider the advisability of
accepting the offer made by Mr. Angerstein, namely, that he would give to
the county his pack of staghounds and deer, on condition that the county
subscribed a sufficient sum "to hunt them in a proper manner."  The
meeting agreed to take over the hounds if adequate funds were
forthcoming.


MAY.


15.--Mdlle. Beatrice's Comedy-Drama Company commenced an engagement at
Norwich Theatre.  The repertory included "The School for Scandal," "Mary
Stuart," "Frou-frou," "Nos Intimes," "The Ticket-of-Leave Man," "John
Jasper's Wife," and "East Lynne."

18.--Died at his residence, Theatre Street, Norwich, in his 82nd year,
Mr. William Butcher, a well-known land surveyor and auctioneer.  He was a
native of Brooke, and entered the office of Mr. Robert Corby, of
Kirstead, a land surveyor, who had one of the largest practices in the
district, if not in the kingdom.  Mr. Butcher had unusual opportunities
of acquiring a practical knowledge of the business at the time when
enclosures of commons in Norfolk and Suffolk were being carried out, for
Mr. Corby was the surveyor employed.  For nearly sixty years he carried
on a most lucrative practice, which was not confined to local limits, but
extended throughout the kingdom, from the remotest parts of Scotland to
the Land's End.  Mr. Butcher served one term as an alderman of the city,
and was Sheriff of Norwich in 1870-71.

24.--The Queen's birthday was celebrated in Norwich by an entertainment
given to the inmates of the Workhouse by the Sheriff (Mr. Stevenson).  It
was stated that the Easter Monday and Whit Monday holidays provided by
the Bank Holidays Act had affected the public observance of the day, and
Volunteer reviews, sham fights, and civic feasts were no longer held to
commemorate the occasion.

27.*--"The early closing of our shops on Thursdays in the summer months
seems now to be the universal custom in Norwich, with the solitary
exception of the chemists and druggists."  (_See_ March 26th, 1879.)

--*"Some days since some men at work on Feltwell Fen found a quantity of
Roman silver coins, many of them distinctly bearing the names of Hadrian,
Antoninus, Trajan, Marcus Aurelius, Divas Antoninus, Vespasian, &c.  They
were contained in a vessel which was broken to pieces by the plough which
turned it up."

31.--The ceremony of laying the foundation-stone of the new building in
Little Orford Street, of the Norwich Church of England Young Men's
Society, was performed by the President, Mr. F. E. Watson.  The building,
which was designed by Mr. Edward Boardman, architect, and erected by Mr.
G. E. Hawes, was formally opened on December 6th.


JUNE.


14.--The annual show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association opened at
Swaffham.  Sir William ffolkes, High Sheriff of Norfolk, presided at the
luncheon.

15.--Died at his residence, South Quay, Great Yarmouth, Vice-Admiral
Thomas Lewis Gooch, aged 69, youngest son of Sir Thomas Sherlock Gooch,
Bart., of Benacre Hall.  Born at Bramfield, he joined the Royal Naval
College in 1820, and entering the Navy, obtained Lieutenant's rank in
1828.  He was appointed to the command of H.M.S. Kite, went to the West
Coast of Africa, and brought home the survivors of the first ill-fated
Niger Expedition.  In 1865 he attained the rank of retired Rear-Admiral,
and became Vice-Admiral in 1871.  In 1828 he married Anne, eldest
daughter of General the Hon. William Gardner, Lieutenant-Governor of
Malta.

18.--Father Ignatius announced that he would commence an eight days'
mission at the Monastery, Elm Hill, Norwich.  Miss Ware, a lady residing
at Claydon, to whom, it was stated, the property belonged, was
communicated with, and she instructed her solicitors to take the
necessary steps for the ejectment of Ignatius.  Mr. J. Clabburn, of
Norwich, as agent to the solicitors, went to the Monastery, accompanied
by three process-servers, and forcibly removed Ignatius and a brother
monk as they were in the act of celebrating mass.  On the 20th Ignatius
summoned Mr. Clabburn and his men for assault, and, after a prolonged
hearing at the Police Court, the magistrates dismissed the case.
Meanwhile Ignatius held his services in the large room at the Bell Hotel,
in the yard of the Rampant Horse Hotel, and at St. Andrew's Hall.

27.--Died at Ambleside, Miss Harriet Martineau, who was born in Norwich
on June 13th, 1802.  "Although she was not a great she was a most
industrious writer, and thoroughly in earnest in whatever she undertook."

28.--The new organ erected at East Dereham church by Messrs. Hill and
Son, of London, at a cost of between 700 and 800, was opened by Dr. E. T.
Chipp, organist of Ely Cathedral.

30.--Died at Catton House, Norwich, Mr. Robert Chamberlin, aged 74.  He
thrice served the office of Mayor--in 1854-5, 1856-7, and 1871-2, and was
Sheriff in 1848-9.  Mr. Chamberlin was a magistrate for the counties of
Norfolk and Suffolk, and for the city of Norwich, and was a
Deputy-Lieutenant of the first-named county.


JULY.


1.--The 3rd Norfolk Rifle Volunteers, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel
Duff, M.P., went into camp at Hunstanton Park, and were officially
inspected on the 6th by Colonel Harenc, commanding the 31st Brigade Depot
at Yarmouth.

2.--Two troops of the 6th Dragoon Guards (Carabiniers) marched from
Norwich, _en route_ to York; the headquarters left on the 8th.

19.--Died, Mr. Wace Lockett Mendham, Town Clerk of Norwich.  He was in
his 66th year, and was appointed to the office on the death of Mr. J. R.
Staff, in 1855.  A Liberal in politics, "previous to his appointment he
might have been a warm partisan, but in his office of Town Clerk he most
carefully concealed his political feelings, and acted with strict
impartiality."  Mr. Mendham married Miss Tillett, a sister of Mr. J. H.
Tillett.  He was succeeded as Town Clerk by Mr. Henry Blake Miller.

21.--The Norwich Central Conservative Club was formally constituted at a
meeting of the party, held at the Bell Hotel.

22.--Died at Cardiff, aged 38, Mr. Henry Powel Smith, fourth son of Mr.
George Smith, formerly manager of the Norwich Theatrical Circuit.

24.--In pursuance of a writ from the Exchequer Division of the High Court
of Justice, the Sheriff of Norwich, by his Under-Sheriff (Mr. F. Fox),
empanelled a jury at the Royal Hotel to inquire what lands and tenements,
and their yearly value, were possessed by James Frederick Neale, of St.
Andrew's Hall Plain, grocer, and what goods and chattels any person had
in trust for him, as he was truly indebted to the Crown in the sum of 801
10s., "which sum was in danger of being lost unless some method more
speedy than the ordinary course of procedure at law be had."  These
proceedings constituted another phase of the notorious Creak case.  The
jury found that Mr. Neale possessed property to the amount of 855,
including 300 book debts, 505 stock-in-trade, and 50 paid on a life
insurance policy, besides freehold property of the value of 16 a year.
The jury thought they were not bound to find what was Mr. Neale's
indebtedness to the Crown, or what was the yearly value of the property
he held belonging to the late Margaret Creak.

29.--The 1st Dragoons (Royal)--five troops with headquarters--arrived at
Norwich, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Graham.


AUGUST.


11.--A fire, involving damage to the amount of about 10,000, occurred at
Messrs. Boulton and Paul's Ironworks, Rose Lane, Norwich.

12.--Died at his residence, Unthank's Road, Norwich, Mr. Josiah Fletcher,
aged 70.  He was born at Henley-on-Thames, and in 1822 was apprenticed to
Mr. Simon Wilkin, printer, &c., of the Haymarket, Norwich, with whom, on
the completion of his term, he entered into partnership.  Mr. Fletcher,
in 1834, succeeded to the business, which was subsequently removed to the
Market Place, and was there carried on by him until 1871, when, in
consequence of his failing health, he retired, and was succeeded by his
only son, who erected the extensive premises at Davey Place Steps.  "Mr.
Fletcher may be said to have been the originator of the 'Norfolk News,'
of which journal he was for some time the editor and chief manager."

18.--Died at Ingoldisthorpe Hall, in his 88th year, Captain John Davy,
R.N.  He entered the Navy in 1803, was midshipman of the Barfleur in Sir
Robert Calder's action in 1805, saw much gunboat service in 1807 and 1808
in the Faro off Messina, and was present at the reduction of the islands
of Ischia and Procida.

29.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, it was decided to purchase
the Oxford Hotel for a sum not exceeding 2,000, for the purpose of
converting it into municipal offices.  A special meeting was held on
September 19th, at which it was reported that immediately after the
decision of the Council a Norwich solicitor had offered 2,250 for the
building.  Mr. J. D. Smith, on behalf of the Corporation, offered 2,275,
at which price it became city property.  Considerable indignation was
expressed at the action of the solicitor in question, which, it was
pointed out, involved an increase in the rates of one farthing in the
pound.


SEPTEMBER.


1.--Mr. and Mrs. German Reed appeared at Norwich Theatre, and were
assisted in their entertainment by Mr. Corney Grain, Miss Fanny Holland,
and Mr. A. E. Bishop.

4.--Madame Blanche Cole's Crystal Palace Opera Company began a six
nights' engagement at Norwich Theatre.

6.--In compliance with a requisition signed by persons of both political
parties, the Mayor of Norwich (Mr. J. H. Tillett) convened a Common Hall,
"for the purpose of giving expression to the views entertained by the
requisitionists on the atrocities committed in Bulgaria."  The Mayor
presided, and the Lord Bishop and many other leading citizens were
present.  Resolutions were adopted expressing indignation and horror at
the atrocities perpetrated by troops in the service of the Turkish
Government.  Meetings of a similar character were held in many of the
towns and villages of the county, sermons were preached in churches and
chapels, and relief funds organized.

9.--Mr. R. T. Gurdon was presented with his portrait (painted by Mr.
Sidley, of London), in recognition of his political services to the
county.  The presentation was made by Sir Francis Boileau, Bart., at the
Liberal Club, Norwich.

10.--Swaffham church was re-opened for public worship.  It had undergone
extensive restoration, under the superintendence of Mr. W. O. Milne,
architect, of London.

11.--Mr. H. Loraine and Miss Edith Kingsley opened Norwich Theatre for a
short season with a performance of "Othello."  Among the other plays
produced were "The Gamester," "Hamlet," and "Richelieu."

12.--An explosion occurred on board the Alexandra steamer, which had been
chartered for the conveyance of the workpeople of Pockthorpe Brewery,
Norwich, on a river excursion.  A case of fireworks placed in the bar
exploded, and filled the cabin with fumes by which many of the party were
seriously affected.  Four deaths resulted.  At the subsequent inquest,
the jury returned a verdict of accidental death, and expressed their
strong opinion "that in future no fireworks or combustibles be taken on
board steamers without being declared as such and placed under proper
charge."

13.--A disastrous gas explosion occurred at the church of St. John
Maddermarket, Norwich.  The Rev. H. L. Rumsey and several members of the
choir were at practice when an escape of gas was noticed.  Mr. Rumsey,
with a lighted taper in his hand, was in the act of turning off the gas
at one of the standards when a brilliant flame shot across the north side
of the nave, followed by a terrible explosion, which completely wrecked
the interior of the church.  The choir escaped without injury, but Mr.
Rumsey was hurled a distance of several yards, and severely shaken and
bruised.  The damage was estimated at 1,000.

19.--A skating rink, built at the cost of 9,000, including fittings, &c.,
was opened at St. Giles' Street, Norwich.  It was 103 feet in length, 55
feet in width, with promenade gallery, smoking rooms, &c.  An outer rink,
abutting upon Bethel Street, covered an area of 80 feet by 40 feet.  For
some months roller skating proved a very popular amusement, and weekly
returns were published of the number of persons who visited the
establishment.  This popularity was, however, of short duration, for on
May 26th, 1877, it was announced: "The passion for rinking having fallen
to zero, the managers have introduced additional attractions in the shape
of a couple of clever bicyclists and a troupe of performing dogs."  A
theatrical licence was subsequently obtained, and the rink was opened, on
September 10th, 1877, as "The Vaudeville Theatre of Varieties," under the
management of Mr. Hugh J. Didcott, with Mr. B. Isaacson as musical
director.  The originator of the skating rink was Mr. Warner Wright, a
local solicitor.

24.--A brilliant meteor "fell about half-past six o'clock directly over
the planet Saturn, which was then shining in a cloudless sky."  It was
observed throughout the Eastern and Southern Counties, and upon the
Continent.

25.--Messrs. H. M. Pitt and H. Hamilton's Company commenced a three
weeks' dramatic season at the Theatre Royal, Norwich.  The pieces
produced included "False Shame," "Partners for Life," "Old Sailors," "Two
Roses," "Forgiven," "Queen Mab," "Still Waters Run Deep," "New Men and
Old Acres," "Money," "London Assurance," &c.  In the company were Miss
Fanny Addison, Miss Alma Murray, Miss Dora Santon, Mr. and Mrs. George
Canninge, Mr. John Burton, Mr. J. Watkins, Mr. Sidney Weatherilt, Mr.
Edward Fowler, Mr. E. D. Ward, Mr. A. Walters, and Mr. Barry.  Mr. H.
Cecil Beryl (Mr. W. H. Sparrow, of Norwich) was the acting manager.

27.--Died at Great Yarmouth, Commander Horatio Nelson Atkinson, "named
after his god-father, the hero of Trafalgar."  He was the eldest son of
Thomas Atkinson, master attendant on Nelson's flagships, and entered the
Navy in January, 1817.  When mate of the Seringapatam, in 1825, he
received three severe gunshot wounds.  He attained the rank of Lieutenant
on November 27th, 1827, and served from February 23rd, 1831, until July,
1834, in the Alfred on the Mediterranean station, where he witnessed the
establishment of King Otho on the throne of Greece, and was presented,
when off Alexandria, with a sword by Mehemet Ali.  From March 31st, 1836,
until his retirement he was employed in the Coastguard, owing to his
inability to procure further occupation afloat.  Commander Atkinson was
in his 74th year.


OCTOBER.


14.--A new County Cricket Club was formed at a meeting held at the Royal
Hotel, Norwich.  Lord Suffield was elected president.

30.--The Boileau drinking-fountain, erected at the junction of the
Newmarket and Ipswich Roads, Norwich, was inaugurated.  Sir John Boileau,
Bart., had bequeathed the sum of 1,000 to defray the cost of the work,
which was designed by Mr. T. Jeckyll, St. George's Terrace, Queen's Gate,
London.  The statuary was designed and executed in bronze by Mr. J. E.
Boehm, the well-known sculptor, and the structure was built by Mr.
Hubbard, of East Dereham.  Sir Francis Boileau, Bart., performed the
ceremony of asking the city to accept the fountain, and was thanked by
the Mayor (Mr. J. H. Tillett), in the name of the citizens.

30.--Norwich Theatre was opened for the winter season by Mrs. W. Sidney,
with an excellent production of Dion Boucicault's Irish drama, "The
Shaughraun."


NOVEMBER.


9.--Mr. Richard Coller was elected Mayor, and Mr. William Cadge appointed
Sheriff of Norwich.

13.--The Prince of Wales arrived at Morton Hall, on a visit to Lord
Walsingham.

20.--The Prince and Princess of Wales visited Norwich, with the object of
furthering an important scheme promoted by the governing body of the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital for enlarging the institution.  Their Royal
Highnesses, who travelled by special train from Wolferton, were received
at Thorpe Station by the Mayor, Sheriff, and Deputy-Mayor, and presented
with an illuminated address, after which they drove to St. Andrew's Hall,
where a distinguished audience had assembled, under the presidency of the
Earl of Leicester, Lord Lieutenant of the county.  The High Sheriff (Sir
William ffolkes, Bart.) moved, "That the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital
fully deserves the confidence and support of the county of Norfolk and
city of Norwich, on account of its services, extended over a hundred
years, to the sick and suffering poor."  The Lord Bishop seconded the
motion, which was adopted.  His Royal Highness then moved, "That it is
desirable, both for the accommodation of the patients and the improvement
of the sanitary condition of the Hospital, that the proposed alterations
and additions be carried out, and that for this purpose an application be
made to the county and city to raise the sum of 35,000 for a building and
sustentation fund."  Votes of thanks were accorded to their Royal
Highnesses for attending the meeting, and to Lord Leicester for
presiding.  Lord Leicester, who had previously offered to subscribe
5,000, on condition that the remaining 30,000 of the 35,000 required were
raised within a stipulated time, now announced that he would give 13,000
to be invested for the future sustentation of the Hospital.  At the
conclusion of the proceedings the Prince and Princess were entertained at
luncheon at the Bishop's Palace, where a distinguished company had been
invited to meet them; and in the afternoon his Royal Highness attended a
Masonic gathering at the Drill Hall, and installed Lord Suffield as
Provincial Grand Master.  Later their Royal Highnesses proceeded by rail
to Gunton, to spend a few days with Lord and Lady Suffield; and in the
evening a concert was given at St. Andrew's Hall, at which Madame Albani
was the principal performer.  (_See_ February 3rd, 1877.)

--A man named William Nelson was severely injured in St. Peter Mancroft
Church Alley, by the explosion of a gaspipe charged with gunpowder.  He
was removed to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, where he died on the
following day.  At the Coroner's inquest, on the 22nd, the jury returned
a verdict of manslaughter against some person or persons unknown.  A
reward was offered by the Mayor for the discovery of the perpetrator of
the outrage, but no information was forthcoming.


DECEMBER.


18.--The Prince and Princess of Wales arrived at Holkham, on a visit to
the Earl and Countess of Leicester, who, on the 21st, gave a grand ball
in honour of the event.

23.--Died at Norwich, Mr. William Cooke Stafford, aged 83.  Mr. Stafford
was one of the oldest journalists in the kingdom.  After a visit to
America, he commenced his professional career in London, in 1818, as a
contributor to the "Anti-Jacobean Review," the "White Dwarf," &c., for
which he wrote leading articles.  He afterwards became editor of the
"Leeds Intelligencer," and proceeded to York to edit the "Yorkshire
Gazette."  Leaving York, he established the "Doncaster Chronicle," and
had subsequent engagements on the "Hull Packet" and the NORFOLK
CHRONICLE.  His later years were spent in London, where he did a
considerable amount of literary work as "publisher's editor," by writing
a history of the Crimean War, and part of "The World as It Is," for Mr.
Peter Jackson.  Mr. Stafford also re-edited Hume and Smollett's History,
and did much work of a similar character.

26.--The pantomime of "Beauty and the Beast, or Harlequin Prince Azor and
the Good Fairy of the Wedding Ring," produced under the direction of Mrs.
Sidney, at Norwich Theatre, was one of the best and most successful
pieces of the kind in the annals of the house.  Stoodley and Harmston's
Circus and Edmunds' Menagerie were exhibited on Castle Meadow; and Madame
Rose Hersee, supported by an excellent concert party, appeared before a
meagre audience at Noverre's Rooms.

27.--Died at the Grove, Chapel Field Road, Norwich, Mr. Joshua Swann,
aged 71.  He was a partner in the firm of Messrs. Willett, Nephew, and
Co., and an alderman of the city.  Mr. Swann's literary and scientific
tastes rendered him a valued and most active member of the committees of
the Norfolk and Norwich Museum and Literary Institution, and he was a
warm supporter of the School of Art and the East Anglian Art Society,
formed shortly before his death.  He left a collection rich in portraits
of local celebrities and etchings by Norwich artists.

30.--Died at Catton, Mr. George Gedge, aged 78.  For many years Mr. Gedge
carried on an extensive business as a dyer, by which he realised a
fortune.  He was a Conservative in politics, and long served the city as
a member of the Town Council and of the old Court of Guardians.  He
directed his attention especially to the advocacy of a system of national
rating, in the furtherance of which he spent both time and money.  It was
to Mr. Gedge's enterprise that the city was indebted for the first visit
of Jenny Lind, the precursor of so much benefit to local charitable
institutions, and of the founding of the Jenny Lind Infirmary for Sick
Children.



1877.


JANUARY.


1.--A deputation of the clergy and tenantry on the Royal estate waited
upon the Prince of Wales at Sandringham, and presented him with a silver
casket and an address, congratulating his Royal Highness upon his safe
return from India.

4.--Castleacre church was re-opened for public worship after its
restoration, at the cost of about 3,000, almost entirely subscribed by
the parishioners.  The chancel was renovated through the munificence of
the Earl of Leicester, lord of the manor, and holder of the impropriate
tithes.

--Died at Ashwicken Rectory, the Rev. John Freeman, aged 61.  He was the
author of a life of Kirby, the entomologist, published in 1852.

5.--The trial of a petition filed by Mr. J. D. Smith against the return
of Mr. Philip Back and Mr. Josiah Harrison Ladyman, as members for the
Fourth Ward, at the Norwich Municipal Election, in November, 1876,
commenced in the Sessions Court at the Guildhall, before Mr. Thomas
William Saunders, barrister, and Recorder of Bath, the Commissioner
appointed for the purpose.  This was the first municipal inquiry of the
kind that had been held in the city, and the greatest interest was taken
in the proceedings.  The petitioner, who alleged bribery, treating, and
other corrupt practices, was represented by Mr. Merewether, Q.C., M.P.,
and Mr. Blofeld; and the respondents by Mr. Grantham, M.P., and the Hon.
John de Grey.  The inquiry lasted eight days, and on the 13th the
Commissioner delivered judgment, declaring the respondents to be duly
elected.  The scene which ensued in the court was one of the wildest
enthusiasm, which was increased by the announcement that costs followed
the event.  In the evening the bells of St. Peter Mancroft were rung, and
a band paraded the streets of the city.

18.--The first annual meeting of the Norfolk and Norwich Bicycle Club was
held at the Grapes Hotel, Norwich.  The first road race of the club took
place on April 30th.  Six competitors entered for the run, which was from
the Grapes Hotel by way of Unthank's Road to Wymondham, Wicklewood, &c.,
and thence to Carleton Forehoe, through Colney and Earlham, to the top of
Belvoir Street, Earlham Road--distance about 24 miles.  The winner was J.
Campling; F. D. Wheeler second.  The club uniform consisted of "a cloth
helmet with a metallic monogram in front, a smart dark gray tunic, and
knickerbockers."  The first sports organized by the club were held, by
permission of the Corporation, in Chapel Field, on October 18th.

19.--Died at Bracondale, Miss Fanny Anne Martineau, only daughter of Mr.
Philip M. Martineau, aged 64.  She was a cousin of Harriet Martineau, the
authoress, and, like other members of the family, possessed intellectual
gifts of a high order.

--Died at Nice, Lord George William Loftus, third son of John, second
Marquis of Ely, by Maria, daughter of Sir H. W. Dashwood, Bart.  He was
born in May, 1813, and in June, 1846, married Martha, eldest daughter of
Mr. J. Fuller, of Norwich.

27.--A meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the presidency
of the Mayor (Mr. R. Coller), at which it was resolved, on the motion of
Mr. C. S. Read, seconded by Mr. George Forrester, "That it is desirable
to hold a Christmas show for the county of Norfolk and city of Norwich,
of fat stock and other produce of the farm and garden."  A second meeting
was held on February 10th, when the Norfolk and Norwich Christmas Show
Association was established, with the Prince of Wales as patron.  The
first show commenced on Thursday, November 22nd, and closed on Saturday,
the 24th.  The general exhibits were displayed in the Volunteer Drill
Hall, and the live stock shown in an annexe erected in Chapel Field.

30.--A severe gale occurred at Yarmouth.  The sea rose to a great height,
broke over the Marine Parade, and did considerable damage, and many
houses on the North Quay were flooded.  Several fishing vessels were lost
in the storm.  The Lords of the Admiralty sent the Valorous and Seamew,
Government vessels, in search of the missing boats, but they returned to
the Roads on February 24th and 25th, and reported that no intelligence
had been gained.  Of the Yarmouth, men alone 112 perished, leaving 46
widows, 11 aged parents, and 101 children.  A fund was raised for their
relief, and 5,255 collected, including 2,715 from the Mansion House.


FEBRUARY.


2.--A meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the presidency of
the Mayor, for the purpose of considering a Bill proposed to be
introduced in Parliament for the preservation of fish in the rivers
Wensum, Yare, and Waveney.  Mr. Frank Buckland and Mr. Spencer Walpole,
inspectors of fisheries, attended the meeting, and resolutions were
adopted in favour of legislation.  The Norfolk and Suffolk Fisheries Bill
passed the Select Committee of the House of Commons on May 8th, and was
reported to the House, and before the end of the year became law.

3.--Died at her residence, High Street, Lowestoft, Dame Pleasance Smith,
widow of Sir James Edward Smith, of Norwich, formerly president of the
Linnaean Society.  This venerable lady, who was 103 years of age, had
received from Queen Victoria a copy of "Our Life in the Highlands,"
containing the inscription, in her Majesty's own handwriting, "To Lady
Smith, on her one hundredth birthday, from her friend, Victoria R., May
11th, 1873."

--The Earl of Leicester presided at a meeting held at the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital, "for the purpose of turning to the best account the
large sum of money offered to the Hospital by the public."  It was stated
that 24,000 had been subscribed, and that 35,000 was the maximum sum
required.  The Sheriff (Mr. Cadge) moved, "That, in the opinion of this
meeting, it is expedient that a new hospital should be erected, in lieu
of any plan for improving the old building."  Mr. J. J. Colman, M.P.,
seconded the motion, which was adopted.  (_See_ June 17th, 1879.)

5.--Mr. C. J. Palmer, author of "The Perlustration of Great Yarmouth,"
was presented with a silver epergne and gold watch by the inhabitants of
the borough, in recognition of his labours in antiquarian work and
literature.

9.--Died at Norwich, aged 59, Mr. James Frederick Hill, for twenty-five
years chorus master of the Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical
Festival.

15.--A resolution having been passed by the owners and ratepayers,
declaring the expediency of the parish of East Dereham being constituted
a local government district, Mr. Arnold Taylor, the inspector appointed
for the purpose, held an inquiry at the Assembly Rooms, and received
evidence on the subject.  The first Local Improvement Board was elected
on August 1st.

19.--At Norwich Theatre, Mr. W. H. Pennington, "the celebrated tragic
actor, one of the Six Hundred, formerly of the 11th Hussars, and one of
the few wounded survivors of the world-famed light cavalry charge at
Balaclava, on October 25th, 1854," made his first appearance, in the
character of Hamlet, and was supported by Miss Viola Dacre as Ophelia.
On subsequent evenings Mr. Pennington appeared as Macbeth, Richard the
Third, &c., and on the 23rd recited, in the uniform of his old regiment,
"The Charge of the Light Brigade."


MARCH.


5.--Died at Great Yarmouth, Major-General Francis Montague Ommanney,
R.A., aged 50 years.  He was the youngest son of Mr. E. S. Ommanney,
formerly of Yarmouth, by Henrietta, daughter of Sir Edmund Lacon, Bart.
With the Royal Artillery he served in the West Indies, and saw much
service in the Indian Mutiny, when he commanded a siege train under Sir
Hugh Rose, afterwards Lord Strathnairn.  He married Harriet Ellen,
youngest daughter of Mr. John Mortlock Lacon.

6.--Died at Scratby, Benjamin Daniels, "the last of the giants of East
Anglia."  His age was 54; height, 6 ft. 6 in.; weight, 24 stones; width,
from shoulder to shoulder across the back, 24 inches.  He possessed great
strength, and frequently loaded has own waggon by carrying four bushels
of wheat under both arms at one time.  "When in great haste to have his
farm work done, the horses being much engaged, he has harnessed himself
to one of his harrows and cultivated the land."  Daniels was buried at
Ormesby St. Margaret, on March 12th.

10.--An unprecedented incident occurred in the ring at Messrs. Stoodley
and Harmston's Circus, at Norwich, during the performance of "Dick
Turpin's Ride to York."  After the "ride," which results in the death of
Black Bess, the mare is removed from the scene on hurdles.  On this
occasion, when the grooms, at the conclusion of the performance,
attempted to raise the animal, it was found that life was really
extinct--Black Bess had sustained an internal rupture in leaping the
"turnpike" gate.  The animal was the property of a French-woman named
Gaertner, and, as a trick horse, was valued at several hundred pounds.

15.--The Norfolk Staghounds had an extraordinary run.  The meet was at
Hempnall House, and fifty horsemen were present.  The stag ran to Shelton
and Alburgh, and then made to the right for Redenhall, through Stanton,
Pulham St. Mary, and Pulham Market, crossing the turnpike by Carpenter's
Walk, on through Wacton and Moulton, to Tivetshall station, where the
first check of two minutes occurred--time, 1 hour 3 minutes; distance, 14
miles.  The hounds again upon the line, went through Gissing to
Dickleburgh, Burston, and Diss, made for the right to Shelfanger, when
another slight check occurred.  The field by this time had dwindled down
to twelve.  On again through Winfarthing to Kenninghall, to the left to
Bridgham and East Harling, and back to Kenninghall, where the deer was
recaptured and placed in a stable belonging to Messrs. Murton and Turner.
The distance was supposed to be 45 miles, and the run occupied 3 hours 5
minutes.  "Among those who rode straightest to the end of this wonderful
run were Hickman, the huntsman, who went like a bird, and handled his
horse well; Mr. E. Fellowes, Mr. T. N. Ward, Mr. James Limmer, Mr. Cross,
and two officers of the Royal Dragoons, from Norwich."

23.--A petition having been sent to the Local Government Board by the
Corporation of Norwich, asking them to issue a provisional order
confirming an improvement scheme made under the Artisans' and Labourers'
Dwellings Improvement Act, 1875, with reference to an area in the parish
of St. Paul which had been declared by the Medical-Officer of Health as
unhealthy and unfit for habitation, Lieut.-Colonel Ponsonby Cox, R.E.,
one of the inspectors of the Local Government Board, held an inquiry at
the Guildhall, for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of the
official representation.  The inspector commended the scheme, and stated
that it was of a most satisfactory character.

24.--Captain Tyler, inspector of railways, made an official inspection of
the newly-constructed railway between Gunton and Cromer, and consented to
its being opened for traffic on the 26th.

--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Baron Bramwell, Ann Farrow, a widow
living at Nordelph, brought an action against John Robert Childs,
stonemason, of Norwich, to recover damages for breach of promise of
marriage.  After a trial which lasted two days, and in which the
plaintiff made some remarkable allegations, the jury returned a verdict
for the defendant.


APRIL.


5.--A new organ, erected at Swaffham church, by Messrs. Bishop and Son,
of London, was opened.

7.--At the adjourned Norwich Quarter Sessions, before the Recorder (Mr.
W. J. Metcalfe, Q.C.), a special jury was empanelled to assess the value
of certain property in London Street, which the Corporation proposed to
take under the compulsory provisions of their Act of Parliament for the
purpose of widening the thoroughfare.  At a meeting of the Town Council
on May 8th, it was agreed that the owners be offered sums amounting to
9,818.

9.--Lieut.-Colonel Bignold was elected president of the Norwich Central
Conservative Club, a position which conferred upon him the leadership of
the Conservative party in Norwich.

9.--The Norwich Corporation farms at Whitlingham and Kirby Bedon having
entailed a loss to the city of 4,000 in five years, the Town Council
accepted the tender of Mr. Garrett Taylor, of Easton, to hire them at the
annual rent of 1,710.

12.--At a meeting held at the King's Arms Hotel, North Walsham, nearly
300 was subscribed to start a pack of harriers in North Norfolk, and an
offer by Lord Suffield to keep the pack in his kennels at Gunton was
unanimously accepted.

13.--Mr. Samuel Brandram, M.A., gave a dramatic recital at Noverre's
Rooms, Norwich, in aid of the building fund of the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital.  It was the first appearance in Norwich of this accomplished
elocutionist, who was regarded as the legitimate successor of the great
Bellew.

18.--The 5th Royal Irish Lancers, commanded by Colonel Dunham Massy, of
Redan fame, marched into Norwich from Aldershot, to relieve the 1st
Dragoons (Royal).

30.--At Norwich Theatre, H. J. Byron's comedy, "Our Boys," was presented
for the first time by Mr. Duck's company.  The part of Perkyn Middlewick
was played by Mr. F. Marshall.

--Died at Norwich, aged 36, Mr. Robert Edward Gibson, surgeon.  He was
the son of a solicitor, a former Mayor of Plymouth, and a nephew of Mr.
C. M. Gibson, his predecessor in the office of medical superintendent of
the Norwich Bethel.  For some years he was surgeon to the Jenny Lind
Infirmary, and held the appointments of surgeon to the City Police, the
Post Office staff, and the Workhouse.  Mr. Gibson married a daughter of
Mr. I. O. Taylor.


MAY.


19.--Died at his residence at Catton, Mr. Osborn Springfield, in his 65th
year.  He was a son of Mr. T. O. Springfield, and served the office of
Mayor of Norwich in 1863-4.  For many years he was a member of the Town
Council and a magistrate for the city, and was reputed to be one of the
largest owners of cottage property in Norwich.  Mr. Springfield was a
Liberal in politics.

26.--The Norwich Town Council accepted the resignation of Mr. C.
Thwaites, City Engineer, on his appointment to a similar post in the
borough of Sunderland.  Mr. Peter Paul Marshall, of Stone, near Dartford,
was elected to fill the vacancy.


JUNE.


7.--A grand military tournament, the first of its kind in Norwich, was
given on the Lakenham Cricket Ground by the officers and men of the 5th
Royal Irish Lancers, in aid of a fund for the widow and orphans of Mr. A.
Frayling, late bandmaster of the regiment.

14.--The veteran actor, Mr. Charles Mathews, commenced a three nights'
engagement at Norwich Theatre, as Adonis Evergreen, in the comedy of "My
Awful Dad."

20.--The two days' show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was
opened in the grounds of Walcot Hall, Diss.  Sir Edward C. Kerrison,
Bart., presided at the luncheon.

24.--Died at 12, Queensbury Place, London, Sir John Henry Thomas Manners
Sutton, third Viscount Canterbury and Baron Bottesford.  His lordship was
the younger and only surviving son of the first Viscount Canterbury,
better known as Sir Charles Manners Sutton, for seventeen years Speaker
of the House of Commons.  Educated at Eton and at Trinity College,
Cambridge, he sat in Parliament in 1839-40 as member for Cambridge.  He
was again elected in 1841, on his appointment as Under-Secretary of State
for the Home Department under Sir Robert Peel's second Administration.
From 1854 to 1861 he was Lieutenant-Governor of New Brunswick, and from
1864 to 1866 Governor of Trinidad.  In the latter year he was appointed
Governor and Commander-in-Chief of Victoria.  On his lordship's return to
England in 1873, he resided chiefly on his estate in Norfolk.  He
married, July 5th, 1838, Georgiana, youngest daughter of Mr. Charles
Tompson, of Witchingham Hall, by whom he had, with other issue, the Hon.
Henry Charles Manners Sutton, who married Amyee Rachael, only daughter of
the Hon. Frederick Walpole, M.P.


JULY.


5.--Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., gave evidence before the Select Committee
appointed by the House of Commons to consider what further legislation
might be necessary for the repression of cattle disease, and for the
regulation of the importation of foreign cattle.  Mr. Read insisted upon
the necessity of slaughtering foreign fat beasts at the port of
debarkation, and of a period of quarantine for store stock, which he
would only allow to be landed at certain ports.

7.--At the Norwich Police Court, John L'Estrange, of Union Place, "the
well-known archaeological authority, who has published one or two highly
important and valuable works on the archaeology of Norfolk," was charged
with forging the name of Francis Gostling Foster, distributor of stamps,
with intent to defraud, and with stealing stamps to the amount of 1,400.
The prisoner had been in the office for twenty years, and had charge of
the stamp department.  He was committed for trial on the 13th, and at the
ensuing Assizes, on August 4th, pleaded guilty, and was sentenced by Sir
James Fitzjames Stephen to seven years' penal servitude.  L'Estrange died
in Millbank Prison, from fistula, on October 15th.

14.--The Norfolk team won the China Cup at the Wimbledon meeting.
Exceedingly good shooting was made by Norfolk Volunteers, and upwards of
150 was brought to the county.

21.--Died at St. Leonard's-on-Sea, the Rev. John Nathaniel Micklethwait,
of Taverham, aged 65.  He was the eldest surviving son of Mr. Nathaniel
Micklethwait, who was High Sheriff in 1810.  In 1849 he married Emily
Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Mr. Charles Mills, of Hillingdon Court,
Middlesex, and succeeded to the family estates on the death of his
brother, in July, 1856.  Mr. Micklethwait had no family, and was
succeeded by his next brother, Henry Nathaniel, born in 1814.  He was a
warm supporter of the Conservative party, took a great interest in
agriculture, and, in his later years, turned his attention to the
breeding of shorthorns, of which he had formed a fine herd.

21.--Died at Portman Square, London, Mr. William Earle Lytton Bulwer, of
Heydon Hall, the chief representative of the old Norman family of Bulwer,
which has held a leading position in Norfolk since the time of the
Conquest.  Mr. Bulwer was born April 29th, 1799, and was the eldest son
of General William Earle Bulwer, who married Elizabeth, daughter and sole
heiress of Mr. Richard Warburton Lytton, of Knebworth Park, Herts., and
whose other sons were the celebrated novelist and statesman, Lord Lytton,
and the well-known diplomatist, Baron Dalling and Bulwer.  Mr. Bulwer
succeeded to the estates of his father in 1807, and married, in 1827,
Emily, youngest daughter of General Gascoyne, by whom he had three sons
and three daughters.  He married subsequently, in 1841, Elizabeth,
daughter of William Green, of Forty Hill, Enfield.  He was succeeded by
his eldest son, William Earle Gascoyne Lytton, formerly of the Scots
Fusilier Guards, who married, in 1855, Marion Dering, daughter and
heiress of Mr. W. Lee Warner, of Quebec House, East Dereham.  Mr. Bulwer
was a Liberal in politics, and took a leading part in all political
movements in North Norfolk, where he was popular as a landlord, and had
considerable influence.

--The 3rd and 4th Battalions of Norfolk Rifle Volunteers, commanded
respectively by Lieut.-Colonel Duff, M.P., and Lieut.-Colonel Gurdon,
went into camp at Yarmouth, and on the 26th were inspected by Colonel
Harenc.

25.--The two principal stones of the nave of St. James' church, Yarmouth,
were laid by the Mayor and Mayoress (Mr. and Mrs. T. B. Steward).  The
sum of 2,300 had been collected for the erection of the nave.  The
architect was Mr. J. P. Seddon, and the contractor Mr. W. E. Martin, of
Hereford.  The work was completed at the cost of about 3,250, and the new
building was opened on May 1st, 1878, when the sermon was preached by
Dean Goulburn.


AUGUST.


7.--The first section of the Yarmouth and Stalham Railway--the portion
extending from the first-mentioned town to Ormesby--was inspected by
Major-General Hutchinson, R.E., and the first train was run on the 8th.
(_See_ July 15th, 1878.)

20.--The Norwich Rifle Volunteers were, for the first time, officially
inspected in their new scarlet uniform.  The inspecting officer was
Colonel Harenc.

21.--By the death, on this date, at Duntrune, Forfarshire, of Miss
Clementine Stirling Grahame, in her 96th year, Mr. J. Edmund Lacon, of
Yarmouth, succeeded to the estate of Duntrune, and to the relics and
papers of the great Viscount Dundee.

22.--The first stone of the Hunstanton Convalescent Home was laid by the
Countess of Leicester.  The building was erected as a memorial of the
convalescence of the Prince of Wales.

24.--Died at Denton Rectory, near Harleston, the Ven. William Arundell
Bouverie, B.D., Hon. Canon of Norwich, and formerly Archdeacon of
Norfolk, in his 80th year.  He was appointed to the living of Denton in
1839, accepted the archdeaconry in 1850, and resigned it in 1869, in
consequence of ill-health.


SEPTEMBER.


17.--Died, Mr. William Cooper, barrister, and Recorder of Ipswich.  He
was the eldest son of Mr. W. Cooper, barrister, of Norwich, and brother
of Mr. Carlos Cooper.  Called to the Bar in 1831, he practised in Norwich
and on the Norfolk circuit for some years, but ultimately settled in
London, and devoted his attention to the Central Criminal Court, where he
enjoyed a large practice.  He was the author of several dramatic pieces,
the principal of which, "Mokanna, or the Veiled Prophet of Khorassan," a
play in blank verse, was produced at Norwich Theatre, with great success,
on April 21st, 1843.  Mr. Cooper was succeeded in the Recordership of
Ipswich by Mr. Thomas Calthorpe Blofeld.

22.--Norwich Theatre was re-opened for the winter season, under the
management of Mr. G. H. Chaplin.  The house had undergone partial and
much-needed cleansing and decoration.

24.--The newly-formed Diocesan Bell Ringers' Association held its first
annual meeting in Norwich.  The society was established by the Rev. G. H.
Harris, Mr. Gervas Holmes, and other gentlemen interested in bells and
bell ringing.


OCTOBER.


16.--A remarkable case of fraud was tried at the Norwich Quarter
Sessions, before the Recorder (Mr. J. W. Metcalfe, Q.C.).  The prisoner,
one William Dowman, was charged with defrauding accident insurance
companies.  He insured under various names with different companies, and
by a peculiar formation of his joints was enabled to assume the
appearance of having been injured.  By this means he obtained medical
certificates, and made successful claims upon the offices.  He was
sentenced to fifteen calendar months' imprisonment.

25.--The sale of the Taverham Hall herd of pure-bred shorthorns and
whole-coloured Jerseys was conducted by Mr. John Thornton.  The total
amount realised was 3,041 1s. 6d.


NOVEMBER.


1.--The restored chancel and newly-erected organ of Diss church were
opened.  The instrument was built by Messrs. J. Rayson and Sons, of
Ipswich, at the cost of 360.

--At Ipswich Assizes (where Norfolk prisoners were, on this occasion,
tried), before Mr. Justice Hawkins, Henry March (59), blacksmith, was
indicted for the wilful murder of Henry Bidewell, blacksmith, and Thomas
Moys, shoeing-smith and farmer, at Wymondham, on October 20th.  The
prisoner was found guilty and sentenced to death.  The execution took
place at Norwich Castle on November 20th.  Marwood was the executioner.

3.--Died at Camperdown Place, Great Yarmouth, Mr. William Thurtell, in
his 83rd year.  Mr. Thurtell, who was a staunch supporter of Conservative
principles, was appointed a magistrate for the borough in 1846.  His
father was Mayor of Norwich in 1828.

6.--In the House of Lords, before the Lord Chancellor, Lord Penzance,
Lord Blackburn, and Lord Gordon, the action, Read _v._ Bailey, was heard,
on an appeal from a decision by the Lords Justices.  On an inspection of
the books of the Bank on the failure of the firm of Harveys and Hudsons,
in 1870, it was discovered that Sir Robert Harvey had abstracted large
sums of money from the coffers of the Bank, and had sought to cover the
deficiency by the opening of fictitious accounts, and by crediting forged
bills to his private account.  In consequence, the trustee under the
bankruptcy of the firm preferred a claim against the separate estate of
Sir Robert Harvey, amounting to the sum of 600,000, for the moneys so
abstracted by Sir Robert Harvey in his lifetime.  This claim was, in
1876, supported by a great mass of evidence before the Master of the
Rolls, who decided in favour of the claim, and gave the trustee of
Harveys and Hudsons the right to rank as a creditor against the private
or separate estate of Sir Robert Harvey, in competition with the
stockbrokers and other private creditors.  The importance of the decision
of the Master of the Rolls, as affecting the interests of the
stockbrokers, was great.  But for this claim of 600,000 they would have
received 20s. in the pound on their debts, whereas the allowance of the
claim to rank in competition with their debts prevented Sir Robert
Harvey's private estate paying more than 6s. 8d. in the pound.  The
stockbrokers accordingly appealed to the Lords Justices against the
decision of the Master of the Rolls, and their lordships upheld the claim
of 600,000, and dismissed the stockbrokers' appeal, with costs.  The
stockbrokers now appealed to the House of Lords, who confirmed the
judgments of the Lords Justices and the Master of the Rolls, and
dismissed the appeal, with costs; in other words, admitting the trustee's
claim for 600,000.  (_See_ December 3rd, 1880.)

9.--Mr. Joseph De Carle Smith was elected Mayor, and Mr. Harry Bullard
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

10.--It was announced that Mr. Francis Edmund Gladstone, Mus. Bac.,
Cantab., had been appointed organist of Norwich Cathedral, in the room of
Dr. Buck, who resigned the appointment in the month of June.  Regret was
expressed that Dr. Bunnett's claims for the post should have been "so
strangely and perversely ignored."  Much adverse feeling was manifested,
and on November 28th a complimentary concert was given to Dr. Bunnett,
under the patronage of the leading inhabitants of the county and city.

11.--During a heavy gale at Yarmouth, six vessels were driven ashore, and
many other shipping casualties were reported.

21.--A meeting of the promoters of the Lynn and Fakenham Railway was held
at Fakenham, and the necessary steps taken in furtherance of the scheme.
(_See_ May 21st, 1880.)

24.--Died, suddenly, at Norwich, in his 65th year, Mr. Thomas Jarrold,
the last survivor of the three brothers who comprised the well-known firm
of Jarrold and Sons.  Mr. Jarrold took especial interest in the education
of the poor, in acknowledgment of which his friends, shortly before his
death, presented him with his portrait.

26.--The new Middle Level Sluice, at Wiggenhall St. Mary, near King's
Lynn, was opened by Mr. E. Fellowes, M.P., chairman of the Middle Level
Commission.  This sluice replaced the one designed by Mr. J. Walker and
constructed by Brogden, of Manchester, at the cost of 30,000, in 1842,
which gave way on May 4th, 1862, with the widespread and disastrous
consequences known as the Middle Level inundation.  After many
unsuccessful attempts to construct a dam across the drain, Sir John
Hawkshaw, C.E., was called in, and he eventually succeeded in that
object, and under his advice sixteen large iron syphons, with the
necessary engine and apparatus for exhausting air from them, were
constructed upon the dam, so as to secure an outlet of the drainage
without admitting sea water from the Ouze.  These syphons answered very
well for years, but were not equal to the task.  The Commissioners went
to Parliament in 1874, and obtained powers to raise money to construct a
new sluice, from designs by Sir J. Hawkshaw, at an estimated cost of
between 50,000 and 60,000, and the work was commenced by the contractor,
Mr. Webster, in September, 1874.


DECEMBER.


3.--Died at Hindringham, in his 93rd year, Mr. William Freeman, formerly
resident in Norwich.  He was appointed Sheriff in 1842, and elected Mayor
in 1843.

7.--Mr. Harry Bullard, Sheriff of Norwich, was presented by the clerks
and heads of departments at the Anchor Brewery with his portrait, painted
in oil by Mr. Ventnor.

19.--Died at Birmingham, in his 79th year, Mr. George Smith, for many
years manager of the Norwich Theatrical Circuit.  "If unsuccessful in his
managerial speculations, he was much esteemed for his kindly disposition,
and had in Norwich at one time hosts of friends."

26.--The pantomime produced at Norwich Theatre, by Mr. G. H. Chaplin, was
entitled, "Sinbad the Sailor."  At the Skating Rink, then known as the
Vaudeville Theatre, was performed the extravaganza, "Turko the Terrible;
or Prince Amabel and the Fairy Roses."  Messrs. Stoodley and Hamilton's
Circus was opened on the Castle Meadow.



1878.


JANUARY.


3.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, the Committee of Visitors of the
County Lunatic Asylum at Thorpe made certain recommendations as to the
best means of raising the sum of 35,000 for the erection of new buildings
and for enlarging the Asylum chapel, as decided upon at a previous
sessions.  Thirty-five acres of land had been purchased on which to erect
the new buildings, which were intended to accommodate 250 additional
patients.

5.--Died at Unthank's Road, Norwich, in his 96th year, Mr. Stephen Wilde,
for many years Governor of the City Gaol.  "He was paymaster-sergeant and
last surviving member of Mr. J. Patteson's Volunteer Corps raised in the
year 1798."

7.--Died at Starston Rectory, the Ven. Augustus Macdonald Hopper,
Archdeacon of Norwich, and thirty-two years rector of Starston, aged 61.
He graduated at Trinity College, Cambridge, as Senior Optime, and first
class in the Classical Tripos in 1839.  Subsequently he obtained by
competition a Fellowship at St. John's College, and in 1845 was appointed
to his living.  After holding the offices of Rural Dean and Proctor for
the Diocese in Convocation, Mr. Hopper became Archdeacon of Norwich in
1868.  He was succeeded as Archdeacon by the Rev. T. T. Perowne.

8.--Died at Cassell Road, Small Heath, Birmingham, the residence of her
son, Mr. Vivian Crome, artist, grandson of Old Crome, Mary Ann Crome,
widow of William Henry Crome, aged 75.  "She was an amateur pupil of that
worthy master, and for many years, while yet Miss Steel, was governess in
several Norfolk county families."

--Died at Middle Market Road, Great Yarmouth, Mrs. Gunn, aged 74.  "She
was a poet of no inconsiderable merit.  Many of her poems have reference
to local events, but the greater number are quite imaginative.  Mrs.
Gunn's writings were printed and published, and found such acceptance
that a further edition was necessary."

25.--Severe weather prevailed at Yarmouth.  Great damage was done to
vessels at sea, and several lives were lost.

26.--A special meeting of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was held
at the Royal Hotel, Norwich, under the presidency of Lieut.-Colonel
FitzRoy, at which it was decided to hold a spring show of cart horses.
The first show took place at Norwich, on March 9th.


FEBRUARY.


2.--A telegram from Shanghai announced the death of Mr. Charles Wyncliffe
Goodwin, assistant judge at that place.  Mr. Goodwin, who was 60 years of
age, was a scholar of considerable eminence, and the author of several
learned works, including the article on the "Mosaic Cosmogony," in
"Essays and Reviews."  He was a son of Mr. C. Goodwin, solicitor, of
King's Lynn, and elder brother of the Bishop of Carlisle.

8.--The Lynn Town Council unanimously resolved to take steps to abolish
"the annual collection of rubbish and roguery which passes under the
title of the Cheese Fair."  The fair, which for many years had been held
in King Street, was abolished by an order issued by the Home Secretary in
the month of April.

18.--The Amateur Dramatic Club of the 5th Royal Irish Lancers commenced a
series of performances at Norwich Theatre, with the production of
"Ingomar."  On succeeding evenings, "The Lady of Lyons," "Black-eyed
Susan," and other pieces were performed.  The proceeds were in aid of the
new uniform fund of the Norwich Rifle Volunteers, and of the Soldiers'
Monument on Norwich Cemetery.

21.--Interesting experiments were made with the telephone in the
counting-house of Messrs. J. and J. Colman, Carrow Works, under the
direction of Mr. H. Sack, superintendent of the Great Eastern Railway
telegraph department.  Telephones were attached to Messrs. Colman's
private wire to London, _via_ Ipswich, and to the railway company's wire
_via_ Cambridge to Liverpool Street Station, a distance of about 120
miles.  "Parties of ladies and gentlemen at both ends were able to
converse freely with each other, the words being clearly understood and
distinctly heard.  This was considered to be a very successful
experiment, although it does not appear that at present the telephone can
be adapted to public use."

22.--Died at Heckingham, in her 100th year, Kezia, widow of Richard
Haywood.


MARCH.


7.--Sir Wilfrid Lawson, M.P., addressed a meeting held at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich, in furtherance of the Permissive Bill.

9.*--"The rules approved by the Secretary of State for the regulation of
prisons in England and Wales under the Act of Parliament (the Prisons
Act) passed last year have been issued.  From these it appears that upon
an order being directed for the discontinuance of Norwich Gaol and
Wymondham Bridewell, the prisoners therein will be transferred to the
County Gaol, Norwich Castle."  The prisoners were transferred from the
Gaol to the Castle in the early part of May.

11.--Mr. H. M. Pitt's Comedy-Drama Company commenced an engagement at
Norwich Theatre.  The company re-appeared at the Theatre on November
25th, for a season of eighteen nights--its farewell visit.

15.--Died at the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, from cancer on the tongue,
Mr. John Joseph Cotman, aged 63.  "As an artist he would have rivalled
his father, John Sell Cotman, but unhappily his unquestionably great
genius was marred by an eccentricity which at times verged on insanity,
and ruined a career which should have been one of honour and renown to
himself and of profit to his family."

--Died at Lewes, Sussex, Mr. George P. Bacon, in his 71st year.  He was
the second son of Mr. Richard Mackenzie Bacon, proprietor and editor of
the "Norwich Mercury."  In 1843 he became proprietor of the "Sussex
Advertiser," which he conducted in a very spirited manner.  Mr. Bacon
joined his brother in forming the "Norwich Mercury" Company.  He was also
well-known as secretary to the Association for the Repeal of the Hop
Duty.

16.--A silver inkstand and a purse of 200 gs. were presented to Mr. H. J.
Martin, in recognition of his services as honorary secretary of the
Norwich Central Conservative Club.

17.--Died at the Cathedral Close, Norwich, Mr. Henry Hansell, proctor,
solicitor and notary public, and registrar of the Archdeaconry of
Norfolk, aged 71.  Mr. Hansell was a warm supporter of the local
charities, and was for several years honorary secretary of the Jenny Lind
Infirmary.  His knowledge of ecclesiastical law and of the rules and
practices of the courts was most profound.  He was succeeded in his
registrarship and other appointments by his son, Mr. Thomas William
Hansell.

25.--The celebrated Vokes Family commenced an engagement at Norwich
Theatre, in "Belles of the Kitchen," "The Wrong Man in the Right Place,"
&c.

28.--The 5th Royal Irish Lancers gave a mounted and dismounted
assault-at-arms at the Circus building, Castle Meadow, Norwich, in aid of
the local charities and other objects.  The performance was repeated on
the 30th.  The regiment received from the Town Council the thanks of the
city for its valuable services.


APRIL.


13.*--"The death is announced of Mr. Thomas Hoseason, of Lynn, at the age
of 68.  It is said that he was the last representative of one of the
famous Dutch families who came over to England with William III., and
took a foremost part in the settlement and cultivation of the country of
Marshland, so much resembling their native land.  The Hoseasons were for
many years large landed proprietors, but their estates have changed
hands, and the deceased had gradually fallen into a state of utter
destitution, and for a long time past had been dependent upon the aid of
friends, and lived in a secluded lodging in a back street in the town."

17.--A public meeting was held at Yarmouth, in opposition to the proposal
of the Corporation to erect a new town hall, with courts and public
offices, at the cost of 24,000.  A resolution condemning the scheme, and
asserting that the outlay would be 36,000, and would involve an addition
to the rates of 3d. in the pound for the next fifty years, was adopted.
The Town Council, on July 15th, approved the plans of Mr. J. B. Pearce,
architect, Norwich.  (_See_ May 31st, 1882.)

22.--Died at the Wilderness, Bracondale, the Rev. Joseph Crompton, rector
of St. Lawrence', Norwich, in his 65th year.  Mr. Crompton began his
career in Norwich as a Nonconformist minister, in about 1848.  For many
years he was minister at the Octagon chapel; but his views underwent such
a change that he relinquished the pastorate and established what was
known as the Free Christian Church, which assembled at the Dutch church,
Elm Hill.  After a ministry of several years, Mr. Crompton, whose views
had approximated to those of the Broad Church party, began to show strong
sympathy with that section of the Establishment.  He avowed himself "a
Dissenter against his will," and stated that the Athanasian Creed was the
last stumbling-block in his way to joining the Church of England.  At his
own request the Bishop shortly afterwards admitted him to Holy Orders,
and he officiated as curate to the Rev. Charles Morse, both at St. Mary's
and St. Michael-at-Plea.  On the Rev. E. A. Hillyard leaving St.
Lawrence', Mr. Crompton was appointed rector of the parish.  He took
great interest in scientific pursuits, and his name was associated with
the Norfolk and Norwich Museum as a lecturer with Professors Lindley and
Sedgwick, Thomas Brightwell, and the Rev. R. Lubbock.  Mr. Crompton was a
zealous supporter of the Norfolk and Norwich Naturalists' Society, of
which he was President in the first two years of its existence.  In
politics he was a decided Liberal.  A window erected to his memory by
public subscription was unveiled at St. Lawrence' church by Mr. Harry
Bullard, Mayor of Norwich, on November 6th, 1879.

22.--The farcical comedy, "Pink Dominoes," was produced at Norwich
Theatre by a company under the management of Mr. S. Genese.  "It is a
class of piece which we are sorry to see introduced on the English stage.
Originating in France, it had better be kept in an atmosphere for which
it may be specially adapted."

26.--Mr. Frank Buckland and Mr. Spencer Walpole, fishery commissioners,
held a public inquiry at Lynn into the use of trawl and seine nets, and
into the alleged destruction of the fry and spawn of sea fish.  A similar
inquiry was held at Yarmouth.


MAY.


9.--At a meeting held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, a branch of the
Church of England Temperance Society was established.  The Lord Bishop
presided, and addresses were delivered by the Rev. Canon Ellison, the
Rev. Canon Wilberforce, Mr. Cadge, and Dr. Eade.

12.--A fire occurred on premises on the South Denes Road and Exmouth
Road, Yarmouth, by which damage was done to the amount of 3,000.

15.--Died at Norwich, Mr. Edward Press, in his 77th year.  He was a son
of the Rev. Edward Press, B.A., and was born at Barnham Broom.  For many
years he practised as a solicitor at Hingham, and held several local
appointments of a public character.  He was, however, more widely known
as County Coroner, the duties of which office he discharged with marked
ability for fifty years.  In politics Mr. Press was a Liberal.  He was
succeeded as County Coroner by Mr. Robert Thomas Culley, who was elected
unopposed on June 6th.

23.--The 5th Royal Irish Lancers' Christy Minstrel Troupe gave
performances at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, in aid of the local
charities.


JUNE.


1.--Died at his residence, Theatre Square, Norwich, Mr. Frank Noverre,
aged 71.  Mr. Noverre was descended from a French family long associated
with Norwich.  His father was one of the original directors of the
Norwich Union Life Insurance Society, and he was himself for many years a
director of the same institution.  At one time he was honorary treasurer
of the Norwich Choral Society, honorary secretary of the Norwich
Philharmonic Society, and a member of the sub-committee of management of
the Norfolk and Norwich Musical Festival.

10.--The celebration of the coming of age of Lord Hastings, on April 4th,
commenced on this date, at Melton Constable.  The festivities lasted five
days.

19.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened
at North Walsham, and was continued on the 20th.  Lord Suffield presided
at the luncheon.

--At a meeting of the Governors of the Norwich Dispensary, it was agreed,
on the motion of Mr. John Gurney, to adopt the provident system in the
working of the institution.

24.--Colonel Massy and the officers of the 5th Royal Irish Lancers, on
the occasion of the departure of the first detachment of the regiment
from Norwich, were entertained at a civic luncheon, given at the
Guildhall, under the presidency of the Mayor (Mr. J. D. Smith).  The
Mayor, on behalf of the citizens, presented to the officers a massive
silver-gilt cup, "in appreciation of the exemplary conduct of the
regiment during its stay among them, and in grateful remembrance of the
many benefits conferred by it upon the city and its institutions."  The
remainder of the regiment marched on the 25th.  The Town Council, on July
1st, passed a special resolution, recording its high estimation of the
regiment, and ordering the entry in the minutes of the fact that "no
complaint has been made nor any collision taken place between the
military and the citizens during the time the regiment has been quartered
in the city."  The Lancers were relieved by the 21st Hussars, commanded
by Colonel Wake.

29.--Died at Constantinople, aged 32, Mr. Robert Pulvertoft Master,
Commissioner of the Turkish Compassionate Fund.  He was the second son of
Mr. Alfred Master, of Norwich, and rendered great services in the cause
of humanity during the Russo-Turkish War.  Mr. Master was educated at
Norwich Grammar School, and, after spending a year in Germany, and a like
period in a commercial house in London, proceeded to Ceylon, where he
became manager of a coffee estate, and married Amelia, second daughter of
Sir Edward Creasy, Chief Justice of the island.


JULY.


4.--Died at Pottergate Street, Norwich, Mr. William Smith, veterinary
surgeon, aged 61.  Mr. Smith attained to considerable eminence in his
profession.  During the time of the Cattle Plague, he did good service to
the county in his official capacity as inspector to the Central
Committee, and at the meeting of the British Association at Norwich read
an able paper on the disease, its origin and treatment.

9.--Winterton church was re-opened by the Bishop of Norwich.  It had been
restored at the cost of 3,000.

13.--The 3rd and 4th Battalions of Norfolk Rifle Volunteers went into
camp at Yarmouth, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Duff, M.P., and
Lieut.-Colonel Gurdon.

15.--The Hemsby to Martham extension of the Yarmouth and Stalham Railway
was opened on this date.  Powers having been obtained for carrying the
line to North Walsham, it was thereafter known as the North Norfolk
Railway.  (_See_ June 8th, 1881.)

20.--Died at Norwich, in his 93rd year, Commander Crane, R.N.  He was the
son of Mr. Edward Crane, Coroner of Norwich, and entered the Royal Navy
as midshipman on board the Repulse, in 1798.  During the summer of 1805
he accompanied Nelson in his pursuit to the West Indies of the combined
French and Spanish fleets.  After continuous service he joined the
Reynard, 18 guns, as Acting Commander in the advance on Riga, and was the
first to bring to the Admiral of the station lying off Carlscrona news of
the great defeat of Napoleon at Moscow.  He was in May, 1813, while in
charge of a prize, driven by a gale into Frederickstadt, in Norway, where
he was detained a prisoner for some months.  In 1843 he received the rank
of commander, and since 1848 had resided in Norwich.


AUGUST.


3.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Lord Justice Thesiger, Mr. W. G.
Loftus, of Bracon Lodge, brought an action against the Rev. T. T. Berney,
rector of Braconash, for trespass.  The defendant claimed the right, as
lord of the manor, of shooting over thirty-four acres' of land around
Bracon Lodge.  This land was principally garden ground.  The plaintiff
objected to defendant sporting in his kitchen garden, and wished to put
an end to the nuisance.  In the course of argument between Mr. Day, Q.C.,
for the plaintiff, and Sir Patrick Colquhoun, Q.C., for the defendant,
reference was made to several "musty deeds" produced by Mr. Berney.  The
jury found for the plaintiff, damages 40s.

5.--A singular claim to the Stanfield Hall estate was made at the Norfolk
Assizes, before Lord Justice Thesiger.  The action was brought by George
Taylor, a railway guard, against Mr. Reginald Gwyn and the Rev. Henry H.
H. Lubbock, the owners of the estate, who pleaded that they had a
possessory title, and that plaintiff's title and right of action were
barred by the Statute of Limitations.  The estate was originally in the
possession of William Jermy, of Bayfield, who died in 1752, and plaintiff
alleged that, as a lineal descendant of Robert Jermy, who died in 1758,
he was heir-at-law.  Mr. Bulwer, Q.C., after opening the case for the
plaintiff, said he was not justified in occupying the time of the court
and putting the parties to further trouble in the matter, when he knew
perfectly well that he must be beaten in the end.  The jury returned a
verdict for the defendants, for whom his lordship gave judgment.

18.--Died at Whitwell Hall, Mr. Robert Leamon, aged 56.  Mr. Leamon, who
was described as "a good specimen of the old Norfolk yeoman," broke down
the Whig monopoly in East Norfolk, "and became the political godfather of
Mr. C. S. Read, for whom he entertained the warmest personal regard."
Mr. Leamon was born in 1822, and inherited from his father a fine
property and extensive business.  He married, in 1848, a daughter of Mr.
John Brooke Gill, of Wood Norton.

22.--Died at Runton, aged 76, Favell Lee, widow of the Rev. Thomas
Mortimer.  She was the authoress of "The Peep of Day," and other works of
a similar character.

24.--A fire took place at Messrs. Bagshaw's paper mills, St. Miles',
Norwich, and did damage amounting to several thousands of pounds.

30.--Among the most notable of architectural improvements in Norwich was
the new building known as Cooper's Restaurant, which was opened on this
date.  It was designed by Mr. Edward Boardman, architect, and occupies a
site on which stood the old business premises of Messrs. Butcher, cheese
factors.


SEPTEMBER.


5.--Mr. and Mrs. German Reed, assisted by Miss Fanny Holland, Mr. Dale,
Mr. Corney Grain, and Mr. Arthur Law, commenced a three nights'
engagement at St. Giles' Hall, Norwich.

9.--Mr. Henry Walsham opened an operatic season at Norwich Theatre.  The
company included Madame Rose Hersee, Miss Palmer, Madame Telma, and Mr.
Ludwig.

11.--The Sheriff of Norwich (Mr. Harry Bullard) provided the first of his
annual excursions for the _employes_ at the Anchor Brewery.  The
workpeople in the service of the firm (with their wives), to the number
of 600, were conveyed to the Crystal Palace and back by special train.


OCTOBER.


2.--A four-oared race, between a crew of the 21st Hussars (Capt.
Lovewell, stroke) and of the Norwich Police, took place between Field's
boat-house, Thorpe, and Trowse railway-bridge--distance, a mile and a
quarter.  After a very close race, the police crew won.

10.--Died, the Rev. Henry Lombe, of Bylaugh Park, aged 86.  He was fifty
years a parochial clergyman, and for twenty-six years rector of Lyng.  At
Swanton Morley, in 1831, when the poor-rates were at an appalling figure,
and poverty excessive, he set on foot and carried on for years on his own
responsibility an extensive cotton weaving business, reduced a turbulent
population to order, and saved the whole parish from starvation.  In the
days of incendiarism he was the main instrument in hunting down into
their hiding-places the leaders of that infamous movement, and the means
of bringing the notorious Nockolds to justice (_q.v._ Vol. I., p. 304).
Before the days of the rural police, he organized a voluntary system of
constabulary in his desperately disturbed parish of Lyng.  In company
with the farmers, he patrolled the parish during the whole winter,
visited every farmstead, and preserved the village from utter ruin.
Clubs, coal charities, and penny banks were under his personal
superintendence to the last day of his active life.  Mr. Lombe was
succeeded in the possession of his extensive landed estates by his son,
Mr. Henry Evans Lombe, of Melton Hall, a B.A. of Corpus Christi College,
Cambridge, and a magistrate for Norfolk and Suffolk.

14.--Died at his residence, St. Giles', Norwich, Mr. George Warren Watts
Firth, F.R.C.S., aged 64.  He was senior surgeon to the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital, a magistrate of the city, and honorary consulting
surgeon to the Norfolk County Lunatic Asylum, a distinction conferred
upon him after his retirement from the office of surgeon to that
institution.

15.--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich, with an evening performance of "Acis and
Galatea," and of "Spring" (from "The Seasons").  The morning performances
were as follow:--16th, "Joseph," and 1st Mass in C (Mozart); 17th,
"Elijah"; 18th, "The Messiah."  On the evening of the 16th a grand ballad
concert was given, and on the evening of the 17th an operatic concert.
The vocalists were Madame Albani, Miss Catherine Penna, Miss Anna
Williams, Madame A. Sterling, Madame Trebelli, Mr. Edward Lloyd, Mr. H.
J. Minns, Mr. W. Shakespeare, Mr. R. Hilton, and Mr. Santley.  Sir Julius
Benedict conducted.  The total receipts amounted to 4,140 4s. 9d., and
the expenditure to 3,898 2s. 6d.

17.--The Rev. Sidney Pelham, curate-in-charge of Aylsham, was elected
vicar of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, in place of the Rev. Charles
Turner, who had accepted the living of Bixley with Framingham Earl, after
31 years' ministry at St. Peter's.

--The monument erected at Norwich Cemetery "to the memory of deceased
soldiers of regiments stationed in this city or who may die while on
service here," was unveiled by Lord Waveney.  It was designed by Mr. John
Bell, a Norfolk man.  The figure forming the finial, called by the
designer "The Spirit of the Army," was cast in terra cotta by Messrs.
Doulton, of the Lambeth Pottery.  Colonel Wake, of the 21st Hussars, in
the name of the British Army and on behalf of his brother officers,
thanked the representatives of the county of Norfolk and city of Norwich
for erecting the memorial.

20.--Died at Norwich, James Truman, aged 70, for upwards of fifty years a
member of the St. Peter Mancroft Company of Ringers.  In 1831 he rang
with the St. Peter's company an intricate peal of Double Norwich Court
Bob Major, at St. Michael at Coslany tower, and in 1844 conducted a long
peal of Stedman's Cinques on the twelve bells of St. Peter's.  The peal
consisted of 7,126 changes, and occupied 5 hours 17 minutes in ringing.
At that time it was the longest peal that had been accomplished in the
method.

28.--Mr. J. B. Gough, the American temperance advocate, gave an "oration"
at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, at a meeting presided over by Canon Lee
Warner.

--Died at Norwich, aged 27, Mr. W. Wilson Turnbull, a member of the
literary staff of the "Eastern Daily Press."  He was the author of
Messrs. Weldon's annual, "Benjamin D---," illustrated by a Norwich
amateur, and of several able pamphlets on the Permissive Bill.  At the
time of his death, Mr. Turnbull was engaged in the preparation of another
annual for Messrs. Weldon.

29.--A meeting of the clergy and lay representatives of the diocese was
held at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich, "for the purpose of deciding upon the
question of the institution of a diocesan conference or synod."  The Lord
Bishop presided.  The Very Rev. Dean Goulburn moved, "That this meeting
do advise the Lord Bishop that, in their judgment, it is inexpedient to
constitute a diocesan conference to meet periodically."  Lord Walsingham
seconded the motion.  Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., moved a direct
negative--"That it is desirable that a conference of the clergy and laity
be established in this diocese."  The Ven. Archdeacon Groome seconded.
After a long discussion, Mr. Read's proposition was adopted by the votes
of 140 laity and 115 clergy, against the votes of 15 laity and 6 clergy.


NOVEMBER.


5.--The marriage of Viscount Anson, eldest son of the Earl of Lichfield,
and Lady Mildred Coke, youngest daughter of the Earl of Leicester, was
solemnised at Holkham church.

6.--The first general meeting of the shareholders of the Norwich Cafe
Company was held at the Guildhall, under the presidency of Mr. John
Gurney.  The company was incorporated in July, with a nominal capital of
20,000, in 20,000 shares of 1 each.  About 8,000 shares had been
subscribed for at this date, by about 90 shareholders.

7.--The extension of the franchise to female householders was advocated
at a public meeting held at St. Giles' Hall, Norwich, presided over by
the Mayor (Mr. J. D. Smith), and addresses were delivered by Miss Helen
Taylor and Miss P. H. Downing.

9.--Mr. Harry Bullard, on the expiration of his term of office as Sheriff
of Norwich, was elected Mayor.  For the office of Sheriff there were two
nominees, Mr. William Howlett and Mr. Donald Steward.  After a long and
acrimonious discussion, Mr. Steward was appointed.

16.--At a meeting of the Board of Management of the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital, Mr. Samuel Herbert Burton was elected house-surgeon, Mr.
Charles Williams surgeon, and Mr. H. S. Robinson assistant surgeon.

--The memorable and disastrous flood occurred at Norwich.  A heavy fall
of snow on the 12th, followed by a rapid thaw and continuous rain, had
the effect of greatly swelling the tributaries of the Yare and Wensum.
Simultaneously, a north-west wind occasioned a high tide at Yarmouth, so
that the river waters were denied their natural outlet.  Instead of
ebbing with the tide, the Yare rose steadily on the 15th, and many
thousand acres of marshes lying between Norwich and Yarmouth were
inundated on the following day.  The New Mills at Norwich, were, however,
responsible for the greater part of the damage from which the city
suffered.  The obstruction caused the waters to overflow the banks of the
river, and, in a short time, many of the streets in the low-lying
localities were flooded, and hundreds of the inhabitants were compelled
to leave their houses by means of boats.  An enormous amount of distress
prevailed.  The Mayor (Mr. Harry Bullard) convened a meeting at the
Guildhall on the 17th (Sunday), at which it was decided to establish
centres for the distribution of provisions; and permission was obtained
from the Government authorities to make use of the governor's house at
the disused City Gaol for the accommodation of the houseless people, of
whom 200 found refuge there.  The Sessions Court at the Guildhall was
opened during the day as a store-house, in which 2,600 loaves of bread
and many hundreds of blankets, received from the County Gaol, Asylum,
Workhouse, and Cavalry Barracks, were placed ready for distribution.  At
6.30 on the same evening another influential meeting was held at the
Guildhall, when the Mayor and the Sheriff (Mr. Donald Steward) were
publicly thanked for the active part they had taken in mitigating the
distress of the people.  On the 18th a third meeting took place, at which
a relief fund was inaugurated, when, in a few minutes, 2,271 13s. 6d. was
subscribed, an amount which, by the end of the week, was increased to
4,200.  Three or four persons lost their lives in the flood.  In various
parts of the county rivers overflowed their banks, and much damage was
done to property.  (_See_ January 4th, 1879.)

18.--An art loan exhibition, largely contributed to by noblemen and
others in the Eastern Counties, was opened at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich,
by the Mayor (Mr. Harry Bullard) in aid of a fund for the restoration of
the church of St. Peter Mancroft.  An inaugural ode, specially written by
Mr. E Oxenford, and composed by Dr. Bunnett, was performed by members of
the Norfolk and Norwich Musical Union.  The exhibition remained open
until December 14th, when a balance of 820 3s. 6d. was handed over to the
credit of the fund.  (_See_ October 4th, 1881.)

19.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, the Provincial Tramways
Company applied for permission to construct tramways in the city.  The
proposed route was to commence at the Cemetery and to proceed by Dereham
Road, St. Giles' Road, Chapel Field Road, Queen's Road, Upper Surrey
Street, All Saints' Green, Golden Ball Street, Castle Meadow, Prince of
Wales Road, Foundry Bridge, and Thorpe Road to Whitlingham Railway
Station.  An adjourned meeting was held on December 17th, at which it was
agreed not to oppose the Bill, provided the Tramways Company consented to
the insertion of such clauses, conditions, and restrictions as, in the
opinion of the Parliamentary and Bylaws Committee might be deemed
necessary.  The Norwich Tramways Bill was considered by a Select
Committee of the House of Commons, on May 6th, 1879.  It was opposed by
the Great Eastern Railway Company and Mr. Foster, a local resident, and
thrown out after only the promoters' case had been heard.  (_See_ January
16th, 1883.)

21.--The Norfolk and Norwich Fat Cattle Show was opened at Chapel Field,
Norwich.


DECEMBER.


12.--The old parish church of St. Bartholomew, Heigham, Norwich, which
had undergone complete restoration and enlargement, by the addition of a
north aisle, at the cost of 2,500, was opened by the Lord Bishop of
Norwich.

17.--A special meeting of the Norwich Town Council adopted a vote of
sympathy with the Queen and other members of the Royal Family, on the
death of the Grand Duchess of Hesse (Princess Alice of England), and a
muffled peal was rung upon the bells of St. Peter Mancroft.  Similar
votes were adopted by the Corporations of Yarmouth and Lynn; and the
county magistrates voted an address to her Majesty on January 4th, 1879.

19.--Mr. E. C. Bailey resigned the office of Clerk to the Norwich Board
of Guardians, after a service of thirty-four years.  He was succeeded in
the appointment by Mr. John Cross.

22.--Died at his residence, Surrey Street, Norwich, Mr. William Peter
Nichols, F.R.C.S., aged 77.  Mr. Nichols was born at Yelverton, and was
educated at King Edward VI. School, Norwich, under Valpy.  He was
subsequently articled to Mr. Dalrymple, and, having studied at St.
Thomas' and Guy's Hospitals, under Sir Astley Cooper, passed his
examinations, and in 1823 established himself in Norwich, where he
speedily made a reputation, although it was not until late in life that
he reaped the full honours he deserved.  On the death of Mr. J. G.
Crosse, Mr. Nichols was elected surgeon of the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital, a position he held for twenty-two years, and relinquished the
post in 1872, when probably the highest possible testimony was paid to
his skill as an operator by Dr. Copeman, who mentioned that in lithotomy
his average of successful cases was higher than that of Dr. Donne, Dr.
Martineau, or Mr. Norgate, all giants in their day.  On his retirement
from office he was unanimously appointed honorary consulting surgeon.
Mr. Nichols was also consulting surgeon to the Bethel Hospital, and, with
Mr. J. F. Watson, successfully carried on for many years the private
asylum at Heigham Hall.  He was elected Mayor of Norwich in 1865, and had
the honour to take the lead in the reception of the Prince and Princess
of Wales, the Duke of Edinburgh, and the Queen of Denmark, when they
visited the city in 1866.  In politics he was a Liberal, and occupied at
various times a seat in the Town Council.  He was also a magistrate of
the city.

23.--Died at his town residence, 36, Upper Brooke Street, Lieut.-Colonel
James Duff, M.P.  He was born at Innis House, Elgin, on July 29th, 1831,
and was the son of General Sir James Duff, who married Miss Eliza
Charlotte Prescott, eldest daughter of General Sir Beeston Prescott,
Bart., of Theobald's Park, Herts.  Educated at Rugby, he entered the Army
in 1851, as ensign in the 23rd Fusiliers, with which regiment he
afterwards went to the Crimea, and obtained his captaincy in 1854.  At
the battle of Inkerman he was taken prisoner, and on his release acted as
_aide-de-camp_ to General Syssons, who commanded the Second Brigade Light
Division until the end of the war.  Captain Duff then embarked with his
regiment for China, but the Indian Mutiny breaking out meanwhile, they
were ordered to Calcutta, to assist in its suppression.  Captain Duff was
present with Lord Clyde at the capture of Lucknow, and was specially
mentioned in dispatches for his services.  He received the Crimean medal
with two clasps, the Turkish medal, the 5th class of the Medjidie, &c.
In 1858 he left the service, and the following year married Mary, only
daughter of Mr. Edward Dawkins, of Upper Brooke Street, London, and niece
of Mr. John Berney Petre, of Westwick House.  On taking up his residence
in the county, he was appointed to the command of the 3rd Administrative
Battalion of Norfolk Rifle Volunteers, and, on the death of the Hon.
Frederick Walpole, was returned as Conservative member for North Norfolk.
In conjunction with Sir Robert Buxton, Mr. Clare Sewell Read, Mr. Colman,
and Sir Edmund Lacon, he was unwearied in his exertions to secure the
passing of the Norfolk and Suffolk Fisheries Preservation Act, and the
modification of Mr. Mundella's Fisheries Bill to the advantage of the
district which he represented.

26.--The Christmas amusements at Norwich included Messrs. Edwards and
Waldegrave's pantomime of "The Children in the Wood, or Harlequin Good
Humour, the Wicked Uncle, and the Good Fairy Birds of the Forest," at the
Theatre; and Bostock and Wombwell's Menagerie on the Castle Meadow.



1879.


JANUARY.


4.--A meeting, convened by the Mayor (Mr. Harry Bullard), and attended by
many of the riparian owners of the county, was held at the Guildhall,
Norwich, "for the purpose of determining whether an inquiry should be
made into the causes of the recent floods, and for devising some means to
prevent their recurrence."  A committee was appointed to hold an inquiry,
and in the month of June Sir John Hawkshaw, C.E., made a report, in which
he stated that floods might be prevented by suitable works, the cost of
which would be heavy if charged entirely on the flooded lands, but
moderate if spread in suitable proportions.  Mr. Bullard, on November
10th, was presented with his portrait, painted by Mr. Ventnor, in
recognition of the services he had rendered to his fellow-citizens during
the floods.

5.--Died at St. Giles' Street, Norwich, Mr. Horatio Bolingbroke, aged 80.
He was educated at Norwich Grammar School, under Valpy, was for many
years engaged in business as a manufacturer, and did much to enhance the
reputation of Norwich for the production of textile fabrics.  Mr.
Bolingbroke was a prominent figure in the political life of the city, was
the first Sheriff appointed under the Municipal Corporations Act, and was
amongst the first of the Liberal members returned to the "reformed"
Corporation.  He was a generous supporter of local charities, chairman of
the Norwich Charity Trustees (General List), and a Justice of the Peace.
Labouring under the affliction of blindness, he had for some years prior
to his death retired from active public life.

16.--The nomination of candidates to fill the vacancy in the
representation of North Norfolk, occasioned by the death of Colonel Duff,
took place at Aylsham.  Mr. Edward Birkbeck, of Horstead Hall, was the
Conservative, and Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, Bart., the Liberal nominee.
The polling took place on the 21st, and the result was declared on the
22nd, as follows:--Birkbeck, 2,742; Buxton, 2,252.


FEBRUARY.


8.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before the Lord Chief Baron, an action was
brought by Mr. Hamon le Strange, lord of the manor of Snettisham, and his
tenant, William Harding, against Richard Auker, for trespassing upon the
foreshore at Snettisham and removing shingle, mussels, and cockles.  Mr.
le Strange in 1866 took legal proceedings to maintain his proprietary
rights on the foreshore, and obtained a verdict, against which an appeal
was entered; but a full bench of judges confirmed the verdict.  Since
then he had issued licences to persons to remove mussels from the
foreshore, and had leased it to Harding, who had found the defendant
carrying mussels away.  The special jury returned a verdict for the
plaintiffs, damages one shilling, and the learned Judge said he would
make the injunction issued against the defendant perpetual.  (_See_
January 21st, 1885.)

13.--Died at Kirstead, the Rev. Jonathan Bates, rector of Kirstead with
Langhale.  He was the son of a Wesleyan minister, and was born at New
Buckenham, on June 13th, 1829.  When still a child he removed with his
family to Edinburgh, where he was placed in the High School.  Thence he
went to Huddersfield College, and at eighteen became junior master.  He
had not only passed the examinations of the London University, but had
saved sufficient money, with the help of the scholarships he had won, to
enable him, on leaving Huddersfield, to enter St. John's College,
Cambridge, where he graduated in 1854, taking his place as eleventh
Wrangler in the Mathematical Tripos.  On completing his University
career, he was appointed second classical and mathematical master of the
Colchester Grammar School.  This post he held four years, and was then
chosen senior or classical tutor and chaplain to the Queen's Medical
College at Birmingham.  Ordained deacon in 1854, and priest in 1855, by
the Bishop of Rochester, he returned to Colchester as mathematical master
at the Grammar School, and did duty as a curate in the vicinity.  In 1860
he was appointed Vice-Principal of the Chester Diocesan College, and in
1862 was presented by Caius College to the living of Kirstead.  Mr. Bates
married the youngest daughter of the celebrated Dr. Medhurst, for many
years a missionary in China.

16.--Died at the Rectory, Toppesfield, the Rev. Professor Brewer, M.A.,
Preacher at the Rolls Chapel, and rector of Toppesfield.  He was a son of
Mr. John Sherren Brewer, of Mile End House, Norwich, and was born at
Calvert Street, in March, 1809.  After receiving his early education at
the hands of his father, he proceeded to Queen's College, Oxford, where
he graduated B.A. in 1833, taking first class honours in Classics.  In
1841 he was appointed to a Professorship, and in November, 1870, was
elected an honorary Fellow of his College.  Professor Brewer was editor
of "Fuller's Church History," published by the University of Oxford, and
of the Calendars of State Papers relating to the Reign of Henry VIII.,
published by the Master of the Rolls.  He was for some time honorary
librarian to the Marquis of Salisbury at Hatfield House, and, in addition
to his appointment as Preacher at the Rolls Chapel, he held the
Professorship of English Literature in King's College, London.  In 1876
he was presented by Lord Beaconsfield to the Crown living of Toppesfield,
which had a gross income of 1,120 and a parsonage house.

21.--Edward Payson Weston, the American pedestrian, passed through
Norwich, on his walk of 2,000 miles in 1,000 consecutive hours (except on
Sundays).  He arrived from Dereham, and at one o'clock lectured at the
Victoria Hall, St. Andrew's, where a large audience had assembled, under
the presidency of the Mayor (Mr. Harry Bullard).  In the afternoon Weston
continued his walk, and arrived at Yarmouth in the evening.

--Died at Wandsworth, Mr. P. Le Neve Foster, secretary of the Society of
Arts.  He was born in 1809, and educated at Norwich Grammar School, prior
to studying at Cambridge, where he took his degree in 1830.  A few years
afterwards he was called to the Bar, and, after working zealously with
the Prince Consort to promote the success of the Exhibition of 1851, was
appointed Secretary of the Society of Arts in 1853.

24.--Under the auspices of the Anglo-American Electric Lighting Company,
Limited, a descriptive lecture was given at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich,
upon the possibilities of the electric light, by Mr. H. Edmunds, a
representative of the company.  The hall was brilliantly illuminated by a
special electric installation.

27.--Died at Bournemouth, Lieut.-Colonel Hugh FitzRoy, formerly of the
Grenadier Guards.  He was born in 1808, and was second son of the Rev.
Lord Henry FitzRoy.  He married, in 1831, Lucy Sarah, second daughter of
Sir Thomas Buller Lethbridge, who died in 1855.  In December, 1856, he
married, secondly, Emily Louisa, widow of Mr. Charles William Marsham, of
Stratton Strawless.  Colonel FitzRoy was an active county magistrate, and
chairman of the Great Yarmouth Haven and Pier Commissioners.


MARCH.


6.--The twelve hours' roller skating championship of the Eastern Counties
was competed for at St. Giles' Hall, Norwich.  The winner was Candler, of
Norwich, who, between eight a.m. and eight p.m. covered 77 miles 7 laps;
second, G. Woolsey, of Yarmouth, 74 miles 20 laps.

13.--The marriage of the Duke of Connaught and Princess Louise Marguerite
was celebrated in Norwich by the ringing of St. Peter Mancroft bells, and
by a civic luncheon given in the Council Chamber, Guildhall, by the Mayor
(Mr. Harry Bullard).  A congratulatory address adopted by the Corporation
was presented to the Queen by the Mayor and Sheriff, at St. James's
Palace, on May 3rd.

22.--The first of the Saturday evening popular concerts, inaugurated in
Prince's Street Schoolroom, and transferred to St. Andrew's Hall, was
given, under the presidency of the Mayor of Norwich.

26.--A Common Hall was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the
presidency of the Mayor, "to consider the question of the continuance of
the half-holiday movement on Thursdays during the approaching summer
months."  A memorial was presented by the traders of the city, affirming
that the two o'clock closing was not conducive to the welfare of the
assistants nor to the commercial prosperity of the city.  After much
discussion, the meeting was adjourned _sine die_, and a few weeks later
official notice was given that "the shops of Norwich, with few
exceptions, remain open on Thursdays till five o'clock."


APRIL.


6.--Died at Great Yarmouth, Sir Thomas Branthwayt Beevor, Bart., of
Hargham.  Born on April 7th, 1798, he was thrice married--in 1819, to
Elizabeth Bridget, daughter of Dr. Richard Lubbock, of Norwich; in 1832,
to Martha, daughter of Mr. Archibald Hardiment, of Old Buckenham; and in
1845, to Mary, daughter of Mr. F. Davies.  Sir Thomas had for some years
resided in a quiet and unostentatious manner at Yarmouth, but in his
early years, as a Liberal of the advanced school, he took a leading part
in the political contests of the county.

7.--Mr. T. W. Robertson, son of the author of "Caste," and other
favourite comedies, made his first appearance with the Caste Company at
Norwich Theatre.  The company made a return visit on November 3rd.  Mr.
Robertson, junior, who had been articled to a veterinary surgeon in the
city, afterwards became very popular as an actor.

11.--Died at Hereford, Miss Christiana Glover, second and last surviving
daughter of the Rev. Edward Glover, M.A., of Norwich, aged 91.  For
several years she lived with the family of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, and
afterwards became a devoted coadjutor of her talented sister, Miss Sarah
Glover, in the work of imparting Christian education in accordance with
the principles of the Church of England to the poorer classes in the
city.  The sisters originated the Norwich Sol-Fa System of Psalmody,
"which may be said to be entirely unrivalled in its results, as producing
perfect intonation and good harmony at comparatively small expense of
time and labour.  The system in a somewhat modified form has been very
widely and successfully diffused by Mr. Curwen."

15.--A new oratorio, "Nehemiah," by Dr. Hill, of Norwich, was performed
for the first time.  It was produced at the Corn Hall, Diss, by the
members of the Diss Choral Society.

--Considerable excitement was caused at Thorpe, near Norwich, by the
action of Mr. Henry Blake, who had enclosed the strip of grass land known
as Thorpe Green, by the side of the river.  Mr. William Birkbeck, as lord
of the manor, announced that if the palings, &c., were not removed by
noon on this day they would be forcibly taken down.  The notice was
disregarded, and Mr. P. E. Hansell, as steward of the manor, directed the
removal of the obstruction.  After the posts and palings had been taken
down, Mr. Hansell intimated that Mr. Birkbeck was prepared to take the
matter into the law courts, and to the House of Lords, if necessary.

16.--A remarkable scene was witnessed at a meeting of the Norwich School
Board.  A motion to increase the staff was supported by the majority and
opposed by the Denominational minority, the latter of whom asserted that
the proposal could be carried out only by rescinding a resolution passed
almost unanimously at a previous meeting.  "Finding their last effort
useless to stem the current of expenditure into which the Board had
plunged, and justly indignant at the treatment they received, the
minority left the room, and Canon Heaviside intimated that it would be a
matter for consideration whether they ever again entered it."  On May 8th
a deputation went to Canon Heaviside's residence and presented to the
gentlemen constituting the minority a memorial, signed by the ratepayers,
urging that by their presence at the Board they could "continue to
protest against reckless extravagance, and so keep the ratepayers better
informed of what is going on."  Ultimately the minority agreed to resume
their duties, "at the request of their constituents, and in the hope that
the public attention called to the proceedings which led to their
withdrawal would have the effect of strengthening their hands in the
endeavour to discharge effectively the duties that devolved upon them."

28.--Mr. Sims Reeves sang at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  His engagement
was originally announced for April 17th, but the usual postponement
occurred.

--Application having been made by the Norfolk Court of Quarter Sessions
that nine disturnpiked roads in the county should, by a provisional
order, be declared ordinary, not main, roads, Mr. Courteney Boyle, an
inspector of the Local Government Board, attended at the Shirehall, to
hear the grounds of the application and any objections thereto.  The
application had been made on the following grounds: (1) That in
consequence of the increase of railways, there was comparatively but
little through traffic along the disturnpiked reads; (2) there being no
highway districts in the county, the Court was not prepared to encounter
the difficulty and expense of dealing separately with the surveyors of
the large number of parishes through which the disturnpiked roads passed;
(3) that should a highway board be established in the county, the unions
through which the disturnpiked roads passed would not be unfairly
burdened by their maintenance, while it would be hard upon outlying
districts of the county to contribute to the repair of roads which they
never used; and (4) that the Court having previously expressed itself in
favour of county boards, hesitated to sanction so novel and large an
expenditure for the county rate as would be involved in paying half the
cost of repairing the disturnpiked roads until the ratepayers were more
directly represented in the county authority.  Mr. C. S. Read, M.P.,
stated his reasons for moving these resolutions at the Court of Quarter
Sessions, and after evidence had been taken in regard to each road in
question, the Inspector said that he should make his report.


MAY.


19.--A glove fight took place at the Corn Hall, Norwich, in the presence
of an immense audience, between Walter Emms and Arthur Shaw.  At the
Police Court, on the 26th, the principals, and John Hicks, James Clarke,
James Laxton, Robert Watson, sub-editor of the "Sporting Life," London;
Thomas Snelling, and Edwin Cunningham were summoned for unlawfully
assembling together for the purpose of a prize-fight.  Emms and Shaw were
ordered to enter into their own recognisances of 100, to find two
sureties of 50 each, and to keep the peace for six months.  The other
defendants were bound over in the sum of 20 each to keep the peace for
six months.

20.--The Norwich Omnibus Company, Limited, was formed.  The first
omnibuses were put upon the Dereham Road route on June 23rd.

--Died at the Crescent, Norwich, Mr. John M. Croker, aged 57.  His ample
leisure enabled him to be of great service to many of the public
institutions of the city, and he was for several years honorary secretary
of the Norfolk and Norwich Cricket Club.

21.--A fire occurred on Messrs. Willis and Southall's shoe premises, the
Upper Market, Norwich.  The damage was estimated at 1,000.


JUNE.


2.--A case of considerable importance to the agricultural community, in
which the Earl of Leicester, Lord Lieutenant of the county, was
defendant, was heard by the Walsingham magistrates.  His lordship was
alleged to have infringed the Contagious Diseases (Animals) Act, 1878,
and the Animals Order of 1878.  The informations, laid by the Veterinary
Inspector of the district (Mr. Edward Case), charged his lordship (1)
with unlawfully causing to be driven on March 3rd a sheep affected with
sheep scab; and (2) with causing 200 suspected animals to be removed.
After a hearing which lasted eight hours, the Bench dismissed the case,
"because the defendant had satisfied them that there was no cause for
suspecting the animals removed."

5.--A singular accident occurred at Wells railway station.  The driver of
engine of a passenger train from Norwich was unable to control the
brakes, and the engine dashing into the station, knocked down the buffer
stops, ran through the end platform, and, crashing into the lavatories
and porter's room, demolished the outer wall of the station, and came to
a standstill when partly in the public street.  A young man named John
Cook was killed.  At the inquest a verdict of accidental death was
returned, and at the subsequent Board of Trade inquiry the engine-driver
was exonerated of blame.

9.--St. Giles' Hall, Norwich, originally opened as a skating rink, and
afterwards used as a variety hall and theatre, was on this date opened
for the summer season as a circus by Mr. Stoodley.

11.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened
at East Dereham, when the entries were larger than on any previous
occasion.  Mr. R. T. Gurdon was president.

15.--The Norwich Artillery Volunteers paraded for the first time in their
new uniform.  The regulation scarlet facings and helmet of the Royal
Artillery had been substituted for the white facings and busby previously
worn.

17.--The Prince of Wales visited Norwich, for the purpose of laying the
foundation-stone of the new Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  The visit was
of a semi-private character.  His Royal Highness, who was received at
Thorpe Station by the Mayor (Mr. Harry Bullard), the Sheriff (Mr. Donald
Steward), the Earl of Leicester, Lord Suffield, and Lord Carrington,
proceeded to the site of the new building, and having performed the
ceremony, returned to the station and travelled by special train to
Yarmouth.  The cost of the new Hospital was originally estimated at
35,500, but the Board of Governors subsequently decided to purchase
adjoining property, at an additional outlay of 5,000.  The Board
afterwards adopted a building design jointly prepared by Mr. T. H. Wyatt,
of London, and Mr. Edward Boardman, of Norwich, and accepted the tender
of Messrs. Lacey and Co. for the completion of the work.  (_See_ June
30th, 1881.)

--The Prince of Wales arrived at Yarmouth, and on the 18th inspected the
Prince of Wales' Own Norfolk Artillery.  His Royal Highness left on the
morning of the 19th.  On both evenings of his stay in the town, the
Prince attended performances given by the Gaiety Company at the Theatre
Royal.

27.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, Mr. J. H. Tillett
moved, "That this Council objects to the proposed schemes of the Charity
Commissioners, particularly to those relating to the Boys' Hospital and
the Girls' Hospital Schools, on the ground that educational and other
funds given expressly and emphatically for the benefit of the poor are
thereby diverted from their proper objects, and applied to the increase
of the endowments in middle and upper schools, which schools, if in need,
should be helped otherwise than at the expense of the poor."  The motion
was adopted, and the Parliamentary and Bylaw Committee were requested to
prepare a petition against the scheme.  A Common Hall was held on July
16th, at which resolutions were adopted expressing dissatisfaction with
the scheme; and at a meeting of the Town Council, on August 26th, the
Parliamentary and Bylaws Committee, in a draft report upon the scheme,
urged that to apply grants originally given for the maintenance,
education, and advancement of the children of the poor, in aid of the
Grammar and Commercial Schools, or either of them, would involve a
misappropriation of the funds and a violation of the intentions of the
founders.  (_See_ October 24th, 1882.)


JULY.


3.--At the Norfolk county magistrates' meeting, a report was received
from the Committee of Visitors that several serious cases of erysipelas,
sore throat, and diarrhoea had occurred at Thorpe Asylum, "and it would
appear that the very offensive smell which pervades the Asylum whenever
the wind blows from the Sewage Farm on the opposite side of the river is
the cause of the above-named epidemics."

4.--In the House of Commons, Mr. C. S. Read supported, in a long and able
speech, Mr. Chaplin's motion, for a Royal Commission to enquire into the
depressed condition of the agricultural interest.

6.--Died at the Vyne, Basingstoke, Mr. W. L. Wiggett Chute, aged 79,
formerly of Pickenham Hall, near Swaffham.  He was called to the Bar by
the Middle Temple in 1827, in which year he assumed, by Royal licence,
the additional name and arms of Chute, on inheriting the estates of that
ancient family in Hampshire and Norfolk.  He was elected with Sir William
Bagge in the Conservative interest at the General Election of 1837, and
held the seat until 1847, when he retired.  In 1837 he married Martha,
second daughter of Mr. Theophilus Russell Buckworth, of Cockley Cley.

9.--A "silver cradle," in the form of a massive epergne, was presented by
the Corporation to the Mayor of Norwich (Mr. Harry Bullard), "in
commemoration of the birth of his daughter, Hilda May, on May 13th,
1879."

11.--Died at Kett's Castle Villa, Mousehold, Norwich, Mr. John Berney
Ladbrooke.  Born in 1803, he was a son of Robert Ladbrooke, painter and
drawing master, and nephew of Old Crome, whose pupil he became after he
had received rudimentary instruction from his father.  "Crome's influence
is traced in nearly all his pictures, although of late years in tone and
colour they more closely resemble the best works of Henry Bright.  He
especially excelled in the representation of woodland scenery."  As a
drawing master Ladbrooke was much valued.

12.--Died at Norwich, Mr. John Withers Dowson.  A son of Mr. Benjamin
Dowson, merchant, of Geldeston, he was born in 1800.  Educated at Norwich
Grammar School, he was articled to a London firm of solicitors, and
afterwards commenced practice in Norwich.  The pursuit of professional
emolument was, however, less an object with him than the furtherance of
the education and the improvement of those around him, especially the
poor, and probably no one in the city or county had in his time done more
practical work in the cause of education.

14.--An inter-county bicycle race, between Norfolk and Suffolk cyclists,
was ridden from Ipswich to Norwich.  The competitors started from Ipswich
at 3.5 p.m., and the race was won by Popplewell, of Ipswich, who arrived
at the Boileau fountain, Norwich, at 6.5 p.m.  Morgan, of Yarmouth, was
second.  The distance ridden was forty-three miles.

15.--An important question affecting the boundary of the city came before
the Norwich Town Council.  The Town Clerk reported that, in the
preparation of the Ordnance Survey, a question had arisen as to whether
two pieces of land, one containing about 38 acres, situate in the parish
of Catton, and the other of about 45 acres, with 150 houses thereon,
situate in the parish of Sprowston, should not be included within the
Parliamentary and municipal boundary of the city and county of the city
of Norwich.  On investigating the matter, it appeared that, by the
charter of Philip and Mary, granted to the city in 1556, these two
inclosures of land were clearly defined as being within the city
boundary, and by several ancient manuscripts and books, including
Blomefield's "History of Norfolk," reference was also made to these lands
as belonging to the city.  It also appeared by the report of the
Commissioners appointed to report on the boundaries of boroughs and
corporate towns, by order of the House of Commons, on April 25th, 1837,
that such lands were within the city jurisdiction, and a plan attached to
such report corroborated the fact.  The matter being important, and the
Town Clerk having been requested to state whether the city authorities
were willing in the new survey to allow such lands to be shown as forming
part of the county of Norfolk, it was referred to the Parliamentary and
Bylaws Committee, for further investigation and consideration.  On August
26th, the Committee reported that they had consulted the Town Clerk and
Major Jones, of the Ordnance Survey, had referred to extracts from
charters and from Blomefield, and had resolved that sufficient evidence
had not been produced to set forth where the boundary of the city of
Norwich should be drawn, and that, therefore, they left Major Jones to
define it as he might think best, without prejudice to the rights of any
party.

19.--The 3rd and 4th Battalions of Norfolk Rifle Volunteers went into
camp on Yarmouth South Denes.  Colonel Bulwer, who had succeeded Colonel
Duff, was in command of the 3rd Battalion, and Lieut.-Colonel Gurdon
commanded the 4th Battalion.

20.--Owing to a heavy and continuous downpour of rain and a strong wind
blowing from the north-west, the waters of the Yare were "backed up,"
overflowed the banks of the river, and submerged many thousand acres of
marshes between Norwich and Yarmouth.  Most of the hay crop in Norfolk
was ruined by the wet weather.

23.--A silver epergne was presented to Mr. E. H. H. Combe, Mayor of
Yarmouth, as a "silver cradle," to commemorate the birth of a daughter in
his year of office.

26.--Particulars were published on this date of the establishment of the
Norwich Steam Laundry and Public Baths, at North Heigham.

27.--A remarkable landslip occurred at Attleborough.  As Mr. Gathergood,
a farmer, whose land lay partly in Attleborough and Rockland, was
crossing a turnip field, he was stunned by a loud report resembling the
roar of a cannon, immediately followed by a rustling noise within a yard
or two of him.  On recovering his presence of mind, he discovered that a
space of land twenty-four yards in circumference had sunk out of sight,
and water was rising in its stead.  On the 28th the water subsided, and
revealed a chasm from thirty-five to forty feet deep, with perfectly
perpendicular sides.  This strange phenomenon was attributed to the
action of the heavy rainfall.


AUGUST.


2.--A terrible thunderstorm and hurricane commenced in the night and
prevailed during the early hours of the morning of the 3rd (Sunday).  It
was accompanied by a deluge of rain and a heavy hailstorm.  Great damage
was done to property in city and county.  But the greatest calamity was
the destruction of Wells church, the tower of which was struck by
lightning at 5.50 a.m. on the 3rd.  The roof of the nave was soon in
flames, and fell in with a crash, and by nine o'clock the whole church
was reduced to a state of utter ruin.  The fine peal of bells was totally
destroyed, and the entire damage was estimated at from 10,000 to 15,000.
(_See_ April 18th, 1883.)

4.--Died at Oxford Street, Unthank's Road, Norwich, Mr. Thomas William
Bond, in his 76th year.  Mr. Bond was some time subeditor, and afterwards
publisher, of the "Norfolk News," and before removing to Norwich kept a
school at Barton Mills, near Stoke Ferry.  He was the compiler of a small
book for children, known as "Bond's Catechism," which was published by
Jarrold, and for many years extensively used in all parts of the country.

5.--Died at the residence of his son, Belmont House, Newport, Essex,
Zachariah Buck, Mus. Doc.  He was born at Norwich on September 19th,
1798, and at an early age attracted the attention of Dr. Beckwith, the
then organist of the Cathedral, who took him into the choir.  Dr.
Beckwith died in 1809, and was succeeded as organist by his son, Mr. John
Beckwith, with whom young Buck continued, and to whom he was articled.
On the death of Beckwith, in 1819, Buck, at the early age of twenty-one,
succeeded in obtaining the appointment of Cathedral organist, his chief
competitor being Alfred Pettet, a fellow-pupil, who was appointed to St.
Peter Mancroft.  Buck soon obtained a large and lucrative practice as a
teacher, and established his reputation as a trainer of boys.  For nearly
forty years he continued to perform the active duties of organist and
choirmaster, but during the last twenty years of his life he relinquished
the organ to his subsequent assistant and partner, Dr. Bunnett.  Besides
instructing during his long career some 7,000 amateur pupils, Dr. Buck
trained a very large number of professional students, most of whom were
selected from his choir.  He composed no great work, but was the author
of a number of pleasing anthems, and of the hymn, "Come hither, angel
tongues invite," which, it was understood, gained for him his Lambeth
degree of Doctor of Music, conferred upon him by the Archbishop of
Canterbury.  He resigned, on June 5th, 1877, his appointment at the
Cathedral, after seventy years' connection therewith.  Dr. Buck was twice
married--first to Miss Hansell, and secondly to Miss Holloway, and left
three sons.

11.--The British, Archaeological Association opened its congress at
Yarmouth.  Lord Waveney, as president, delivered an inaugural address.
The members of the Congress visited Norwich on the 18th.

26.--Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., having declined the invitation of the
Government to become a member of the Royal Commission appointed to
enquire into the depressed state of agriculture and its causes, and
believing that he could serve farmers better another way, sailed on this
date from Liverpool for America, in the City of Montreal liner, in
company with Mr. Albert Pell, M.P.  The object of the hon. gentlemen was
to collect, in the United States, information conducive to the inquiry,
and this duty they undertook as unpaid assistant commissioners.  They
made a tour through the Western agricultural regions of Manitoba, Dakota,
Nebraska, Kansas, Kentucky, went south-west to Texas, and returned to
Philadelphia on November 26th.  They thoroughly examined the system of
cultivation, transportation, and ocean shipment of provisions and grain;
they travelled an average of 120 miles each day, besides making minute
investigations; and in this work they were greatly assisted by the St.
Paul and Sioux City Railway, who gave them the use of a special train for
a week.  They examined the terminal and shipping facilities of the
Pennsylvania railroad, the American steamship line at Philadelphia, and
the Abbatoir Company's arrangements for the shipping of live and dead
meat.  After visiting Baltimore, Washington, and New York, Mr. Read and
Mr. Pell sailed for home on December 10th.  Mr. Read arrived in Norfolk
on December 22nd, and was welcomed at Wymondham station by Mrs. Read and
several personal friends.

26.--The Town Clerk reported, at a meeting of the Norwich Town Council,
that the Norwich Improvement Act received the Royal assent on July 22nd.
Among the works which it enabled the city to undertake was to remove
Foundry Bridge and construct a new one forty-five feet wide; to build a
bridge across the Wensum at St. Martin-at-Oak, and to exercise increased
powers in the sanitary administration and local government of the city.

30.--The death was announced, at Brussels, of Lord Gordon of Drumearn,
who, when Lord Advocate for Scotland, in 1867, was returned as member of
Parliament for the borough of Thetford.


SEPTEMBER.


16.--The Norwich Town Council adopted a resolution authorising the paving
of the Provision Market with wood, at a cost not exceeding 1,100.  (_See_
August 31st, 1880.)

--The improvement of Chapel Field, Norwich, was, after many delays,
ordered by the Town Council to be undertaken, at a sum not exceeding
1,000, the cost to be charged to the sanitary rate.  On November 7th the
Mayor and Mayoress (Mr. and Mrs. Bullard) and Mrs. Donald Steward planted
the first of the new trees.  (_See_ November 4th, 1880.)


OCTOBER.


6.--Died at Norwich, in his 70th year, the Rev. William Grigson, M.A.,
for thirty-three years rector of Whinburgh and Westfield.  A son of Mr.
Edward Harvey Grigson, of Saham Toney, he was educated at Corpus Christi
College, Cambridge, and married, in 1844, Margaret, third daughter of Mr.
James Hales, of Norwich.  The first of his ancestors to settle in the
county was the Rev. William Grigson, M.A., rector of Hardingham, in 1584,
and since that period they have continued to reside in Norfolk, where
they once held a large extent of landed property.  Mr. Grigson's
favourite studies were archaeology and genealogy.  As an authority upon
the latter, his assistance was sought from all parts of the kingdom, and
his name will always be remembered in connection with the "Visitations of
Norfolk," of which work he was a joint editor.

15.--Died at the Chantry, Norwich, in his 77th year, Mr. G. Pinson,
formerly Governor of Norwich Castle.

28.--Died at Knapton House, Sir Henry Robinson, K.B., in his 76th year.
He was a son of Mr. George Robinson, and served for some years in her
Majesty's Bodyguard of Gentlemen-at-Arms, of which he was appointed
Standard-Bearer in 1840, and Lieutenant-Commanding in 1845.  In 1842 he
married Lucy, daughter of Mr. W. D. Cooper-Cooper, of Toddington Manor,
Bedford.


NOVEMBER.


6.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference was opened at Noverre's Rooms,
Norwich, under the presidency of the Lord Bishop.  The proceedings were
continued on the 7th.

10.--The Norwich Town Council, owing to political differences, were
unable to elect a Mayor.  Mr. Willis was nominated and declared elected,
but refused to take office.  Mr. Philip Back having been appointed
Sheriff, the meeting was adjourned until the 22nd, when the Liberal party
declining to nominate, Colonel Bignold proposed Mr. Samuel Newman, who
refused to accept the position.  Another adjournment was made to the
28th, when Mr. Harry Bullard declared his readiness, by accepting the
office for another year, to relieve the city of the stigma cast upon it.
The meeting then adjourned until December 2nd, when Mr. Bullard was
re-elected.

18.--Mr. Frank Buckland and Mr. Spencer Walpole, Inspectors of Fisheries,
opened an inquiry at Cromer as to an application for an Order prohibiting
either entirely or subject to such exceptions and restrictions as the
Board of Trade might determine, the fishing for and taking of small
edible crabs and berried hen lobsters.  A similar inquiry was held at
Sheringham on the 19th.

20.--The Norwich Fat Cattle Show was opened at Chapel Field, and was
continued on the 21st and 22nd.


DECEMBER.


3.--Died at Westbourne Terrace, Hyde Park, London, Mr. John Unthank.  The
third son of Mr. William Unthank, of Norwich, a solicitor in considerable
practice and agent to Mr. Coke, afterwards Earl of Leicester, he was born
in 1798.  In 1842 he was called to the Bar at Lincoln's Inn, and joined
the Northern Circuit, where, for several years, he practised as a special
pleader.  In 1859 he was appointed a Master of the Court of Queen's
Bench, and held the post until 1878, when he retired, in consequence of
ill-health.

7.--Died at 18, Bethel Street, Norwich, Mr. Frederick Lawrence Phillips,
journalist, for many years editor and part proprietor of the "Norwich
Argus."  Mr. Phillips, who was sixty years of age, was originally
intended for the legal profession, but took to the stage, upon which he
achieved fair success, and married Miss Ellen Daly, a prominent actress
of her day.  An unfortunate accident, while playing Rob Roy, at Norwich
Theatre, terminated his hope of advancement in the theatrical profession.
Confined to his couch for some time, he employed himself in the study of
languages, and subsequently devoted himself to the translation of tales
and dramas, and to the production of original dramatic works.

9.--The Rev. Osborne W. Tancock, M.A., of Exeter College, Oxford,
seventeen years master at Sherborne School, was appointed master of
Norwich Grammar School, in place of the Rev. Dr. Jessopp, on his
presentation to the rectory of Scarning.

18.--The marriage of William Heveagre Legge, Viscount Lewisham, Member of
Parliament for West Kent, eldest son of the Earl of Dartmouth, with Lady
Mary Coke, fourth daughter of the Earl of Leicester, took place at
Holkham.

25.--Died at Threxton, aged 68, Mr. Thomas Edward Walter Barton.  The
Watton and Thetford Railway was originated mainly through Mr. Barton's
instrumentality.  His favourite study was archaeology, and he possessed a
valuable antiquarian collection and library.

26.--The Christmas pantomime produced at Norwich Theatre by Mr. R. Hall
was entitled, "Aladdin the Great."

27.--Died at his residence, Upper Surrey Street, Norwich, aged 68, Mr.
Thomas Brightwell, a well-known solicitor, and clerk to the Charity
Trustees, in which office he was succeeded by Mr. E. S. Bignold.



1880.


JANUARY.


17.--Died at St. Giles' Street, Norwich, in his 63rd year, Mr. Arthur
Morris Foster Morgan, surgeon.  He was third son of Mr. Richard Morgan,
actuary of the Norwich Union Life Insurance Society, and after completing
his professional studies was appointed medical-officer of the Norwich
Dispensary, a post which he relinquished on entering into private
practice.  Mr. Morgan was president of the Board of Directors of the
Norwich Equitable Fire Insurance Company, and held several other public
appointments.  For twenty years he was a member of the Corporation, and
for some time was an alderman of the city.  In polities he was a Liberal.


FEBRUARY.


12.--Died at his residence, Stradsett Hall, near Downham Market, Sir
William Bagge, Bart., M.P.  One of twins born on June 17th, 1810, he was
a son of Mr. Thomas Philip Bagge, and priority of birth entitled him to
the family estates, to which he succeeded on the death of his father, on
June 30th, 1827.  In 1833 he married Frances, fourth daughter of Sir
Thomas Preston, Bart., of Beeston Hall, and two years after made his
entry into public life by acceding to a request to contest the
Parliamentary representation of West Norfolk, which had hitherto been in
undisturbed possession of the Whigs.  In this first attempt to break down
the political monopoly exercised in the division Mr. Bagge was
unsuccessful; three years subsequently, however, he and Mr. Chute were
returned.  In 1841 he and his colleague were returned unopposed.  In 1847
the Liberals made another attempt, and succeeded in electing one of their
candidates, the Hon. E. K. Coke, but were unable to displace Mr. Bagge
from his position.  In 1852 Mr. Bagge was joined by Mr. G. W. P.
Bentinck, and the contest resulted in an easy victory over Mr. Hamond.
It was deemed advisable by both sides in 1857 to have a compromise, and
Mr. Bagge, "from private reasons, and a desire not to disturb the peace
of the county," retired to make room for Mr. Gurdon, who, with Mr.
Bentinck, thereafter represented the division.  At the General Election
in 1865 the Conservatives resolved to take the entire representation, and
Mr. Bentinck's state of health not allowing him to undertake the fatigue
of a contest, Mr. Bagge was asked to come forward with the Hon. T. de
Grey.  The result was a large increase of Conservative strength and the
return of both candidates.  In 1867 the honour of a baronetcy was
conferred upon Mr. Bagge, in recognition of his valuable political
services.  Sir William was succeeded by his eldest son, William Henry
Ernest, who was born in 1840.

14.--A public meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, for the
purpose of making known in the county the aims and objects of the
Farmers' Alliance.  Mr. Henry Birkbeck presided, and it was asserted that
the society was non-political.  "Everything passed smoothly until the
hon. member for South Norfolk, Mr. C. S. Read, ventured to take a
different view from that of preceding speakers, and he was subjected to
persistent interruption by certain well-known Liberal politicians."  Mr.
J. Howard, president of the Alliance, and Mr. J. W. Barclay, M.P. for
Forfarshire, were among the speakers.

17.--Two monster pike were captured in private waters in the county.
One, taken by Mr. Joseph English, of Upper St. Giles' Street, Norwich,
weighed 30.5 lbs., and measured from the nose to the fork of the tail
nearly 46 inches; its girth was 24 inches, and the length of its head 13
inches.  The other, killed by Mr. Frank Thorns, of Exchange Street,
Norwich, was 47 inches in length, and 27 inches in girth; its head from
the tip of the lower jaw to the edge of the gill covers was 13.5 inches.

21.--Died at Yarmouth, Mr. James Henry Orde.  He was born in Jersey,
graduated at Oriel College, Oxford, and was appointed a clerk in the War
Office through the influence of his uncle, Lord Raglan.  Mr. Orde was
appointed private secretary to General Peele, Secretary of State for War,
and held that office until 1859, when he went to Yarmouth, and devoted
himself to public affairs in that town.  He married Margaret Barclay,
fourth daughter of Mr. Daniel Gurney, of North Runcton.

24.--Died at Ber Street, Norwich, Mr. Samuel Richardson, aged 73.  He was
well-known in scientific circles as a geologist and antiquary, and as a
contributor to various periodicals.

25.--Died at his residence, the Upper Close, Norwich, Dr. Edward Copeman.
For nearly half a century he occupied a prominent position in the medical
profession of East Anglia.  The eldest son of Mr. Edward Breese Copeman,
merchant, he was born at Great Witchingham on December 26th, 1809, and
was educated at Trunch Grammar School, then conducted by the Rev. W.
Rees.  He became a pupil of Mr. Arthur Brown, of Norwich, on whose death
he was transferred to Mr. J. G. Crosse; he subsequently studied at St.
George's Hospital, London, and became M.R.C.S. and L.A.C. in 1832.  Soon
afterwards he was elected house-surgeon of the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital, which institution he left to enter into general practice with
Mr. W. Taylor, at Coltishall.  In 1848 he returned to Norwich, and,
having graduated as M.D. at Aberdeen University, established himself in
consulting practice.  Dr. Copeman was afterwards elected a Fellow of the
Royal College of Surgeons, became a member of the Royal College of
Physicians, and in 1871 was made a Fellow of that body.  In 1851 he was
elected physician of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital; he was also
physician to the Norwich Eye Infirmary, the Norwich Magdalen, and the
Lying-in Charity, and was one of the founders of the Jenny Lind Infirmary
for Sick Children, of which institution he was the first physician.  Dr.
Copeman was a magistrate of the city and a trustee of Doughty's Hospital.
A frequent contributor to the medical literature of the day, he was the
author of several standard works, among which were "A Treatise on
Apoplexy," "Records of Obstetric Practice," "Illustrations of Puerperal
Fever," "Cerebral Diseases of Infancy," "A History of the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital," &c.


MARCH.


6.--A disastrous fire occurred at New Buckenham, in a range of shops and
private houses.  Damage was done to the amount of 3,000.

8.--Mr. William Amhurst Tyssen-Amherst was returned unopposed as the
representative of the division of West Norfolk, to fill the vacancy
caused by the death of Sir William Bagge, Bart., M.P.

16.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, the Town Clerk reported
the receipt of a letter from the Home Office, informing him that the old
City Gaol had been sold for 7,505, and that, in accordance with the
provisions of the Prisons Act, the sum of 1,984 0s. 5d. was due from that
amount to the Corporation.

29.--Mr. Charles Dillon, "one of the few living actors of the old school"
commenced a twelve nights' engagement at Norwich Theatre.  He was
supported by Miss Bella Mortimer.  Among the plays produced were
"Richelieu," "Othello," "The Merchant of Venice," "The Gamester," "Much
Ado about Nothing," and "Macbeth."  The last-named tragedy was performed
on Saturday, April 10th, on which occasion Mr. Dillon made his final
appearance on the Norwich stage.  (_See_ June 24th, 1881.)

30.--The nomination of candidates for the representation of Norwich took
place.  The nominees were Mr. J. J. Column and Mr. J. H. Tillett
(liberals), sad Mr. Henry Harben, of Seaford Lodge, Hampstead, and the
Hon. F. W. B. Massey-Mainwaring, 30, Grosvenor Place, London
(Conservatives).  The potting on the 31st resulted as follows: Colman,
6,549; Tillett, 6,512; Harben, 5,242; Massey-Mainwaring 5,032.

31.--Sir Robert Jacob Buxton, Bart., and Mr. Clare Sewell Read
(Conservatives), and Mr. Robert Thornhagh Gurdon (Liberal) were nominated
candidates for the representation of South Norfolk.  The polling took
place on April 6th, and the counting of the ballot-papers was proceeded
with at the Shirehall, Norwich, on the 7th.  "The result of the first
count was a dead heat between Mr. Read and Mr. Gurdon, the numbers for
both being 2,906.  Mr. Read's agent demanded a second count, and on the
clerks going through the papers, one of them discovered a voting-paper
for Buxton and Read, on the back of which the voter, in distinct
violation of the Ballot Act, had inscribed his name.  The rejection of
this paper made the numbers as between Mr. Read and Mr. Gurdon 2,905 and
2,906.  Thus the seat was lost by one vote, and the official return was
made as follows; Buxton, 2,917; Gurdon, 2,906; Read, 2905."  A proposed
petition against the return of Mr. Gurdon was abandoned.


APRIL.


3.--Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., and Mr. Edward Birkbeck were returned
unopposed for the division of North Norfolk.

4.--The funeral took place at Langham of William Nelson, who died at the
age of 101 years 4 months.

8.--Mr. Kay, Q.C., was appointed third Chairman of the Norfolk Court of
Quarter Sessions.

--King's Lynn election took place, and resulted as follows: Sir W.
ffolkes (Liberal), 1,286; the Hon. R. Bourke (Conservative), 1,257; Lord
Claud J. Hamilton (Conservative), 1,192; Mr. Frank Lockwood (Liberal),
1,151.

9.--Polling took place in the Western Division of Norfolk, and resulted
as follows: Mr. William Amhurst Tyssen-Amherst, 2,671; Mr. G. Bentinck,
2,433; Mr. Anthony Hamond, 2,304.

10.--Mr. Thomas Johnson Seppings, of Wormegay Grange, Mayor of King's
Lynn, died suddenly when presiding at a meeting of a Committee of the
Corporation, held at the Town Hall.  Mr. Seppings was in his 69th year.

14.--Lord Walsingham was elected second Chairman of Swaffham Quarter
Sessions, in place of Sir William Bagge, deceased.

23.--Mr. Bret Harte, the celebrated American author, delivered, at
Noverre's Rooms, Norwich, a lecture descriptive of early Californian
life, entitled, "The Argonauts of '49."


MAY.


3.--The Norwich City Asylum, at Hellesdon, built by Messrs. Cornish and
Gaymer, from plans by Mr. R. M. Phipson, was formally handed over to the
Committee of Visitors by the contractors.  The wards were designed for
the accommodation of 311 patients, and the total cost of the Asylum,
including land (1,841), and building (48,708) was 62,159.

15.*--[Advt.]  "The Erpingham Coach-and-Four is now running every Tuesday
and Saturday, calling at the several parishes on the way.  Times and
fares can be had at the Maid's Head Hotel, Norwich, the starting-place."

17.--The Annual Moveable Committee of the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows
commenced its proceedings at King's Lynn, and was attended by 400
delegates.

19.--The Duke of Edinburgh arrived at Yarmouth, in the discharge his
duties as Admiral-Superintendent of Naval Reserves and Coastguards.  In
the evening his Royal Highness attended a ball given by the officers of
the Prince of Wales' Own Norfolk Artillery Militia, and left Yarmouth on
the 21st.

21.--A meeting was held at the Royal Hotel, Norwich, under the presidency
of the Mayor (Mr. H. Bullard), in furtherance of the proposed new line of
railway between Lynn, Fakenham, and Norwich.  Mr. Walrond Smith, C.E.,
stated the details of the scheme, and a committee was appointed to
promote the progress of a Bill before Parliament.  The Corporation of
Norwich had previously presented a petition against the railway, but, on
the promoters giving an undertaking to construct a new road from Barn
Road to a point in St. Martin-at-Oak Street, to be carried over the
Wensum by a bridge, the Town Council, on May 26th, consented to the
withdrawal of the petition.  Before the end of the year a more elaborate
scheme was submitted by the promoters, who suggested an extension of the
line beyond the intended terminus at North Heigham.  It was to cross the
Wensum and pass beneath the Fakenham and Aylsham turnpikes to the hamlet
of Pockthorpe, to be again carried over the river near Bishop Bridge, and
to pass through the Lower Close and St. Faith's Lane to the Prince of
Wales Road, where it was proposed to erect a central station for the
accommodation of passengers, goods, and cattle.  Application was made to
the Corporation to contribute 50,000 towards the cost of the land
required for this undertaking.  The matter was considered at a meeting of
the Town Council on December 21st, when the proposals generally, and the
suggested contribution in particular, were ridiculed.  The Dean of
Norwich, on behalf of the Cathedral body and the inhabitants of the
Close, wrote an indignant protest against the contemplated intrusion upon
their privacy and injury to their property.  The subject was referred to
the Parliamentary and Bylaws Committee, who, in due course, condemned the
scheme.  (_See_ March 31st, 1882.)

24.--The Sheriff of Norwich (Mr. Philip Back) revived the observance of
the Queen's birthday, a custom which had been in abeyance for some years,
by giving a grand ball at St. Andrew's Hall.

27.--The headquarters of the 6th Inniskilling Dragoons arrived at Norwich
Cavalry Barracks.


JUNE.


3.--At a meeting of the Norwich Board of Guardians, a series of
resolutions and amendments on the subject of the Boys' Home and the
education and industrial training of pauper children was considered.  Mr.
Daynes moved that from and after June 24th the Boys' Home in St. Faith's
Lane be discontinued, and the boys transferred to the Workhouse, and that
the Home be offered for sale.  Canon Copeman moved that it was desirable
to provide education and industrial training for the children of the poor
apart from the Workhouse.  The amendment was adopted by 24 votes against
12.

3.--The centenary anniversary of the Yarmouth Monthly Book Club was
celebrated by a dinner held at the Crown and Anchor Hotel.  "In former
days the custom was for each member present at the dinner to propose the
health of a lady.  The society was promoted by the Rev. Richard Turner,
afterwards vicar of the parish, who, at the first meeting, was elected
honorary secretary, and held that office fifty years.  He was succeeded
by Dr. G. Penrice, who was followed by the Rev. Mark Waters, B.A., in
1841.  After the decease of that gentleman, in 1864, the business was
conducted by the Rev. Bowyer Vaux, who, five years ago, resigned, and was
succeeded by Mr. J. F. Waters.  The club is remarkable for its age, for
having had during its century of existence only five secretaries, and for
being still as flourishing as it was in its early years."

12.--A special meeting of the Norwich Diocesan Conference, summoned by
requisition, was held at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich, to consider the
Burials Bill introduced by the Government.  The Conference adopted
resolutions protesting against the principle of the Bill, and suggesting
certain amendments thereto, the chief of which were that its provisions
should not extend to the consecrated parts of cemeteries nor to
churchyards to which land had been added by living donors, and that the
permissive clause as to the modification of services be omitted.

14.--Died at North Runcton, Mr. Daniel Gurney, in his 90th year.  He was
for many years senior partner in the Lynn and district banks of Messrs.
Gurney and Co.  Mr. Gurney was a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries,
and wrote some useful essays on banking and "A Record of the House of
Gurney," printed for private circulation.  He was a magistrate and Deputy
Lieutenant for the county, and served the office of High Sheriff in 1858.

15.--Died at St. Leonard's Precincts, Mousehold, Norwich, Mr. John Henry
Druery, of the Middle Temple, barrister-at-law.  He was a member of the
Antiquarian Society of London, of the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological
Society, membre de la Societe Francaise d'Archaeologie, &c.

--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, the corporate seal was
affixed to an agreement between the Ecclesiastical Commissioners for
England and the Corporation, for carrying into effect the arrangement
made in 1866 with the Dean and Chapter of Norwich for conveying Mousehold
Heath to the Corporation for the purpose of public pleasure grounds.  The
proposal met with strenuous opposition from the inhabitants of
Pockthorpe, who claimed the Heath as the property of themselves and their
successors, and asserted that while they were entitled to the rents,
rights, and profits, the Ecclesiastical Commissioners had no title
whatever.  (_See_ June 21st, 1881.)

16.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was held at
Downham Market, and was continued on the 17th.  Mr. H. Villebois was
president.

27.--The celebration of the centenary of the Sunday School movement
originated practically by Robert Raikes, the newspaper editor, of
Gloucester, commenced at Norwich with a special service at the Cathedral
and children's services at the parish churches.  The proceedings of the
week closed on July 1st.  The centenary was celebrated throughout the
county.


JULY.


1.--Colonel Black, Chief Constable of Norfolk, resigned his appointment,
and received from the magistrates the highest superannuation allowance
permitted by law.  On September 23rd Mr. Paynton Pigott, who, for six
years, had been Deputy Chief Constable, was elected to the vacant post.
Colonel Black, on his retirement, was presented with valuable
testimonials by the magistrates and the constabulary.

10.--A fifty miles walking match, for 20 a side, took place at the
Hop-pole Gardens, Norwich, between George Parry, winner of O'Leary's
champion belt of the world, at Chicago, and William Clarke, the Norfolk
champion.  Heavy rainstorms occurred during the day, and at times the
track was flooded.  Clarke left the path after completing 40 miles, and
Parry, who was three miles ahead, also retired.

14.--The Duke of Norfolk visited Norwich, and presided at an influential
meeting held at St. Andrew's Hall, on behalf of the Eastern Counties'
Asylum for Idiots.  The principal streets of the city were decorated in
honour of the visit, peals were rung upon the bells of St. Peter
Mancroft, and his Grace was received at the hall by the Mayor (Mr. Harry
Bullard), the Sheriff (Mr. Philip Back), the Deputy Mayor.  (Mr. J. D.
Smith), and other civic dignitaries.  The Mayor presented to the Duke an
address of welcome, adopted on the previous day by the Town Council, and
afterwards entertained his Grace and 200 guests at a _dejeuner_.

17.--The Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture adopted a resolution, moved by
Mr. C. S. Read, expressing satisfaction with the steps taken by the
Government for the repeal of the Malt Tax by the substitution of a beer
duty, "as repeatedly recommended by the chamber."

22.--Died at Munich, three weeks after her arrival there from London,
Madame Anna Caroline de Belleville Oury, one of the most distinguished
pianists of her time.

24.--The 3rd and 4th Battalions of Norfolk Rifle Volunteers went into
camp at Great Yarmouth, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Bulwer and
Lieut.-Colonel Gurdon, M.P.  The total number of men under canvas was
1,301.

27.--The Norwich Town Council, on the motion of Mr. George White, adopted
the following resolution: "Several months having elapsed since this
Council requested the Parliamentary and Bylaws Committee to consider the
legal position in which the Corporation stands with the British Gaslight
Company, and, considering the enormous interests at stake, the Council
urges upon the Committee the necessity of at once reporting as to what
steps, if any, they advise to be taken, in order to relieve the citizens
from the unjust and unnecessary burdens imposed upon them through the
extravagant charge made for gas."  The Committee were also instructed "to
take into consideration the question of electric lighting, as lately
adopted by several corporations."  (_See_ August 30th, 1881.)

27.--A grand bazaar was held in Holkham Park, in aid of the restoration
fund of Wells church.  The proceedings realised a profit of 845.

28.--Died at Castle Rising, the Hon. Theophilus Howard, second son of
Charles John, Earl of Suffolk and Berkshire.  Mr. Howard entered into
possession of the estate of Castle Rising at the close of 1876, having
received it by deed of gift from Mrs. Howard, of Ashstead.  By his
succession this property, which came into the possession of the Howard
family in 1545, again reverted to the Suffolk and Berkshire line, from
which it was separated by the death of Henry, twelfth Earl of Suffolk and
Berkshire, in the year 1779.  Mr. Howard married Lady Audrey Townshend,
youngest daughter of the Marquis Townshend, in 1873, and left two sons
and two daughters.  He was called to the Bar in 1863, and in 1873 was
appointed a Commissioner in Lunacy, a post which he resigned in 1878.
"He was the first of the great Howard family who made Castle Rising his
permanent residence and home, for though the estate had been possessed by
the Howards since 1545 it was always as a political occupation when
Castle Rising was a Parliamentary borough, or as a temporary residence
for the shooting.  Consequently, through the long period of 335 years not
one of the family is known to have died there, and certainly none, with
the exception of Mr. Howard, have been buried in the parish church or
churchyard."


AUGUST.


9.--At the Norwich Police Court, William Davies, of the Army Hospital
Corps, Henry Pritchard, and William Solly, privates in the 6th
Inniskilling Dragoons, and Staff-Sergt. Alexander W. Browne, Army
Hospital Corps, were charged with attempting to kill and murder John
Smith, a private of the 17th Regiment of Foot, at the Cavalry Barracks,
on August 3rd.  Smith had been left in the military hospital by a
detachment of the 17th, who had handed the barracks over to the
Inniskillings.  Smith was suffering from a loathsome disease, and it was
alleged that the orderlies of the dragoons and Davies, who had charge of
him, with the cognisance of Browne, stuffed up the fireplace of the ward
with straw, closed the windows and door, and placed plates of burning
sulphur upon the floor, for the purpose of suffocating him.  The man died
a few days subsequently from the effects of the disease from which he was
suffering.  The prosecution alleged two motives against the
prisoners--first, that some of them were interested in a will made by
Smith in their favour, and, secondly, that they were desirous of getting
rid of an unpleasant patient.  After several remands, the prisoners were
committed for trial at the Assizes.  The case was heard before the Lord
Chief Justice on November 12th, when the jury acquitted the prisoners.
Sergt. Browne was shortly afterwards promoted to the post of Acting
Sergt.-Major in the Army Hospital Corps at the North Camp, Aldershot, and
headmaster of the 3rd District Station Hospital.

16.--Mr. Traverner's English Opera Company commenced a six nights'
engagement at Norwich Theatre, in the opera of "Martha."  The company
included Miss Annette Albu, Mdlle. Joyce-Maas, Mr. Michael Dwyer, Mr.
William Parkinson, and Madame Arabella Smythe.

--The annual meeting of the National Association of Architects commenced
at Norwich.  Visits were made to different parts of the county, for the
inspection of the church architecture of the district.

30.--The extension of the East Norfolk Railway from Aylsham to Cawston
was inspected by General Hutchinson, and was opened for public traffic on
September 1st.

31.--The Norwich Town Council received a report from a special committee
recommending a scheme for repairing the main streets of the city with
wood, at the cost of 19,284.  The scheme was adopted on September 15th.
On October 13th Mr. Arnold Taylor, an Inspector of the Local Government
Board, held an inquiry at the Guildhall as to an application by the
Corporation for powers to borrow 30,300 for street improvements and wood
paving.  It was stated that of the amount named, 25,000 would be required
for the latter work.  The Town Clerk reported, on November 16th, that the
Local Government Board had sanctioned a loan of 25,000, repayable with
interest within a period not exceeding twelve years.  (_See_ January
22nd, 1883.)


SEPTEMBER.


3.--The Grantully Castle steamship, with Mr. and Mrs. Gladstone on board,
arrived in Yarmouth Roads.  Mr. J. J. Colman, M.P., and several members
of the local Liberal party put off in the steam-tug Meteor, and boarded
the steamer.  Mr. A. Peaton read to the right hon. gentleman an address,
conveying to him the congratulations of the Liberal party in Yarmouth
upon his recovery from his recent severe illness.  Mr. Gladstone, who had
most cordially received the deputation, returned thanks in a
characteristic speech.

--The staff of the Anchor Brewery, Norwich, to the number of 650, were
conveyed by special train to the Alexandra Palace, by invitation of the
head of the firm, Mr. Harry Bullard, Mayor of the city.

17.--Died at the Bedford Hotel, Brighton, aged 84, the Right Hon. Sir
Fitzroy Edward Kelly, Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer Division of the
High Court of Justice.  He was elected High Steward of Norwich, an office
which was abolished by the Municipal Reform Act.  Sir Fitzroy received
three years' annuity to January 1st, 1839, and a life pension of 48 a
year.

18.--The appointment was announced of Dr. Horace Hill as chorus-master of
the Norwich Festivals.

21.--The Norwich Town Council appointed Dr. Bunnett City Organist, at the
salary of 50 per annum.

26.--Died at Aylsham, in his 86th year, Mr. Robert William Parmeter, who
held the office of Clerk of the Peace for the county of Norfolk from 1842
to 1868, when he was succeeded by Mr. Charles Foster.

27.--Died at Fawley Court, Buckinghamshire, Mr. Edward Mackenzie, aged
69.  He was a member of a family who were largely identified with railway
enterprises, especially in France, where he resided sixteen years.  Mr.
Mackenzie's connection with Norfolk and Suffolk began in 1869, when he
purchased the estates of Thetford and Santon-Downham.  "He is best
remembered by the public for his foundation of the British Orphan Asylum
at Slough."


OCTOBER.


5.--A meeting of the Wells and Fakenham Turnpike Trustees was held at
Wells, for the purpose of letting the toll-gates for a term of eleven
months expiring on November 1st, 1881.  The trust would have ceased in
1876, but Mr. E. B. Loynes, clerk to the trustees, was instructed to
attend a Select Committee of the House of Commons, to give information on
the subject.  This resulted in a further period of five years being
granted, and certain restrictions and conditions were imposed to be
observed by the trustees.  It was only in 1824 an Act was obtained for
making this road.  "Under no conditions, however, can the trust be
maintained beyond November 1st, 1881, and therefore after that date the
Wells and Fakenham Turnpike Trust will be a thing of the past."

11.--Died at Unthank's Road, Norwich, the Rev. John Hallett, aged 57, for
twenty-four years minister of the Old Meeting House.

18.--The "Caste" Company, under the management of Messrs. Robertson and
Bruce, commenced a farewell engagement at Norwich Theatre.  Miss Cora
Stuart (Mrs. T. W. Robertson) made her first appearance on the Norwich
stage.

22.--A new organ, erected at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, by Messrs.
Bryceson Bros. and Ellis, Charlton Works, Islington, was formally handed
over by Mr. Hugh Barclay, on behalf of the subscribers, to the Mayor (Mr.
Harry Bullard).  The organ and its accessories cost 1,874.  The receipts
amounted to 1,841, and Mr. R. A. Gorell made up the deficiency by handing
in a cheque for 35.  Dr. Bridge, organist of Westminster Abbey, Dr.
Bennett, and Dr. Gladstone played selections upon the new instrument, and
the Mayor entertained the large company present on the occasion.  The
public opening of the organ took place on the 23rd, when Dr. Bunnett gave
the first recital of his annual series.

26.--Died at Lowestoft, Mr. John Bathurst Graver-Browne, of Morley Hall,
aged 43.  He was a son of Mr. John Graver-Browne, by his wife Frances
Bathurst, granddaughter of the Bishop of Norwich, and married, in 1871,
Frances Julia, daughter of Sir Henry Stracey, Bart.  Mr. Graver-Browne
was a magistrate and Deputy Lieutenant of the county, and served the
office of High Sheriff in 1873.

29.--A dreadful disaster occurred at Wells-next-the-Sea.  The Eliza Adams
lifeboat, manned by thirteen men, capsized while going to a ship in
distress, and eleven of the crew were drowned.  Great public sympathy was
expressed, and to the fund inaugurated for the relief of the bereaved
families the Royal National Lifeboat Institution contributed 1,000.


NOVEMBER.


4.--Chapel Field, Norwich, renamed Chapel Field Gardens, was re-opened
for the use of the public.  This hitherto neglected area had been
tastefully laid out as a garden, and in the centre was erected the
wrought-iron pavilion manufactured by Messrs. Barnards and Bishop, and
exhibited by them four years previously at the Philadelphia Exhibition.
It was designed by Mr. T. Jeckyll, and purchased for the city by public
subscription.  The Mayor (Mr. Harry Bullard) performed the opening
ceremony, and after the band of the 6th Inniskilling Dragoons had played
the National Anthem, his worship entertained a large company to luncheon
at the Drill Hall.

--The Norwich Diocesan Conference commenced its sittings at Noverre's
Rooms, Norwich, under the presidency of the Lord Bishop.  The proceedings
concluded on the 5th.

--Died at Tasburgh, Mr. Ernest H. Willett, only son of Mr. Henry Willett,
of Norwich.  He was a well-known cricketer, and although he fell away
from the early promise of his Radley days, did good service as captain of
the county eleven.  With Mr. H. Birkbeck, jun., and the Rev. H. W.
Turner, Mr. Willett resuscitated the County Club, which played its first
match with Essex, at Brentwood, on July 28th and 29th, 1876.

9.--Mr. Samuel Grimmer was elected Mayor, and Dr. Eade appointed Sheriff
of Norwich.

14.--Died at Stow Hall, Downham Market, Sir Thomas Leigh Hare, Bart.
Born July 18th, 1807, he was formerly captain in the 2nd Life Guards, and
afterwards captain in the West Norfolk Militia.  A magistrate and a
Deputy Lieutenant for Norfolk, he had served the office of High Sheriff.

18.--The annual exhibition of the Norfolk and Norwich Christmas Show
Association opened at the Drill Hall and Chapel Field, Norwich, and was
attended by the Patron, the Prince of Wales, who arrived from Horstead
Hall, where he had been staying as the guest of Mr. Edward Birkbeck.  His
Royal Highness, after leaving the show, was entertained to luncheon by
Mr. and Mrs. Colman, at Carrow House.  The Prince, before returning to
Horstead, inspected the various departments at Carrow Works.

20.*--"A final dividend of 9.5d. in the pound is announced in connection
with the bankruptcy of Messrs. Harvey and Hudsons, bankers, Norwich, who
failed for upwards of 1,700,000, in July, 1870.  The total return to the
creditors has been 14s. 3.5d. in the pound."  (_See_ December 3rd.)

22.--The Prince and Princess of Wales arrived at Melton Constable, on a
visit to Lord and Lady Hastings.  Their Royal Highnesses left on November
26th.

--The dead body of Henry Jonathan Minns, lay clerk at Norwich Cathedral,
and a well-known local tenor, was discovered suspended by the neck upon a
ladder in the presbytery triforium over St. Luke's chapel at the
Cathedral.  At the adjourned inquest, held on the 26th, the jury returned
a verdict to the effect that deceased committed suicide while of unsound
mind.  On the same day "a special service of humiliation" was held at the
Cathedral, when an address was delivered by the Dean.

23.--The Duke of Edinburgh arrived at Didlington Hall, on a visit to Mr.
W. A. Tyssen-Amherst, M.P., and left on the 26th.  His Royal Highness was
engaged in the inspection of the Coastguard and Naval Reserves on the
East Coast.

24.--A special choral service, in aid of the Choir Benevolent Fund, was
held at Norwich Cathedral.  Members of the choirs of her Majesty's
Chapels Royal, St. Paul's Cathedral, Westminster Abbey, Ely, Norwich, and
Peterborough Cathedrals, Eton College, and St. George's Chapel, Windsor,
took part, and the sermon was preached by the Rev. Dr. Swainson, Canon of
Chichester.

29.--The bells of Blofield church were re-opened, after re-hanging by the
Redenhall firm of bell-founders--Captain Moore, Mr. Gervas Holmes, M.A.,
of Emanuel College, Cambridge, and Mr. Mackenzie, C.E.

--The Conservative party at Lynn presented to Lady Hamilton, wife of Lord
Claud J. Hamilton, a valuable diamond bracelet, and congratulated his
lordship, who formerly represented the borough, upon his election for
Liverpool.


DECEMBER.


3.--Application was made in the Rolls Court for leave to bring an action
in connection with the Harvey and Hudsons bankruptcy.  It was alleged
that a certain asset of the firm (a life interest on property which had
been sold by Mr. E. K. Harvey to his brother, Sir Robert) was disposed of
for a sum far below its value; Messrs. Boswell and Baxter, wine
merchants, who were creditors of Messrs. Harvey and Hudsons, claimed that
the matter should be re-opened and re-adjusted.  Divested of
technicalities, the claim of the plaintiffs, who sued for themselves and
other creditors of Sir R. J. Harvey's joint and separate estates, was to
have the purchase of the life interest by the defendants set aside, and
to have the benefit of the policies effected, and payment of the income
arising from the life interest which had been already received by the
defendants, after allowance had been made for the purchase-money and
interest of the premiums paid on the policies; and also the costs of the
suit.  The Master of the Rolls granted the application to December 9th.
(_See_ December 7th, 1882.)

8.--Trinity Wesleyan chapel, Dereham, the foundation-stone of which was
laid in the month of April, was opened for public worship.  The work,
executed from designs by Mr. Edward Boardman, architect, Norwich, cost,
inclusive of minister's house, &c., 3,400.

15.--A new warehouse, erected at the cost of many thousands of pounds, at
Lynn docks, and stored with large quantities of cotton seed, belonging to
different merchants, was destroyed by fire.  The damage was estimated at
15,000.

18.--At a meeting of the Executive Committee of the county of Norfolk,
held at the Shirehall, Norwich, the Chairman (Mr. C. S. Read) reported an
alarming outbreak of foot-and-mouth diseases affecting 1,754 cattle,
1,640 sheep, and 66 pigs.  (_See_ February 28th, 1881.)

24.--The Christmas pantomime produced at Norwich Theatre by Messrs.
Herbert and Collingwood was entitled, "Robinson Crusoe and Harlequin
Billee Taylor, or Man Friday among the Afghans."  This was the last
Christmas pantomime performed at the Theatre.  At Messrs. John Sanger and
Son's Circus, on December 27th, was produced, "Little Red Riding Hood,
the Wicked Wolf, and the Princess's Fairy Garden Party."



1881


JANUARY.


8.--Dr. F. E. Gladstone, it was announced, had resigned the post of
organist of Norwich Cathedral, upon receiving a similar appointment at
Christ church, Lancaster Gate, London.  He was succeeded by Mr. Frederic
C. Atkinson, organist of Manningham church, Bradford, a native of Norwich
and pupil of Dr. Buck.

12.--Winter set in with great severity, and during the night upwards of
six inches of snow fell.  The frost was intense.  On the 17th the Yare
was frozen over and navigation stopped, and on the 18th an extraordinary
snowstorm and gale occurred.  The thermometer registered 32 degrees of
frost, and the wind, which during the preceding night had veered to the
east, suddenly assumed the strength of a hurricane, which raged for
nearly twenty-four hours.  "A velocity of 548 miles was recorded, a force
very rarely experienced in this part of the country."  Little snow fell
until about five o'clock in the afternoon, when the clouds discharged
themselves with a virulence almost unprecedented.  From six to eight
inches of snow fell in a few hours, and in places there were drifts ten
feet in depth.  The traffic on most of the branch lines of the Great
Eastern Railway was suspended nearly twenty-four hours.  The mail train
from Norwich to Yarmouth--four hours late--ran into a drift near
Buckenham, and remained embedded six hours.  The use of five engines and
the efforts of sixty men proved unavailing, and there was no alternative
but to take the train back to Norwich.  Many of the roads being
impassable, the mail-cart drivers abandoned their journeys.  Terrible
shipping disasters occurred off Yarmouth; thirteen vessels were wrecked,
and nearly fifty lives lost.  The surf lifeboat was capsized a few yards
from the shore, and of the crew of ten who were entangled in the tackle
beneath the craft six were drowned.  From the 14th to the 21st never once
did the thermometer rise above freezing-point.  On the 26th the
temperature rose to 38 degrees, and rain fell on the 27th.

17.--Prince's Street Sunday schools and Lecture Hall, Norwich, were
opened, as an adjunct to the Congregational church.  The fine block of
buildings was designed by Mr. Edward Boardman, architect, and erected by
Messrs. Downing and Sons, at the cost of about 12,600.

24.--The National Skating Association held a race-meeting on Wroxham
Broad.  Fixed originally for the 18th, but postponed in consequence of
the gale, it was attended, amongst other competitors, by George ("Fish")
Smart, Champion of England, W. ("Turkey") Smart, and many prominent Fen
skaters.

28.--Killed at the battle of Lang's Nek, South Africa, aged 21, Lieut.
Robert Hamond Elwes, Grenadier Guards, _aide-de-camp_ to Sir G. Pomeroy
Colley.  He was the eldest son of Mr. Robert Elwes, of Congham House,
near King's Lynn.


FEBRUARY.


9.--A squadron of the 3rd Hussars arrived at Norwich Cavalry Barracks,
from Colchester.

14.--The comic opera, "Les Cloches de Corneville," was performed at
Norwich Theatre for the first time by a company under the management of
Mr. Charles Bernard.  A company of children presented the same opera at
the Theatre on March 28th.

28.--In accordance with a resolution adopted at a meeting of the Norfolk
Chamber of Agriculture on the 26th, a deputation waited upon Earl
Spencer, President of the Privy Council, when Mr. C. S. Read, as
president of the Chamber and Chairman of the Executive Committee of the
County, expressed, on behalf of Norfolk agriculturists, the desire that,
in view of the prevalence of foot-and-mouth disease, greater restrictions
should be observed in regard to store cattle, and that a certain
relaxation should be made in the case of fat cattle, which, it was
proposed, should be sent direct from licensed sales and markets to
slaughter-houses, to be killed within four days.  It was also suggested
that the Privy Council should prohibit the importation of live animals
from countries where they knew disease existed.  A further deputation,
headed by the Mayor of Norwich (Mr. S. Grimmer), interviewed Earl Spencer
on March 25th, with the view of obtaining such relaxation of the Orders
in Council as to permit the sale of store stock at Tombland Fair.  A
fresh outbreak of the disease occurred in the autumn, and on October 28th
the county authority passed a resolution affirming that, notwithstanding
its recurrence, the time had not arrived for the closing of the markets;
that should the Privy Council consider it necessary to stop the spread of
the disease by closing the store stock markets, such order should not
take effect before the first week in December; that the existing
regulations for preventing the importation of diseased cattle from
foreign countries were entirely insufficient, and that until more
stringent regulations were in force the system of closing markets was
vexatious.  (_See_ January 7th, 1882.)


MARCH.


8.--The Spring Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was held at
Lynn, but the change of venue resulted in a very small entry.

19.*--"Died, a few days ago, in a modest dwelling in Yarmouth, Charles
Crawshay Wilkinson, the inventor of perforated sheet stamps.  The
Government offered a very handsome reward for a contrivance by which
postage and other stamps might be most easily separated.  Mr. Wilkinson,
then only a working-man, in the service of a distinguished firm,
exercised the considerable technical knowledge and natural cleverness he
possessed, and constructed a perforating machine similar to those now in
use.  This success was made known to his employers, who presented him
with a sum for the invention, but obtained the credit for it, and also
the large reward offered.  The inventor gained a competency by his
industry, went to Yarmouth, and lived happily in retirement.  With the
exception of intimate friends, very few knew him as the real originator
of a device which had benefited countless millions of people."


APRIL.


2.*--"Mr. Edward Ebenezer Kay, Q.C., of Thorpe Abbots, near Scole, has
accepted the Judgeship vacant by the retirement of Vice-Chancellor Sir
Richard Malins.  He does not become Vice-chancellor, but simply one of
the Judges of the High Court of Justice."

18.--The National Fisheries Exhibition was opened at the Drill Hall,
Norwich, by the Prince of Wales.  His Royal Highness, who was accompanied
by the Princess of Wales, Prince Leopold, the Lord President of the Privy
Council and the Countess Spencer, Sir W. Vernon Harcourt and Lady
Harcourt, his Excellency Count Dannesekjold-Samsoe, Count
Frijs-Frijsonborg, Lord and Lady Charles Beresford, Mr. Mundella, M.P.,
and Sir Philip Cunliffe Owen, arrived from Wolferton at Thorpe station at
12.20, and was received by the Mayor (Mr. S. Grimmer), the Sheriff (Dr.
Eade), and the Deputy-Mayor (Mr. Harry Bullard).  The Artillery
Volunteers supplied a guard of honour in the station yard, and the Royal
visitors were escorted by a detachment of the 3rd Hussars.  At the Drill
Hall, where the Rifle Volunteers mounted a guard of honour, their Royal
Highnesses were received by the President of the exhibition (Mr. Edward
Birkbeck, M.P.) and other officials.  The President presented an address
to the Prince of Wales, who replied, and declared the exhibition open.
The Mayor afterwards entertained their Royal Highnesses and a
distinguished company to a _dejeuner_ at St. Andrew's Hall.  At four
o'clock the Royal party returned to Thorpe station, whence they proceeded
to Wolferton.  The exhibition, which was promoted by the Norfolk and
Suffolk Fish Acclimatization Society, remained open until May 7th, was
visited by 70,000 persons, exclusive of exhibitors and their assistants,
and nearly 2,800 was received for admission.  Several distinguished
scientists delivered lectures at the Prince's Street Lecture
Hall--Professor Huxley on "The Herring," on April 21st; Mr. Edward Jex,
on "Deep Sea Fisheries," on April 22nd; Mr. R. Bowdler Sharpe, on
"Fish-eating Birds," on April 25th; and Mr. H. N. Moseley, naturalist to
the Challenger Expedition, on "Deep-sea Dredging," on April 28th.  On the
last day of the exhibition, Earl Ducie distributed the prizes and
diplomas to the exhibitors.

19.--A meeting of the members of the Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture and
of farmers and agriculturists residing in West Norfolk was held at the
Town Hall, Lynn, under the presidency of Mr. C. S. Read, when a
resolution affirming "that the present state of the agricultural interest
demands the serious attention of the Government of the country" was
unanimously adopted.  In compliance with a letter addressed to the
parochial clergy by the Lord Bishop, services of humiliation and of
intercession for a plentiful harvest were held throughout the diocese
during the last week of May.

26.--On the occasion of the funeral of Lord Beaconsfield, flags were
displayed at half-mast on the churches and public buildings of Norwich,
muffled bells were tolled, and many business establishments were
partially closed.  A funeral sermon was preached at the Cathedral by
Canon Heaviside.

28.--Died, in his 84th year, Mr. Brampton Gurdon, of Letton Hall and
Grundisburgh Hall, Suffolk.  He was the eldest son of Mr. Theophilus
Thornhagh Gurdon, of Letton, and in 1855 served the office of High
Sheriff.  In 1857 Mr. Gurdon was elected unopposed one of the members for
the Western division of the county, and was again returned, with Mr.
Bentinck, in 1859.  He retained the seat until July, 1865, when he and
Sir Willoughby Jones were defeated by Mr. Bagge and the Hon. T. de Grey.
Mr. Gurdon married the Hon. Henrietta Susannah, daughter and co-heiress
of the first Baron Colborne, of West Harling Hall.

29.--Charles Monsey, a superannuated Excise officer, murdered his wife at
Worstead, by inflicting wounds upon her head with a hatchet.  At Ipswich
Assizes, before Mr. Justice Hawkins, on May 9th, affidavits were produced
as to the insanity of the accused, and the trial was postponed.  Monsey
was afterwards detained as a criminal lunatic.


MAY.


7.--The Census returns for Norwich were published on this date, as
follow:--Houses: Inhabited, 19,777; uninhabited, 1,011; building, 246.
Persons: Males, 40,281; females, 47,560; total, 87,841.

29.--Died at Hoveton House, the Rev. Thomas John Blofeld, vicar of the
parish, aged 74.  He was educated at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge,
where he graduated in 1829.  Ordained in 1830, he was for a short time
vicar of Old Sodbury, Gloucestershire, and exchanged the living for the
rectory of Drayton and Hellesdon.  Mr. Blofeld was rural dean of the
deanery of Taverham, which he resigned, with the rectory of Drayton, in
1851, on his appointment to the living of Hoveton.  He married, in 1834,
Catherine Charlotte, daughter of the Rev. Anthony Collett, of
Heveningham, Suffolk, by whom he had three sons and a daughter.  Mr.
Blofeld was an active county magistrate, chairman of the visiting
justices of the County Gaol, an auditor of the county accounts, and a
Deputy Lieutenant.  For many years he was one of the most able and
energetic of the leaders of the Conservative party in North Norfolk.  In
his youth he was a great oarsman, was stroke of the Trinity boat, and one
of the founders of boating on the Cam.  With a taste for outdoor
pursuits, he was a keen and skilled naturalist, and a sportsman of the
best type.

30.--Died at Les Avants, the Rev. Herbert Pelham, aged 26, curate of St.
Philip, Heigham, and youngest son of the Bishop of Norwich.  "He had been
staying at Gleion, in Montreaux, on the banks of Lake Geneva, with his
brother, the Rev. Sidney Pelham.  In the morning, at four o'clock, both
brothers left their hotel for a walk amongst the mountains, aiming at a
point which they reached at seven o'clock.  After resting half an hour,
they began to descend.  Not more than ten minutes had elapsed after their
starting, when, on a grassy slope, Mr. Sidney Pelham, who was in front,
heard a rushing sound, and perceived that his brother was falling head
foremost down a cliff some 240 feet in extent."  On hurrying to the spot
he found the body motionless, and a surgeon who was summoned pronounced
that death had been instantaneous.  Great public sympathy was expressed
in Norwich and the diocese, and many resolutions of condolence were sent
to the Bishop.

31.--Died at his residence, at Thorpe, Norwich, Mr. William Howlett, aged
78.  He had been an alderman and town councillor.  Identified with the
musical profession, Mr. Howlett had rendered very valuable assistance to
the funds of many of the Norwich charities.


JUNE.


8.--The new section of the Yarmouth and North Norfolk Railway, between
Stalham and North Walsham, was inspected by Major-General Hutchinson,
R.E., and was opened for passenger traffic on the 13th.  A public dinner
to commemorate the event was held, under the presidency of Mr. C. S.
Read, at the King's Arms Hotel, North Walsham, on the 15th.

9.--The Prince of Wales arrived at Yarmouth, and inspected the Norfolk
Artillery Militia on the South Denes.  The Duke of Cambridge,
Commander-in-Chief, arrived in the evening, and on the 10th inspected the
Militia, and the 2nd Norfolk Artillery Volunteers.

21.--The Norwich Town Council granted to the promoters of the proposed
Agricultural Hall the lease of a piece of land 174 feet long by 103 feet
wide, for a term of seventy-five years, commencing September 29th, 1881,
at an annual ground rent of 100, subject to the promoters expending at
least 7,000 for the erection of the building thereon.  (_See_ March 25th,
1882.)

--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, a scheme for the regulation
and management of Mousehold Heath was adopted.  On June 24th, at Norwich
Quarter Sessions, eleven persons were indicted for committing damage to
certain roadways on the Heath, the property of the Corporation.  The case
was adjourned to the October Sessions.  In the High Court of Justice, on
July 29th, before the Master of the Rolls, application was made for an
injunction to restrain the "Pockthorpe Committee" and others from dealing
in any way with Mousehold Heath.  The injunction was granted.  At the
October Sessions, the prosecution was withdrawn, on the ground that the
injunction had been obeyed by the defendants.  (_See_ June 5th, 1883.)

22.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened
at Wymondham, and closed on the 23rd.  The Earl of Kimberley presided at
the public luncheon.

24.--Died, in his 64th year, the Rev. Thomas Lyon Fellowes, vicar of
Honingham and East Tuddenham, and Hon. Canon of Norwich Cathedral.  He
was a son of the Rev. J. Fellowes, rector of Shotesham, took a great
interest in agriculture, and was for many years chairman of the Executive
Committee of the Norfolk Agricultural Association.  Mr. Fellowes gave
valuable assistance to the Norfolk and Norwich Christmas Show
Association, and was a renowned breeder and successful exhibitor of
poultry.  He married Miss Reeve, of Lowestoft.

24.--Died, suddenly, at Hawick, N.B., where he was fulfilling an
engagement, Mr. Charles Dillon, the well-known actor.  Mr. Dillon, who
was in his 62nd year, was a native of Diss, and first appeared upon the
provincial stage, where he acquired considerable reputation as an
elocutionist and exponent of legitimate drama.  He made his first
appearance on the London stage at Sadler's Wells Theatre, and
subsequently became lessee and manager of the Lyceum Theatre.  Mr.
Dillon's last appearance in London was in September, 1878, and in Norwich
on April 10th, 1880.

29.--An extensive fire occurred at Carrow Works, and resulted in the
destruction of a pile of lofty buildings.

30.--The wards of that portion of the new Norfolk and Norwich Hospital
known as the pavilion and central administrative block having been
completed for the reception of patients, were opened.  Mr. Edward
Boardman was the architect of the building.  Mr. T. H. Wyatt, of London,
was originally associated with him, but, by the failure of his health and
subsequent death the whole of the work devolved upon Mr. Boardman.
(_See_ August 20th, 1883.)


JULY.


9.--The Norwich Rifle Volunteers, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel
Boileau, proceeded by special train to Windsor, and took part in the
Volunteer review before her Majesty the Queen in the Great Park.  On the
return journey the train by which they travelled dashed into a train of
empty carriages at Egham.  The accident delayed the return of the
Volunteers, who reached Norwich at four o'clock on the morning of the
10th.

19.--The Strumpshaw Hall estate was sold, at the Royal Hotel, Norwich, by
Messrs. Spelman, for 33,145, exclusive of timber.

--Died at Ipswich, Mr. John Worlledge, Chancellor of the Diocese of
Norwich, and for twenty-four years Judge of the Suffolk County Court
circuit.  Mr. Worlledge, who was in his 72nd year, was a son of Mr. John
Worlledge, of Chevington, and was educated at Felstead Grammar School and
Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated fourth wrangler in 1831.
Called to the Bar at the Middle Temple in 1838, he became well known as a
pleader on the Norfolk Circuit, and was appointed Chancellor of the
Diocese in April, 1871.

26.--Died at Oulton, Mr. George Thomas Borrow, author of "The Bible in
Spain," "Lavengro," and other works.  "The deceased was in his usual
health up to the afternoon of the 25th, when he complained of feeling
unwell, and was assisted to bed.  On the following morning he was found
dead in bed."  The writer of the obituary notice, after stating that
Borrow was a son of Captain Borrow, Adjutant of the West Norfolk Militia,
and was born at East Dereham in 1803, records several more or less
familiar incidents in his career, and concludes a summary of his literary
work with the remark: "His most important book was 'Romano Lavo-Lil,' a
vocabulary of the English gipsy language, which represents the labour of
many years, and was published in 1874."

30.--The 3rd and 4th Battalions of Norfolk Rifle Volunteers went into
camp at Yarmouth, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Bulwer and
Lieut.-Colonel Gordon, M.P.


AUGUST.


1.--The first Norwich Cricket Week commenced on the Lakenham Ground.

3.--North Walsham pariah church was re-opened, on the completion of the
new roof to the nave.  The work was carried out at the cost of 2,208, by
Messrs. Cornish and Gaymer, under the direction of Mr. J. B. Pearce,
architect, of Norwich.

13.--Died at Bilney rectory, the Rev. Henry Collison, aged 89.  Mr.
Collison, who was one of the oldest clergymen of the Church of England,
was the eldest surviving son of Mr. Nicholas Cobb Collison, a merchant of
London, by his marriage with Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Mr. Peter
Stoughton, of Wymondham.  He was formerly chaplain of the King's Bench
Prison, of the old Marshalsea in the Borough, and of the Court of the
Palace of Westminster.  For some time he served as military chaplain at
the Cape of Good Hope, and afterwards held the rectory of Bilney for
nearly half a century.  Mr. Collison married, in 1851, Harriett Mary,
younger daughter of Mr. Thomas Abel Ward, of Watford, Herts.

30.--The Norwich Town Council, who had erected two electric lights in the
Market Place, decided to extend the system experimentally to several of
the principal streets, at a cost not exceeding 400, for twelve months.
(_See_ April 24th, 1883.)


SEPTEMBER.


5.--Mr. Thomas Calthorpe Blofeld, who had been appointed to the office of
Chancellor of the Diocese of Norwich, rendered vacant by the death of Mr.
Worlledge, presided for the first time at the Norwich Consistory Court,
and received the congratulations of the officials.

8.--The Church of England portion of Wymondham Cemetery was consecrated
by the Bishop of Norwich, and a dedicatory service was held by the
Nonconformists in that part of the burial-ground appropriated to their
use.  The entire cost of the Cemetery, including the chapels, designed by
Mr. Edward Boardman, of Norwich, was 2,000.

20.--The Norwich Town Council adopted a resolution of condolence with the
American nation on the death of President Garfield.

29.--Sidestrand church was consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich.  "In
1846, owing to a landslip, caused by the action of the sea, considerable
anxiety was felt for the safety of the old church, and a fund was started
with the object of removing it to another site.  About 300 was
contributed, but as there seemed no immediate necessity to remove the
church, the money was invested, and it was not until November, 1880, that
the vestry definitely decided to build the new church.  With accumulated
interest, the original fund amounted to 850, and the balance of the cost
of removal and restoration, which is now over 2,000, has been generously
provided by the lord of the manor, Mr. Samuel Hoare, who also gave the
site."


OCTOBER.


4.--The church of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, was re-opened after
restoration, at the cost of 7,500.  The contractor was Mr. G. E. Hawes,
and the architect Mr. G. E. Street.  The Restoration Committee decided to
proceed with the work upon the tower, and a special appeal was made to
the citizens to assist the completion of this great undertaking.  (_See_
January 11th, 1882.)

11.--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  The _artistes_ included Madame Albani, Miss Mary
Davies, Mrs. Osgood, Madame Patey, Madame Mudie-Bolingbroke, Mr. Edward
Lloyd, Mr. Barton McGuckin, Mr. Santley, Mr. Frederic King, and Mr.
Brockbank.  Mr. Alberto Randegger conducted for the first time.  The
following productions were included in the programme: 11th, evening, "St.
Paul"; 12th, morning, "The Martyr of Antioch"; evening, "Faust"; 13th,
morning, "St. Ursula" (Cowen), composed expressly for the Festival, and
Racine's "Athalie"; evening, grand operatic and ballad concert, including
"The Sun Worshippers," composed for the Festival by A. G. Thomas; 14th,
morning, "The Messiah"; evening, operatic and ballad concert, including
"The Harvest Home," composed expressly for the Festival by J. F. Barnett.

14.--A hurricane, which prevailed throughout Great Britain, did great
damage in the towns and villages of Norfolk.  Many fine trees were
uprooted, and houses unroofed; railway signal-boxes were blown down, and
several shipping disasters occurred along the coast.

18.--The jubilee anniversary of the Eldon Club, formed in 1831, was
celebrated at the Bell Hotel, Norwich, when the members dined under the
presidency of Lieut.-Colonel Bignold.

21.--A girl, named Hannah Brett, was brutally murdered at Saham Toney, by
an ex-convict, named Henry Stebbings.  At the Norfolk Assizes, on
February 9th, 1882, before Mr. Justice Grove, he was found guilty and
sentenced to death, but was respited, on the ground of homicidal mania.

23.--Died at Woking, Sir William Henry Ernest Bagge, Bart., of Stradsett
Hall, aged 41.  In default of issue, he was succeeded in the baronetcy by
his only brother, Commander Alfred Thomas Bagge, R.N.


NOVEMBER.


1.--Salhouse church was re-opened, after restoration at the cost of
2,100.

3.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference met at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich, and
the proceedings were continued on the 4th.  A special meeting was held on
December 19th, to consider proposals for the revision of the Education
code.

--The Ven. Archdeacon Nevill was elected vicar of St. Peter Mancroft,
Norwich, on the resignation of the Rev. Sidney Pelham.

9.--Mr. William Hunter was elected Mayor, and Mr. J. J. Winter appointed
Sheriff of Norwich.

10.--Died at the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, aged 53, Edmund Stephen
Weller, formerly of the 16th Landers.  As colonel's trumpeter, he sounded
the famous charge of the regiment at Aliwal, on January 28th, 1846.

15.--The squadron of the 3rd Hussars marched from Norwich, for Aldershot.
The headquarters of the 7th Dragoon Guards, commanded by Colonel Colin
Campbell, arrived on the 17th.  "Since the regiment was last quartered
here, Captain Mollyneaux, a former officer, obtained from the Tower of
London and presented to the regiment a pair of kettledrums captured by
the 7th at the battle of Dettingen, in 1743."


DECEMBER.


17.*--"A line of wire has been suspended between Messrs. Morgan's
Brewery, King Street, and Mousehold House, the residence of Mr. W. H.
Hackblock, who is a member of the firm."  This is the first record of a
telephone wire erected in Norwich.  The line was constructed by the
United Telephone Company.

19.--The Prince and Princess of Wales arrived at Holkham, on a visit to
the Earl and Countess of Leicester.

26.--For the first time for many years there was no pantomime at Norwich
Theatre.  The Christmas attraction was the appearance of Mr. George
Loveday's London Folly Company, in Paul Merritt's "Rough and Ready" and
Pinero's "Hester's Mystery."  The company included Messrs. John
Billington, E. D. Ward, E. W. Garden, Misses Ada Mellon, Emily Thorn,
Eliza Johnstone, &c.  At John Sanger and Son's Circus, on Castle Meadow,
was produced the equestrian spectacle, "Dick Whittington and his
Wonderful Cat."



1882.


JANUARY.


7.--Great discontent was caused among the agriculturists of the county by
the issue of a Privy Council Order directing the closing of the markets
for the sale of store stock, owing to the recurrence of foot-and-mouth
disease.  At a meeting of the Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture, a
resolution was adopted and forwarded to Earl Spencer, declaring "that the
severe restrictions imposed on the sale of cattle in the county were
uncalled-for, and that a heavy penalty inflicted upon all persons moving
diseased cattle would be a sufficient protection from disease."  On the
14th Mr. Edward Birkbeck, M.P., presided at a large meeting held at
Norwich Corn Hall, at which resolutions were adopted protesting against
"harassing and unnecessary restrictions, entailing serious loss upon the
farming community"; and on the 18th a deputation appointed by the meeting
waited upon Earl Spencer, with the object of obtaining relaxation of the
restrictions.  An important conference of the local authorities and Privy
Council inspectors was held on the 21st, to discuss the state of the
cattle lairs at Trowse and Lakenham, when it was resolved that as the
local authorities had done all in their power to check the spread of the
disease through the lairs, the Privy Council be requested to take such
further steps as might seem desirable.  On the 28th a telegram was
received from the Privy Council, stating that the Order relating to the
sale of fat beasts had been so far relaxed as to permit animals that had
been offered at a public sale in a place not infected being sent within
six days to the Metropolitan markets; and on February 17th the "London
Gazette" announced that the restrictions in Norfolk, Essex, and Suffolk
had been removed.  Another outbreak occurred in December, and on the 9th
of that month Norwich market was closed in respect to the sale of fat
cattle.  On the same day a large meeting of farmers, graziers, and
dealers was held, under the auspices of the Norfolk Chamber of
Agriculture, for the purpose of supporting an application made by Mr.
Birkbeck, M.P., to the Vice-President of the Privy Council (Mr.
Mundella), "that other than the Metropolitan market be opened to fat
cattle sold on Norwich Hill and at the cattle sales held in the county."
On December 23rd it was announced that the authorities of the county and
city were taking energetic measures to stop the sale of store stock
unless the animals had been on a farm or premises fourteen days, and
persons were appointed to watch the movements of animals, with the view
of detecting any evasion of the Privy Council Order.  (_See_ March 17th,
1883.)

10.--Mr. J. L. Toole appeared with Mr. G. Loveday's London Folly Company
at Norwich Theatre, and continued his performances on the 11th, 12th, and
13th.  His characters were Barnaby Doublechick ("Upper Crust"), Spriggins
("Ici On Parle Francais"), Paul Pry, Tom Cranky ("Birthplace of
Podgers"), Caleb Plummer ("Dot"), and Tittums ("The Steeplechase").

11.--An "Old English Fair," in aid of the restoration fund of the church
of St. Peter Mancroft, was opened at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, and
continued on the 12th and 13th.  A total profit of 1,880 10s. 6d.
resulted, and by the first week in March the required sum--4,000--for the
completion of the work had been raised.  (_See_ April 29th, 1883.)


FEBRUARY.


13.--Died at his residence, Unthank's Road, Norwich, the Rev. George
Gould, minister of St. Mary's chapel, aged 63.  Mr. Gould was a native of
Bristol, and, on entering the Baptist ministry, took charge of the Abbey
church, Abbey street, Dublin.  Thence he removed to Exeter, and in the
spring of 1849 succeeded the Rev. W. Brock in the Norwich pastorate.  He
was president of the Baptist Union in 1879-80, chairman of the Norwich
School Board, and for several years a governor of the Grammar School and
Commercial School.  Mr. Gould was very decided in his religious and
political opinions, and firm in upholding them; in private life he was
greatly esteemed.


MARCH.


1.--A fine steamer, named the Levadia, of Newcastle, bound from Shields
to Alexandria, with coals, was wrecked on the Middle Cross Sand, five
miles off Yarmouth.  Several men were drowned by the upsetting of one of
the ship's boats, others who had lashed themselves to the masts of the
vessel perished from cold and exposure, and of the crew of twenty-five a
solitary survivor, Thomas Sewell, a Yarmouth man, was rescued by the
Gorleston lifeboat.

2.--Mr. Arthur H. Mann, B.Mus., of New College, Oxford, organist at
King's College, Cambridge, whose exercise, "Ecce Homo," had been
performed on the previous day in the Sheldonian Theatre, was admitted to
the degree of Doctor of Music.

7.--The first Good Friday performance of "The Messiah," took place at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  Mr. F. W. B. Noverre was leader of the band, Dr.
Bunnett organist, and Dr. Hill conductor.

21.--The Norwich Town Council adopted a memorial to the Secretary of
State for War, in which the War Office was petitioned to retain Norwich
as a cavalry station.  The Mayor, Sheriff, and the members of Parliament
for the city, on May 5th, waited upon the Secretary of State for War, and
urged the retention of cavalry headquarters in the city, in addition to
its being made the brigade depot of the Norfolk Regiment.  (_See_ March
24th, 1883.)

25.--The Spring Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was held on
the Lakenham Cricket Ground, Norwich.

--The Earl of Leicester performed the ceremony of laying the
foundation-stone of the Norfolk and Norwich Agricultural Hall, at
Norwich.  On April 27th, in the High Court of Justice, Chancery Division,
before the Vice-Chancellor, Sir C. Hall, application was made on behalf
of Mr. Philip Back for an injunction against the Corporation of Norwich
and the Agricultural Hall Company, Limited, to restrain them from
erecting the hall, on the ground that the Corporation had no power to let
the land, which had been dedicated from time immemorial to fairs and
markets.  The hearing was adjourned until May 20th, when the Court
refused the application; and on November 11th it was announced that Mr.
Back had consented to abandon the action.  (_See_ November 16th.)

31.--In the House of Commons, the opposition of the Dean and Chapter and
other residents in the Cathedral Close, Norwich, to the invasion of the
precincts of the Cathedral by the Lynn and Fakenham Railway Company was
successful, the company being compelled, by the strong feeling expressed
against the proposed route, to withdraw that portion of their Bill
affecting the Close.


APRIL.


14.--The last sections of the line of railway from Wroxham to the Wells
branch of the Great Eastern Railway Company, by which the union of East
and West Norfolk was effected, was inspected, on its completion, by
Major-General Hutchinson.  The line was opened for traffic on May 1st.

15.--A party of about twenty members of the North Walsham and Aylsham
Agricultural Association started from Norwich on a trip to Holland, the
expenses of which were defrayed by Mr. Samuel Hoare and Sir T. Fowell
Buxton, Bart.  They arrived at Rotterdam on the 16th.  In the course of
the tour much valuable information was obtained regarding the Dutch
systems of agriculture and dairying.

18.--The portrait of Mr. Harry Bullard, to which fifteen hundred persons
subscribed, in recognition of his eminent services to the city, was hung
in St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  It was painted by Mr. Frank Holl, A.R.A.

22.--A county meeting, in furtherance of the movement originated by the
Prince of Wales for establishing a Royal College of Music, was held at
St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, under the presidency of the Earl of
Leicester.

25.--Mary Ann Plunkett, aged nineteen, was murdered at Mill Hill, Catton,
by a youth of twenty-two, named William George Abigail, who shot her in
the head with a revolver.  He was tried at Ipswich Assizes, before Mr.
Baron Pollock, and sentenced to death.  The execution was carried out at
Norwich Castle, by Marwood, on May 22nd.


MAY.


13.--The Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture discussed the financial proposals
made by Government with regard to the maintenance of highways.  The
following motion, by Mr. C. S. Read, was adopted: "That this Chamber
approves of the principle of relieving local rates by applying some
special taxes towards the repair of main roads, but considers the
proposals of the Government are no sufficient remedy for the extra cost
of maintenance of main roads, and expresses its disappointment that a
contribution of only 250,000 from the Imperial finances can be given in
aid of local rates without the imposition of additional taxation."

17.--Cardinal Manning addressed a great meeting at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, in furtherance of the principle of Local Option.  His Eminence,
on August 30th, again visited Norwich, and at the Victoria Hall addressed
the members of the Roman Catholic temperance society--the League of the
Cross.

21.--Died at his house in Grosvenor Square, London, William Henry
FitzRoy, Duke of Grafton.  His Grace was the eldest son of Henry, fifth
Duke, by Mary Caroline, third daughter of Admiral the Hon. George
Cranefeld Berkeley.  He was born on August 4th, 1819; served as an
_attache_ of the British Legation at Naples in 1841, and represented
Thetford in the House of Commons from 1847 to 1863.  In politics his
Grace was a Whig of the old school.

31.--The new Town Hall at Yarmouth was opened by the Prince of Wales.
After the ceremony, at which a loyal address was read on behalf of the
burgesses by the Recorder (Mr. Simms Reeve), the Mayor (Mr. C. C. Aldred)
entertained his Royal Highness and a distinguished company to luncheon.
On June 1st the Prince of Wales inspected the Norfolk Artillery, and left
the town on June 2nd.


JUNE.


1.--A sacred and operatic concert was given at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, under the direction of Sir Julius Benedict, in aid of the funds
of the Jenny Lind Infirmary for Sick Children.  The performers included
Madame Blanche Cole, Miss Lucy Franklein, Madame Alice Barth, Mr.
Faulkner Leigh, Mr. Aynsley Cook, &c., and the band and chorus were
composed of the opera company performing at the Theatre Royal and of the
members of the Norfolk and Norwich Festival Choir.

2.--At Norwich Theatre was produced Sir Julius Benedict's romantic opera,
"The Lily of Killarney," under the personal direction of the composer.
The performance was repeated on the 3rd.

22.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened
at Norwich, in the grounds of Mr. A. R. Chamberlin, Ipswich Road, and was
continued on the 23rd.  Mr. Henry Birkbeck presided at the public
luncheon.


JULY.


2.--The Right Rev. Samuel Crowther, D.D., Bishop of the Niger district of
Africa, preached at St. Giles' church, Norwich, and at the Cathedral.
Originally an African slave-boy, he was the first Bishop of the negro
race, and at the time of his visit to Norwich was 70 years of age.

8.--It was announced that Sir Willoughby Jones, Bart., had resigned the
senior chairmanship of the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, to which position he
was elected in October, 1856.  On October 19th, Mr. J. R. Bulwer, Q.C.,
M.P., Recorder of Cambridge, was elected to fill the vacancy.

22.--The 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Battalions of Norfolk Rifle Volunteers went
into camp at Yarmouth, under the respective commands of Lieut.-Colonel H.
E. Buxton, Lieut.-Colonel Bulwer, and Lieut.-Colonel R. T. Gurdon, M.P.

24.--Bishop Pelham, who, on June 11th, completed the twenty-fifth year of
his episcopate, received at the Palace, Norwich, a congratulatory address
from the clergy of the several archdeaconries.  (A portrait of his
lordship, painted by Mr. W. Owles, R.A., was presented to him on October
18th, 1883.)


AUGUST.


3.--The officers of the 7th Dragoon Guards were entertained to luncheon
at the Guildhall, Norwich, by the Mayor (Mr. W. Hunter), prior to the
departure of the regiment for active service in Egypt.  The right wing
left Trowse station on the 4th, and sailed from the South West India
Docks, in the Egyptian Monarch, on the 5th.  The left wing proceeded from
Trowse to Southampton on the 6th.  On the departure of the cavalry, the
Barracks were temporarily occupied by a detachment of the 1st Battalion
Norfolk Regiment, from Colchester.  In September the citizens sent a
petition to the Secretary of State for War, asking that the 7th Dragoons
might be permitted to return to Norwich, but the authorities were unable
to accede to the request.

12.--The first reference was made to the commencement of operations in
Norwich by the Salvation Army, who had "secured St. Giles' Hall, formerly
the Skating Rink, and converted it into suitable quarters."  Frequent
complaints of nuisances created by the "Army" were from time to time
addressed to the magistrates.  "General" Booth made his first visit to
Norwich on September 9th.

23.--Mr. J. J. Henley and Dr. Airey, Local Government Board Inspectors,
opened an inquiry at Norwich Workhouse into certain cases of alleged
injury from vaccination reported to the Department by Mr. Ralph Lee
Bliss.  Eight definite cases were submitted, and in each the operation
had been performed by the public vaccinator (Dr. Guy), at the vaccination
station.  Six of these cases were investigated.  Subsequently five other
cases were submitted, but only two were the subject of inquiry, the
others being private cases, into which the Inspectors had no power to
enquire.  The inquiry concluded on September 4th.  The Commissioners, in
their report, dated October 21st, stated that no blame was to be attached
to the public vaccinator as to the performance of his duties; "but we
think," they added, "he should discontinue the use again and again of the
same ivory points, and we consider it was an error of judgment on his
part to continue vaccination attendance while he was daily visiting cases
of erysipelas, without taking more than ordinary precautions to guard
against the spread of infection."


SEPTEMBER.


1.--A three weeks' mission, in furtherance of the Blue Ribbon movement,
was commenced in Norwich by its founder, Mr. Francis Murphy.  The new
pledges taken during the mission numbered 10,000, and upwards of 15,000
blue ribbons were distributed.

--The express service from the Eastern Counties to Doncaster was opened
by the Great Eastern Railway Company, over their own and the Great
Northern joint line.

5.--The coming of age of Mr. Russell J. Colman, eldest son of Mr. J. J.
Colman, M.P., was celebrated by a dinner given in the grounds of Carrow
House, to between 3,000 and 4,000 of the _employes_ at Carrow Works.

9.--The death was recorded of Mr. John Laffan Hanly, proprietor and
editor of the "Levant Times," at Constantinople, at the age of 48.  Mr.
Hanly was for some time chief reporter on the NORFOLK CHRONICLE, and
subsequently editor of the "Lincolnshire Chronicle."

13.--The French fishing lugger, La Reine des Anges, deeply laden with
herring, was wrecked on the Middle Cross Sand off Yarmouth, and of her
crew of eighteen, ten were drowned.

17.--Special thanksgivings were offered in the churches in Norwich "for
the glorious success achieved by our arms at Tel-el-Kebir, with the
consequent collapse of the rebellion of Arabi and the prospect of the
restoration of peace in Egypt."

24.--Died at Yarmouth, Mr. Charles John Palmer, F.S.A.  He was Mayor of
the borough in 1835, 1854, and 1855, and was very zealous in promoting
various local undertakings, among which was the restoration of the parish
church.  Mr. Palmer was the author of several antiquarian works, the best
known of which is his "Perlustration of Great Yarmouth."

27.--The coming of age of Mr. Edward Evans Lombe, eldest son of the Rev.
Henry Evans Lombe, was celebrated at Bylaugh Park.


OCTOBER.


21.--Died at East Dereham, Mr. George Alfred Carthew, F.S.A., M.A., aged
75.  Mr. Carthew, who was known throughout the kingdom as an able
archaeologist, contributed many valuable papers to the journals of
learned societies.  He was the author of "A History of the Hundred of
Launditch," and of a similar work, passing through the press at the time
of his death, on the topography, archaeology, genealogy, and biography of
East and West Bradenham, Necton, and Holme Hale.  He had vast stores of
curious information, acquired in the course of a life-long study of
matters illustrating the history of the county in ancient times.  He was
a descendant of the old Cornish family of Carthew, a member of which,
Thomas Carthew, of Canalidgy, married, in the year 1685, Mary Colby, of
Banham.  Mr. Carthew helped to found the Norfolk and Norwich
Archaeological Society, and to establish its position among the learned
societies of the kingdom.

24.--An inquiry, directed by the Charity Commissioners for England and
Wales, under the Endowed Schools Act, 1869, was opened at the Guildhall,
Norwich, by Mr. C. H. Stanton, into the matter of the endowments commonly
known as the Grammar School of the foundation of King Edward VI., the
Commercial School of the same foundation, the Boys' Hospital, the Girls'
Hospital, and Norman's Charity.  Many prominent citizens made statements
before the Commissioner, who closed his inquiry on the 25th.  (_See_
August 11th, 1883.)

26.--A remarkable case of somnambulism occurred on this date.  A girl of
seventeen, employed as general servant by a shopkeeper at Felthorpe,
after retiring to rest at nine o'clock, got out of bed, and, having put
on a dress and a pair of boots, climbed out of the bed-room window, and,
without waking, reached the ground by groping along the roof of a lean-to
shed.  She then walked to Cawston, a distance of five miles, and was
found about four o'clock in the morning sitting fast asleep on the
doorstep of her father's house.  She was stiff, cold, and speechless, and
on being restored to warmth and consciousness, stated that she had no
recollection whatever of having left her bed.

28.--A severe gale, accompanied by wrecks and loss of life, occurred on
the Norfolk coast.

--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Lindley, James Charles
Edwards, 37, solicitor's clerk, pleaded guilty to forging certain
documents.  The prisoner read a written statement, in which he said, "A
love for pictures was my ruin, a craving desire and mania to possess
myself of something better than my neighbours gradually developed, until
at last it became a madness with me."  He was sentenced to ten years'
penal servitude.


NOVEMBER.


2.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference was opened at Noverre's Rooms,
Norwich.  The sittings concluded on the 3rd.

9.--Mr. Charles Rackham Gilman was elected Mayor, and Mr. Samuel Newman
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

16.--The new Agricultural Hall at Norwich was opened by the Prince of
Wales, on the occasion of the first exhibition held within the building
by the Norfolk and Norwich Christmas Show Association.  Among the
distinguished company who received his Royal Highness were the Earl of
Leicester, the Marquis of Hamilton, the Earl of Rosebery, Lord
Walsingham, Lord Hastings, Lord Claud Hamilton, the High Sheriff, the
Mayor of Norwich and Mrs. Gilman, &c.  The Prince of Wales, having
declared the hall open, made a tour of the show, and subsequently
attended a meeting in the Farmers' Room, at which the recently-formed
Prisoners' Aid Society was inaugurated.  [The Christmas Show has since
been held annually at the hall in the month of November.]

17.--The Rev. W. L. Blackley, rector of North Waltham, Hampshire, author
of "Essays on the Prevention of Pauperism," delivered an address at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich, on his scheme of "national insurance or
compulsory providence."  On the 18th Mr. Blackley addressed a second
meeting, held at Noverre's Rooms, under the presidency of Lord
Walsingham.

21.--The Prince and Princess of Wales arrived at Merton Hall, on a visit
to Lord and Lady Walsingham.


DECEMBER.


2.--The opening of the Norwich extension of the Lynn and Fakenham
Railway, completed on November 21st, was celebrated by a _dejeuner_ given
at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, by the contractors, Messrs. Wilkinson and
Jarvis.  Sir William ffolkes, Bart., presided over the large and
representative gathering.

7.--The action, Boswell _v._ Coaks, came before Mr. Justice Pearson.  His
lordship stated that he was intimately acquainted with one of the
defendants, and suggested that the action be taken elsewhere.  All
parties agreed, and the trial was consequently deferred.  (_See_ February
26th, 1883.)

18.--A large portion of Gunton Hall, the seat of Lord Suffield, was
destroyed by fire.

--An important public meeting, presided over by the Mayor (Mr. C. R.
Gilman) was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, at which resolutions were
adopted in favour of the entire prohibition of the use of drag-nets in
the Yare and Wensum.

26.--Messrs. T. W. Robertson and H. Bruce's Company appeared at Norwich
Theatre, in the farcical comedy, "The Guv'nor."

28.--A meeting of the clergy and laity of the diocese was held at the
Clerical Rooms, Norwich, at which Dean Goulburn moved, "That the proposed
memorial to Dr. Pusey, embodying as it does a scheme for the purchase of
his library and the appointment of clergy of the Church of England as
librarians, who shall devote themselves to theological research and
instruction, and to the help and counsel of junior members of the
University, deserves the cordial and earnest support of all Churchmen."
The motion was adopted, and a committee appointed to obtain funds towards
the establishment and maintenance of the proposed memorial.

29.--Woodbastwick Hall, the seat of Mr. Albemarle Cator, was destroyed by
fire, involving the loss of about 40,000.



1883.


JANUARY.


6.--Died at Norwich, Mr. William Henry Daly, solicitor, aged 30.  Mr.
Daly was nephew of Mr. Frederick Lawrence Phillips, editor of the
"Norwich Argus."  Upon the death of Mr. Phillips, he assumed for a short
time the editorial control of the "Argus."  Mr. Daly, who was a man of
brilliant attainments, and had before him a very promising career, had
been a member of the Norwich Town Council, and was solicitor to the
Norfolk and Norwich Licensed Victuallers' Association.

12.--Professor Huxley, F.R.S., Inspector of Fisheries, held a public
inquiry at Cromer, as to the desirability or otherwise of granting an
order under the provisions of the Fisheries (Oyster, Crab, and Lobster)
Act, to continue or vary the existing Order, dated February 2nd, 1880.  A
similar inquiry was held at Sheringham.  As the result of the evidence,
the Order was renewed and made more stringent.

16.--The Norwich Tramways Bill, promoted by the Hallidie Patent Cable
Tramways Corporation, Limited, was reported upon by the Parliamentary and
Bylaws Committee of the Norwich Town Council, who recommended "that, in
consequence of the nuisance and discomfort caused by their construction
and working," a petition be presented against the Bill in its entirety.
The discussion was adjourned until the 22nd, when an amendment, "That the
Bill be opposed only so far as to protect the interests of the citizens,"
was negatived by 25 votes to 18.  The recommendation of the Committee was
thereupon adopted, and the company ultimately abandoned the scheme.
(_See_ November 16th, 1886.)

22.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, it was reported that the
wood-paving scheme had been completed.  An area of 75,638 yards had been
laid, at the total cost of 24,036 17s. 10.5d.  The scheme was
subsequently extended to districts in which special application was made
by the ratepayers.

29.--The first of the touring pantomime companies appeared at Norwich
Theatre--Messrs. Sheridan and Watkin's Company, in "Little Red Riding
Hood," originally produced at Yarmouth Theatre.

30.--The centenary anniversary of the Norwich Public Library was
celebrated by a _conversazione_, given by the President (Mr. C. E.
Noverre), the Vice-President (Mr. T. Muir Grant), and the ex-President
(Mr. Bosworth Harcourt).

31.--The Great Yarmouth Golf Club was formed, at a public meeting held in
that town.  The game had for some months previously been played on the
Denes.


FEBRUARY.


6.--M. Guilmant, the celebrated French organist, gave organ recitals at
St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  He revisited the city on December 18th.

9.--A meeting under the auspices of the Marriage Law Defence Union was
held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, under the presidency of Mr. H. S.
Patteson.  Earl Percy, Earl Beauchamp, the Right Hon. A. J. R. Beresford
Hope, M.P., and the Rev. Dr. Badenoch were announced to speak.  The
proceedings were very disorderly, and ultimately the promoters of the
meeting were compelled to vacate the platform.  The opposing party
thereupon proposed and adopted resolutions in favour of legalising
marriage with a deceased wife's sister.

14.--At the Guildhall Police Court, Norwich, Mr. Joseph Stanley,
solicitor, was charged, on the information of Edward Burgess, described
as a printer and publisher, with assaulting him.  The defendant, it was
alleged, met the complainant in London Street, and, producing a
riding-whip from beneath his coat, struck him several blows across the
face.  The assault was admitted, and defendant pleaded, in mitigation,
that he horsewhipped the complainant in consequence of certain statements
published by him in a paper called "Daylight."  The Bench inflicted a
fine of one shilling, and declined to make an order as to costs.  This
was the first of a remarkable series of cases arising directly or
indirectly from the publication of the print above referred to.  At
Norwich County Court, on February 21st, before the Judge (Mr. E. P.
Price, Q.C.) and a jury, William Hammond, "otherwise E. Field and Co.,"
brought an action against Edward Burgees and J. A. Burgis, the
proprietors of "Daylight," for an alleged libel.  The action was
originally entered for trial in the High Court of Justice, the plaintiff
laying his damages at 1,000, but it was remitted to the County Court, on
the application of the defendants, on the plaintiff failing to give
security for costs.  Mr. Horace Brown was for the plaintiff (who did not
appear), and Mr. Montague Williams for the defendants.  The case was
partly heard when Mr. Brown said that, having regard to what had
transpired, he did not think it right to ask the jury for damages.  A
verdict was therefore entered for the defendants.  On February 24th,
Arthur Ventnor, artist, of Bridewell Alley, was charged at the Police
Court with wilfully breaking the plate-glass windows at the office of
"Daylight," and doing damage to the amount of 20.  The defendant was
committed for trial at the Quarter Sessions, held on April 3rd, before
the Recorder (Mr. W. J. Metcalfe, Q.C.).  It was urged on behalf of the
defendant that he had broken the windows owing to a caricature of himself
being exhibited therein.  The Grand Jury made the following presentment:
"We consider that considerable provocation was given to Mr. Ventnor by
the exhibition of the caricature before he broke the windows."  The
Recorder, who deplored the publication of such a paper, addressing the
defendant, said, "The sentence of the Court is that you be imprisoned for
three hours, which means that you have been in the dock a great deal too
long already, and that you now be discharged.  Who is to pay the costs of
this prosecution?  Not the public, certainly, but the people who provoke
other people to smash their windows."  The verdict was received with
great applause by a crowded court.  At the Police Court on April 23rd,
Messrs. Burgess and Burgis appeared in answer to an information laid by
Lewin Samuel, clothier, of St. Giles' Street, for publishing in
"Daylight" a defamatory libel of and concerning him.  This was a criminal
prosecution, on the fiat of the Public Prosecutor.  The defendants
alleged in their paper that the complainant and his brother were "Jew
money-lenders, who sold up the homes of hard-working men and the beds
from under women and children, and extorted 150 per cent. and more,
interests for small loans."  The case was sent for trial at the Assizes.
The defendants appeared before Mr. Justice Day, on August 9th.  After the
case had been part heard, Mr. Horace Brown, counsel for the prosecution,
asked leave to withdraw.  His lordship granted the request, and remarked
that Mr. Brown's client "had attained his object in having the character
of his business thoroughly exposed to the public."  The defendants were
then discharged.

26.--The trial of the action.  Boswell _v._ Coaks, commenced before Mr.
Justice Fry.  On the fifth day of the trial, March 12th, his lordship
gave judgment.  In his opinion, he said, the plaintiff's case had failed,
and he dismissed the action, with costs.  Later in the day the judge
remarked that there was a certain point in the case which he had not
appreciated, and ordered the action to be restored to the paper as part
heard.  At the further hearing, on March 19th, his lordship said he
adhered to the view which he previously expressed, and pronounced
judgment unreservedly in favour of the defendants, who were entirely
acquitted of the charge against them.  On June 19th an appeal was entered
against the decision of Mr. Justice Fry.  (_See_ May 19th, 1884.)

27.--Hengler's Grand Circus, the first exhibition of the kind given in a
permanent building in the city, was opened at the Agricultural Hall,
Norwich.

--At a meeting held at the Globe Hotel, Lynn, under the presidency of Sir
William ffolkes.  M.P., Mr. A. C. Fountaine, of Narford Hall, was
selected master of the West Norfolk Foxhounds, in place of Mr. Anthony
Hamond, who had hunted the hounds for eighteen years.  At the suggestion
of the Prince of Wales, a fund was inaugurated for the purpose of
presenting Mr. Hamond with a testimonial upon his retirement.  The
presentation took place at Sandringham, on December 1st, when a large
number of the subscribers were entertained to breakfast by his Royal
Highness, who handed to Mr. Hamond "his portrait in oil, mounted upon his
favourite hunter, with the huntsman, Bob Claydon, and the whips, H.
Browne and F. Clayden, in attendance."  The picture was painted by Mr.
Samuel Carter, who was born upon the Westacre estate.

--The new railway from Acle to Yarmouth was inspected by Major-General
Hutchinson, and shortly afterwards opened for traffic.


MARCH.


6.--A strong gale and high tide occurred at Yarmouth.  Many of the houses
on the Marine Parade were in danger of being flooded.  Many thousands of
fish were killed in the Yare by the ingress of salt water.

--The Mayor and Mayoress of Norwich (Mr. and Mrs. C. R. Gilman) attended
the launch, at Hull, of a new steamer, the Norwich, built by Messrs.
Earle's Shipbuilding Company, for the Great Eastern Railway Company's
service between Harwich and Antwerp.  The Mayoress performed the ceremony
of naming the vessel.

10.*--"Lieutenant M. W. M. Edwards, 2nd Battalion Highland Light
Infantry, son of Mr. H. W. B. Edwards, of Hardingham, has been presented
by the Queen with the Victoria Cross, for conspicuous bravery, displayed
by him at the battle of Tel-el-Kebir."

11.--A remarkably high tide took place at Lynn.  The waters overflowed
not only the quays, but the high banks of the river, a circumstance
unprecedented for at least half a century.  The lands reclaimed by the
Norfolk Estuary Company from the bed of the old river were flooded to the
extent of 400 acres.  The low-lying streets of the town were inundated by
the overflow from the river and "flats," and by sewage driven up through
the gullies.  At Wells the waters overflowed the quay and entered the
adjacent houses.

17.--It was announced that the Privy Council had granted licences for the
sale of store sheep at Tombland Fair, on March 2nd.  Norwich Cattle
Market was opened for the sale of fat and store stock on April 7th, under
certain conditions.  (_See_ January 5th, 1884.)

22.--The Spring Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was held on
the Old Cricket Ground, Lakenham.

24.--A public subscription was inaugurated to enable the city of Norwich
to purchase a site for the erection of brigade depot barracks for the
Norfolk Regiment.  The War Office, it was announced, had agreed to retain
the Cavalry Barracks on condition that the city provided a site for the
infantry depot.  On July 24th the War Office intimated their acceptance
of the site on Plumstead Road, which was purchased at the cost of 1,600.

26.--The accomplished young tragedienne, Miss Alleyn, made her first
appearance at Norwich Theatre in the character of Juliet, with a company
under the management of Mr. Charles Bernard.  Among her other
impersonations during the engagement were Marguerite Gauthier ("Woman's
Love"), Lady Teazle, Adrienne Lecouvreur, Rosalind, Pauline, Iolanthe
("King Rene's Daughter"), and Portia.  Miss Alleyn was described as
"incomparably the best actress seen on the Norwich stage within the last
thirty years."

30.--Mr. and Mrs. Gladstone passed through Lynn railway-station, on their
way to Sandringham, to visit the Prince and Princess of Wales.  "Mr. and
Mrs. Gladstone travelled in a first-class carriage, and on the arrival of
the train they were apparently asleep.  Mr. Gladstone, however, soon woke
up, and immediately one of his admirers, in the form of a 'working-man,'
proceeded to the carriage window and introduced himself as one of his
supporters, and thereupon shook hands with the Premier.  On Sunday
morning (April 1st), some prominent members of the Liberal party in Lynn
received fictitious invitations to lunch with Mr. Gladstone at
Sandringham, the envelopes in which the notes were enclosed bearing the
postmark of that village."  The visit terminated on April 2nd.


APRIL.


11.--Mr. Melton Prior, special artist of the "Illustrated London News,"
delivered at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, a pictorial lecture on the
Egyptian War.

13.--A specially-invited company visited Carrow Works, Norwich, to
witness the lighting of the premises for the first time with the electric
light installed by the Hammond Electric Light and Power Supply Company.
The machinery in the printing works was, for the first time, driven by
electric power.

18.--The parish church of Wells-next-the-Sea, rebuilt at the cost of
10,000, after the destruction of the original building by lightning, on
August 3rd, 1879, was opened.  Mr. Herbert Green, of Norwich, was the
architect, and Mr. S. C. Parmenter, of Braintree, Essex, the contractor.

20.--Died at Bank Street, Norwich, aged 48, Mr. R. T. Culley, Coroner for
the County of Norfolk, to which office he was appointed in June, 1878,
after discharging for sixteen years the duties of Deputy Coroner.

21.*--"Major-General Seager died the other day, at Scarborough, aged 71.
General Seager rose from the ranks.  He was regimental sergeant-major of
the 8th Hussars when that regiment was stationed in Norwich in 1840, and
formed an attachment for a young lady residing in the Close, whose
parents interfered and stopped the further progress of the engagement,
which they would hardly have done could they have anticipated the career
which lay before the disdained young sergeant-major.  Though in the
ranks, he was the son of a Liverpool merchant.  He won his honours and
promotion in the Crimea and in the Indian Mutiny.  For the former he was
'specially mentioned' for his bravery in the heroic Balaclava charge,
when he broke through the Russian lines, for which he was made captain."

22.--A porpoise was killed in the Yare at Buckenham Ferry.  "A capture of
this kind is unparalleled on the river Yare.  It is supposed the fish
came up on the night of the 21st, with the strong flood tide."

24.--The Norwich Town Council decided to discontinue the experimental
lighting of the city with the electric light.  In the House of Commons,
on August 1st, a Bill to confirm a provisional order of the Board of
Trade, in reference to electric lighting at Norwich, was considered, and
reported to be read a third time.

29.--The Mayor and Corporation of Norwich attended the re-opening service
at St. Peter Mancroft church, on the completion of the great work of
restoration.  The sermon was preached by the Bishop of Liverpool.  "By
means of the liberal donations of Messrs. Gurney and Co., the twelve
bells have been repaired and re-hung, three houses which stood on the
churchyard have been purchased and taken down, and the accumulated soil
has been removed from the church walls and the churchyard levelled."


MAY.


3.--Mr. Hugh Aylmer's herd of shorthorns was sold at West Dereham, by Mr.
John Thornton.  The cows and heifers (55 lots) averaged 69 11s. 3d., and
the bulls (18) 72 14s. 10d.  The total amount realised was 5,108 5s.

3.--A meeting of the freeholders in the Norwich district was held at the
Shirehall, under the presidency of the High Sheriff (Colonel W. E. G. L.
Bulwer), for the nomination of candidates for the office of County
Coroner.  Mr. John Furness, solicitor, of Forncett, was nominated by Sir
Francis Boileau, and seconded by Mr. C. S. Read; and Mr. Joseph Stanley,
solicitor, of Norwich, was proposed by Mr. Fred Bullard, and seconded by
Mr. John Hotblack.  The show of hands was declared to be in favour of Mr.
Stanley; whereupon a poll was demanded on behalf of Mr. Furness.  The
election took place on May 7th, and the result was declared as follows:
Stanley, 707; Furness, 628.  The last contested election for the County
Coronership took place in 1827.

8.--The first steam fire-engine for the use of the city was tested in
Norwich Market Place.  It was purchased for 600, partly contributed by
the Norwich Union Fire Office, and partly subscribed by the public.

26.*--"The Queen has been pleased to approve the 1st City of Norwich and
the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Norfolk Rifle Volunteer Corps to be known
respectively as the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Volunteer Battalions of the
Norfolk Regiment regular force."

27.--Died at his residence, St. Andrew's Broad Street, Norwich, Mr. James
Harcourt, aged 64, formerly choirmaster of the Norfolk and Norwich
Musical Festival.  He was a pupil of Mr. Pettet, a musician of great
local repute, and organist of St. Peter Mancroft and St. Stephen's
churches.  Mr. Harcourt succeeded to his master's position at St.
Peter's, on its being relinquished by Mr. Critchfield, also a pupil and
the successor of Mr. Pettet.  He held that post for twenty-seven years.
On the death of Mr. Hill he was chosen Festival choir-master, and was
also conductor of the Norwich Philharmonic Society and of the Norfolk and
Suffolk Church Choral Association.


JUNE.


2.--Died at Broad House, Wroxham, Mr. Alfred John N. Chamberlin, in his
60th year.  He was a prominent supporter of aquatic sports, and the
annual regatta on Wroxham Broad was mainly kept up by his energy.  Mr.
Chamberlin had been a member of the Norfolk and Suffolk Yacht Club from
its commencement, and was one of the promoters of the National Fisheries
Exhibition at Norwich.

5.--In the High Court of Justice, Chancery Division, before Mr. Justice
Chitty, was heard the action, the Mayor and Corporation of Norwich _v._
Browne and other inhabitants of Pockthorpe, by which the plaintiffs
sought to establish the title of the citizens to Mousehold Heath.
Judgment was given on the 7th, in favour of the Corporation, to whom the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners had transferred their rights in the Heath.
It was understood that if the defendants loyally accepted the judgment,
no attempt would be made by the Corporation to enforce costs.  On
November 5th an official inquiry was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, by
Mr. H. S. Milman, Assistant Land Commissioner, into objections or
suggestions respecting a draft scheme prepared for the regulation of
Mousehold Heath.  (_See_ April 28th, 1884.)

18.--Died at Bournemouth, Major Charles Loftus.  A son of General William
Loftus, of Kilbride, co. Wicklow, Colonel of the 2nd Dragoon Guards, and
lieutenant of the Tower of London, by his second wife, Lady Elizabeth
Townshend, only surviving daughter of George, first Marquis Townshend, he
was born at Stiffkey, on September 21st, 1796, and entered the Royal Navy
in 1809.  He served until the conclusion of the war, in 1815, when an
accidental fall from the main rigging to the quarterdeck of his ship
necessitated his retirement.  He so far recovered as to be able to take a
commission in the Coldstream Guards, which, however, he was compelled to
resign by increasing affliction.  In 1835 he married a daughter of
Colonel John Dixon, of Gledhow, Yorkshire, and settled at Dunham Cottage,
Norfolk.  On Lord Sondes' retirement from the command of the Norfolk
Regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry, in 1838, he was made Major Commandant of
the corps, which in 1841 was, by Royal permission, entitled Prince
Albert's Own Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry.  When in 1849 blindness compelled
him to live in retirement, Major Loftus occupied his time by dictating
recollections of his youth and after life, which were published in two
series, "My Youth by Land and Sea," and "My Life from 1815 to 1849."

20.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened
at Fakenham.  Prince Albert Victor came from Sandringham and made a tour
of the showyard in company with Lord Hastings, the president for the
year.  The show was continued on the 21st.

30.--A disastrous thunderstorm occurred at Norwich.  Many of the
low-lying streets were flooded by the rain water, and in Grove Street,
Unthank's Road, a man sheltering beneath a tree was struck dead by
lightning.  Another man was killed by lightning on the farm of Mr.
Keable, at Earlham, and some of the farm buildings were destroyed by
fire.  In several parts of the county stacks were fired and live stock
killed.


JULY.


9.--Died at Southtown, Yarmouth, Commander Francis Harris, R.N.  He
entered the Navy on July 12th, 1805, as first-class volunteer on board
the Temeraire, 98, Captain Harvey and Sir Charles Hamilton, in which ship
he was present at the battle of Trafalgar.  From 1826 to 1860 he was
employed with the Coast Guard, and retired with the rank of commander.

13.--Died at Tunstead, the Rev. G. H. Harris, aged 57, for twenty years
rector of the parish.  Mr. Harris was well known for his exertions in
behalf of church bell-ringing, and was the means of reviving the art not
only in his own neighbourhood, but in other parts of the county.  He was
the originator and honorary secretary of the Norwich Diocesan Association
of Ringers.

14.--In the High Court of Justice, Chancery Division, before
Vice-Chancellor Bacon, an order was made for the compulsory winding-up of
the Norwich Equitable Fire Insurance Company, which was stated to be
insolvent.

25.--Died at East Dereham, where he had spent the declining years of his
life, Mr. Antonio James Oury, the celebrated violinist.  Mr. Oury was
born in London in 1800.  His father, a native of Nice and of noble
descent, left home to follow the early campaigns of the then General
Bounaparte, and was taken prisoner by the British and landed near
Southampton, at which place he married, in 1799, the daughter of a Mr.
Hughes, a musician and dancing master.  Young Oury at the age of three
years commenced violin playing under the tuition of his father and George
Macfarren.  In 1812 he became the pupil of three eminent professors,
Mori, Spagnoletti, and Kiessewetter; and in 1820 he went to Paris to
study under Baillot, Kreutzer, and Lupont.  Returning to England, he made
his debut at the London Philharmonic Society, and afterwards became joint
leader with Francis Cramer at the Birmingham, York, Leicester, and Derby
Musical Festivals, and made several operatic tours in Ireland.  In 1826
he was engaged as leader of the ballet, sub-leader of the opera, and solo
violinist at the King's Theatre, and as successor to Mori and Lacy he
held this tripartite post for five years.  Oury married, in 1831, the
distinguished pianist, Mdlle. Belleville, whose father had been an
officer of Napoleon's.  In 1832 they left England for Hamburg, Berlin,
St. Petersburg, and Moscow, gave twenty-three concerts during a residence
of two years in Russia, and returned to Berlin.  They next visited
Leipzig, Dresden, Prague, and Vienna.  After a brilliant sojourn of two
years in the Austrian capital Oury visited Pesth and Buda, gave seven
concerts with great success and profit, played in the presence of the
Imperial Court at the Bourge Theatre, Vienna, and returned to Munich.
Accompanied by Madame Oury he gave concerts in all the principal towns on
the Rhine, and arrived in Holland, where his wife was attacked by a
serious illness, which interrupted several professional engagements.
They subsequently visited a number of other places on the Continent, and
returned to England after an absence of nine years.  In 1846-47 Oury and
his accomplished partner visited Italy, gave concerts at Rome, Naples,
Venice, and Milan, and returned to England in 1848.  Oury removed to
Norwich in 1868, and after being some years resident there, proceeded to
Dereham, where he lived with Mr. Arthur Mori.


AUGUST.


6.--Lady Walsingham unveiled a fountain and rest erected at Swaffham as a
memorial to Sir William Bagge, Bart., for thirty-six years a
representative in Parliament of the Western Division of the county.  Its
cost, which amounted to 800, was defrayed by public subscription.

7.--Died suddenly at a board meeting of the Norwich Union Fire Insurance
Society, of which he was a director, Mr. Elijah Crosier Bailey, Clerk of
the Peace for the city, aged 65.  He was head of the firm of Bailey,
Cross, and Barnard, solicitors, and was appointed Clerk to the Norwich
Board of Guardians in 1844, in succession to Mr. Roger Kerrison, and
resigned in 1879.  On the death of Mr. Arthur Dalrymple in 1868 he was
elected Clerk of the Peace.  Mr. Bailey was for many years secretary of
the Norfolk Agricultural Association, and on his resignation of that
office was appointed honorary director.  A warm supporter of the party,
he was for a long period Conservative agent for East Norfolk.  Mr. Bailey
married, first, Miss Cann, daughter of Mr. W. R. Cann, of Wymondham, by
whom he left four sons; and, secondly, in January, 1879, Miss Haselwood,
of Swardon, Kent, granddaughter of Sir Edward Dering, Bart., M.P.

--At Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Day, Joseph Betts, described as
a labourer, was charged with maliciously sending to the Right Rev. the
Lord Bishop of Norwich, on June 5th, a letter threatening to murder him.
Mr. Blofeld, for the prosecution, said that the Bishop was of opinion
that the prisoner had no real intention to take any step towards carrying
out his threat, and was desirous that the case should be withdrawn.  The
judge said that his lordship had acted in a very handsome and generous
manner, and allowed the prosecution to be withdrawn on the prisoner
entering into recognisances to keep the peace towards the Bishop and all
other persons.  At the Norwich Police Court on September 21st Betts was
charged with knowingly, wilfully, and feloniously sending to Mr. J. J.
Colman, M.P., a letter, signed "Another Invincible," threatening to
murder him "unless he fairly and proportionately distributed his last
year's balance among his workmen."  He was committed for trial, and at
the Assizes on October 27th was sentenced by Lord Justice Fry to twelve
calendar months' imprisonment.  (_See_ February 21st, 1889.)

11.--The scheme prepared by the Charity Commissioners for the future
management of the endowed schools and children's hospitals in connection
with King Edward VI.'s charity and Anguish's and Norman's charities, was
published.  The scheme for the Grammar and Commercial Schools was
practically the same as those promulgated in 1878.  In the matter of
Anguish's charity, it was proposed to divide the endowment into two
parts, one to be called Thomas Anguish's endowment for boys, and the
other Thomas Anguish's endowment for girls.  The existing boys' school
was to be given up, the master pensioned, and the income devoted, so far
as 200 yearly was concerned, to providing lodging, clothing, and
maintenance for boys holding exhibitions preferentially awarded under the
scheme.  With the rest of the income the governors were to maintain seven
special exhibitions for poor boys who for not less than three years had
been scholars in some public elementary school or schools, and as many
general exhibitions for poor boys as the income available would allow to
be tenable at either of King Edward VI. schools.  As to Thomas Anguish's
endowment for girls, the girls' hospital was to be abolished and the
income applied in the same way as that for boys, except that 300 yearly
was to be devoted to providing lodging, clothing, and maintenance for
orphan or other necessitous girls.  Norman's charity was to cease to
exist in its then form, the master pensioned, and the endowment to be
appropriated to the maintenance of a girls' middle school, the scheme for
which was practically the same as that for the King Edward VI.  Middle
School for Boys, and to be known as Norman's School, provision being made
for the acquisition by purchase of the Girls' Hospital School at Lakenham
by the new governors of the Norman School.  On August 28th the Norwich
Town Council passed resolutions in opposition to the scheme, on the
ground that it was contrary to the wishes of the founders and of the
people of Norwich; and similar resolutions were carried at a meeting of
the Norwich Charities Protection Society held at the Guildhall on
September 10th, under the presidency of the Sheriff.  (_See_ February
3rd, 1888.)

20.--Miss Maude Branscombe and her London company appeared at Norwich
Theatre in the comedy, "Masks and Dominoes," and the burlesque, "Undine,
or ye Nymph, ye Knight, and ye Awful Fright."

--The Norfolk acid Norwich Hospital was opened by the Duke and Duchess of
Connaught upon its completion.  The actual expenditure to this date had
been 51,179, of which about 39,118 had been obtained by subscription,
10,192 was withdrawn from invested capital, and 2,569 was advanced to the
treasurer by Messrs. Gurney and Co.  To wholly clear the new building
from debt about 5,000 was required.  The Duke and Duchess were received
at Thorpe Station by the Mayor (Mr. C. R. Gilman), the Sheriff (Mr. S.
Newman), the Deputy-Mayor (Mr. W. Hunter), the Earl of Leicester, and
other representatives of the Hospital.  His Royal Highness, after
replying to an address read by the Town Clerk, drove with the Duchess
through the gaily decorated streets of the city to the Hospital, where
Prince Albert Victor had arrived some time previously from Horstead Hall
in company with Mr. Edward Birkbeck, M.P.  After the formal opening of
the building their Royal Highnesses visited the various departments, and
attended a grand bazaar held in the grounds; and later in the afternoon
proceeded to Cotton Hall as the guests of Mr. S. Gurney Buxton and Miss
Buxton.  On the morning of the 21st their Royal Highnesses visited the
Cathedral, and left for London at 2.55 p.m.  The Hospital bazaar, which
remained open until the 25th, produced net receipts amounting to 5,779
5s. 3d.

28.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, Mr. J. Wilson Gilbert was
elected Clerk of the Peace by 27 votes, against 25 recorded for Mr.
George Alden Stevens.


SEPTEMBER.


3.--Died, at Norwich, Mr. Alfred Master, F.R.C.S., aged 67.  He was a son
of Colonel Harcourt Master, and was born at Catton.  A pupil of Mr. P. N.
Scott, and afterwards of Mr. J. Godwin Johnson, with whom he became
associated in practice, Mr. Master was for many years surgeon of the
County Gaol.  He was a magistrate of the city and a prominent member of
the committee of the Norfolk and Norwich Musical Festival.

7.--Knapton church was re-opened by the Bishop of Norwich.  It had been
restored at the cost of about 2,000.

10.--Mr. J. C. Buckmaster, of the Science and Art Department, South
Kensington, delivered a lecture at Cromer on "Science Teaching in
Agriculture."  Mr. Buckmaster also lectured at North Walsham, Coltishall,
Aylsham, Wymondham, and Norwich.

--Mr. Sheil Barry made his first appearance on the Norwich stage in his
famous impersonation of Gaspard in "Les Cloches de Corneville."

14.--Died, in his 83rd year, the Rev. John Methold, vicar of Wighton.  He
was educated at Harrow and Trinity College, Cambridge, and was appointed
to his living in 1839.  "It is a singular fact that the last three vicars
of Wighton, Mr. Charles, Mr. Tickell, and Mr. Methold, held the vicarage
for no less than 143 years."  Mr. Methold played for Harrow in the first
cricket match which that school won against Eton.

15.--Died, at his residence, Ber Street House, Norwich, Mr. John May
Robberds, of the firm of Fosters, Burroughes, and Robberds, solicitors,
aged 74.  A son of John Warden Robberds, who in his day was a geologist
of some note, and contributed the historical and geological notes to
"Stark's River Scenery," Mr. Robberds had lived in comparative retirement
for upwards of half a century.  He was unrivalled as an authority upon
conveyancing law.


OCTOBER.


1.--At Norwich Police Court, Mr. William Sidney, proprietor of the
Theatre Royal, made application for a licence for the performance of
stage plays in that building.  He stated that it was fifty years since he
first performed at the Theatre, when, under the management of Mr.
Davenport, it was open all the year round, and was understood to be a
patent theatre.  It was afterwards purchased by a company of which Sir
William Foster and Mr. Robberds were the chairmen.  He (Mr. Sidney)
became lessee and afterwards proprietor, and purchased the shares and
freehold land.  The understanding during all those years was that it was
a patent theatre and required no licence from the magistrates.  The Town
Clerk had requested him to produce the patent, but neither he nor his
solicitors (Messrs. Rackham) were able to do so.  Eventually a patent was
found, but to their great surprise it was granted to one Thomas Ivory for
seven months in the year only, commencing November 1st.  The Town Clerk
explained to the magistrates that the attention of the Executive
Committee of the Corporation having been called to the necessity of
certain structural alterations at the Theatre, Mr. Sidney was requested
to have them carried out, and in consequence of his non-compliance the
Lord Chamberlain was communicated with, and then it appeared that no
patent had been granted to a theatre in Norwich since 1768.  The
magistrates, before granting the licence, required Mr. Sidney to comply
with the demands of the Corporation, and on the 19th, it being reported
that the work was completed, his application was acceded to.

15.--The coming of age of Mr. John Cator, eldest son of Mr. Albemarle
Cator, was celebrated at Woodbastwick by a village _fete_.

18.--The Duke of Portland laid the last stone of a new dock at Lynn.

30.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference was opened at the Victoria Hall,
Norwich, under the presidency of the Lord Bishop.  The proceedings
concluded on the 31st.


NOVEMBER.


9.--Dr. Eade was elected Mayor and Mr. J. Farrar Ranson appointed Sheriff
of Norwich.

12.--Col. Boileau, at the annual distribution of prizes to the 1st
Volunteer Battalion Norfolk Regiment, announced his impending retirement
from the command of the corps.  He was succeeded by Lieut.-Colonel
Mansel.

23.--The headquarters of the 4th (Queen's Own) Hussars arrived at the
Cavalry Barracks, Norwich.

24.--A fire occurred on the premises of Mr. Ilott, Bridewell Alley,
Norwich, and caused damage to the amount of between 1,200 and 1,500.


DECEMBER.


3.--Mr. David James commenced a six nights' engagement at Norwich Theatre
in the character of Perkyn Middlewick ("Our Boys").

18.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council an important letter was
read from Mr. John Gurney, of Sprowston Hall, referring to the
opportunity then afforded to acquire Norwich Castle and the surrounding
grounds for the use and recreation of the citizens.  (_See_ February
19th, 1884.)

26.--The holiday attraction at Norwich Theatre was the production of the
Drury Lane drama, "Youth," by Messrs. Holt and Wilmot's company.

28.--The Mayor and Mayoress of Norwich (Dr. and Mrs. Eade) entertained
820 aged men and women at St. Andrew's Hall.



1884.


JANUARY.


5.--A great meeting of Norfolk farmers was held at the Agricultural Hall,
Norwich, at which was passed a series of resolutions affirming that they
viewed with alarm the serious loss imposed upon the nation by the
importation of live stock from countries where foot and mouth disease was
known to exist, and calling upon the Government to order the withdrawal
of existing restrictions on the removal of stock in England.  On the 29th
a similar meeting, presided over by Lord Walsingham, was held at Lynn,
and a third meeting took place at Fakenham on the 31st.  Deputations from
the Corporations of Norwich and Lynn waited upon the local authority at
Norwich on February 23rd to discuss what steps should be taken to effect
the re-opening of the cattle markets in the city and borough, and it was
decided to send a deputation to the Privy Council.  This deputation,
consisting of representatives of the county authority, and of the
Corporations of Norwich and Lynn, waited upon Lord Carlingford on
February 28th, and asked for the immediate opening of the markets and the
removal or modification of other restrictions.  At the quarterly meeting
of the county magistrates on April 10th, Mr. C. S. Read, M.P., reported
that the sum of 2,586 had been expended during the three months for
inspection and expenses in carrying out the provisions of the Act.  The
Contagious Diseases (Animals) Act Amendment Bill was read a second time
on March 21st and a third time on May 3rd, and on May 19th it received
the Royal assent and became law.

20.--Died, at King's Lynn, Mr. James Fiddaman.  He began life in very
humble circumstances and without the advantages afforded by education.
The son of a tailor in a small way of business, he first acted as an
assistant to his uncle, who was ostler at a tavern in Lynn.  He was
afterwards ostler or "boots" at inns and hotels in neighbouring towns;
subsequently he tramped the country for a time, visiting London,
Brighton, and other places in quest of a good situation.  Eventually he
returned to Lynn, took a public-house known as the Wheatsheaf, in Norfolk
Street, and made it the local centre of the sporting interest in West
Norfolk.  After a time he bought the house, converted it into an hotel
and wine vaults, and rapidly made a fortune.  Mr. Fiddaman was a
munificent donor to many benevolent institutions, and his private acts of
charity were numerous.  An enormous concourse of persons attended his
funeral.

30.--Died, at his residence, Thorpe St. Andrew, Mr. Richard Noverre
Bacon, aged 85, probably the oldest journalist in the kingdom.  At an
early age he was engaged in newspaper work under his father, Richard
Mackenzie Bacon, whom in 1845 he succeeded as proprietor and editor of
the "Norwich Mercury."  A Whig of the old school, Mr. Bacon in his
editorship of the "Mercury" was tenacious in the maintenance of his
opinions, and held them with a firmness which did not always please the
more advanced section of the Liberal party--hence the establishment of
the "Norfolk News" as the representative organ of Liberal Nonconformity
in county and city.  Mr. Bacon served his fellow-citizens in the Town
Council, on the Hospital board, and in other capacities, and assisted in
founding the Jenny Lind Infirmary for Sick Children.  As a journalist he
was decidedly inferior to his distinguished father, and his only literary
work was his "Essay on Norfolk Agriculture," written in 1844, which won
for him the prize offered by the Royal Agricultural Society, besides
bringing him prominently forward among the agriculturists of the county,
a connection he was assiduous in maintaining to the close of his career.


FEBRUARY.


19.--A deputation of Norfolk magistrates and members of the Norwich Town
Council waited upon the Home Secretary (Sir William Harcourt) on the
subject of the proposed provision of a new prison site at Norwich.  Lord
Walsingham explained the objects of the deputation.  The county prison at
Norwich, with the Castle and a portion of the ground on which it stands,
having been offered under Section 34 of the Prisons Act, 1877, for
re-purchase by the original prison authority, _i.e._, the county of
Norfolk, at the statutory price fixed by the Act (amounting in this case
to 10,569), a committee was appointed by the Court of Quarter Sessions
for the county, and another committee by the Town Council of Norwich.
The county authority would not consent to take money out of the pockets
of the heavily-burdened ratepayers for the repurchase of property which
they had been compelled by law to part with for nothing; but they asked
that this ancient and interesting piece of county property should be
restored to its original owners "that it might be by them preserved to
the best advantage in all its imposing dignity and grandeur."  The Mayor
of Norwich (Dr. Eade) stated that Mr. John Gurney had gone so far as to
offer, free of cost, another site for a prison.  The Home Secretary
replied that the Prison Commissioners would not abandon the site, but
would continue to occupy it, unless an offer were made which they could
accept.  If it was desired that they should go elsewhere, it should be
made worth their while to do so.  At a meeting of the Norwich Town
Council on April 10th it was reported that the Home Secretary was willing
to accept 5,000 for the Castle, and that a still further reduction was
probable.  On June 17th the Mayor announced to the Corporation that the
Government had agreed to sell to the city the Castle and its environments
for 4,000; and it was resolved to purchase the property for that sum.
(_See_ October 19th, 1886.)

20.--Mr. C. S. Read was returned unopposed to fill the vacancy in the
representation of the Western Division of the county, caused by the
resignation of Mr. Bentinck, M.P.  Mr. Read took his seat in the House of
Commons on the 21st, and had a very cordial reception.  "The Premier
shook his hand when he came to the table, and a score of members behind
the chair greeted him as heartily."


MARCH.


15.--On this date were published the names of Norfolk men, and of those
connected with the county, who had distinguished themselves at the battle
of Teb, on March 13th.  The list included Colonel Sir Redvers Buller, of
Castle Rising; Commander Rolfe, of Heacham; Major Haggard, son of Mr.
Haggard, of East Bradenham; Lieutenant Probyn (killed), nephew of Sir
Dighton Probyn; and Captain Wilson, R.N., of the Hecla, son of Mr.
Knyvett Wilson, of Swaffham.  Captain Wilson afterwards received the
Victoria Cross.

20.--Mr. Oscar Wilde lectured before a large audience in the Assembly
Room, Agricultural Hall, Norwich, on the subject of "The House
Beautiful."

22.--The Spring Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was held for
the first time at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich.  Since this date the
show has been held annually in the same building in the month of March.

26.--Mr. E. P. Weston, the celebrated pedestrian, who on the 15th
completed his walk of 5,000 miles in as many consecutive hours (Sundays
and Christmas Day excluded), delivered a lecture at the Agricultural
Hall, Norwich, on "How I Came to Walk into Walking."  The Mayor (Dr.
Eade) presided.  Weston, whose address was in the cause of temperance,
stated that in fourteen years he had walked 56,000 miles.

28.--Intelligence was received at Norwich of the death, at Cannes, of the
Duke of Albany.  The great bell of St. Peter Mancroft was tolled, and
flags displayed at half-mast.  References were made to the sad event by
preachers in various places of worship on Sunday, the 30th; on April 8th
the Town Council passed a resolution of condolence with her Majesty the
Queen and the Duchess of Albany; and on April 10th the county magistrates
adopted a similar resolution.


APRIL.


12.--Died, at Rackheath Park, Lady Stracey, wife of Sir Henry J. Stracey,
Bart.  Her ladyship was a daughter of Mr. George Denne, of the Paddock,
Canterbury, and married Sir Henry on March 5th, 1835.  Of the marriage
there were eight sons and six daughters.

--Died, at Yarmouth, Mr. William Norton Burroughs, in his 86th year.  He
was Mayor of the borough in 1846.

14.--Madame Cave-Ashton's Opera Company commenced an engagement at
Norwich Theatre, in "Il Trovatore."

25.--Died, at Morningthorpe Rectory, the Rev. Edmund Nelson Rolfe, eldest
son of the Rev. Robert Rolfe, rector of Hempnall aged 73.  He was first
cousin to Lord Chancellor Cranworth.  "Of an old Norfolk family, he bore
the Christian name of Nelson to mark his relationship to the great Lord
Nelson.  His mother was a daughter of the Rev. Edmund Nelson, and aunt to
Horatio Viscount Nelson."

28.--The Royal assent was given to "The City of Norwich (Mousehold Heath)
Scheme Confirmation."


MAY.


1.--At St. Paul's Cathedral, the Rev. Sidney Linton, D.D., vicar of St.
Philip's, Heigham, Norwich, was consecrated by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Bishop of Riverina, New South Wales.  A farewell meeting was
held in St. Philip's parish on May 26th, when the Bishop received parting
gifts.

13.--"Cuthbert Bede" (the Rev. Edward Bradley), author of "Verdant
Green," lectured in the Assembly Room, Agricultural Hall, Norwich, on
"Modern Humourists."

19.--In the Court of Appeal, Lords Justices Baggallay, Cotton, and
Lindley commenced the hearing of the appeal case, Boswell and others _v._
Coaks and others.  This was an appeal from the judgment of Mr. Justice
Fry in the action brought by Mr. J. F. Boswell and Mr. James Baxter on
behalf of themselves and of other unsatisfied creditors of Sir Robert
John Harvey, deceased, against Isaac Bugg Coaks and others, to have the
purchase of a life interest on certain property set aside.  Mr. Justice
Fry had given judgment for the defendants, and from that judgment the
plaintiffs now appealed.  On Wednesday, 28th, the sixth day of the
hearing, their lordships adjourned until after the Whitsuntide recess.
The hearing was resumed on June 12th, and continued until June 16th, when
Lord Baggallay said their lordships would consider their judgment.  On
July 31st judgment was given for the plaintiffs.  "The arguments of
counsel and examination of witnesses in the appeal occupied the time of
the Court for nine days, and it is just over six weeks since the case
closed and their lordships announced that they would consider their
judgment.  It amounts to a complete vindication of the action taken by
the plaintiffs, for whom practically the verdict throughout was given,
with costs."  (_See_ December 9th, 1885.)

29.--Died, at Wimbledon, the Right Hon. Sir Bartle Frere, G.C.B.,
G.C.S.I.  He belonged to an ancient family established in Norfolk and
Suffolk from the time of the Conquest, and was a younger brother of Mr.
George Edward Frere, of Roydon, near Diss.  Born on March 29th, 1815, he
was educated at Bath Grammar School, and at the age of seventeen was
nominated to Haileybury; in the entrance examination he came out last but
one, but once admitted he set himself to work with such energy that at
the end of 1833 be passed from the college as its foremost student into
the ranks of the Company's Civil Service.  His name will ever be
associated with South African diplomacy.

31.--A great county and city meeting was held at the Agricultural Hall,
Norwich, under the presidency of the Earl of Leicester, for the purpose
of taking such measures as might be necessary to induce the Council of
the Royal Agricultural Society of England to hold their annual meeting at
Norwich in 1886.  Resolutions were adopted in furtherance of the objects
of the meeting.  (_See_ July 12th, 1886.)


JUNE.


10.--A fire occurred at Scole, and resulted in the destruction of the
shop of Mr. A. Pettit, and of other property.  Mr. Pettit's loss amounted
to upwards of 1,000.

--Died, at Catton, Mrs. Mary Sewell, widow of Mr. Isaac Sewell.  She was
the daughter of Mr. John Wright, of Buxton, and was born in 1797 at
either Felthorpe or Great Yarmouth.  Most of her early life was spent at
the former place; and in 1818 she married Mr. Sewell, of Yarmouth.
Subsequently they removed to the neighbourhood of London, where they
resided until 1835.  During the next twenty years they lived at Brighton
and at Chichester, and then removed to Bath, where they remained till
1867, when Mrs. Sewell went to reside with her son at Catton.  Her
connection with literature began at a very early period of her life, and
her publications were both numerous and popular.  The most successful
were "Mother's Last Words" and "Our Father's Care."  The former was
issued by Messrs. Jarrold on November 1st, 1860, and up to January 25th,
1884, upwards of one million copies had been printed and circulated.
Similar success attended the latter work, which proved equally popular.
Mrs. Sewell was originally a member of the Society of Friends, but in
consequence of misgivings she withdrew in 1834, and for a time attended a
Congregational chapel in London.  On her removal to Brighton she
associated herself with the Church of England.  "She was no sectarian,
but a Christian in the broadest and most genuine sense."

18.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association opened at
Lynn, and was continued on the 19th.  Sir Lewis W. Jarvis was president.

26.--Died, at Newmarket Road, Norwich, Mr. John Pymar, aged 76.  For more
than fifty years he served the city in various capacities, but never
aspired to the higher offices.  For nearly half a century Mr. Pymar was a
member of the Board of Guardians, and for more than forty years an
alderman of the city.  Throughout his career he was a moderate and
consistent Liberal.

--Died, at Prince's Street, Norwich, Mr. John Quinton, for fifty-five
years librarian at the Norfolk and Norwich Literary Institution, aged 72.

28.--Died, at Yarmouth, aged 73, Mr. Charles Cory Aldred, Deputy-Mayor of
the borough.  In early life he served as naval surgeon in H.M.S.
Dreadnought, and was afterwards surgeon-major in the Norfolk Artillery
Militia.

29.--The Rev. Frederick Baggallay, who had been elected vicar of St.
Peter Mancroft, Norwich, in succession to the Ven. Archdeacon Nevill,
officiated for the first time.  He was the fifth son of the Right Hon.
Sir Richard Baggallay, Lord Justice of Appeal, and formerly curate at St.
George's, Hanover Square.


JULY.


1.--St. John's church, Yarmouth, was re-opened after further enlargement,
at the cost of 1,500.  Within a quarter of a century the building had
been five times enlarged.

--Died, at Glaisdale Lodge, Hunstanton, Rhoda Bunn, formerly of
Wolferton, in her 104th year.  She was born at Beeston-next-Mileham, on
February 23rd, 1781, "and shortly after her last birthday was presented
by the Queen with her portrait upon receipt of a photograph of the old
lady sent by the vicar, the Rev. A. Waller."

7.--Colonel George Wilson Boileau was presented by the members of the 1st
Volunteer Battalion Norfolk Regiment, at Norwich, with a massive silver
Monteith bowl "as a mark of respect and esteem on his retirement in 1883,
after commanding the battalion fifteen years."

14.--A large meeting of the Conservative party in West Norfolk was held
at Swaffham "with the object of supporting the Lords in their
constitutional action with regard to the Franchise Bill."  This was the
first of many meetings held throughout the county at which the principle
of redistribution was strongly enforced, and Mr. Bright's famous dictum
at Bradford in 1859 quoted: "Repudiate without mercy any Bill of any
Government, whatever its franchise, whatever its seeming concessions may
be, if it does not redistribute the seats."  At Lynn, on July 22nd, Sir
Stafford Northcote, Lord Cranborne, and Mr. Bourke addressed a
largely-attended meeting in support of redistribution, and at Norwich, on
the 29th, the Earl of Donoughmore, Sir Hardinge Giffard, Q.C., M.P., and
Sir R. J. Buxon, M.P., spoke in favour of the action of the House of
Lords.

--The newly-erected parish church at Edgefield was consecrated by the
Bishop of Norwich.  The dilapidated church of SS. Peter and Paul standing
upon the confines of the parish had been demolished, and the materials
capable of being re-used were utilised for the erection of the new church
upon a more convenient site.  The demolition was commenced on November
13th, 1882, and the building of the new church was carried out from plans
by Mr. J. D. Steading, of Charlotte Street, Bradford Square, W.C., by Mr.
Bartram, builder, of Aylsham, at the cost of 1,900.

30.--Deopham church was re-opened, after restoration by Messrs. Cornish
and Gaymer, of North Walsham.


AUGUST.


9.--Died, at Merton Rectory, the Rev. George Crabbe, B.A.  He was a son
of the eldest brother of the celebrated poet Crabbe, and was born at
Pucklechurch, Somerset, in 1819.  Educated at Bury St. Edmund's School,
and at Queen's College, Cambridge, he was presented to the living of
Merton by Lord Walsingham, father of the present peer.  Mr. Crabbe
married his cousin, the third daughter of the Rev. George Crabbe, younger
son of the poet.  During the last two or three years of his life he was
engaged in examining and arranging the family documents at Merton Hall,
and the result of his researches was published in 1883 by direction of
the Committee of the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society, under
the title of "Robert de Grey, Recusant."  This was followed by Part I. of
"A Report on the Muniments of Merton Hall, Norfolk," published in the
"Norfolk Antiquarian Miscellany," edited by Walter Rye.  Part II. was
nearly completed at the time of his death.

11.--Great heat was experienced on this date.  "The heat registered in
the shade was 90 degrees at Eaton, and 95 in Park Lane, Norwich."  A
violent thunderstorm occurred on the 12th.

13.--Died suddenly, at Brighton railway station, the Duke of Wellington.
Born February 3rd, 1807, he succeeded his illustrious father, the
greatest of British generals, on September 14th, 1852.  As Lord Douro he
was elected Conservative member for Aldeburgh in 1830, and retained his
seat until 1831.  In 1837 he was returned for Norwich, and continued to
sit until July, 1852, a few months previous to the death of his father.
During the life of Sir Samuel Bignold, with whom he was on terms of the
closest intimacy, the Duke of Wellington was a frequent visitor to
Norwich, the last occasion being in 1874, when he joined in the
celebration of the venerable knight's 83rd birthday, on October 13th, and
on the following evening accompanied him to the annual dinner of the
Eldon Club.

21.--Died suddenly, at Cranmer Hall, Sir Willoughby Jones, Bart., aged
63.  He was the second son of Major-General Sir John Thomas Jones,
K.C.B., _aide-de-camp_ to the Queen (who was created a baronet in 1831),
by Catherine Maria, daughter of Mr. Effingham Laurence, of New York.
Educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took a wrangler's degree
in 1843, he entered for the Bar, but his future career was decided by the
death of his brother, Sir Laurence Jones, who, having held the baronetcy
for only two years, was murdered by brigands whilst on a tour in Turkey,
in November, 1845.  Sir Willoughby, on succeeding to the baronetcy,
devoted himself to the pursuits and duties of a country gentleman.  He
was for nearly thirty years Chairman of the Norfolk Court of Quarter
Sessions, chairman of the Norwich centre of the Cambridge Local
Examinations, and a member of the Archaeological Society and of the
Naturalists' Society.  He also took great interest in the Volunteer
movement, and in its early days was captain of the 10th Company of
Norfolk Rifles.  Sir Willoughby served the office of High Sheriff in
1851, and married in 1856 his cousin, Emily, daughter of Mr. Henry Taylor
Jones, of Chatham, by whom he left three sons and four daughters.  In
early life he was a Conservative, and as such sat for Cheltenham in
1847-48; but he afterwards changed his principles, and in 1865, as a
Liberal, unsuccessfully contested West Norfolk.

25.--Mr. Edward Terry commenced a three nights' engagement at Norwich
Theatre, as Captain Ginger ("Weak Woman").  His other impersonations were
Chevalier Walkinshaw ("The Rocket"), Kerry ("Kerry, or Night and
Morning"), and Paul Pry.

26.--A long and heated discussion took place at a meeting of the Norwich
Town Council on a motion for adopting a recommendation by the Libraries
Committee "that the reading room at the Free Library be opened on Sundays
from 3 o'clock until 9 p.m., from Michaelmas to Christmas next, by way of
experiment."  A strong protest was handed in on behalf of the clergy of
the city, and the motion was defeated by 21 votes against 12.


SEPTEMBER.


20.--It was announced that the Mousehold site for the new brigade depot
for the Norfolk Regiment had been handed over to the military
authorities, and plans were in hand for the erection of the barracks.
(_See_ June 18th, 1888.)

29.--A new lifeboat was launched at Cromer, and was named by Mrs.
Bond-Cabbell the "Benjamin Bond-Cabbell."  It was built by Messrs.
Beeching, of Yarmouth.


OCTOBER.


6.--The Eastern and Midland Railway extension to Holt was inspected and
approved by Major-General Hutchinson.

14.--The Norfolk and Norwich Musical Festival commenced with an evening
performance of "Elijah."  The other productions were: On the 15th "The
Redemption," first time of performance in Norwich; the 16th the dramatic
oratorio, "The Rose of Sharon," the music composed expressly for this
Festival by A. C. Mackenzie; the 17th "The Messiah."  Grand miscellaneous
concerts were given on the evenings of the 15th, 16th, and 17th.  The
principal vocalists were Miss Emma Navada, Miss Anna Williams, Madame
Patey, Miss Damian, Mr. Edward Lloyd, Mr. Maas, Mr. H. E. Thorndike, and
Mr. Santley.  Mr. Alberto Randegger conducted.  The balance, after the
payment of expenses, amounted to 953 1s. 3d., of which amount 700 was
distributed among the local charities.

15.--The Prince and Princess of Wales arrived at Norwich from Melton
Constable, where they were on a visit to Lord and Lady Hastings, and
attended the Musical Festival.  Their Royal Highnesses arrived at the
City Station of the Eastern and Midlands Railway at 11.40 and were
received by the Mayor (Dr. Eade), the Sheriff (Mr. J. Farrar Ranson), and
the Deputy-Mayor (Mr. C. R. Gilman), and were escorted to St. Andrew's
Hall by a detachment of the 4th (Queen's Own) Hussars.  During the
interval in the performance of "The Redemption" their Royal Highnesses
and a distinguished company were entertained to luncheon by the Mayor.
On leaving the hall the Prince and Princess visited the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital, and later returned to Melton Constable.  Their Royal
Highnesses again visited the city on the evening of the 17th, and
attended the Festival concert, at the conclusion of which they proceeded
to Melton Constable, and ended their visit to Lord and Lady Hastings on
the 18th.


NOVEMBER.


6.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference commenced its sittings at Noverre's
Rooms, Norwich.  The proceedings ended on the 7th.

7.--The new building erected on St. James's Road by the Corporation of
Lynn, for the reception of the Stanley Library, was opened.  The Bishop
of Carlisle (Dr. Harvey Goodwin, son of Mr. Charles Goodwin, of Lynn)
delivered an inaugural address, in the course of which he reviewed the
changes and improvements in his native town since he last visited it
twenty-five years previously.

10.--Mr. John Hotblack was elected Mayor and Mr. William Howard Dakin
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

18.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council the Parliamentary and
Bylaws Committee reported that counsel was of opinion "that the
Corporation should for the present hold its hand and not make any further
distribution among the freemen of the funds arising from the Town Close
Estate."  The recommendation of the Committee "that the question of
payment remain in abeyance until the next meeting," was adopted by 45
votes against 11.  At an adjourned meeting held on December 16th "to
consider the case submitted to the Solicitor-General and Mr. Asquith,"
Mr. Hackblock moved the adoption of the recommendation of the
Parliamentary and Bylaws Committee "that the City Treasurer be directed
to carry the amounts of the rents of the Town Close Estate in his hands
to a separate account, with the view of affording an opportunity for
obtaining a judicial decision as to the rights of the freemen to the
estate."  Mr. Joseph Stanley moved "That the freemen be paid as usual."
The amendment was defeated by 26 votes against 21.  On the adjournment of
the Council a writ issued by Mr. Stanley on behalf of four freemen, and
directed against the Mayor, Aldermen, and Councillors and her Majesty's
Attorney General, was served upon the Town Clerk.  It claimed for the
freemen a declaration that the Corporation was seized and entitled to the
receipt of the rents and profits of the Town Close Estate upon trust only
for the benefit of the plaintiffs and others the freemen of the city, and
an account of the rents and profits of the estate which had been received
by the Corporation.  The appointment of a receiver was asked for, and in
addition the plaintiffs sought an injunction to restrain the Corporation
from admitting to the freedom of the city by servitude any persons who
had served only under articles of clerkship to a solicitor for not
exceeding five years, and had not served seven years' apprenticeship to a
freeman trader.  The Corporation was also desired to furnish an account
of all persons so admitted from September 9th, 1835, it being contended
by the freemen that the profession of law was not a trade or business as
required by the Act, and that no man could be admitted under less than a
seven years' apprenticeship.  (_See_ March 21st, 1887.)

30.--Died, at Costessey Park, the Right Hon. Henry Valentine Baron
Stafford.  He was a son of George William, eighth lord (in whose favour
an attainder was reversed in 1824), by his first wife, Frances Henrietta,
youngest daughter and co-heiress of Mr. Edward Sulyarde, of Wetherdon,
Suffolk, and was born January 2nd, 1802.  His lordship was twice married,
first on February 13th, 1829, to Julia, second daughter of Mr. Edward C.
Howard, F.R.S., and niece of the 12th Duke of Norfolk, who died in
November, 1856; and, secondly, in September, 1859, to Emma Eliza,
daughter of Mr. Frederick S. Gerard, of Aspull House, Lincolnshire, and
niece of Robert Lord Gerard, by whom he was survived.  He was one of the
first Roman Catholics who sat in the House of Commons after the passing
of the Roman Catholic Relief Bill, when he was chosen member for
Pontefract.  On the occasion of the visit of the Prince and Princess of
Wales, the Queen of Denmark, and the Duke of Edinburgh to Norwich, in
1866, Lord Stafford entertained them at Costessey Park.  In recognition
of his munificent liberality on that occasion a subscription was
inaugurated by the Corporation of Norwich for a full-length portrait of
his lordship, which was placed in St. Andrew's Hall.  Lord Stafford was
the courtliest of gentlemen and the most liberal of landlords.


DECEMBER.


2.--Died, at Bacton Grange, North Walsham, in his 67th year, Mr. William
Partridge Cubitt.  He was born at Bacton, where the Cubitt family had
been for many generations tenants under the Wodehouses.  As a coal
merchant he owned ships which traded between Bacton and the North.  For
many years he was captain of the Bacton lifeboat crew, and had received
medals and certificates for courageously saving life on the Norfolk
coast.  On one occasion he swam his horse out to a wreck and brought the
sailors to shore hanging to the stirrup-leathers of his saddle.  "He was
not only a good sailor, a good farmer, and a sharp and wise merchant, but
he was also a splendid horseman across country."  In politics Mr. Cubitt
was strongly Liberal.

2.--A meeting was held at King's Lynn, at which was formed for West
Norfolk a branch of the National Fair Trade League.  The principles of
the League were, for a time, advocated in this and other parts of
Norfolk, but the movement was short-lived.

3.--Died, at the Close, Norwich, Mr. John Orfeur, in his 80th year.  He
was a son of Lieutenant Abdiel Orfeur, R.N., of Great Yarmouth, a
descendant of the family of Orfeur in Cumberland.  By business a timber
merchant, he devoted his leisure time to scientific pursuits, was one of
the promoters of the Norwich Geological Society, and of the Norfolk and
Norwich Naturalists' Society, and a warm supporter of the Norfolk and
Norwich Museum.

6.--The Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture adopted a resolution affirming its
belief that the long-continued depression in agriculture injuriously
affected all other industries, and its desire that a Committee of the two
Houses of Parliament should enquire into the causes of the distress and
recommend such practical remedies as might be found advisable.  Mr. C. S.
Read, M.P., moved a similar resolution at a meeting of the Central
Chamber of Agriculture, on December 10th.

16.--Died, at Houghton Hall, his seat in Norfolk, the Marquis of
Cholmondeley.  His lordship, who was born August 31st, 1800, was the
younger of the two sons of George James, fourth earl and first Marquis of
Cholmondeley, by his marriage with the Lady Georgina Charlotte Bertie,
second daughter and co-heiress of Peregrine, third Duke of Ancaster.  He
was educated at Eton and Christ Church, and at the age of 22, as Lord
Henry Cholmondeley, he entered the House of Commons as one of the members
for the pocket borough of Castle Rising, in the place of his brother,
Lord Rocksavage, who was called to the Upper House in his father's Barony
of Newburgh.  In 1832 Castle Rising was disfranchised under Lord John
Russell's Reform Act, and Lord Henry remained out of Parliament until
1852, when he was returned as one of the members for South Hampshire.  In
May, 1870, on his elder brother's death, he succeeded to the Marquisate
and the rest of the family honours, and to the estates of Cholmondeley
Castle in Cheshire, and of Houghton Hall, Norfolk.  He was an excellent
and considerate landlord, and did his best to encourage agricultural
improvements on his estates.

17.--An extensive fire occurred in the drapery establishment of Mr.
Alfred Jermyn, High Street, Lynn.  A range of buildings was entirely
destroyed.  The premises were valued at 6,500, and the stock in trade at
20,000.

26.--Messrs. T. W. Robertson and H. Brace's Comedy Company appeared at
Norwich Theatre in the farcical pieces, "Nita's First" and "My Milliner's
Bill."  At Messrs. John Sanger and Son's Circus, at the Agricultural
Hall, was produced the Christmas spectacle, "Aladdin, or an Old Lamp with
a New Face."

29.--Died, at Bridewell Alley, Norwich, aged 53, Mr. Arthur Dale Ventnor,
a well-known portrait painter.

30.--Died, at his residence, Surrey Street, Norwich, Mr. Richard
Makilwaine Phipson, F.S.A., aged 57.  He commenced practice as an
architect in London, and in 1849 took an office at Ipswich.  In 1859 he
was appointed to the post of County Surveyor of Norfolk, and afterwards
became one of the diocesan surveyors under the Ecclesiastical
Dilapidations Act, 1871.  Much of the work of church restoration carried
out during the quarter of a century preceding his death had been
entrusted to him, and he was the architect of the Norwich City Asylum.
Mr. Phipson was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Antiquaries, and took
great interest in the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society.



1885.


JANUARY.


2.--The Hon. T. W. H. Pelham, one of the Commissioners appointed to
inquire as to the boundaries to be assigned to the divisions of the
several counties under the Redistribution of Seats Bill, attended at the
Shirehall, Norwich, for the purpose of receiving suggestions and of
hearing objections as to the constitution of the divisions of the county
of Norfolk.  On February 28th it was announced that the Commissioners had
issued their report and had determined the areas of the six divisions
into which the county would be divided, with one member to each.  These
were known as South, South-West, East, North, Mid, and North-West.
Yarmouth and King's Lynn were allotted one member each.

6.--Died, at Cathedral Street, Norwich, Mrs. Emily Stannard, widow of
Joseph Stannard, artist, and daughter of Daniel Coppin, aged 82.  Mrs.
Stannard was a clever painter of fruit, flowers, and still life.  In 1821
she was presented with the large gold medal of the Society of Arts for an
original painting of fruit, and in 1828 received a gold medal for a
painting of game.

8.--The coming of age of Prince Albert Victor Christian Edward of Wales,
eldest son of the Prince and Princess of Wales, was marked by great
rejoicings not only at Sandringham, but throughout the county.  Addresses
and gifts were presented by the tenantry, and by the Corporations of
Norwich and Lynn; Sanger's circus company from Norwich gave performances
for the amusement of the villagers; and in the evening a grand ball took
place at Sandringham House.  The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. John Hotblack)
invited 600 children to a fancy dress ball given at St. Andrew's Hall in
honour of the event.

15.--The Mayor and Corporation of Norwich attended at St. Andrew's Hall
to inaugurate an art loan exhibition in aid of St. Peter Mancroft church
restoration fund, and of the churchyard improvement.  The exhibition
remained open for three weeks, and realised a balance of 517.

21.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before the Lord Chief Justice, Mr. Hamon le
Strange brought an action against the Corporation of Lynn for the purpose
of determining the boundary between his fishery and the fishery of the
Corporation, which were coterminous.  It was alleged that the defendants
wrongfully cut away and removed two buoys belonging to the plaintiff.
The defendants denied the act, but subsequently justified it on the
ground that the buoys were an interference with the fishery of the
Corporation.  The hearing concluded on the 24th, when the jury found for
the plaintiff and allowed 40s. damages in order to carry costs.  The
defendants gave notice of motion for a new trial on the ground of
misdirection of the jury.  On June 24th the application was made in the
Queen's Beach Division, and was refused.

21.--Died, at All Saints' Green, Norwich, Thomas Frederick Armes,
bugle-major of the 1st Volunteer Battalion Norfolk Regiment.  Formerly in
the 4th Light Dragoons, he took part in the famous light cavalry charge
at Balaclava, in which he was wounded and left for dead on the field.

26.--The Prince of Wales attended the annual meeting of the Provincial
Grand Lodge of Norfolk Freemasons at Lynn, and was present at the banquet
presided over by Lord Suffield.

29.--A widow, named Elizabeth Everitt, 50 years of age, of Wormegay, near
Downham Market, was murdered by her son, William Everitt.  The murderer
was certified to be insane, and was removed to the Broadmoor Criminal
Lunatic Asylum.

--Died, at Hill House, Surlingham, Mr. Frederick Anthony Mills, in his
85th year.  Born at Pulham St. Mary, where for many years his father
practised as a surgeon, he received his early education under Valpy at
Norwich Grammar School, and was one of the last survivors of the Valpeian
Club.  A taste for natural history and anatomical investigation rendered
his studies when a pupil at Guy's both congenial and promising.  For some
time he practised surgery in Norwich in partnership with Mr. Cadge, and
after the death of his wife, settled at Surlingham with his old friend
and fellow-sportsman, Mr. Robert Pratt, and indulged in his favourite
pursuits of fishing and shooting.  Mr. Mills was a Liberal of the old
school, "but his contempt for mere party triumphs led him to speak with
more pride than regret of his never having been a member of the Norwich
Town Council."


FEBRUARY.


2.--Died, at Surrey Street, Norwich, Mrs. Louisa Mary Barwell, widow of
Mr. John Barwell.  She was the eldest daughter of Mr. Richard Mackenzie
Bacon, and was born March 4th, 1800.  In early life she showed great
taste and talent in music, became one of the finest amateur singers of
her day, and assisted her father in editing the "Musical Review."  In
1824 she married Mr. John Barwell, and soon afterwards contributed
articles to the "Journal of Education" and other similar periodicals.
Mrs. Barwell in 1833 published her first book, "Little Lessons for Little
Learners."  Her works on educational subjects numbered fourteen.

11.--The "Tichborne Claimant" (who was released from Pentonville Prison
on October 20th, 1884) appeared at Sanger's Circus, Norwich, and
addressed the audience on his life and adventures.  He made a second
appearance on the 12th.

16.--Sir J. W. Lubbock, M.P., and Mr. H. L. Courtney, M.P., at the
Agricultural Hall, Norwich, propounded the principles advocated by the
Proportional Representation Society.


MARCH.


5.--A "service of humiliation" was held in the nave of Norwich Cathedral,
"with prayers for our nation in general and specially for our soldiers
and sailors in Egypt."

--A salmon trout, weighing 4.75 lbs., was captured at Pull's Ferry,
Norwich.

7.--At the Norfolk Adjourned Quarter Sessions, held at the Shirehall,
Norwich, Mr. T. H. B. Heslop of Thames Ditton, Surrey, was appointed
County Surveyor, in place of Mr. R. M. Phipson, deceased.


APRIL.


6.--An English Opera Company, including Mr. Faulkner Leigh, Madame
Cave-Ashton, Madame Campobello, and Mr. William Parkinson, commenced a
season at Norwich Theatre in the operas of "La Sonnambula," "The
Waterman," "Il Trovatore," "Pygmalion and Galatea," "Maritana," &c.  Sir
Julius Benedict was announced as conductor, but in consequence of his
serious illness his name was withdrawn.

--The annual conference of the National Union of Elementary Teachers
opened at the Lecture Hall, Prince's Street, Norwich, and concluded on
the 9th.

19.--Died, at his residence, Heigham, Norwich, aged 84, the Rev.
Frederick Field, LL.D.  He graduated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where
he obtained the Tyrwhitt Hebrew Scholarship, and took his Bachelor's
degree as tenth wrangler and Chancellor's medallist.  He was afterwards
elected to a Fellowship, and in 1843 was instituted to the rectory of
Reepham, which he held till 1863.  In 1875 he was created an honorary
LL.D. of Cambridge University.  Dr. Field was a member of the Old
Testament Revision Committee, and the editor of "Barrow's Treatise on the
Pope's Supremacy," and of several learned works published by the Society
for Promoting Christian Knowledge, the Clarendon Press, Oxford, and the
Cambridge University Press.

21.--Died, at Hill House, Dersingham, Captain William D'Urban Blyth, late
14th Hussars, aged 59.  He was a member of an old Norfolk family, and
joined his regiment, then the 14th Light Dragoons, in India in 1847.  He
served through the Punjaub Campaign of 1848 and 1849; and with the
Central India Field Force, under Sir Hugh Rose, during the Mutiny.
Captain Blyth for some time held the post of riding master in his
regiment, and in addition superintended the training of 1,200 remounts
for cavalry during the Crimean War.  He took part in thirty-six separate
engagements, and was never once wounded.  On retiring from the Army he
settled at Weasenham Hall, his birthplace, and subsequently at
Dersingham, where he became a warm supporter of the West Norfolk
Foxhounds, and a justice of the peace.


MAY.


1.--A "habitation" of the Primrose League was inaugurated at Holt at a
meeting held under the presidency of Sir Alfred Jodrell, Bart.  This is
the first record of the formation of a branch of the organization in
Norfolk.  The preliminary meeting was followed by a great gathering held
in the same town on May 12th.  Other "habitations" were quickly formed in
various parts of the county.

9.--The Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture discussed the question of
inaugurating a series of agricultural experiments.  The committee to whom
the matter had been referred reported in favour of the proposal, which
had the warm support of the Prince of Wales and the Earl of Leicester.
The report was adopted, and it was decided to commence experiments in the
autumn.  An address on the subject was delivered by Sir Thomas Acland,
M.P.

20.--The Prince of Wales arrived at Yarmouth, and on the 21st inspected
the Norfolk Artillery, in which Prince Albert Victor was serving at the
time.  On the 22nd the Prince of Wales was to have visited Norwich for
the purpose of inspecting the 3rd Battalion Norfolk Regiment, but the
parade was abandoned in consequence of the heavy rain.  A ball given at
Yarmouth Town Hall in the evening by the officers of the Eastern District
Brigade, was attended by their Royal Highnesses.  The Prince of Wales
left for Sandringham on the 23rd.

21.--Died, aged 78, Mr. Jeremiah Colman, of Carshalton Park, senior
partner in the firm of Messrs. J. and J. Colman.  He was one of the
twelve sons of Mr. Robert Colman, and a member of the cricket team of
eleven brothers.


JUNE.


3.--The Derby Stakes were won at Epsom by Lord Hastings' Norfolk-bred
horse, Melton, which beat Mr. Brodrick-Cloete's Paradox and Mr.
Childwick's Royal Hampton.  On September 16th Melton won the St. Leger
Stakes at Doncaster by six lengths.

4.--A festival of the Choir Benevolent Fund took place at Norwich
Cathedral.

13.--The Queen, it was announced, had conferred the honour of knighthood
upon Dr. Eade, of Norwich.  The Norwich Town Council on the 16th passed a
vote of congratulation to Sir Peter Eade, who on August 1st was presented
to her Majesty at Osborne.

17.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened
at Watton, and was continued on the 18th.  Lord Walsingham was president.


JULY.


4.--Captain Smith, East Surrey Regiment, son of Mr. Henry Smith, of
Ellingham Hall, was enthusiastically welcomed on his return after active
service in Afghanistan and the Soudan.  Captain Smith entered the Army in
1878, and went immediately to the front.  He served in the Afghan War
under Sir Donald Stewart, and in the Soudan under General Graham, and
took part in the operations at Hasheen and Tamai.  While at Suakim he
contracted fever and was invalided home.

9.--The Merton flock of pure-bred Southdown sheep, the property of Lord
Walsingham, was sold by Mr. John Thornton.  The 541 lots revised 3,254
12s. 6d.

--Died, at Catton, aged 82, Mr. William Jary Cubitt, who served the
office of Sheriff of Norwich in 1865-66.

10.--Died, at Thorpland Hall, Fakenham, aged 83, the Rev. Henry James Lee
Warner.  He was born at Stanton St. Quintin, Wiltshire, where his father
was then curate.  Soon afterwards his grandfather succeeded to the
Walsingham Abbey estates, and in 1807 his father accepted the charge of
the adjoining parishes of Walsingham and Houghton-in-the-Dale.  Having
attended Aylsham Grammar School he proceeded to Rugby, and thence to St.
John's College, Cambridge, where, in 1825, he took double honours in
classics and mathematics, being fourth Senior Optime and in the second
class of the Classical Tripos.  After residing at the Temple and reading
for the Bar, he travelled for some time on the Continent, and on
returning to England read for Holy Orders, and was ordained at Norwich by
Bishop Bathurst.  Mr. Lee Warner first held a curacy at Canterbury, and
in 1834 succeeded his father in the parishes of Great and Little
Walsingham and Houghton-in-the-Dale.  From conscientious motives he
resigned his plurality of livings and thenceforth devoted himself to the
more populous parish of Little Walsingham on a stipend of 100 per annum.
Mr. Lee Warner largely identified himself with Church work in the
diocese, and in 1863 was appointed an Honorary Canon of Norwich
Cathedral.  He was a well-known archaeologist.  "A man of singular
modesty, of simple faith and self-denying habits, he was not only a
strong teetotaller by conviction, but also in many ways opposed to what
he considered excessive luxury."

10.--The North Elmham herd of red polled cattle, purchased and bred since
1875 by Mr. Thomas Fulcher, was sold by Mr. John Thornton.  Forty-six
cows and heifers realised a total of 1,077 guineas, and nine bulls 165
guineas.

21.--A terrible disaster occurred at Caister.  At about midnight a vessel
was observed in distress near the Barber Sand, and the yawl Zephyr,
manned by a crew of fifteen hands, was launched.  The yawl had not
proceeded far when she struck a sunken wreck, and her side being ripped
away, she sank rapidly, and eight of her crew were drowned.

22.--Died, at Yarmouth, Alfred George Stannard, artist, aged 57.  He was
the eldest son of Alfred Stannard, of Norwich, a nephew of "Joe" Stannard
and brother of Miss Stannard, the painter of fruit and flowers.

25.--The 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Volunteer Battalions Norfolk Regiment went
into camp at Yarmouth.


AUGUST.


1.--The Norfolk Agricultural Association decided to merge with the Royal
Agricultural Society in 1886 and to hold no county show that year.

6.--In the House of Commons, Mr. J. A. Picton asked the Secretary of
State for the Home Department whether it was a fact that, as reported in
the London papers, the Rev. Coker Adams, rector of Saham Toney, had on
Sunday, July 26th, pronounced in his parish church sentence of
excommunication against Joseph Payne, a parishioner, aged 82, because of
his persistent neglect of the Church's ordinances and refusal of her
ministrations, and enquired whether notice would be taken of his illegal
action?  Sir Richard Cross replied that he saw this account with extreme
surprise and regret, and he thought it right the sentence should be sent
to the Bishop, who, he had no doubt, would make enquiry into the matter.

7.--Died, at Rackheath Park, Sir Henry Josias Stracey, Bart.  A prominent
member of a well-known county family, Sir Henry for many years occupied a
distinguished position.  Born in 1802, he was educated at Eton, and
afterwards served for several years in the 1st Dragoons, and on
succeeding to the baronetcy, on the death of his father in 1855, he
entered with considerable ardour into politics.  Just previously he had
been returned without opposition as one of the representatives of East
Norfolk on the retirement of Mr. Edmond Wodehouse.  On the dissolution of
Parliament in 1857 Major-General Windham, in the flush of the fame he had
gained in the Crimea, was brought forward for East Norfolk with Sir E. N.
Buxton, and there being divided opinions in the Conservative camp, Mr.
Burroughes and Sir Henry Stracey declined to contest the seat.  On the
death of Sir E. N. Buxton in June, 1858, Sir Henry was again nominated,
and was defeated by the Hon. Wenman Coke.  In the following year he was
returned with Sir Edmund Lacon for Yarmouth, defeating Mr. (afterwards
Sir E. W.) Watkin and Mr. Young, and sat for that borough until 1865.  In
1868 he stood for Norwich in opposition to Sir W. Russell and Mr.
Tillett, and was returned at the head of the poll, but was unseated on
petition.  In 1874 he again came forward, in conjunction with Mr.
Huddleston, was unsuccessful, and thereafter took no share in polities.
Sir Henry married, in 1835, Charlotte, only daughter and heiress of Mr.
George Denne, of the Paddock, Canterbury.  He served the office of High
Sheriff in 1871, and was a Deputy Lieutenant and magistrate for the
county of Norfolk.

18.--Died, at Hingham, Sir Thomas Beevor, Bart., aged 61.  He married, on
December 19th, 1850, Sophia Jane, daughter of the Rev. Clement
Chevallier, rector of Badington and Cransford, Suffolk, and widow of Mr.
Isaac Jermy Jermy, who, with his father, Mr. Isaac Jermy, fell a victim
to the murderer, James Blomfield Rush.  "The Beevor family, which, with
their connections, are very numerous, are descended from the Rev. William
Beevor, rector of South Walsham and Rockland in 1659 (the eldest son of
Abraham Beevor, of Heckmondwike, Yorkshire), whose grandson, Sir Thomas,
eldest son of Thomas Beevor, of Norwich, and Hester, daughter of John
Sharpe, of Norwich, was created a baronet in 1784."  The subject of this
notice was educated for the Bar, but in his latter years devoted himself
to the supervision of the business of the Norwich Union Life Assurance
Society, of which he was chairman of the directors, and was at the same
time a director of the Norwich Union Fire Office.  His eldest son, Thomas
Edward, died to 1879, and the second son, Hugh Reeve, succeeded to the
baronetcy.

24.--Norwich Theatre was opened under the management of Mr. Fred Morgan.
The inaugural performance, "In Chancery," was given by Mr. Edward Terry's
company.  On succeeding evenings "Weak Woman" and "The Rocket" were
produced, and Mr. Terry also appeared in the character of James Blodder
in an adaptation of Thackeray's "Jeames's Diary."  Several improvements
had been effected in the Theatre, which had undergone much-needed
redecoration.


SEPTEMBER.


4.--The 4th Queen's Own Hussars marched from Norwich Cavalry Barracks,
_en route_ to Edinburgh and Glasgow.

14.--The first exhibition by members of the Norwich Art Circle (formed in
the month of February) was opened at the Old Bank of England Chambers,
Queen Street.

25.--The annual congress of the homoeopathic practitioners of Great
Britain was held at the Royal Hotel, Norwich, under the presidency of Dr.
Herbert Nankivell, of Bournemouth.

--Mr. Arthur Coyte, of Thorpe Hamlet, Norwich, died from gunshot wounds
accidentally inflicted whilst shooting on the Stratton Strawless estate
on the previous day.  Mr. Coyte, who was the second son of the Rev. James
Coyte, rector of Polstead, Suffolk, was 53 years of age.

30.--Died, at Norwich, aged 91 years, the Rev. Henry Banfather.  He was
educated at Norwich Grammar School under Forster and Valpy, by the latter
of whom he was made an assistant master.  On Valpy's death he took
private pupils, and was most successful in obtaining candidates for Holy
Orders.  He was then appointed by the Corporation headmaster of the
school, a position which he held for many years before his retirement to
the living of Sprowston.


OCTOBER.


7.--Died, at his chambers, Great Ormond Street, London, Mr. Robert Hindry
Mason, aged 61 years.  Mr. Mason had led a busy life as a journalist.  He
established, edited, and conducted, from 1852 to 1854, the "Greenwich,
and West Kent Observer," owned the "Sunderland Times" and "Sheffield
Advertiser," and subsequently became proprietor of the "London and Eton
Gazette."  Some years previously, when a resident in Norwich, he
published a work, entitled "Norfolk Photographically Illustrated," and at
the time of his death was engaged upon his best known work, the "History
of Norfolk."

12.--A great Conservative demonstration was held at the Agricultural
Hall, Norwich, at which a requisition, signed by 5,000 electors, was
presented to Mr. Harry Bullard, inviting him to contest the
representation of the city in the Conservative interest.
Lieutenant-Colonel Bignold presided, and was supported by the Earl of
Dunraven, Under Secretary for the Colonies, and by many prominent leaders
of the party in county and city.  In reply to the requisition Mr. Bullard
said, "My answer is unhesitatingly 'Yes.'"  This meeting was said to have
been the largest ever held in a public building in Norwich.

19.--Lord Randolph Churchill addressed a large meeting of the
Conservative party at Lynn in support of the candidature of Lord Henry
Bentinck for North-West Norfolk.  On the 20th Lord Randolph proceeded to
Merton Hall as the guest of Lord and Lady Walsingham.

24.--The Channel Squadron, consisting of the Minotaur (flagship),
Agincourt, Monarch, Sultan, Iron Duke, and Leander, arrived in Yarmouth
Roads, and anchored between the Britannia and Wellington Piers.  Admiral
Fellowes was in command, and the officers and men numbered 3,750.  The
squadron sailed for Deal on November 4th.

31.--Mr. Edward Birkbeck, M.P., was presented, at the Fishmongers' Hall,
London, with a valuable service of silver plate, subscribed for by many
fishermen, boatowners, and others in recognition of his successful
efforts to serve the fishing industry of the United Kingdom.  The
presentation was made by the Prince of Wales, who was accompanied by
Prince Albert Victor.


NOVEMBER.


4.--The 13th Hussars, who formed the principal cavalry contingent of Sir
Charles Warren's Bechuanaland expeditionary force, arrived at Norwich by
two special trains.  A portion of the regiment had proceeded to
Colchester.  Lieutenant-Colonel Miller was in command of the headquarter
troops, which numbered 16 officers and 240 men.

9.--Mr. John Gurney, of Sprowston Hall, was elected Mayor, and Mr. J. J.
Dawson Paul appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

12.--Madame Albani gave a concert at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, in aid
of the Jenny Lind Infirmary.  She received the voluntary assistance of
Miss Damian, Mr. Edward Lloyd, Mr. Santley, Lady Benedict (solo pianist),
M. Carl Walther (solo violinist), Dr. Bunnett (organist), and the Norwich
Gatehouse Choir.  Signor Bisaccia conducted, and the proceeds amounted to
529 14s. 8d.

13.--Died, at Milgrove House, Fulham, Thomas Heron Jones, seventh
Viscount Ranelagh.  He was born at Fulham in 1812, and succeeded his
father in 1820.  His lordship took a prominent part in originating and
forming the Volunteer force in 1859.  For some time he served in the 1st
Life Guards and in the 7th Fusiliers.  By his death the title, which was
created in 1628, became extinct.  He was succeeded in his estates
(principally at St. Faith's, Norwich) by his cousin, Alexander
Montgomery, son of Vice-Admiral the Hon. Alexander Montgomery Jones, son
of the fourth Viscount.  Lord Ranelagh served the office of High Sheriff
of Norfolk in 1868.

13.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Stephen, Robert Goodale,
45, gardener, was indicted for the wilful murder of his wife, Bathsheba
Goodale, at Walsoken, on September 15th.  He was found guilty and
sentenced to death.  The execution took place at Norwich Castle on
November 30th.  Berry, of Bradford, was the executioner.  "As the clock
of an adjacent church struck the hour of eight, Berry, who was stationed
behind the prisoner with the lever in his hand, asked him, 'Do you wish
to say anything else before you go?' to which Goodale replied in the
negative, and before the eighth stroke had sounded, the lever was pulled,
the trap-door fell, and the prisoner, who weighed 15 stone, and was 5 ft.
11 in. in height, and was allowed a drop just short of six feet,
disappeared from view.  To the horror of the bystanders the rope
rebounded, and it was thought that by some means it had become
unfastened.  On looking into the pit below the scaffold the spectators
observed the body lying on the ground, with the head still enveloped in
the white cap, completely severed from the trunk."  At the subsequent
inquest the jury found that death was caused by hanging, and "they
imputed no blame to anyone for what had occurred."

19.--A desperate encounter took place between a couple of tigers at
Bostock and Wombwell's menagerie at Norwich.  One animal seized the
other, named Tippo, by the throat, and although every effort was made to
separate them, Tippo was laid lifeless upon the floor.  The victim's
windpipe was crushed, and death resulted from suffocation.  The animal, a
fine specimen of the Royal Bengal tiger, was valued at 400.

23.--The General Election under the extended franchise commenced on this
date.  The nomination of candidates for the representation of Norwich
took place at the Guildhall, before the Sheriff (Mr. J. J. Dawson Paul).
The following were proposed:--Mr. Harry Bullard, of Hellesdon House (C.);
Mr. Jeremiah James Colman, of Carrow House (L.); and Mr. Robert Samuel
Wright, of 1, Paper Buildings, Temple, London, barrister-at-law (L.).
The polling took place on the 25th, between the hours of eight a.m. and
eight p.m.  "The Market Place was the scene of a regular carnival.  The
principal form of practical joking was the discharge of small bags of
flour at any prominent person who chanced to run the gauntlet of the
crowd.  No ill-temper was displayed, and probably no election ever took
place in Norwich where so little animosity was exhibited.  We think the
keeping of the poll open until eight o'clock was generally admitted to be
a mistake, as unnecessarily prolonging the excitement incidental to an
election where party feeling runs high."  At the close of the poll the
ballot boxes were conveyed to the Guildhall, where the counting
immediately commenced, and the result was declared at 12.45 as
follows:--Bullard, 7,279; Colman, 6,666; Wright, 6,251.  On December 21st
a petition was lodged against the return of Mr. Bullard.  (_See_ March
17th, 1886.)

--At Yarmouth, on the re-enfranchisement of the borough, Sir Henry
Wheatley Tyler (C.) and Captain Cecil W. Norton (L.) were nominated.  The
polling, which took place on the 24th, resulted as follows:--Tyler,
2,661; Norton, 2,476.

--The Right Hon. Robert Bourke (C.) and Sir W. ffolkes, Bart. (L.) were
nominated for King's Lynn.  The polling on the 25th resulted--Bourke,
1,472; ffolkes, 1,302.

24.--For South Norfolk Sir Robert Jacob Buxton, Bart. (C), and Mr.
Francis Taylor, of Diss (L.), were nominated.  The polling took place on
the 27th, and the result was declared at the Shirehall, Norwich, on the
28th as follows:--Taylor, 4,580; Buxton, 3,588.

--The candidates nominated for East Norfolk were Mr. Edward Birkbeck (C.)
and Mr. Philip Falk, of Kensington Palace Gardens, London (L.).  The
polling took place on the 30th, and the result was declared at the
Shirehall, Norwich, on December 1st as follows:--Birkbeck, 4,682; Falk,
4,459.

25.--The nomination of candidates for North Norfolk took place at
Aylsham.  The nominees were Mr. Samuel Hoare, of Cliff House, Cromer (C),
and Mr. Herbert Hardy Cozens-Hardy, Q.C., of 50, Ladbroke Grove, Notting
Hill, London (L.).  The polling was on December 1st, and the declaration,
at Aylsham, on December 2nd.  Result:--Cozens-Hardy, 5,028; Hoare, 3,342.

27.--The nomination of candidates for South-West Norfolk took place at
Swaffham.  The candidates were Mr. W. A. Tyssen Amherst (C.) and Sir W.
Brampton Gurdon (L.).  The polling was on December 4th, and the
declaration on December 5th:--Amherst, 4,096; Gurdon, 3,776.

30.--The candidates for North-West Norfolk--Lord Henry Bentinck (C.) and
Mr. Joseph Arch (L.), were nominated at Lynn.  The latter, described as
the president of the National Agricultural Labourers' Union, was
nominated by Sir Lawrence Jones, Bart.  The polling, on December 8th, was
declared on December 9th as follows:--Arch, 4,461; Bentinck, 3,821.


DECEMBER.


3.--Mid Norfolk election, candidates, Mr. Ailwyn E. Fellowes (C.) and Mr.
R. T. Gurdon (L.), took place.  The poll was declared on the 4th at East
Dereham--Gurdon, 5,275; Fellowes, 2,872.

9.--The parish church of East Dereham, partially restored at the cost of
2,134, by Messrs. Cornish and Gaymer, of North Walsham, under the
supervision of Mr. E. P. Willins, was re-opened.  The eighteenth century
plaster, which concealed the Early English roof of the nave, was removed,
and the unsightly old galleries, which blocked up the north and south
aisles and the west end, were demolished.  The Perpendicular font was
transferred from the north transept to its original position near the
west door.  Colonel Bulwer was chairman of the Restoration Committee.

--In the House of Lords, before Lords Selborne, Blackburn, Bramwell,
Watson, and Fitzgerald, was commenced the hearing of the appeal, Coaks
and others _v._ Boswell and others.  This was an appeal from the judgment
of Lords Justices Baggallay, Cotton, and Lindley.  On Monday, 14th, the
fourth day, the case for the respondents closed, and their lordships
reserved judgment.  (_See_ February 22nd, 1886.)

20.--The new reredos at the church of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich,
designed by Mr. Seddon, and executed by Mr. Harry Hems, of Exeter, was
formally dedicated.  It was described as "an adaptation of the Norfolk
screen, with its carved oak and painted panel work."

26.--Miss May Holt's company appeared at Norwich Theatre in her "local
drama," entitled, "Every Man for Himself."  "Little Red Riding Hood" was
produced at Sanger's Circus at the Agricultural Hall.



1886.


JANUARY.


2.--The appointment of Dr. Bates, of Edinburgh, as organist and master of
the choristers at Norwich Cathedral, was announced.

7.--The county magistrates decided to hire of Mr. James C. Snelling the
mansion known as Eaton Hall as lodgings for the judges of Assize, at the
yearly rental of 250.  On January 20th, Mr. Justice Hawkins, after
delivering his charge to the Grand Jury at the Norfolk Assizes, said he
could not offer the magistrates his gratitude for their endeavours to
provide for the comfort of her Majesty's judges, unless, indeed, they
thought he and his marshal had the habits and tastes of a Polar bear and
an Arctic fox.  Eaton Hall was well fitted for one or both, as it was
simply a bleak house in a frozen waste; it was redolent of putty and
paint; workmen were tapping just beyond the dining-room door in precisely
the same way as he should expect to hear tapping in the back manufactory
of an undertaker's shop; and the rooms were furnished with the view to
economy and discomfort with a show of luxury skilfully but not very
judiciously combined.  On November 15th Mr. Justice Field, in concluding
his charge to the Grand Jury, said he found the accommodation at Eaton
Hall exceedingly nice and extremely comfortable, and he added, amid
laughter, he had not seen any Polar bears or Arctic foxes.

10.--The jubilee of the Norwich District of the Manchester Unity of
Oddfellows was celebrated by a special service held at the Cathedral, and
attended by several hundred members, and by the Mayor and Corporation.
"The Order was introduced into Norfolk in the year 1835 by five
woolsorters from the North of England--John Raven, Walter Meldrum, Thomas
Dack, Benjamin Fearnside, and Thomas Lambert.  They were the founders of
the mother lodge of the district, the Travellers' Rest, the first place
of meeting being at the New Brewery, Pockthorpe."  The Mayor (Mr. John
Gurney) entertained to dinner at St. Andrew's Hall, on May 18th, upwards
of 900 members of the Order.

19.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, an application was
received from the Norwich School Board for the consent of the Corporation
to an assignment of the lease of the Dutch Church from the trustees to
the Board, with the view of converting the building into a higher grade
school.  The Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society addressed to the
Council a strong protest against the application, which was refused by 35
votes against 12.  On April 21st a meeting was held, under the presidency
of the Mayor, at the Old Bank Buildings, at which it was moved by Mr.
Colman, M.P., seconded by Mr. Harry Bullard, and unanimously agreed,
"That the provisional contract entered into by Mr. Frederic Oddin Taylor
in February last for the purchase of the lease of the Dutch Church be
adopted, and that a scheme be formulated assuring the future inalienable
use of the building as an adjunct to and in connection with St. Andrew's
Hall, subject to existing rights."  It was further decided to raise by
public subscription the sum required (800) to present the building,
"hereafter to be called Blackfriars' Hall," to the city after proper
renovation.  The Town Council on June 29th passed a resolution expressing
warm appreciation of the efforts made by Mr. F. Oddin Taylor, and
received a deputation composed of the gentlemen who had taken part in the
movement, from whom they accepted Blackfriars' Hall as a gift to the
citizens.

21.--Died, at Child's Hill House, Hampstead, Mr. Joseph Hoare, in his
72nd year.  He was the fourth son of Mr. Samuel Hoare, banker, of London,
by his marriage with Louisa, daughter of Mr. John Gurney of Earlham.  Mr.
Hoare, who was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, was a Deputy
Lieutenant for the county of Middlesex, and was president of the
Hampstead Conservative Association.  In May, 1859, he was returned to the
House of Commons as member for Hull, but was unseated on petition.  He
married, in 1847, Rachel Juliana, second daughter of Mr. Charles Barclay,
M.P.  For many years it was his custom to spend the summer at Cromer,
where he was known as a generous supporter of charitable and religious
institutions.

22.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Hawkins, John Thurston,
30, labourer, was indicted for the wilful murder of Henry Springall, an
old man, at Hingham, on December 5th, 1885.  The prisoner was found
guilty, and received sentence of death.  The execution took place at
Norwich Castle on February 10th.  The culprit was a nephew of Henry
Webster, who was hanged at the same prison on May 1st, 1876, for the
murder of his wife at Cranworth.

--St. Cuthbert's church, Sprowston, erected at the cost of 2,000, was
opened by the Bishop of Norwich.  The building was designed by Mr. A. R.
G. Flemming, of Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, and the contractor was Mr.
G. E. Hawes, of Norwich.

26.--A violent explosion, caused by an escape of gas, occurred at
Victoria Station, Norwich.


FEBRUARY.


2.--Died, at St. Clement's Hill, Catton, the Rev. Richard Rigg, M.A., for
forty-two years rector of St. Clement's, and some time rector of St.
Michael-at-Coslany and St. Edmund the King, Norwich, in his 81st year.  A
clergyman of the old school, he was a warm adherent to the Evangelical
party, was for forty years secretary of the Norfolk and Norwich Auxiliary
of the British and Foreign Bible Society, and one of the founders of the
Norwich Church of England Young Men's Society.

--Mr. John Ellis, of Sprowston, received from the Treasury a grant of 150
"in consideration of his services to the nation in having been the
founder of the first juvenile reformatory in England, that of Saltley,
near Birmingham."

6.--It was announced that her Majesty the Queen had conferred upon Mr.
Edward Birkbeck, M.P., the honour of a baronetcy.

7.--Died, at Brockheath, Salisbury, General William Custance, C.B.,
colonel of the 11th Hussars, in his 75th year.  The second son of Mr.
Hamilton Thomas Custance, of Weston House, he entered the Army in 1831,
and served with distinction in the Crimean War and the Indian Mutiny.

13.--A deputation of unemployed workmen waited upon the Mayor of Norwich
at the Guildhall and urged upon him the necessity of steps being taken to
relieve the exceptional distress then prevailing in the city.  On the
17th a public meeting was held, at which a fund was opened.  Relief works
were shortly afterwards started on Mousehold Heath.

14.--Died, at St. Helen's House, Norwich, Mr. Edward Field, in his 75th
year.  He succeeded Mr. Thomas Bignold as solicitor to the Norwich Fire
and Life Assurance Offices, and in 1857-8 served as Mayor of Norwich.  On
the death of Sir Samuel Bignold Mr. Field became leader of the
Conservative party in the Town Council, and was for many years Chairman
of the Board of Guardians.  He drafted the Norfolk and Suffolk Fisheries
Act, 1877, and was chiefly instrumental in getting it passed;
subsequently he became honorary secretary to the Board of Conservators,
of which also he was a member.  Mr. Field, who was a magistrate of the
city, for several years held the rank of captain in the Norwich Rifle
Volunteers.

20.--Died, at 49, Brook Street, Grosvenor Square, London, Mr. George
William Pierrepont Bentinck, aged 82.  He was the eldest son of
Vice-Admiral William Bentinck (a representative of the junior branch of
the family of the Duke of Portland), by marriage with Lady Frances Eliza
Augusta Pierrepont, only daughter of Charles, first Earl of Manvers.  In
1853 he was returned as Conservative member for West Norfolk, and
retained the seat until March, 1868, when he retired on account of
ill-health.  He was, however, re-elected by the same constituency in
1871, and sat till February, 1884, when he finally retired from
Parliamentary life.  Mr. Bentinck, who was a Tory of the old school, and
maintained his principles to the last, was a magistrate and a Deputy
Lieutenant for the county.

22.--In the House of Lords judgment was given in the case, Coaks and
others, appellants, and Boswell and others, respondents.  Their lordships
held that there had been no fraud in the purchase of the Harvey life
interest, and therefore reversed the order of the Court of Appeal and
that of Mr. Justice Fry, dismissing the action with costs restored.  The
respondents were condemned in the whole costs of the case.  On September
17th, 1887, it was announced: "The plaintiffs have discharged the taxed
costs of the defendants.  These amounted to 12,930 19s. 11d., of which
2,194 13s. 5d. was allowed in respect of the appeal in the House of
Lords."  Mr. M. S. Emerson, solicitor to the plaintiffs, stated, in a
letter published on September 24th, 1887, that they had the opportunity
of compromising the case.  "It is a fact," he wrote, "that I refused
30,000 before the case came into court. . . .  The six counsel engaged
for the plaintiffs met, and were unanimous in their opinion that I was
right in refusing the 30,000."  (_See_ July 22nd, 1892.)


MARCH.


2.--At a special meeting of the shareholders of the Norwich Public
Library, held for the purpose of taking into consideration the
advisability of amalgamating the Library with the Literary Institution,
according to a scheme prepared and approved by the committees of both
institutions, it was agreed by 27 votes against 4 to adopt the proposal.

17.--The trial of the election petition presented by Mr. Henry Birkbeck
and others against the return of Mr. Harry Bullard as one of the members
for Norwich, commenced at the Shirehall before Mr. Justice Denman and Mr.
Justice Cave.  Counsel for the petitioners were Mr. Charles, Q.C., Mr. R.
T. Reid, Q.C., and the Hon. Mark Napier; and for the respondent Mr.
Gully, Q.C., the Hon. Mr. Denman, and Mr. Blofeld.  Bribery, treating,
undue influence, and personation by agents, were alleged.  The only case
of bribery that was proved was the gift of a two-shilling piece by an
alleged agent, to a voter, but it was sufficient to render the election
void, and Mr. Bullard was unseated.  The judges, however, declined to
give the petitioners their costs, and Mr. Bullard's costs were defrayed
by the subscriptions of men of all parties.  (_See_ May 7th.)

18.--Died, at Marham Hall, Mr. Henry Villebois, aged 79.  An excellent
landlord, an ardent sportsman, and for some years Master of the West
Norfolk Foxhounds, Mr. Villebois was one of the earliest friends in
Norfolk of the Prince of Wales, whom he had the honour of several times
entertaining at Marham.  He married, in 1831, Maria, elder daughter of
Mr. Thomas Philip Bagge, of Stradsett Hall, and was a magistrate and a
Deputy Lieutenant for the county.  Mr. Villebois commenced active duties
as a M.F.H. about 1842, when he took the Vale of White Horse, purchasing
the pack from the triumvirate, the Earl of Suffolk, Earl Bathurst, and
Mr. Cripps, who had hunted the country conjointly.  He likewise purchased
the Herefordshire Hounds from Sir Vevers Cornwall, and, with John
Dinnecombe as huntsman, showed excellent sport until 1854, when, in
consequence of a severe accident, he resigned the mastership to Lord
Gifford, and sold his hounds to the Earl of Portsmouth.  For the next
three or four years he hunted with Lord Suffield, and in 1858 consented
to hunt the West Norfolk.  His lordship continued with the East Norfolk,
but resigned in 1859; Mr. Villebois then hunted the entire country, but
after two or three years resigned the Eastern portion to Lord Hastings.
In the spring of 1865 Mr. Villebois sold his hounds and horses at Albert
Gate, when seven of the hunters, bought from Mr. Newcome Mason, of
Hendon, his great ally in all hunting matters, realised 1,015 guineas.
After giving up the mastership he stuck to West Norfolk, and from 1871 to
1875 hunted the country round Marham with a small pack purchased from the
Rev. "Jack" Russell.  The shooting at Marham could not be excelled, for
Mr. Villebois would have partridges and pheasants as well as foxes.  His
funeral at Marham on March 24th was attended by upwards of three thousand
persons.

29.--The funeral took place, at the Rosary burial ground, Norwich, of
Thomas Harrison, who was born in the city in 1795, and had seen much
active service as a soldier.  He joined the 69th Regiment at the age of
17, was taken prisoner at the bombardment of Antwerp, was present at
Waterloo, went out to India, where he was under arms for fourteen years,
took part in the first expedition to Burmah, and on returning to England
in 1832 was rewarded with a pension of fifteen pence per day.

31.--A fire occurred at Browick Hall, near Wymondham, and did damage to
the amount of 2,000.


APRIL.


7.--At the Guildhall, Norwich, Mr. Samuel Hoare, of Cliff House, Cromer,
was nominated a candidate to fill the vacancy caused in the
representation of the city by the unseating on petition of Mr. Harry
Bullard.  The Liberal party offered no opposition, and Mr. Hoare was
declared duly elected.

9.--Died, at Great Yarmouth, Mr. Oswald Diver, aged 59.  When a young man
he was renowned as an oarsman, won many sculling matches on the Thames,
and at Norwich, Lynn, and other places, and in 1847 beat Playford, who
then held the Thames Amateur Championship.

22.--The Archbishop of Canterbury administered at Sandringham church the
rite of confirmation to the Princess Victoria of Wales.

24.--The Prince of Wales visited Norwich for the purpose of inspecting
the show-ground of the Royal Agricultural Society, and was entertained at
Carrow House by Mr. J. J. Colman, M.P.

29.--A special meeting of the Norwich Diocesan Conference, convened by
the Lord Bishop, in compliance with a numerously-signed requisition, was
held at Noverre's Rooms to take into consideration the subject of Church
Reform.


MAY.


1.--The new station erected by the Great Eastern Railway Company at
Thorpe, Norwich, was opened for inspection, and on the 3rd was used by
the public for the first time.  It was built by Messrs. Youngs and Son,
of Norwich, from designs by Mr. J. Wilson, the company's engineer, at the
cost of 60,000, and replaced the old station, which had been in use since
the opening of the line.

--A great meeting of "an entirely non-party character" was held at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich, under the presidency of the Earl of Leicester,
Lord Lieutenant of the county, in support of the principles of the Irish
Loyal and Patriotic Union.  A resolution was adopted affirming that any
proposals tending to invalidate the legislative union between Great
Britain and Ireland would prove disastrous to the interests of both
countries.  On June 25th Lord Leicester wrote a letter which had an
important influence upon the electorate of the county.  "I have never
been in the habit," he wrote, "of taking part in political matters of a
purely party description, though if ever I should have been inclined to
break through the rule it would be at a time like the present, when we
are passing through a great crisis in our national history, when the old
party barriers have been broken down, and when Liberals, Radicals, and
Conservatives meet on a common platform in a common cause.  The question
before the country is solely this: whether the loyalists and Protestants
of Ireland should be legislated for by an independent Parliament composed
of men whom Mr. Gladstone himself has termed as marching through rapine
to the dismemberment of the empire, or whether the United Kingdom is to
remain under one Queen and one Parliament.  I cannot believe that
Englishmen will ever consent to the former proposal.  I trust that the
electors of Norfolk, with those of the rest of England, will insist that
their members shall be patriots and decline to support Mr. Gladstone's
dangerous policy."  Lord Suffield and other prominent Liberals also
renounced their adhesion to Mr. Gladstone.

7.--At the combined Norfolk and Suffolk Assizes, held at Ipswich, before
Mr. Baron Pollock, Charles Edward Wigger, a shoemaker, was indicted for
receiving from one Walter Banham, a bribe for voting, or agreeing to
vote, for Mr. Harry Bullard at the Norwich election on November 25th,
1885, and was sentenced to three months' imprisonment with hard labour.

10.--George Edward Ray, 31, solicitor, of Norwich, was sentenced at the
Norfolk and Suffolk Assizes, at Ipswich, to seven years' penal servitude
for forging the conveyance of a real estate with intent to defraud.

11.--At the same Assizes Edward Burgess, of Norwich, the printer and
publisher of a newspaper called "Daylight," was indicted for publishing
on February 20th a libel upon Mr. Joseph Stanley, solicitor, and Coroner
for Norfolk.  The trial occupied three days, and on the jury finding the
defendant guilty he was sentenced to three months' imprisonment without
hard labour, and ordered to pay the costs of the prosecution.

12.--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. John Gurney), as chairman of the
Conservators of Mousehold Heath, opened the new road constructed thereon,
and dedicated the Heath to the free use of the people as a recreation
park for ever.

19.--The sale of the Westacre shorthorns and shirehorses, the property of
Mr. Anthony Hamond, was conducted by Mr. John Thornton and Mr. Sexton,
respectively.  Forty-five cows averaged 28 ls. 5d.; seven bulls averaged
34 16s., and 16 mares and seven stallions 53 16s. 3d.  The total amount
realised was 2,690 13s. 6d.

25.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, Mr. E. S. Steward tendered
his resignation of the office of City Treasurer.  On June 8th it was
decided that the resignation be not accepted, but that Mr. Steward be
dismissed from office.  Mr. Hugh Gurney Barclay was on June 16th
appointed to fill the vacancy.  At the Norwich Assizes, on November 23rd,
the late City Treasurer was indicted for falsifying and making certain
false entries in the bankers' pass book belonging to the Mayor and
Corporation, with intent to defraud them of 1,848 16s. 9d., and on the
24th was found guilty and sentenced by Mr. Justice Field to six months'
imprisonment, (_See_ January 25th, 1887.)

29.--The 19th (Princess of Wales' Own) Hussars, who had been on active
service in Egypt since 1882, arrived at Norwich, and took over the
Cavalry Barracks, vacated during the week by the 13th Hussars.  The
regiment, commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Combe, came by special train
from Harwich, where they had disembarked from the transport Geelong, and
at Thorpe station were received by the Deputy-Mayor (Mr. John Hotblack),
the Sheriff (Mr. J. J. Dawson Paul), and other prominent citizens.  The
route from the station to the barracks was profusely decorated, and the
regiment received an enthusiastic welcome from the citizens.


JUNE.


10.--Died, at Fincham Rectory, the Rev. William Blyth, rector of the
parish and hon. canon of Norwich Cathedral.  An ardent archaeologist, he
was the author of a "History of Fincham," published in 1863.  During his
tenure of office as rural dean five new churches were built, fifteen
restored, and thirteen greatly improved, out of a total of twenty-fire
churches in his deanery.  The total outlay upon this work was 45,000.

20.--Died, Mr. Henry James Lee Warner, of Walsingham Abbey.  The eldest
son of the Rev. Daniel Henry Lee Warner, he was born January 12th, 1809,
and succeeded to the estate in 1858.  Mr. Lee Warner served as High
Sheriff in 1863, and some years previously successfully contested
Canterbury in the Conservative interest.


JULY.


2.--The General Election commenced.  The contest was fought upon the
issue of Home Rule, and the candidates were distinguished severally
Conservatives, Liberal Unionists, and Gladstonians.  Liberal Unionist
candidates received the support of the Conservative party.

2.--Polling took place at Yarmouth: Sir H. W. Tyler (C.), 2,977; Captain
C. Norton (G.), 2,011.

--Lynn election: The Right Hon. Robert Bourke (C.), 1,417; Mr. J. J.
Briscoe, Bourne Hall, Cambridgeshire (G.), 1,146.

--Mr. W. A. Tyssen Amherst (C.) was returned unopposed for South-West
Norfolk.

3.--Sir Edward Birkbeck (C.) and Mr. H. Lee Warner (G.) were nominated at
the Shirehall, Norwich, candidates for East Norfolk.  The polling took
place on the 8th: Birkbeck, 4,578; Lee Warner, 4,000.

--Mr. Francis Taylor, of Diss (L.U.), was returned unopposed member for
South Norfolk.

5.--The nomination of candidates--Lord Henry Bentinck (C.) and Mr. Joseph
Arch (G.)--for the representation of North-West Norfolk, took place at
the Town Hall, King's Lynn.  The polling was held on the 9th: Bentinck,
4,084; Arch, 4,064.  (_See_ April 5th, 1887.)

6.--Mr. Ailwyn Edward Fellowes (C.) and Mr. Herbert Hardy Cozens-Hardy,
Q.C. (G.) were nominated, at the Town Hall, Aylsham, candidates for North
Norfolk.  The poll was opened on July 10th: Cozens-Hardy, 4,084;
Fellowes, 3,325.

7.--The nomination took place at East Dereham of Mr. R. T. Gurdon (L.U.)
and Mr. James Toller, tenant-farmer, of Winfield Farm, Waterbeach (G.),
as candidates for Mid Norfolk.  The polling took place on the 15th:
Gurdon, 3,032; Toller, 2,638.

8.--The nomination of candidates for the representation of Norwich took
place at the Guildhall before the Sheriff (Mr. J. J. Dawson Paul).  The
candidates were Mr. J. J. Colman (L.), Mr. Samuel Hoare (C.), Mr. Jacob
Henry Tillett (L.), and Mr. Clare Sewell Read (C.).  The polling on the
9th resulted as follows:--Colman, 6,295; Hoare, 6,156; Tillett, 6,119;
Read, 5,564.

12.--The show of the Royal Agricultural Society of England opened at
Whitlingham, Norwich.  There were 1,840 entries of stock and 4,656
entries of implements, as against 624 and 1,882 respectively at the
former show held at Norwich in 1849.  On the 13th the show was visited by
the Prince and Princess of Wales and the Princesses Louise, Victoria, and
Maud, who travelled from Sandringham and arrived at the temporary railway
station adjoining the show-ground.  Their Royal Highnesses made al tour
of the show-yard, and the Prince of Wales presided at the annual meeting
of the society; in the afternoon the Royal party returned to Sandringham.
Their Royal Highnesses again came to the city on the 14th.  They arrived
at the City station of the Eastern and Midlands Railway, where they were
received by the Mayor (Mr. John Gurney), the Sheriff (Mr. J. J. Dawson
Paul), the Earl of Leicester, Mr. Colman, M.P., Mr. Hoare, M.P., Mr.
Harry Bullard, Mr. C. R. Gilman, and other gentlemen.  Escorted by the
19th (Princess of Wales' Own) Hussars, their Royal Highnesses were driven
through the gaily decorated streets of the city to St. Andrew's Hall,
where, by invitation of the Mayor, a large and distinguished company had
assembled for luncheon.  On the conclusion of the proceedings the Royal
visitors drove to the show-ground, and after further inspecting the
exhibits returned to the city and visited the Norfolk and Norwich Dog
Show at the Agricultural Hall.  On this day 200 of the Commissioners from
the Colonial Exhibition in London were present at the Royal Show, by
invitation of the Council of the Society.  The Mayor and Mayoress held a
reception at St. Andrew's Hall on the evening of the 15th, and on the
16th the Prince of Wales paid a third visit to the show.  In the evening
a display of fireworks, provided by the Sheriff, was given on the Castle
Meadow.  The total number of visitors to the show during the week was
104,761, and the receipts, exclusive of the sum derived from the sale of
season tickets, amounted to 6,784 3s.  The loss to the society was 1,062
1s. 3d.

15.--A great sale of shorthorn cattle and Southdown sheep, the property
of the Prince of Wales, was conducted at Sandringham by Mr. John
Thornton.  The Prince and Princess of Wales were present at the luncheon,
at which there was a distinguished gathering.  Fifty-two cows and heifers
sold for 2,496 guineas, an average of 50 8s.; 17 bulls realised 840 gs.,
an average of 51 5s. 10.5d.  Good prices were obtained for the
Southdowns.

--Died, at Golding Street, Heigham, Norwich, Mr. Obadiah Short, aged 83.
Born in the parish of St. Augustine, he was employed from 1816 to 1829 as
a journeyman weaver.  Meanwhile he practised drawing and painting in his
garret in St. Edmund's, and became acquainted with Mr. Sparshall, a wine
merchant and a local patron of art, who lent him some of Stark's works
for copying purposes.  Soon afterwards Short made sketches of birds for
the Norfolk and Norwich Museum, and was employed by Dalrymple and Crosse
to make drawings of pathological subjects; the original drawings for
Crosse's work on the "Urinary Calculus," published in 1841, were all from
his pencil.  In 1834 Short accepted an engagement as designer at the
manufactory of Messrs. Willett, with whom he remained for more than fifty
years.  During his long life he painted a large number of pictures,
principally in oil.  "Although he did not attain to the production of
'high art,' his works were faithful delineations of landscape scenery
selected with a fine taste, and pleasing to a vastly larger proportion of
the lovers of pictures than many of the works of 'high art' which few
people understand."

22.--The Houghton Hall estate, the property of the Marquis of
Cholmondeley, was offered for sale at Tokenhouse Yard under an order of
the Court of Chancery.  For Houghton Hall (built by Sir Horace Walpole at
the cost of 450,000) and 10,564 acres of land, 300,000 was offered, at
which sum the property was withdrawn.

24.--The camp of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Volunteer Battalions Norfolk
Regiment commenced at Yarmouth.


AUGUST.


5.--The first of the Norwich Cricket Week amateur theatrical performances
was given at Norwich Theatre under the management of Sir Kenneth Kemp,
Bart.  The programme, which was repeated on the 6th, included "A Fair
Encounter" and Tom Taylor's "Plot and Passion."

9.--Died, Dr. Robert James Mann, F.R.C.S.  Born in Norwich in 1817, he
was educated for the medical profession at the University College,
London, obtained his M.D. degree at St. Andrew's, and was for some years
in practice in Norfolk.  In 1857 he left England for Natal, where he
resided nine years, and returned to England with a special appointment
from the Legislative Council to promote emigration.  Dr. Mann, in 1874,
was appointed secretary to the African section of the Society of Arts.
He was for some years on the staff of the "Edinburgh Review," and was the
author of several popular scientific treatises.

14.--Henry Last, a master carpenter, about 66 years of age, was murdered
in his cottage in Old Post Office Yard, Norwich, by George Harmer.  The
murderer was apprehended in London on the 19th.  He was tried at Norwich
Assizes on November 22nd, before Mr. Justice Field, found guilty, and
sentenced to death.  The execution took place at Norwich Castle on
December 13th.  Harmer was the last culprit executed within the walls of
the Castle.

25.--The third Parliamentary election within the period of eight months
took place at King's Lynn.  A vacancy had occurred in the representation
of the borough by the appointment of Mr. Bourke, M.P., to the
Governorship of Madras.  Two candidates were nominated--Mr. Alexander
Weston Jarvis, of Middleton Towers (C.), and Mr. James Harris Sanders, of
Shelly, Herts (G.).  The polling resulted as follows:--Jarvis, 1,423;
Sanders, 1,168.


SEPTEMBER.


6.--Died, at Belsize House, East Dereham, Mr. Charles Wright, solicitor,
aged 74.  Mr. Wright was for many years clerk to the justices, and
Coroner for the Duchy of Lancaster.  He was a lover of the fine arts, and
a famous cricketer, and for a long period was annually invited to play at
Lord's in the match between Gentlemen and Players.

20.--Died, the Rev. John Jessopp, M.A., vicar of St. Gregory, Norwich,
aged 71.  Educated at Cambridge University, he was ordained in 1840, and
became chaplain to the East India Company, but after serving two years in
India illness necessitated his retirement from the post.  On returning to
Europe he was appointed chaplain to the King of the Belgians, and for
some years resided at Ostend in that capacity.  Mr. Jessopp, on
terminating his services to King Leopold, became chaplain at the Surrey
County Gaol, and on coming to Norwich, in 1877, was presented to the
living of St. Gregory.  He was brother to the Rev. Dr. Jessopp, rector of
Scarning, and formerly head-master of Norwich Grammar School.

28.--Died, at Heigham Hall, Norwich, Mr. John Ferra Watson.  The son of a
Norwich manufacturer, he was born at Weybread in 1816, and was educated
for the medical profession.  Mr. Watson founded Heigham Hall, which he
converted from a small square building into a handsome mansion, and made
it one of the finest private lunatic asylums in the country.  A Liberal
of the old Whig type, he for many years sat in the Norwich Town Council
both as an alderman and as a councillor, and was a magistrate for the
city.  He took great interest in parochial affairs, and as churchwarden
inaugurated the restoration of the mother church of St. Bartholomew, in
the hamlet of Heigham.

30.--The Rev. Henry Ward Beecher lectured at the Victoria Hall, Norwich,
on "Wastes and Burdens of Society."


OCTOBER.


9.--Died, at Thelveton, Mr. Thomas Mann, of Thelveton Hall, aged 65.  Mr.
Mann, who succumbed to injuries received through an accidental fall from
his horse, was head of the extensive firm of London brewers, Messrs.
Mann, Crossman, and Paulin.  He was a successful exhibitor of cattle, and
took great interest in agricultural pursuits; and during his long
residence at Thelveton effected a series of improvements, which were
hardly completed at the time of his death.  Among Mr. Mann's most notable
works were the rebuilding of cottages on his estate, the restoration of
the parish church, and the erection of parish schools.  He was a generous
supporter of many charities, and his death was greatly deplored both in
London and in Norfolk.

12.--The Congress of the Congregational Union of England and Wales was
opened at Norwich, under the presidency of the Rev. Edward White.

15.--Died, at his residence, Wroxham House, Mr. Robert Blake-Humfrey,
second son of Mr. Thomas Blake, of Norwich and Scottow.  Born November
23rd, 1795, he was educated at Norwich Grammar School under Dr. Forster,
and afterwards under Valpy.  At the early age of 16.5 years he was
gazetted to an ensigncy by purchase in the 3rd Regiment (the Buffs), and
joined the 2nd Battalion at Walmer Barracks.  In July, 1813, he went out
with a detachment of 100 men to join the 1st Battalion in Spain, and
arrived off St. Sebastian during the siege.  His detachment, with some
companies of the 43rd and 52nd, were immediately ordered to march up
country.  The force to which the Buffs were attached having taken Vieux
Moguere, they were in turn driven out of it next day, and the light
company in which Blake was serving covered the retreat.  On the order to
face about the British drove back the enemy and retook the village, and
in the assault the young officer was wounded in both legs by a grape
shot.  Amputation of the left leg was rendered necessary, and his
military career ended.  With pay and pension and a very small fortune
from his father, Mr. Blake retired to a quiet life in Norfolk.  In 1838
he married Charlotte, youngest daughter of Colonel Harvey, of Thorpe, by
whom he left three sons and four daughters.  On the death of the Rev.
John Humfrey, in 1847, he succeeded under his will to the Wroxham estate
and other property, and assumed the surname of Humfrey after and in
addition to the name of Blake.  Mr. Blake-Humfrey spent much time in
drawing and etching and in the study of heraldry and archaeology.  He
compiled a complete history in MS. of the Sheriffs of Norfolk, with their
coats of arms most beautifully emblazoned.  Mr. Blake-Humfrey was a
magistrate for the county of Norfolk.

19.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council at letter was received from
the Mayor (Mr. John Gurney), suggesting that upon the Prison
Commissioners handing over the Castle to the Corporate authorities, steps
be taken to convert the keep and the prison buildings into a museum.  The
cost of such work was estimated at 5,000, and in the event of its being
carried out Mr. Gurney intimated that he would be prepared to defray the
expense.  (_See_ July 16th, 1887.)

21.--The portrait of Sir Willoughby Jones, Bart., painted by H. T. Wells,
R.A., was presented to the county by Sir F. G. M. Boileau, Bart., on
behalf of the subscribers.

25.--The Sheriff of Norwich and Mrs. J. J. Dawson Paul were presented at
the Guildhall with a valuable piece of plate and a diamond spray
bracelet, in token of personal esteem, and in commemoration of the birth
of their son, Joseph Dawson, during the year of Mr. Paul's shrievalty.

28.--The Bishop of Norwich laid the foundation-stone of the new church of
St. Thomas, Heigham.  (_See_ June 28th, 1888.)


NOVEMBER.


3.--The south-east corner of the tower of St. Michael-at-Thorn church
fell during a gale, crashed through the roof of the nave, and did
considerable damage to the interior of the church.

4.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference was held at Noverre's Rooms, under
the presidency of the Bishop.  The proceedings concluded on the 5th.

5.--Died, at Great Yarmouth, Mr. Thomas Proctor Burroughs, F.S.A., aged
50.  By profession a solicitor, he was greatly devoted to archaeological
pursuits, and took a prominent part in the preservation of the Toll House
and other antiquities in Yarmouth.  Mr. Burroughs was an ardent collector
of pictures, books, and curiosities of local interest, a Roman Catholic,
and a staunch Conservative.

8.--Arthur Riches (36), fishhawker, murdered his wife by stabbing her on
the Walk, in the Haymarket, Norwich.  He was tried at Norwich Assizes on
November 23rd, and found guilty, but strongly recommended to mercy on
account of the great provocation he had received.  The prisoner was
sentenced to death, but the punishment was afterwards commuted to penal
servitude for life.  (Riches died at Parkhurst Convict Prison, Isle of
Wight, in April, 1898.)

9.--Mr. Harry Bullard was for the third time elected Mayor of Norwich.
Mr. Frederick Oddin Taylor was appointed Sheriff.

10.--Died, at Scoulton Rectory, the Rev. John Munnings Johnson, in his
93rd year.  A son of the Rev. Paul Johnson, of Runton, he entered the
Navy as a lad, and after serving a short time in the Royal Billy, joined
the Gibraltar, 80 guns, commanded by Captain Lukin, afterwards Admiral
Windham.  After seeing much fighting he was transferred to the Mars, 74
guns.  In 1807 he was ordered out to the Baltic with the armament which
attacked Copenhagen, and captured the entire Danish fleet.  The years
1808 and 1809 were employed in the blockade of the French fleet in Brest.
In 1810 he was called to the Tagus, and in 1811 accompanied Sir J. Moore,
who went with a large armament to protect British traders from the Danes
and Prussians.  After passing for his lieutenancy in January, 1812, Mr.
Johnson went with Sir James Lucas Yeo to the Lakes of Canada, where they
contended at great disadvantage with the American squadron.  In 1814,
after the storming of Oswego, Mr. Johnson was made lieutenant, and at the
close of the war in 1815 he returned to England with a large portion of
the Duke of Wellington's army, which, after the peace with France, had
been sent to America.  He then went on half-pay, and in 1824, determining
to take holy orders, entered as an undergraduate at Cambridge University.
In 1828 he took his degree, and the following year was ordained by Bishop
Bathurst.  Mr. Johnson became curate in charge of Scoulton in 1831, and
was presented to the rectory in 1846.  There he remained until 1878, when
he went to reside at Gurney's Manor, Hingham.  He resigned the living in
1883, and was succeeded by his son, the Rev. Henry Johnson, with whom he
resided until his death.  Mr. Johnson married, in 1833, Miss Anne Wilson,
daughter of the Rev. Henry Wilson, of Kirby Cane, afterwards Lord
Berners.

11.--Melton, the property of Lord Hastings, won the Liverpool Cup,
beating Oberon, Bird of Freedom, Sailor Prince, and fourteen others.
Ridden by Watts, Melton carried 9 st. 3 lb. and started at 100 to 8
against.

15.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Field, Elizabeth
Hamlinton (34), dressmaker, was found guilty of the murder of her infant
daughter, at Fakenham, on October 16th.  She was strongly recommended to
mercy.  "The prisoner almost fainted when the judge put on the black cap;
her face indicated terror, and when the dread sentence was pronounced she
moaned, and at its conclusion cried out despairingly."  The Mayoress of
Norwich (Mrs. Bullard) interested herself on behalf of the unhappy woman,
and forwarded an influentially signed memorial to the Home Secretary.  In
due course the prisoner was respited.

16.--The Norwich Town Council assented to an application by Mr. Joseph
Kincaird, of 3, George Street, Westminster, to construct tramways in the
city upon certain routes, on condition that an amount equal to the cost
of removing the lines and reconstructing the streets in case the tramways
were not worked for a given period, be placed on permanent deposit.
Other conditions as to the control of traffic, &c., were imposed.  The
Norwich Tramways Company, Limited, with a capital of 30,000, was
registered on December 23rd.  (_See_ December 17th, 1889.)

27.--Died, at 41, Brook Street, Grosvenor Square, London, Mr. Octavius
Edward Coope, M.P.  He was first returned to the House of Commons in
July, 1847, as Conservative member for Yarmouth.  Mr. Coope was born in
1814, and was a partner in the firm of Ind, Coope, and Co.

30.--A military tournament by the 19th (Princess of Wales' Own) Hussars
commenced at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, and concluded on December
4th.  The proceeds were in aid of local charities.


DECEMBER.


4.--A remarkable phenomenon was recorded at Yarmouth.  "The tide twice
flowed and ebbed within three hours.  At 9.42 p.m., the calculated time
for dead low water, the gauge registered only six feet above zero.  Thus
high and low water were practically reversed, a most uncommon
phenomenon."  On the night of the 8th "the barometer fell to 28.20, the
lowest local reading for the past twenty years."

6.--A new fire escape for "populous buildings," invented by Captain
Longe, of Spixworth Park, was tested at Thorpe Asylum.  It consisted of
"a movable staircase mounted on a frame on four wheels, which can be
readily and expeditiously moved by two men to any window of a burning
building, and raised by a double crank to a window 18 ft. from the
ground, at an angle of 45 degrees, by which the inmates, stepping on a
small platform, can easily descend."  The Lunacy Commissioners reported
favourably upon the invention.

27.--"Falka," produced by Van Biene and Horace Lingard's Comic Opera
Company, was the Christmas attraction at Norwich Theatre.  The dress
circle, which had remained in its original state since the erection of
the Theatre in 1826, was at this date remodelled and greatly improved by
the removal of the uncomfortable and objectionable boxes.

28.--Considerable damage was done to the telephone wires in Norwich by a
heavy fall of snow.  "The whole system came to grief through the wires
breaking and the derricks giving way."

--Died, at his residence, Shadingfield Lodge, Yarmouth, Mr. Samuel
Nightingale, in his 84th year.  He served the office of Mayor of the
borough in 1868-69.



1887.


JANUARY.


6.--Dr. David George Thomson, senior medical officer of the Surrey
Asylum, was appointed by the Norfolk county magistrates Medical
Superintendent of the County Asylum at Thorpe, in place of Dr. Hills,
resigned.  The Court granted Dr. Hills a superannuation allowance of 600
per annum.  At the Easter Sessions resolutions were presented by thirteen
unions, protesting against the allowance as an excessive burden upon the
county rates.

14.--A serious riot occurred in Norwich Market Place.  A crowd of
unemployed workmen, harangued by two Socialists, named Mowbray and
Henderson, who suggested that they could not starve, and that they must
procure food for themselves, became a disorderly mob, and under the
leadership of the agitators, made a raid upon several shops on the Walk.
The ringleaders, with two men, named Hurrell and Hall, were apprehended,
and committed for trial.  The case came before Mr. Justice Grantham at
the Assizes on the 21st, when Mowbray was sentenced to nine months',
Henderson to four months', Hall to one month's, and Hurrell to one week's
imprisonment, with hard labour.  A similar disturbance on a minor scale
took place at Yarmouth at about the same date.  Owing to inflammatory
placards distributed during the month of September, the Chief Constable
of Norwich, on October 1st, applied to the magistrates for power to raise
a force of 200 special constables.  On October 11th the required number
were sworn in, and informed that their active services would not be
required except on a special summons from the magistrates.

25.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Grantham, was tried the
action, the Corporation of Norwich _v._ Coxe.  In this case the
Corporation sued the Rev. Dr. Coxe, one of the sureties of Mr. E. S.
Steward, the late City Treasurer, to recover from him the sum of 1,000,
for which amount he was bond.  On behalf of the defendant it was urged
that the auditors were remiss in passing accounts that were incorrect,
and the judge made strong comments upon the loose manner in which they
did their work.  The jury gave a verdict for the defendant.


FEBRUARY.


8.--Mr. Archibald Forbes delivered a lecture, at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, on "Ten Years of War Correspondence."

12.--A shocking murder was committed at Kenninghall Workhouse.  Jonas
Rivett, an inmate, aged 71, stabbed Henry Baker, a ward attendant, in the
neck, severing his windpipe and jugular vein.  At the combined Norfolk
and Norwich Assizes, held at Ipswich, on April 20th, before Mr. Justice
Field, the prisoner was found guilty and sentenced to death.  He was
subsequently respited, and removed to Broadmoor Criminal Lunatic Asylum.

17.--Died, at Syleham, in her 100th year, Lucy Steggall, widow of Robert
Steggall.

24.--Died, at Cannes, Mr. John Gurney, of Sprowston Hall, Deputy-Mayor of
Norwich.  On retiring in November, 1886, from the office of Mayor of the
city he sought relaxation on the shores of the Mediterranean.  A severe
shock of earthquake, which occurred at Cannes at the time of his visit,
is supposed to have told upon his highly sensitive and nervous
organization, and to have indirectly caused his death.  Mr. Gurney was
the eldest son of Mr. John Gurney, of Earlham Hall, and grandson of Mr.
Samuel Gurney, of West Ham.  He was born on December 11th, 1845, and
educated at Harrow, whence he proceeded to Trinity College, Cambridge,
where he took his B.A. degree in 1866.  The following year he became a
member of the firm of Gurneys, Birkbecks, Barclay, and Buxton.  In 1871
he married Isabel Charlotte, daughter of Mr. R. Blake-Humfrey, of
Wroxham.  Mr. Gurney, who was afflicted with blindness, was one of the
most liberal benefactors of Norwich, and was greatly esteemed by the
citizens.


MARCH.


11.--Norfolk, in common with other parts of the country, was visited by a
severe spell of wintry weather.

15.--A dispute between smackowners and smacksmen at Yarmouth ended on
this date.  Differences had arisen over the substitution by the former of
the share system for the old plan of payment by wages and poundage.  The
strike was beginning to have a disastrous effect upon trade, and was
ended by an amicable arrangement.

18.--Died, at Stirling, Mr. J. F. Young, for many years a favourite actor
upon the Norwich stage.  Mr. Young was widely known as a member of the
original "Caste" Company.  He had been lessee of both Norwich and
Yarmouth Theatres, and was greatly respected in private and professional
circles.

21.--The action, Stanley _v._ the Mayor and Corporation of Norwich and
the Attorney-General, was tried in the Chancery Division of the High
Court of Justice, before Mr. Justice Kekewich.  This case raised the
question of the right of the freemen to receive in perpetuity the rents
of the Town Close Estate, a valuable plot of land of about 100 acres in
extent, which was conveyed to the city in 1524 by the Prior of Norwich.
It was contended on the part of the plaintiffs that this land became
vested in the Corporation for the exclusive benefit of the freemen, the
terms in the original grant "citizens" and "commonalty" being synonymous
with "freemen."  Mr. Justice Kekewich concurred in this contention, gave
judgment for the plaintiffs, and ordered the costs of the action to be
borne by the estate.  (_See_ January 23rd, 1888.)

23.--A remarkable sale by auction was held at Leziate under a warrant of
distress for the non-payment of tithe.  "Mr. W. H. Boyce, of Holt House
Farm, having made up his mind to object on principle to the payment of
the tithe rent charged by the Rev. A. J. Groom, rector of
Ashwicken-cum-Leziate, and having also failed to induce the rector or his
legal agent to make any abatement of the amount due, namely, 42 8s., a
warrant of distress was issued, under which seizure was made of ten
homebred steers, two cows in calf, and part of a stack of hay.  The sale
was conducted by Mr. W. B. Lane.  It was carried out in quite an amicable
manner, and the humour of the thing was enhanced by Mr. Boyce providing
luncheon for those in attendance.  The auctioneer had sold up to a
certain point, when he announced that his duty was done, but Mr. Boyce
gave him a commission to go on selling as long as he liked.  This he
accordingly did with excellent results.  At the conclusion of the action
Mr. Boyce thanked his friends for the way in which they had acted,
expressed his objections to tithes in general, and the present claim in
particular, and afterwards entertained several of his friends at dinner."


APRIL.


5.--In the Queen's Bench Division of the High Court of Justice, before
Mr. Baron Pollock and Mr. Justice Stephen, a petition was presented by
Mr. Joseph Arch against the return of Lord Henry Bentinck as member for
North-West Norfolk, on July 9th, 1886.  The petitioner alleged that the
respondent was guilty of an illegal practice in paying the sum of 3 to
Charles Wacey, of South Creake, in respect of expenses in the conduct or
management of the election.  The money was sent in a letter from Guist
Hall, where Lord Henry Bentinck was staying, on January 20th.  The letter
was as follows:--"Dear Mr. Wacey--I enclose you a little present as some
small compensation for the trouble and worry you have had in connection
with the election and afterward.  I am much obliged to you for all you
have done, and I hope you will continue to help us in the future in the
same able and energetic manner in which you have done in the past.  Yours
truly, Henry Bentinck.  P.S.  You had better not tell anyone that I sent
you anything."  This letter miscarried, and was delivered not to Charles
Wacey, but to Thomas Wacey, who belonged to the party represented by Mr.
Arch.  Thomas Wacey ultimately forwarded the postal orders contained in
the letter to Charles Wacey, who cashed them and kept the proceeds.  It
was contended on the part of the respondent that the payment made in
January, 1887, had no relation whatever to the conduct or management of
the election in July, 1886.  The money was paid on account of
registration services, and the injunction of secrecy was made because to
have paid all the district secretaries would have involved the respondent
in an expenditure of 100.  The petition was dismissed with costs.

10.--A new organ, built at the cost of 450, was opened at St. Gregory's
church, Norwich.

14.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference commenced at Noverre's Rooms,
Norwich, under the presidency of the Lord Bishop.  The proceedings were
concluded on the 15th.

18.--An "Old World Exhibition" was opened at Blackfriars' Hall, Norwich,
by the Mayor, in aid of a fund for rebuilding the tower of St.
Michael-at-Thorn.  This remarkable collection, chronologically arranged
by the Rev. W. F. Creeny, was of great historical and educational
interest, and was contributed to by many of the leading residents in
county and city.  The exhibition closed on April 30th.


MAY.


12.  A fifty miles bicycle race from the second milestone on the Dereham
Road, Norwich, to Swaffham and back, was ridden by members of the Norwich
Amateur Bicycle Club.  The roads were heavy, and the wind, during the
greater part of the journey, unfavourable.  Result: 1st, H. J. Hayes, 3h.
45m. 30s.; 2nd, Overton, 3h. 46m.; 3rd, Howes.

14.--The currency question was discussed by the Norfolk Chamber of
Agriculture, and a resolution adopted expressing alarm at the daily
increasing difficulty experienced by the agricultural classes in
obtaining money with which to meet their obligations, asserting the
belief that "an increase in the circulating medium would lessen that
difficulty," and urging the Government "to respond to the invitation of
the great Powers who had asked this country to join with them in
restoring to the peoples the free coinage and use of silver money."  The
following resolution was also adopted:--"Although currency may in some
way affect the prosperity of trade and agriculture in this country, it is
the opinion of this Chamber that the main cause of the depression is the
influx of foreign produce to the ruin of the English producer and the
employment of foreign labour in the place of English labour."

14.--Died, at Thorpe Hamlet, Norwich, Mr. George Alden Stevens,
solicitor, in low 57th year.  An entirely self-made man, he rose by
perseverance and integrity to become a partner in the firm of Miller and
Son.  He was an ardent politician, and for several years argent to the
Liberal party, and the constant adviser of Mr. Jacob Henry Tillett
throughout his chequered experiences on the hustings and in the election
courts.  Mr. Stevens was a member of the Town Council, and an alderman,
and it was largely due to his generosity and zeal that Chapel Field was
transformed from a barren and useless waste into a beautiful garden.

18.--Died, at Gladstone Street, Norwich, George Wilde, aged 62, the last
survivor in the city of the famous light cavalry charge at Balaclava.
Wilde was a private in the 13th Light Dragoons, and in the charge his
horse was killed and himself wounded.  He was in receipt of a pension of
thirteen pence per day.

--The Prince of Wales visited Yarmouth and laid the foundation-stone of
the new hospital.  On the 19th his Royal Highness inspected the 2nd
Brigade Eastern Division Royal Artillery, and in the evening attended a
ball given by the officers.

24.--The Queen's birthday was celebrated in Norwich by a review on
Mousehold Heath of the 19th (Princess of Wales' Own) Hussars, the 3rd
Battalion Norfolk Regiment, and the 1st Volunteer Battalion Norfolk
Regiment.  The Mayor (Mr. Harry Bullard) gave a banquet at Blackfriars'
Hall in the evening.  Earlier in the day his worship and the Sheriff (Mr.
F. Oddin Taylor) entertained the inmates of the Workhouse.

25.--An "anti-coercion demonstration," held under the auspices of the
National Liberal Federation, was addressed at the Agricultural Hall,
Norwich, by Mr. John Morley, M.P.


JUNE.


1.--Died, at Yarmouth, where he had resided four years, the Rev. Joseph
Philip Knight, the composer of many popular songs.  The youngest son of
the Rev. Francis Knight, D.D., he was born at the Vicarage,
Bradford-on-Avon, on July 26th, 1812.  His love for music displayed
itself at an early age, and at fifteen he began to devote himself to the
study of harmony and composition.  When about twenty Mr. Knight composed
his first six songs under the name of Philip Mortimer.  Among these were
"Old times," sung by Henry Philips, and "Go, forget me," extremely
popular both in this country and in Germany.  After this he used his own
name, and, in company with Haynes Bayly, produced a number of highly
successful songs, amongst which the most famous were "Of what is the Old
Man thinking?" "The Veteran," "Days Gone By," "The Grecian Daughter," and
"She wore a Wreath of Roses."  He subsequently composed the song and duet
to the words written for him by Thomas Moore, "The Parting" and "Let's
take this World as some Wild Scene."  In 1839 Mr. Knight visited the
United States, where he remained two years.  To this time are due, among
other popular songs, his celebrated "Rocked in the Cradle of the Deeps"
sung with immense success by Braham, and "Why Chime the Bells so
merrily?"  On his return to England he produced "Beautiful Venice," "Say,
what shall my Song be To-night?" "The Dream" (words by the Hon. Mrs.
Norton), "Amy Robsart," and "Queen of the Silver Bow," all more or less
the rage in their day.  Some years afterwards Mr. Knight married, and
lived for a long time in France and Germany, doing very little in the way
of composition, but on his return to England he wrote many other songs,
"Peace, it is I," "The Lost Rose," "The Watchman," "The Anchor," "Where
is the Place of thy Rest?" and the duet, "Where the Roses Grow," all of
which, enjoyed great popularity.  His songs, duets, and trios number 225.

4.--Queen Kapiolani, and the heiress presumptive to the Hawaiian Throne,
the Princess Lilivokalani, consort and sister respectively of Kalakana,
King of Hawaii, on a visit to England for the purpose of attending the
celebration of the Jubilee of Queen Victoria, arrived at Rackheath Hall,
where they were entertained as the guests of Captain and Mrs. Steward.
During the stoppage of the train at Trowse station, the visitors were
waited upon by the Mayor and Mayoress of Norwich (Mr. and Mrs. Bullard),
who were attended by the Town Clerk and other civic officials.  On the
5th (Sunday) the Queen and Princess attended service at the Cathedral, at
which the Mayor, Sheriff, and members of the Town Council were present;
and on the 6th they visited the Cathedral, St. Andrew's Hall, St. Peter
Mancroft church, and the Castle, and were entertained to luncheon at the
Guildhall by the Mayor and Mayoress.  In the afternoon they proceeded to
Pine Banks, Thorpe, and were entertained by Mr. I. O. Howard Taylor.  On
the 6th the Queen and Princess departed for London.

15.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association opened at
Blickling Park.  The Marquis of Lothian presided at the public luncheon.
The show was continued on the 16th.

19.--The celebration of the Jubilee of Queen Victoria began in Norwich on
this day (Sunday) with a thanksgiving service at the Cathedral, and with
special services at the Roman Catholic and other Nonconformist places of
worship.  The Mayor and Corporation attended the Cathedral in the
morning, and Prince's Street Congregational chapel in the evening.  On
the 20th a special meeting of the Town Council was held on the
requisition of forty-four members, at which it was unanimously resolved
to confer the honorary freedom of the city upon Mr. Harry Bullard as
Mayor of Norwich.  The 21st was observed as Jubilee Day.  Early in the
morning intelligence was telegraphed to the city that the Mayor was among
the eleven chief magistrates in the kingdom who had received the honour
of knighthood.  The day's proceedings commenced with a special service at
the Cathedral, attended by Churchmen and Nonconformists, by a detachment
of the 19th Hussars, under Colonel French, and the Norwich Artillery
Volunteers and Rifle Volunteers.  At noon 11,000 school children
assembled in the Market Place and sang the National Anthem, after which
Sir Harry and Lady Bullard were "at home" at the Guildhall, and
entertained a large company to luncheon.  In the afternoon there was a
military parade of the 19th Hussars and Volunteers on Dix's Land,
Unthank's Road; the school children had tea at their respective schools,
and in the evening the city was illuminated and a grand display of
fireworks was given on the Castle Meadow.  The festivities were continued
on the 22nd, when the Mayor and Sheriff entertained 1,100 of the aged
poor at the Agricultural Hall, and in the evening Sir Harry and Lady
Bullard gave a _soiree_ at St. Andrew's Hall.  On the 23rd the inmates of
the Workhouse were entertained.  The 21st was observed with great
rejoicing in every town and village in the county, and the weather being
beautifully fine, the proceedings were of a most successful character.
The amount subscribed in Norfolk to the Women's Jubilee offering to the
Queen was 1,565 2s. 6d.

29.--Ringland church, restored at the cost of 2,000, was re-opened.


JULY.


13.--"As You Like It" was for the first time performed locally as a
"pastoral play" in the grounds of Mousehold House, Thorpe Hamlet, the
residence of Mr. W. H. Hackblock.  The comedy was represented by amateurs
on the occasion of a garden _fete_.

16.--The new prison on Plumstead Road, Norwich, designed by the surveyor
to the Prison Department, and built by Messrs. W. and T. Denne, of
Walmer, Kent, was completed on this date.  The prisoners were transferred
from the Castle to the new prison on August 2nd.  On September 12th the
Prison Commissioners gave formal possession of the Castle to the Mayor
and Corporation.  The late Governor (Mr. A. E Dent), in handing the keys
to the Town Clerk (Mr. H. B. Miller), remarked that the Castle had for
many generations--since 1345, when it was first used as a county prison,
been in the hands of governors, and he was glad, as the last of that long
line, to hand over the building to the Corporation to be employed for a
different purpose in the future.  (_See_ July 27th, 1891.)

20.--Mr. Henry Chaplin, M.P., was the principal speaker at a great
Primrose League _fete_ given in Melton Constable Park by Lord Hastings.

25.--Died, at his resident, at Sevran, in the environs of Paris, Mr.
William Bateman, aged 75.  He was second son of Mr. John Bateman, of
Norwich, and brother of Dr. Bateman.  At the age of 29 he settled in
Paris as a merchant and acquired an ample fortune.  During his mercantile
career Mr. Bateman established extensive commercial operations in Spain,
and in 1870 King; Amadeus conferred upon him the dignity of Knight of the
Order of Charles III. of Spain.  Mr. Bateman married the eldest daughter
of Mr. William Harrison, of Yarmouth.

27.--The Premier (Lord Salisbury) visited Norwich.  His lordship was
received at Thorpe station by the High Sheriff (Sir Alfred Jodrell,
Bart.), the Mayor (Sir Harry Bullard), and Lieutenant-Colonel Bignold,
the leader of the Conservative party in the city.  Escorted by a
cavalcade of fifty horsemen, among whom were several leading residents in
the county and city, Lord Salisbury drove to Harford Lodge, the residence
of Colonel Bignold.  In the evening the Premier addressed a great
meeting, held at the Agricultural Hall, under the presidency of Colonel
Bignold, and at the conclusion of the proceedings travelled by special
train to Coltishall, whence he drove to Horstead Hall as the guest of Sir
Edward Birkbeck, M.P., and the Hon. Lady Birkbeck.  Lord Salisbury
returned to Norwich on the 28th, and after attending a luncheon given at
the Guildhall by the Mayor, proceeded to the Agricultural Hall, where he
received addresses presented by deputations from many Conservative
associations in East Anglia.  Having delivered a further address his
lordship departed from Thorpe station by the 3.25 train for London.


AUGUST.


3.--The Cricket Week theatrical performances commenced at Norwich
Theatre, and were continued on the 4th and 5th.  The pieces produced by
Sir Kenneth Kemp's company of amateurs were "The Parvenue" and
"Woodcock's Little Game."

9.--Died, at 3, Belgravia Square, Edward Fellowes, first Baron de Ramsey.
His lordship, who was raised to the Peerage on July 5th, was the second
son of Mr. William Fellowes, of Ramsey Abbey, Huntingdonshire, by his
wife, Emma, fourth daughter of Mr. Richard Benyon, of Englefield House,
Berks.  He was born in 1809, and entering Parliament for Huntingdonshire
in 1837, sat in the House of Commons without interruption until the
General Election in 1880, when his eldest son, Captain Fellowes,
succeeded to the seat which had been successfully defended against
Liberal assaults during forty-three years.  For more than half a century
Mr. Fellowes was chairman of the Commissions which had the management of
the Middle Level and Ouse Outfall Works.

19.--Died, at Alfred Place, South Kensington, Mr. John Palgrave Simpson.
He was the second son of Mr. William Simpson, Town Clerk of Norwich and
Treasurer for the county of Norfolk, and of his wife Katherine, daughter
of Mr. William Palgrave, of Coltishall.  Intended for the Church, he was
educated under a private tutor at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge,
where he took the degree of B.A., and proceeded M.A. in due course.
Abandoning the idea of adopting the clerical profession, Mr. Simpson
travelled on the Continent and in the East.  He was in Paris when a
sudden and severe reverse of fortune, consequent upon the failure of a
bank, compelled him to seek means of repairing his losses.  Literary
occupation seemed the only course open to him, and, as he confessed, he
succeeded in his efforts beyond expectation.  For some years he
contributed to the leading magazines--"Blackwood's," "Bentley's,"
"Frazer's," and others, and published three novels, "Second Love and
other Tales," "Gisella," and "The Lily of Paris, or the King's Nurse."
Mr. Simpson's career as a writer for the stage was mainly due to
accident.  He seldom visited theatres, but it chanced one night that he
went to the Strand Theatre, and was so pleased with the performance of
William Farren, Leigh Murray, and Mrs. Stilling that he conceived the
idea of writing a play for them, and the result was the comedy drama in
one act, entitled "Poor Cousin Dick," which was played with considerable
success at the house on April 8th, 1850.  Subsequently Mr. Simpson wrote
several successful plays, the principal of which was the famous three-act
comedy, "A Scrap of Paper," produced at St. James's Theatre on April
23rd, 1861.


SEPTEMBER.


2.--A gale, which prevailed throughout England, was severely felt on the
Norfolk coast.  A large number of vessels ran into Yarmouth Roads for
shelter, among them H.M.S. Narcissus and her escorts Valorous and Echo.
A fine vessel, the Falls of Bruar, 1,742 tons register, the property of
the Glasgow Shipping Company, was wrecked, and only five hands out of the
crew of twenty-nine were saved.

21.--The Sheriff of Norwich (Mr. F. Oddin Taylor) gave a _soiree
musicale_ at Blackfriars' Hall, at which the principal performers were M.
Leopold Godowsky, Miss Alexes Leighton, Senor A. Gimenez Manjon, Signor
Bottesini, and Mr. Odell.

26.--The first of many protracted discussions took place at a meeting of
the Norwich Town Council, upon a report furnished by the City Engineer
(Mr. P. P. Marshall) upon the state of the sewerage system of the city.
The old sewers were said to be in a defective state, and it was proposed
to abandon the low-level system, and to adopt the separate system with a
new rising main, at an estimated cost of 78,000.

29.--The church of St. Michael-at-Plea, Norwich, which for many years had
been in a dilapidated state, was opened after restoration at the cost of
3,000.

--At the annual dinner of the North Walsham and Aylsham Agricultural
Association, held at North Walsham, cigarettes, made from tobacco grown
in Norfolk by Sir Edward Birkbeck, M.P., were handed to the guests.  The
President (Lord Suffield) described the tobacco as "very good," and said
that Sir Edward, who had taken considerable interest in the experiment,
"believed that its growth was really going to do something for the
benefit of Norfolk farmers."


OCTOBER.


4.--Died, at 6, St. Augustine's Road, Camden Square, N.W., Mr. David
Fisher, who for thirty years had held a prominent position upon the
London stage as a leading comedian.  Mr. Fisher was born at East Dereham,
which was one of the towns on the circuit of the Norfolk and Suffolk
Company of Comedians, under the control of the Fisher family.  Like his
father, uncle, and grandfather, Mr. Fisher was highly respected in
Norfolk and the sister county, and his periodical visits to the scenes of
the former theatrical successes of his predecessors were always regarded
with pleasure by a large circle of friends and admirers.  On those
occasions Mr. Fisher gave dramatic and musical recitals, in which he was
assisted by his talented daughter, Miss Mary Fisher.  His career in
London commenced with Charles Kean at the Princess's Theatre, where, on
November 2nd, 1853, he appeared as Victor in "The Lancers."  In 1859 Mr.
Benjamin Webster, then at the Adelphi, secured his services, and until
1863 Mr. Fisher performed at that Theatre with considerable success in
many important parts.  For a short time he severed his connection with
the stage, and gave his single-handed performance, "Facts and Fancies,"
at Hanover Square Rooms and St. James's Hall.  Subsequently he joined Mr.
Vining's company at the Princess's, and afterwards appeared at Drury Lane
and other leading Metropolitan theatres.

9.--Died, the Rev. Kirby Trimmer.  Born in London on December 22nd, 1804,
he was the son of Joshua Kirby Trimmer, of Chiswick, eldest son of Mrs.
Sarah Trimmer, the authoress.  After a short residence at Vendome, he
graduated at St. Alban's Hall, Oxford, and was ordained in February,
1829.  He served the curacies of Burnham Overy, Burnham Sutton, Great
Bircham, and Stanhoe, and in 1840 became curate of St. George's Tombland,
Norwich, to which living he succeeded in 1842.  In the pursuit of botany,
Mr. Trimmer attained to great distinction, and published the well-known,
standard work, the "Flora of Norfolk."  His other literary efforts
embraced a series of "Conversations" on the Thirty-nine Articles, and he
interested himself greatly in the "Philological Dictionary" in course of
publication at the time of his death.

11.--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  The vocalists included Madame Albani, Miss Liza
Lehmann, Miss Annie Marriott, Miss Hilda Wilson, Miss Lena Little, Mr.
Edward Lloyd, Mr. Charles Wade, Mr. Barton McGucken, Mr. Santley, Mr.
Alex. Marsh, Mr. Brockbank, and Mr. Barrington Foote.  Mr. Alberto
Randegger was conductor.  The opening performance included the "Jubilee
Ode," "The Heavens Declare," and the "Hymn of Praise."  On the morning of
the 12th were produced the "Garden of Olivet" (Bottesini), a devotional
oratorio composed expressly for the Festival, and conducted by the
composer; and the "Stabat Mater."  On the 13th the morning performance
comprised the oratorio, "Isaiah" (Mancinelli), composed expressly for the
Festival, and conducted by the composer; and the "Fourth Mass"
(Cherubini).  The "Messiah" was given on the 14th.  A miscellaneous
programme was performed on the evening of the 12th; the evening
performance on the 13th included "The Irish" (C. V. Stanford), conducted
by the composer, and the cantata, "The Golden Legend," composed and
conducted by Sir Arthur Sullivan.  The concluding performance on the
evening of the 14th was the dramatic legend, "Faust."  The Festival
yielded a surplus of 719 3s. 1d.

20.--The new Town Hall at Downham Market, erected at the cost of 1,230,
was opened by Mr. W. A. Tyssen Amherst, M.P.

21.--An extensive range of premises in St. George's Bridge Street,
Norwich, formerly the drapery establishment of Mr. Henry Snowdon, was
destroyed by fire.  The damage was estimated at between 12,000 and
15,000.

25.--Died, at Queen Anne's Mansions, S.W., Sir Philip Edmond Wodehouse,
G.C.S.I., K.C.B., aged 76.  He was the eldest son of Mr. Edmond
Wodehouse, of Sennowe Lodge, and was for many years in the Civil Service
and in the Foreign and Colonial Offices.


NOVEMBER.


7.--The honorary freedom of the city of Norwich was conferred upon the
Mayor (Sir Harry Bullard), and to Lady Bullard was presented a diamond
crescent brooch and a hair spray of coralline pearls.  In the evening a
complimentary dinner was given, at the Bell Hotel, to the Mayor and to
the Sheriff (Mr. F. Oddin Taylor) by the members of the Board of
Guardians.

9.--Mr. Frederick William Harmer was elected Mayor and Mr. Robert George
Bagshaw appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

11.--Died, at Belsfield, Windermere, Mr. Henry William Schneider, aged
70, formerly Member of Parliament for Norwich.

12.--The old colours of the 1st Battalion Norfolk Regiment, presented to
the Prince of Wales by Colonel Massy and the officers, were "laid up" in
Sandringham church in the presence of his Royal Highness.

14.--Wintry weather was experienced in Norfolk.  "As many as 13 degrees
of frost were registered in some places."

21.--The foolhardy feat of entering a cage containing five Barbary lions
and two wolves, at Wombwell's Menagerie, was performed at Norwich by a
druggist named Woodcock.  He went into the van under the protection of a
coloured girl, who acted as "trainer" to the establishment.

24.--The High Sheriff of Norfolk (Sir Alfred Jodrell, Bart.) gave a grand
county ball at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.

29.--Died, at Brighton, Mr. George Henry Christie, of Framingham, aged
76.  Mr. Christie was formerly head of the eminent firm of art
auctioneers established by James Christie in Old Pall Mall about the year
1762.  His grandfather was the friend of Sheridan and Garrick, and
Gainsborough painted a fine portrait of him.  Like his father and
grandfather, Mr. Christie was educated at Eton.  He continued head of the
firm until 1860, when he was succeeded by his son, Mr. James Henry Brooke
Christie.


DECEMBER.


5.--At a large meeting held at Blackfriars' Hall, Norwich, under the
presidency of Lieutenant-Colonel Bignold, Mr. Edward Wild was presented
by the Conservative party of the city with an illuminated address
expressing to him their sympathy "in the unjustifiable attack made on him
in the Town Council," and congratulating him "on his complete and
triumphant refutation of the charges."  The address further stated: "They
desire also to express not only as a party but as citizens their
appreciation of Alderman Wild's honourable character, and of the debt the
city owes him for his long, faithful, and able services."

13.--A military tournament, given by the 19th (Princess of Wales' Own)
Hussars, in aid of the city charities, commenced at the Agricultural
Hall, Norwich, and concluded on the 17th.

--Died, at Morton Hall, Mr. George Duckett Berney, in his 75th year.  He
was a son of Mr. Thomas Trench Berney, by his wife, Mary, daughter of Mr.
Thomas Penrice, of Great Yarmouth and of Witton House, and married
Catherine Mary, daughter of the Rev. Henry Lombe, of Bylaugh Hall.  Mr.
Berney was a justice of the peace and a Deputy-Lieutenant for the county
of Norfolk, and in 1881 served the office of High Sheriff.  He took a
practical interest in pisciculture.



1888.


JANUARY.


2.--Mr. Edward Compton's company appeared at Norwich Theatre in Mr. W. G.
Wills' play, "Jane Shore," with Miss Isabel Bateman in the title _role_.

17.--Mr. Andrew Johnston, Assistant Commissioner under the Boundary
Commission appointed to make inquiries as to the delimitation of counties
and Poor Law Unions, in view of impending legislation in the form of a
new Local Government Bill, attended a meeting of the County Rate Basis
Committee, held at Lynn under the presidency of Mr. R. T. Gurdon, and
heard various statements made by the county magistrates.  A Committee
appointed to confer with the Commissioners reported at the County
Sessions on April 5th that they considered it undesirable to alter the
boundaries of the county.  On April 10th a deputation appointed by the
Norwich Town Council waited upon Mr. Ritchie to ask for the inclusion of
Norwich in Schedule 4 of the Local Government Bill, in order that the
city might be constituted a county in itself, and not be included in the
county of Norfolk as was proposed.  The Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture,
on May 5th, passed resolutions in favour "of an alteration in the
proposed electoral divisions so as to give a fair representation to the
agricultural interest; of an extension of the term of office of the
elective councillors; of one electoral register for all purposes; and of
the postponement of the question of District Councils until next year."
The Chamber further agreed to petition Parliament in favour of the wheel
tax.

--A report was submitted to the Norwich Town Council on the completion of
the new Foundry Bridge.  The original estimate for the work was 13,000;
the actual cost, including all charges, was 12,032 11s. 4d.  The width of
the bridge is 50 feet--five feet more than was originally intended.  The
Great Eastern Railway Company contributed 1,200 towards the cost of the
undertaking.

20.--Died, at Shadwell Court, Sir Robert Jacob Buxton, Bart.  The son of
Sir John Jacob Buxton, Bart., by the eldest daughter of Sir Montagu
Cholmeley, he succeeded to the title in 1842 as the third, and, in
default of male issue, the last baronet.  Sir Robert was educated at Eton
and Christ Church, Oxford, and married, in 1865, Mary Augusta Harriet,
daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Johnstone, by whom he left two daughters,
Maud Isabel and Sybil Mary.  He was a Deputy-Lieutenant for Norfolk, and
sat in Parliament for the Southern Division of the county from 1871 to
1885.  In 1870 he served the office of High Sheriff of Norfolk, and was a
justice of the peace for both Norfolk and Suffolk.  Sir Robert was at one
time an officer in the Suffolk Yeomanry Cavalry, and afterwards
identified himself with the Volunteer movement by accepting, in 1860, a
captaincy in the 20th Norfolk Rifle Volunteers.

21.--At the annual meeting of the Norfolk and Norwich Horticultural
Society the Mayor of Norwich (Mr. F. W. Harmer) presented to Mr. Arthur
Waters Preston a handsome black marble clock of classical design,
subscribed for by members and friends of the society in recognition of
his services as hon. secretary from 1881 to 1888.  Accompanying the
testimonial was a cheque for 50 and an illuminated address.

23.--The action, Stanley _v._ the Mayor and Corporation of Norwich,
arising out of the claim of the freemen to the Town Close Estate, came
before Mr. Justice Kekewich in the Royal Court of Judicature.  Mr. Walter
Rye, Mr. Stanley's agent, asked that it might be referred to Mr. Blofeld,
Recorder of Ipswich and Chancellor of the Diocese of Norwich, to enquire
and report who were the persons entitled as freemen to participate in the
rents and profits of the estate, and what persons were entitled to be
admitted as freemen under the inquiry directed by the judgment given in
March, 1887.  His lordship made the order asked for, and directed that
the inquiry be held at the Guildhall, Norwich, or at such other place as
the referee might from time to time direct.  Mr. Blofeld opened the
inquiry on March 19th, and continued the proceedings on the 20th, when a
large number of freemen attended for the purpose of proving their right
to have their names placed upon the roll.  On the same day (the 20th) it
was reported to the Town Council that the cost of the Town Close Estate
litigation amounted to 4,500, and a resolution was adopted for leave to
borrow the amount on mortgage of the estate.  In the Chancery Division of
the High Court of Justice, on July 7th, a point was raised as to the
jurisdiction of the court to affirm a declaration of the Attorney-General
creating the Town Close Estate a charity.  Mr. Justice Kekewich, on July
14th, sustained the objection taken by the respondents to the
Attorney-General's application, and held that before issuing a summons
the Attorney-General must establish by independent proceedings an
information that there was a charity in existence to be regulated.  The
summons had been so drawn as to assume the existence of a charity, and
this was just what his lordship thought could not be assumed.  On
December 14th, in the Supreme Court, before Lords Justices Cotton,
Lindley, and Bowen, the Attorney-General appealed from Mr. Justice
Kekewich's decision.  Their lordships, after hearing arguments, held that
Mr. Justice Kekewich had determined by his judgment that the Town Close
Estate was a charitable trust.  On December 20th, however, their
lordships reconsidered their decision, directed the order of Mr. Justice
Kekewich to be discharged, and ordered the summons to be set down for
further argument, and to decide whether there was or was not a charity.
(_See_ January 21st, 1889.)

31.--Died, at Southwell Lodge, Norwich, Mr. John Willis, aged 54.  Mr.
Willis was a member of the firm of Willis and Southall, an alderman, and
a justice of the peace for the city.  A native of Gloucestershire, he had
resided in Norwich for a quarter of a century.  It was through his
advocacy that the Artisans' Dwellings Act was put into force in Norwich,
and the rookeries in St. Paul's were demolished.  He also interested
himself in the matter of the gas supply, and vigorously protested against
what he conceived to be the unjust treatment of the citizens by the Gas
Company.  He married, in 1870, the only daughter of Mr. Colmam, of Stoke
Holy Cross, and sister of Mr. J. J. Colman, M.P.


FEBRUARY.


3.--In pursuance of requisition a special meeting of the Norwich Town
Council was held for the purpose of considering a notice for rescinding a
resolution passed on January 17th in relation to Anguish's Charity,
namely, "That this Council gives its cordial support to a proposal of the
Charity Commissioners to utilise the funds of the Norwich Charities for
the purposes of technical education."  Colonel Bignold moved, "That no
application of the funds of Anguish's and the allied charities can be
satisfactory to this Council which is not strictly in accordance with the
will of Thomas Anguish confirmed and settled by Royal Charter in 1629,
namely, for the sustentation, relief, and maintenance, as well as the
teaching, of all very poor children born and brought up in the city of
Norwich."  This resolution was adopted at an adjourned meeting on the
7th, and a committee appointed "to consider the present position of the
trust, and, if necessary, to confer with the Charity Trustees, and still
further, if necessary, to communicate with the Commissioners."  On the
28th the Special Committee submitted the following suggestions to the
Council for approval:--"(1) That in any scheme which may be submitted by
the Charity Trustees to the Commissioners a sum not exceeding 200 per
annum be set aside for the purposes of technical education out of the
Boys' Hospital.  (2) That the residue of the fund be devoted to the
sustentation, relief, maintenance, and elementary education of as many
boys as the money will provide for.  (3.) That if considered within the
meaning of the trust this committee would be willing to accept a scheme
of maintenance other than that provided for by the Home."  Meanwhile the
Trustees submitted amended proposals, but on March 20th the Council
adopted those drawn up by the Special Committee.  (_See_ January 21st,
1896).

7.--The members of the Norwich and Norfolk Conservative Club having
vacated their former premises on the Walk for larger and more convenient
quarters in St. Giles' Street, held a meeting, at which an inaugural
address was delivered by Mr. S. Hoare, M.P.  The newly-acquired premises
formed originally a portion of the Norfolk' Hotel, and adjoining was a
large and handsome banqueting room, which for several years afterwards
was used for Conservative gatherings and other purposes.

9.--The first of a series of "Science Lectures for the People," delivered
under the auspices of the Norwich Corporation through the instrumentality
of the Gilchrist Educational Trust, was given at St. Andrew's Hall by Sir
Robert Stawell Ball, Astronomer Royal of Ireland, on "The Wonders of the
Midnight Sky."  The second lecture, entitled "A Bank Holiday in the
Country," was delivered on February 21st by the Rev. W. Tuckwell, M.A.,
rector of Stockton, and late Fellow of New College, Oxford.  (_See_
January 14th, 1889.)

11.--A notorious poacher, named Robert Large, undergoing three months'
hard labour for an assault on a police-constable, effected his escape
from the New Prison at Norwich, in company with another prisoner named
Annison.  The latter was arrested at Martham on the 16th, and on the
following day Large was re-taken.

24.--A heavy fall of snow occurred, and on the 25th the ground was
covered to the depth of several inches.


MARCH.


1.--Jim Mace, "retired champion of the world," appeared at Norwich
Theatre in a series of exhibition sparring contests with Wolf Bendoff,
Pooley Mace, and Mike Jennett.  The entertainment was repeated on the 2nd
and 3rd.

3.--Lord Harris, Under-Secretary for War and chairman of the Grand
Council, addressed a Primrose League meeting held at the Agricultural
Hall, Norwich.

6.--Hengler's Grand Cirque opened at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich.

8.--Died, at his residence, St. Giles' Street, Norwich, Mr. Charles
Suckling Gilman, in his 81st year.  Mr. Gilman for many years spent an
active and busy life in the city.  He initiated the Norwich Law Students'
Amicable Society, founded the Norfolk and Norwich Aquatic Club, whose
members at one time engaged in rowing contests with the crews of the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge; and aided the inauguration of the
Norwich Athenaeum.  In 1834 Mr. Gilman founded the Militia Substitute
Insurance Association, and after the memorable hailstorm in August, 1843,
he established the General Hailstorm Insurance Society.  In 1846 he
became the leading promoter and secretary of the Norwich Mutual Marine
Insurance Society, in 1849 he founded the Norfolk Farmers' Cattle
Insurance Society, and in 1856 assisted his son, Mr. C. R. Gilman, in the
formation of the Norwich and London Accident Insurance Association.  Mr.
Gilman was the last surviving member of the Norwich Corporation of
pre-Reform days, having been elected for the Wymer Ward in March, 1830.
For some time he was a member of the new Corporation, a revising assessor
and member of the old Court of Guardians, and a member of the old Paving
Commission.  Mr. Gilman was engaged with Mr. Joseph John Gurney and
others in founding and organizing the Norwich District Visiting Society,
and was one of the oldest life governors of the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital, and a member of the Festival Committee and of the Committees of
the Blind Institution, the Norfolk and Norwich Eye Infirmary, the Norfolk
and Norwich Dispensary, and the Jenny Lind Infirmary.  With Mr. John
Henry Gurney and Sir Samuel Bignold, he took an active part in the
formation of the original Norwich Chamber of Commerce.  Mr. Gilman was
descended from an old Norfolk family which goes back into the sixteenth
century, and one of his maternal ancestors was the great Norfolk hero,
Nelson.

--The first of a series of "Health Lectures for the People," arranged by
the Corporation of Norwich, was delivered at Prince's Street Lecture Hall
by Mr. S. H. Burton.  The subject was "Healthy Homes and how to keep them
so."  On the 15th Mr. Donald Day lectured on "Foods and Drinks," and on
the 22nd Dr. S. J. Barton on "Personal Health."

10.--The silver wedding of the Prince and Princess of Wales was
celebrated in Norwich and the county.  Congratulatory addresses were
adopted by the Corporations of Norwich, Yarmouth, and Lynn; and on April
2nd the citizens of Norwich presented their Royal Highnesses with
replicas of portions of the Corporation plate.  Presents were also given
by the tenants on the Sandringham estate and by the West Norfolk Hunt.
In commemoration of the event the Mayor and Sheriff of Norwich (Mr.
Harmer and Mr. Bagshaw) entertained 950 of the aged poor of the city to
dinner at St. Andrew's Hall; and on August 24th Mr. Samuel Hoare, M.P.,
gave a treat to the inmates of the Workhouse.

22.--Died, at his residence, Willow Lane, Norwich, Mr. Charles Goodwin,
formerly house surgeon of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  Mr. Goodwin
held important posts in connection with other city charities, and was on
the commission of the peace for Norwich.

23.--At the Norwich Police Court, Mr. Edward Burgess, accompanied by
several members of the committee of the Unemployed Relief Fund, applied
for the issue of a summons for libel against the Norwich District
Visiting Society and the editor of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE.  The newspaper
had published an article in which the committee were referred to "as
certain persons who are not entitled to constitute themselves almoners of
the general public as an excuse for pursuing their favourite policy of
sending round the hat and beating a drum in the manner of other
mountebanks."  This article had been reprinted and circulated by the
officers of the Visiting Society.  The magistrates were of opinion that
the article was not libellous, and dismissed the application.


APRIL.


1.--Died suddenly, at his residence, Bank Plain, Norwich, Mr. Arthur
Preston, solicitor.  He was the youngest son of Mr. John Preston, of
Great Yarmouth (who was twice Mayor of that borough), and was born on
July 3rd, 1819.  After serving his articles with Mr. Roger Kerrison he
was admitted a solicitor in 1842, and from 1844 to 1864, when Mr.
Kerrison died, he was in partnership with him.  Mr. Preston was appointed
Clerk to the Burials Board in 1861, and held the office until his death;
he had been a director of the Norwich Union Life Insurance Society since
1867, and president since 1885; and he was the Norwich solicitor to the
British Gas Light Company, Limited, to which office he was appointed in
1864.  Mr. Preston was twice married--in 1854 to Maria, daughter of Mr.
Robert Waters, and in 1869 to Louisa Jane, daughter of the Rev. J.
Culling Evans, of Stoke Pogis, Buckinghamshire.  He left a family of five
sons and three daughters.

--An outbreak of fire at West Beckham Workhouse caused damage to the
amount of 1,500.

5.--The proceedings of the Norwich Diocesan Conference commenced at
Noverre's Rooms, Norwich, and concluded on the 6th.

16.--The E and D Troops of the 19th (Princess of Wales' Own) Hussars
marched from Norwich Cavalry Barracks for Hampton Court and Kensington.
The remaining troops left on the 26th, on which day three troops of the
20th Hussars marched in under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Blake.

21.*--"A party of emigrants, numbering sixty, from parishes in the
neighbourhood of Diss, have left this week for Canada."

28.--Died, at 19, Hanover Terrace, Ladbroke Square, London,
Lieut.-Colonel George Black, formerly Chief Constable of Norfolk, in his
79th year.  It was on October 20th, 1852, that Colonel (then Captain)
Black, a half-pay officer of the Royal Staff Corps, who had seen service
as adjutant in Canada, was appointed to the command of the Norfolk
Constabulary, and he held the post until the autumn of 1880, when he
retired on a pension.  For sixteen or seventeen years Colonel Black held
the command of the Norwich Rifle Battalion in succession to Colonel
Brett.  At the funeral, which took place at Willesden Cemetery on May
2nd, the coffin was borne to the grave by six superintendents of the
Norfolk Constabulary.


MAY.


2.--Nine cottages were destroyed by fire at Hockering.  Most of the
furniture and belongings of the occupants were consumed, and a public
subscription was opened for the relief of the sufferers.

19.--The Norfolk Artillery Volunteer Brigade went into camp at Yarmouth
under the command of Lieut.-Colonel H. M. Leathes.

22.--Died, at Norwich, Mr. John Betts, in his 89th year.  The head of a
large wholesale and retail drapery establishment, he was appointed
Sheriff in 1844, elected Mayor in 1845, and placed on the commission of
the peace in 1848.

24.--Died, at Bracondale, Norwich, Major-General James Cockburn, formerly
of the 79th Cameron Highlanders, aged 77.  He was second son of
Major-General James Patteson Cockburn, of the Royal Artillery, and was
born in Norwich when his father was stationed there in 1810.  After
serving in Canada he received the appointment of staff officer of
pensioners in the Norwich District, from which post he retired in 1877.
General Cockburn was a justice of the peace for the city, and
vice-president of the Norwich Union Fire Insurance Society.

--The members of the British Dairy Farmers' Association arrived at Trowse
railway station, and visited Carrow Abbey, where they were entertained to
luncheon by Mr. J. J. Colman, M.P.  After inspecting the Whitlingham
herd, they proceeded to Norwich, and held a conference at the
Agricultural Hall.  In the evening the members dined at the Royal Hotel
under the presidency of Mr. Clare Sewell Read; and on the 25th proceeded
by train to King's Lynn and Sandringham.

30.--The Earl of Leicester presided at a public meeting at Norwich, and
made an eloquent appeal on behalf of a fund for the enlargement and
reconstruction of the Blind Institution.  The cost of the proposed work
was estimated at 4,000.  (_See_ October 16th, 1891.)


JUNE.


12.--An inter-county match between teams of twenty men each took place on
the occasion of the annual meeting at Yarmouth of the Norfolk Volunteer
Service Association.  Total scores: Suffolk, 1,711; Lincolnshire, 1,697;
Norfolk, 1,652; Essex, 1,557.

18.--The staff of the 4th Battalion Norfolk Regiment left Yarmouth and
took up their quarters at the Infantry Depot known as the Britannia
Barracks, Norwich.

19.--The Norwich Town Council adopted an address of condolence with the
Queen and with the Empress of Germany on the death of the German Emperor.
Similar addresses were passed by the Corporations of Yarmouth and Lynn.

21.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association opened at
East Dereham.  Mr. R. T. Gurdon, M.P., presided at the luncheon.  The
show was continued on the 22nd.

28.--The church of St. Thomas, Heigham, was consecrated by the Bishop of
Norwich.  The building was designed by Mr. Ewan Christian, of London, and
erected by Mr. G. E. Hawes, at the total cost of 6,600.

30.--Dr. S. J. Barton was elected an honorary physician of the Norfolk
and Norwich Hospital in place of Sir Peter Eade, who retired from the
post of senior physician.  Dr. Beverley was elected honorary surgeon to
fill the vacancy occasioned by the resignation of Mr. T. W. Crosse.


JULY.


5.--A severe thunderstorm, accompanied by heavy rain and hail, occurred
in Norfolk.

7.--Died, at East Dereham, Mr. Samuel Bates, who was born in that town in
1789.  He started in business in the Market Place in 1814, and was a
subscriber to the dinner held in 1815 on the occasion of the celebration
of peace.  In 1809 he witnessed and took part in the festivities
connected with the Jubilee of George III., and seventy-seven years later
participated in the celebration of the Jubilee of Queen Victoria.

9.--The Mayor (Mr. F. W. Harmer) opened, at the rooms of the Norwich Art
Circle, Queen Street, a loan collection of works by John Sell Cotman.

14.*--"Lieut.-Colonel William Earle Gascoyne Lytton Bulwer is gazetted to
the command of the Eastern Counties Volunteer Brigade."

21.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the presidency of
the Deputy-Mayor (Sir Harry Bullard), a local branch was established of
the National Association for the Employment of Reserve and Discharged
Soldiers.

--The 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Volunteer Battalions of the Norfolk Regiment went
into camp at Great Yarmouth.  The marching in state was 2,000.

24.--The Fellows of the Huguenot Society of London held their summer
conference at Norwich.  The proceedings were continued on the 25th.


AUGUST.


6.--The Norwich Cricket Week commenced on this date, and concluded on the
11th.  The principal match of the week was Norfolk _v._ Parsees.  Scores:
Norfolk, 138-73; Parsees, 78-129.  Sir Kenneth Kemp's amateur theatrical
company appeared at the Theatre on the 8th in "The Porter's Knot" and "To
Oblige Benson"; on the 10th the comedy was repeated, and a "Cups and
Saucers" was produced as an after-piece.

10.--Upwards of 10,000 people were present at a Primrose League _fete_
given at Houghton Park by Mr. E. Kenyon-Stow.  Addresses were delivered
by Lord Henry Bentinck, M.P., Mr. Weston Jarvis, M.P., and Mr. Whitmore,
M.P.

18.--Died, at Norwich, Mr. Henry Stevenson, F.L.S.  He was the youngest
son of Mr. Seth William Stevenson, and was born at Surrey Street,
Norwich, March 30th, 1833.  Educated at King's College School, London, he
became, on attaining his majority, a co-partner in the proprietorship of
the NORFOLK CHRONICLE, and at the age of 22 was elected honorary
secretary of the Norfolk and Norwich Museum, a position which he filled
with marked ability to the close of his life.  Volume I. of his standard
work, "The Birds of Norfolk," was published in December, 1866, and Volume
II. in September, 1870; and Volume III. was in course of publication at
the time of his death.  His other literary work included a memoir of his
friend, the Rev. Richard Lubbock, M.A., rector of Eccles, published with
a revised edition of Lubbock's "Fauna of Norfolk," edited by Mr. T.
Southwell (1879), and numerous contributions to the Transactions of the
Norfolk and Norwich Naturalists' Society, of which he was one of the
founders, and filled the office of president in 1871-72.  Mr. Stevenson
was appointed Sheriff of Norwich in 1875.  He married, in 1856, Eliza
Dangerfield, stepdaughter of Mr. Edward Slater, who died from injuries
received in a carriage accident on July 17th, 1862; his second wife was
Ann Emilia, eldest daughter of Mr. Wm. Self, surgeon, of Hackney.

30.--Lord Walsingham killed to his own gun, on his small moor at
Blubberhouses, Yorkshire, 1,058 grouse.  Of these, 1,036 were taken home
the same night, and 22 were picked up the following day.  "The record of
his having killed 842 grouse to his own gun on August 28th, 1872, had
been so freely disputed by many persons, who professed to regard it as a
physical impossibility, that it was his lordship's intention to prove
more could be accomplished."


SEPTEMBER.


6.--Died, at Ormesby Lodge, Sir Edmund Henry Knowles Lacon, Bart.  He was
the eldest son of Sir Edmund Knowles Lacon, and his wife, Eliza Dixon,
eldest daughter and co-heiress of Mr. Thomas Beecroft, of Sculthorpe
Hall.  Born August 14th, 1807, he was educated at Eton and Emmanuel
College, Cambridge, where he took his B.A. in 1828 and his M.A. degree in
1831.  In 1839 he married Eliza Georgiana, daughter of Mr. James Esdale
Hammet, of Battersea.  He succeeded to the baronetcy in 1839.  Sir Edmund
was first returned to Parliament for the borough of Yarmouth in 1852.  At
the next General Election, in March, 1857, Mr. McCallagh and Mr. E. A.
Watkin gained the representation of the constituency by a narrow majority
over Sir Edmund and his colleague, the Hon. Charles Smyth Vereker, son of
Viscount Gort.  A petition was presented, and a Committee of the House of
Commons declared the election void.  Thereupon Sir Edmund issued an
address, but subsequently followed the example of Mr. Vereker, and
retired, so that Serjeant (afterwards Mr. Justice) Mellor and Mr.
Adolphus W. Young had a walk-over.  On the dissolution taking place in
1859 he and Sir Henry Stracey defeated Messrs. Watkin and Young; a
petition and enquiry followed, but they were declared duly elected.  In
1865 Sir Henry Stracey retired, leaving Sir Edmund with Mr. James Goodson
as his colleague, and both were returned in opposition to Mr. Alexander
Brogden and Mr. Philip Vanderbyl, who presented a petition, which, though
the sitting members were undisturbed, resulted in the Committee reporting
that they had reason to believe corrupt practices had prevailed.  A Royal
Commission and the disfranchisement of the borough followed.  Then came
the Reform and Redistribution Acts of 1868, under which the county of
Norfolk was divided into three parts, and Yarmouth was merged in the
Northern Division.  At the first election under the new arrangement Sir
Edmund Lacon and his colleague, the Hon. Frederick Walpole, were
returned, notwithstanding the powerful opposition of the Liberal party,
who had brought forward Mr. Edmond R. Wodehouse and Mr. R. T. Gurdon.  A
petition was presented, and failed.  In 1869 Sir Edmund was presented by
his constituents with a piece of silver plate weighing 900 ozs., and
valued at upwards of 600, in recognition of his services to the
Conservative cause.  In 1874 he and Mr. Walpole were returned unopposed,
and in 1880 there was again no contest, when Sir Edmund and Mr.
(afterwards Sir Edward) Birkbeck were elected on the death of Colonel
Duff, who had succeeded Mr. Walpole.  Under the redistribution scheme of
1885 Yarmouth was allowed one member, but at the next General Election
Sir Edmund retired, and Sir H. W. Tyler was elected in his stead.  Sir
Edmund Lacon was senior partner in the banking firm of Lacons, Youells,
and Co., and in the extensive brewery of Lacons and Co.  On the death of
Lord Sondes in 1875 he was appointed High Steward of Yarmouth; he was a
Deputy Lieutenant for Norfolk and a magistrate for Norfolk and Suffolk.
Sir Edmund was formerly Colonel Commandant, and at the time of his death
Honorary Colonel, of the East Norfolk Militia.

9.--A serious fire occurred at the Orchard Street Saw Mills, Norwich,
occupied by Messrs. Cunnington Bros, timber merchants.  Considerable
damage was done to the machinery and stock-in-trade, and a large building
was destroyed.

11.--The detachment of Royal Engineers, who had for ten years been
engaged on the Ordnance Survey, left Norwich for York.  The work in
Norfolk was completed in 1883, and it was found that very little
alteration was needed in the map drawn thirty or forty years previously.
The survey of the northern half of Cambridgeshire was then commenced and
was completed in 1885; this was followed by the survey of a portion of
Huntingdonshire and Northamptonshire, including the city of Peterborough;
and finally the southern half of Lincolnshire, which was finished in
April, 1887.  The detachment, including women and children, numbered 120,
and the official papers, books, &c., weighed between 30 and 40 tons.  The
first commanding officer was Captain Macpherson, who was succeeded by
Captain Day and by Major Washington.

20.--The new Hospital, erected at Dene Side, Yarmouth, was publicly
opened by Sir James Paget, the distinguished physician, a native of the
town.  The total cost of the institution was estimated at 10,750.


OCTOBER.


19.--A great Conservative demonstration took place at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, in connection with a conference of the Eastern Division of the
National Union of Conservative Associations.  Lord Walsingham presided,
and Sir John Gorst, Q.C., M.P., Under Secretary for India, was the
principal speaker.


NOVEMBER.


2.--Died, Sir Lewis Whincop Jarvis, in his 72nd year.  He was a son of
Mr. Lewis Weston Jarvis, and a grandson of Mr. Robert T. Whincop, a
former Town Clerk of Lynn.  For more than fifty years he carried on
business as a banker and solicitor in his native town of Lynn, and on
January 15th, 1878, received the honour of knighthood in recognition of
the many eminent services he had rendered to the borough.  He married, in
1850, Emma, daughter of Mr. Alexander Bowker, by whom he left issue five
sons and a daughter.  Sir Lewis was an alderman of Lynn, and was Mayor
for three successive years, 1860-63.

9.--At the meeting of the Norwich Town Council Mr. Alexander Robert
Chamberlin was elected Mayor of the city, but upon his declining to
qualify Mr. Joshua Farrar Ranson was chosen.  Mr. George White was
appointed Sheriff.

--The Marquis of Salisbury was appointed High Steward of the borough of
Great Yarmouth.

10.--The Gorleston lifeboat, the Refuge, was capsized whilst upon salvage
service, and of her crew four were drowned.

13.--Mr. Harry Furniss delivered at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, a
lecture on "Art and Artists."

15.--Upton church, which had been restored at the cost of 1,122, was
re-opened by the Bishop of Norwich.

26.--At Blofield Petty Sessions, Jeremiah Cozens Wiley, farmer, of Little
Plumstead; Samuel Rose, farm steward; William Feek and Thomas Powley,
labourers, of the same place, were summoned on the information of John
Ford, an inspector of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals, for "unlawfully ill-treating and torturing 16 bullocks by
dishorning them on October 8th and 15th."  Mr. Colam, barrister-at-law,
prosecuted on behalf of the society, and Mr. H. J. Gidney, of Aylsham,
defended.  The case excited great interest, and the court was crowded by
a large number of scientific witnesses and leading agriculturists.  The
act of dishorning the animals was admitted by the defendants, and in
support of the contention of the prosecution that the operation was
unnecessary and cruel were called Professor Walley, principal of the
Edinburgh Veterinary College; Professor McCall, principal of the Glasgow
Veterinary College; Professor F. Collins, F.R.C.V.S., Mr. G. A. Lepper,
F.R.C.V.S, Professor Pritchard, President of the Royal College of
Veterinary Surgeons, London; Mr. Cox, F.R.C.V.S., Professor J. McQueen,
and several local veterinary surgeons.  It was urged in defence that the
operation, although painful, was necessary and humane, because it
prevented cattle injuring each other with their horns.  Several prominent
agriculturists and graziers, including Mr. Clare Sewell Read, Mr. B. B.
Sapwell, and Mr. William Case, gave evidence in support of this view.
The magistrates dismissed the informations, and the chairman (Mr. Edward
Gilbert) said "they considered the operation a most painful one, but they
did not suppose that Mr. Wiley did it with any cruel intention towards
the animals on which the operation was performed.  If it went forth to
the public that it was advisable to have polled cattle it would be seen
also that it was advisable that the animals should be operated upon at an
earlier stage."  (_See_ April 16th, 1889.)

29.--Mr. J. L. Toole commenced a three nights' engagement at Norwich
Theatre as Mr. Milliken, M.A., in the comedy of "The Don."  The pieces
produced on the 30th and on December 1st were "The Butler," "The
Spitalfields Weaver," "Paul Pry," and "Ici On Parle Francais."


DECEMBER.


1.--The weather was very mild at this date.  "That 1888 will be noted as
an extraordinary year in the meteorological annals of this country is a
fact requiring no demonstration--snow in harvest and blossoming primroses
in the open air on the eve of December, February rains throughout the
summer months, and March gales in November."  A correspondent, writing to
"The Times," on December 3rd, stated: "I am still supplied with green
peas grown in my garden at Brundall, the roses are all in flower; the
fields abound in primroses and wild flowers."  The cuckoo was said to
have been heard at North Elmham on December 6th.  In Norwich primroses
and other vernal flowers were in full bloom on Christmas eve, and
strawberries were gathered at Swainsthorpe on Christmas morning.

5.--The Prince of Wales and Prince George of Wales arrived at Didlington
Hall on a visit to Mr. W. A. Tyssen Amherst, M.P., and left on the 8th.

10.--Lieut.-Colonel Foster was presented with a gold watch, subscribed
for by past and present members of the 1st Volunteer Battalion Norfolk
Regiment, on his retirement from the corps, after twenty-five years'
service.

22.--A public inquiry was held at the Guildhall Norwich, by Mr. Charles
Chapman, Assistant Commissioner under the Royal Commission on market
rates and tolls, into the circumstances of markets and fairs in the city.
Statements were made by many of the leading citizens.  A similar inquiry
was held at Yarmouth.

29.--The Norfolk County Club, whose quarters were originally at the Royal
Hotel, and subsequently in St. Giles' Street, having purchased the old
Bank House, Upper King Street, Norwich, the reconstruction of the
premises for the purposes of the club was completed on this date under
the superintendence of Mr. Edward Boardman.  The house was formerly the
residence of Mr. Anthony Hudson, and was afterwards known as Greyfriars'
College.

31.--Mr. Henry Birkbeck, on the completion of the fiftieth year of his
connection with the banking-house of Gurneys, Birkbecks, Barclay, and
Buxtons, "the Norwich and Norfolk Bank," was presented by the managers
and clerks with a silver salver in commemoration of the event.



1889.


JANUARY.


3.--The Norfolk magistrates met at the Shirehall, Norwich, for the last
time for the discharge of the general business of the county.  Mr. J. R.
Bulwer, Q.C., presided.  On the motion of Sir Francis Boileau, Bart.,
seconded by Mr. C. S. Read, a vote of thanks was accorded to the senior
Chairman, Mr. R. T. Gurdon, "for the impartial, courteous, and punctual
manner in which he has discharged the various duties appertaining to the
office of Chairman during the eighteen years in which he has with marked
ability presided over this Court."  One of the last acts of the Court was
to grant to the Under-Sheriff (Mr. Hales) the sum of 700 towards the
expenses of the County Council elections, which took place on January
24th.  The first meeting of the Norfolk Provisional County Council was
held at the Shirehall, Norwich, on February 7th.  Mr. Gurdon was elected
provisional chairman by 37 votes against 18 recorded for Lord Kimberley.
After the election of aldermen the meeting was adjourned until February
16th, when Mr. Gurdon was elected permanent Chairman by 53 votes against
20 polled by Lord Kimberley.  Lord Walsingham was elected Vice-Chairman.
It was reported that the cost of the elections was 3,308 4s. 6d.  The
first meeting of the fully-constituted Council took place at the
Shirehall on April 13th; and on December 14th it adopted a comprehensive
scheme for the management of the main roads of the county.

--A regimental ball, given by the officers of the 20th Hussars, took
place at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.

9.--A meeting of the citizens was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, for
the consideration of the Norwich Corporation Bill, which, during the
preceding year the Town Council had decided to present to Parliament.
The Mayor (Mr. J. Farrar Ranson) presided, and the proceedings were of a
most disorderly character.  At the adjourned meeting on the 23rd similar
scenes were witnessed.  The Bill, which was very comprehensive, and
contained provisions relating to infectious diseases, police regulations,
private street works, hackney carriages, the employment of children,
consolidation of parishes, &c., passed through Select Committee of the
House of Commons on June 18th.

14.--The first of another series of "Science Lectures for the People" was
given, under the Gilchrist Educational Trust, at St. Andrew's Hall by Sir
Robert Stawell Ball, Astronomer Royal for Ireland, on "The Sun, the
Fountain of life and Light."  Dr. Lant Carpenter, on January 28th,
lectured upon "Electric Lighting"; Dr. Andrew Wilson, February 9th, on
"Some Animal Architects: Chalk Builders and Coral Makers"; Professor
Miall, February 25th, on "The Life-history of the Earth"; Professor
Seeley, March 11th, on "Water and its Action in Land-shaping"; and the
Rev. Dr. Dallinger, F.R.S., F.L.S., president of the Royal Microscopical
Society, March 25th, on "Contrasts of Nature--the Infinitely Great and
the Infinitely Small."  The Corporation in December arranged a series of
lectures independently of the Gilchrist Trust.  On the 4th of that month
Sir Robert Ball lectured on "Shooting Stars," and on the 18th Dr. Andrew
Wilson discoursed on "The Heart and its Action."  (_See_ March 5th,
1890.)

21.--The freemen of Norwich unanimously agreed that it was undesirable to
take any steps in opposition to the Attorney-General's motion for
declaring the Town Close Estate a charity.  In the Court of Appeal, on
June 22nd, before Lords Justices Cotton, Bowen, and Fry, Mr. Ingle Joyce
informed their lordships that a scheme was to be devised for the
management of the estate; the Corporation were to retain a sufficient sum
to cover their costs, and the plaintiffs in the action were to have their
costs as between party and party.  Their lordships sanctioned the
agreement.  "All that now remains to be done in the original action is to
settle the roll by striking off the names of freemen wrongfully
admitted."  At a meeting of the Town Council on August 27th it was
reported that the estimated costs in the litigation amounted to 5,000.
(_See_ February 6th, 1892.)

23.--Died, at Yarmouth, Mrs. Rose Ellen Thackeray, widow of the Rev.
Joseph Thackeray, many years rector of Horstead and Coltishall.  Mrs.
Thackeray, who was in her 79th year, was the authoress of "Social
Skeletons," and "Pictures of the Past," and a contributor of poetical
sketches to various magazines.  She was the youngest daughter of Captain
John Robinson, of the Scots Guards.

24.--Mr. and Mrs. Kendall commenced a three nights' engagement at Norwich
Theatre in "The Queen's Shilling."  "A Scrap of Paper" was performed on
the 25th, and "Two Friends" on the 26th.

26.--Died, at St. Andrew's Hall Plain, Norwich, Mr. Alfred Stannard,
artist, in his 83rd year.  He was the last survivor of the Norwich School
of Artists, which commenced with Old Crome.  He was the younger brother
of the famous Joseph Stannard, and father of Miss Stannard, the
well-known painter of fruit and flowers.  During the last few years of
his life Mr. Stannard was in receipt of an annual pension of 50 from the
Turner Fund of the Royal Academy.

26.--Died, at the Cathedral Close, Norwich, Mrs. Elizabeth Taylor, widow
of Mr. John Oddin Taylor, aged 81.  She was the eldest of the twelve
children of Mr. John Brewer, of Mile End House, Eaton.  Among her
brothers were Professor Brewer, Preacher at the Rolls-Chapel, and editor
of the State Papers of the time of Henry VIII.; Dr. William Brewer,
Chairman of the Metropolitan Asylums Board, and sometime Member of
Parliament for Colchester; and Dr. Cobham Brewer, the well-known author
of the "Guide to Science" and other educational works.  Born on November
9th, 1807, she was educated with her brothers at Mile End School, and
there acquired that proficiency in the classics and love of literature
generally which she maintained and cherished throughout her life.  Among
the pupils attending her father's school was John Oddin Taylor, who was
destined to become her husband.  Early in life she manifested an ardent
enthusiasm for music, and studied under Dr. Crotch, and for her great
proficiency in the art was on two occasions awarded a medal.  With her
high intellectual gifts were combined broad and liberal sympathies, and
she won the confidence and affection of all.

29.--Mr. T. P. O'Connor, M.P., addressed a Gladstonian Liberal meeting
held at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, under the presidency of Mr. J. J.
Colman.


FEBRUARY.


5.--A series of military tournaments, given by the 20th Hussars in aid of
the city charities, commenced at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, and
concluded on the 9th.

9.--A severe gale did great damage to the fishing fleet in the North Sea.
Several Yarmouth fishermen were drowned.  Heavy snowstorms occurred on
the 10th.

20.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Field, George Edward
Brock (46), solicitor, was sentenced to ten months' imprisonment for
obtaining money by false pretences.

21.--A murderous attack was made upon Police-constable Southgate, of the
Norwich police, by a man named Joseph Betts, who in 1883 was charged with
sending threatening letters to the Bishop of Norwich and Mr. J. J.
Colman, M.P., signed "Another Invincible."  Southgate was returning from
night duty at 6.35 a.m., when he was accosted by Betts, who fired a
revolver at him, the bullet passing between his left arm and the side of
his body.  Betts then withdrew to his house in Northumberland Street,
where he barricaded himself.  Several police-officers went to the house
to effect his apprehension; a ladder was procured, and while Inspector
Guiett was preparing to ascend to the bedroom window Betts appeared above
and deliberately fired at the officer.  The bullet struck the leather
peak of the inspector's cap, and, glancing off, inflicted a superficial
wound upon his head.  Ultimately the prisoner was captured by a ruse, and
removed to the police-station.  On March 1st he was committed for trial.
Betts was tried at the Norwich Assizes on July 20th on the charge of
firing a pistol at Police-constable Southgate with intent to murder him.
He was found guilty of intent to do grievous bodily harm, and was
sentenced by Lord Chief Justice Coleridge to fifteen years' penal
servitude.  The prisoner was afterwards removed to Broadmoor Criminal
Lunatic Asylum.

--Died, at Ashill Rectory, the Rev. Bartholomew Edwards, "within ten days
of his 100th year."  Born on March 2nd, 1789, he graduated at St. John's
College, Cambridge, taking his B.A. degree (7th Sen. Opt.) in 1811.  He
was ordained deacon by Bishop Bathurst at Norwich in 1812, and priest in
1813.  In the last-named year he received his only preferment, which he
held for 76 years.  Mr. Edwards, who was the oldest clergyman in the
Church of England, was a rural dean, a justice of the peace, and a Deputy
Lieutenant for Norfolk.  He recorded his vote at the County Council
election on January 24th, and caught a chill; congestion of the lungs
supervened, and this attack was the immediate cause of his death.

27.--The Marquis of Hartington visited Norwich and addressed a large
meeting of the Unionist party held at St. Andrew's Hall.  The Earl of
Leicester presided, and was supported by several representatives of the
nobility and county gentry.


MARCH.


5.--Hengler's Circus company commenced a season's engagement at the
Agricultural Hall, Norwich.  Mr. George Gilbert, a native of the city,
and Miss Jennie O' Brien (Mrs. Gilbert), members of the company, were
enthusiastically received at the opening performance.

19.--The Norwich Town Council unanimously adopted a farewell address to
the Very Rev. E. M. Goulburn on his resignation of the Deanery of
Norwich.  The address was presented to Dean Goulburn at the Deanery on
April 23rd by the Mayor (Mr. J. Farrar Ranson), who was accompanied by
the Sheriff (Mr. G. White) and other members of the Corporation.  (_See_
July 5th.)


APRIL.


2.--The new lifeboat, Mark Lane, presented to the National Lifeboat
Institution by traders at Mark Lane, was launched at Yarmouth.

--Captain Wiggins, F.R.G.S., lectured at Norwich, upon his experiences in
the Arctic Seas and Siberia.  Mr. J. H. Gurney, jun., F.Z.S., F.L.S., who
presided, introduced the lecturer as a native of the city.  Captain
Wiggins referred to the fact that forty-three years previously he lived
as a boy at Norwich, and expressed the pleasure it gave him to return to
his native town to tell them of things which he never dreamed of years
ago.  On the previous day Captain Wiggins was received at Marlborough
House by the Prince and Princess of Wales.

9.--The Sheriff of Norwich and Mrs. White gave a _soiree_ at St. Andrew's
Hall, at which many residents in the city and county were present.

12.--The Earl of Rosebery addressed a great Gladstonian meeting held at
the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, under the presidency of the Earl of
Kimberley.  His lordship, after making an eloquent speech in favour of
Home Rule, entered Mr. J. J. Colman's carriage, and, preceded by two
brass bands, and escorted by torchbearers, was driven to Carrow House.

13.--Died, at Mill Hill Road, Norwich, aged 60, Mr. James Darkin, a
well-known music seller, who had been the means of introducing to the
city many talented singers and musicians.

16.--In the Queen's Bench Division of the High Court of Justice, before
Lord Coleridge and Mr. Justice Hawkins, was mentioned the case, Ford _v._
Wiley.  This case arose out of the question whether the operation of
dishorning cattle, _i.e._, sawing off their horns at the roots, was
cruelty within the meaning of the Act for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals.  The Blofield Bench of magistrates had ruled in the negative.
Lord Coleridge said: "All that we have to say for the present is that we
have made up our minds distinctly and clearly to give judgment reversing
the decision of the magistrates, holding as we do that the practice of
dishorning is unlawful.  But as we differ from several judgments we think
it only respectful to the learned judges who decided those cases to say
that we have duly considered everything they have said on the subject,
and therefore we have thought right to take time to put our judgment into
writing (though we entirely agree in it), and we will deliver judgment
early in the next sitting."  On May 18th the Lord Chief Justice, in
delivering judgment, said the operation of dishorning was detestably
brutal, and it was also unnecessary except to enable its owner to obtain
a pound or two more for the animal on its sale.  Mr. Justice Hawkins
concurred, and the case was remitted to the magistrates for further
hearing.

23.--The Queen, accompanied by Princess Louise, arrived at Sandringham on
a visit to the Prince and Princess of Wales.  His Royal Highness, with
whom was Prince Albert Victor, welcomed her Majesty at Lynn railway
station, where she was presented with an address by the Mayor (Mr. G. G.
Sadler) on behalf of the Corporation of the borough.  On driving from
Wolferton station to Sandringham House her Majesty was escorted by a
large number of the members of the Norfolk Hunt, headed by Sir Dighton
Probyn; and in the grounds one hundred men of the Norfolk Artillery
formed a guard of honour.  The officers in attendance were Colonel Lord
Suffield, Major Dawson, Lieutenant the Hon. H. Tyrwhitt Wilson, and
Lieutenant Lombe.  On the 22nd her Majesty visited the Artillery camp in
the park, and drove to Castle Rising and inspected the ruins; on the 23rd
several of the neighbouring villages were visited, and in the afternoon
the Queen received a deputation of the tenantry on the estate, who
presented to her a loyal address; and on the evening of the 26th her
Majesty witnessed a performance of "The Bells" and "The Merchant of
Venice," given by Mr. Henry Irving, Miss Ellen Terry, and the Lyceum
Company.  Her Majesty returned to Windsor on the 27th.

25.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference was opened at Noverre's Rooms,
Norwich, under the presidency of the Bishop of the Diocese, and was
continued on the 26th.

26.--The phonograph, described as "Edison's wonderful talking machine,"
was exhibited for the first time in Norwich, "with a unique library of
voices," by Mr. William Lynd, M.I.C.E.


MAY.


7.--Died, at Norwich, aged 36, Mr. Edward Preston Willins, A.R.I.B.A.  He
was the youngest son of Mr. William Willins, and published a handsome
volume, entitled, "Quaint Old Norwich," a work much sought after by local
collectors.

9.--Lieutenant Campbell, Quartermaster of the 20th Hussars, was
accidentally drowned in the Yare by the capsizing of his sailing boat,
near Buckenham Ferry.  His wife, who was with him at the time of the
accident, was saved by his servant, Private Moore.  Mr. Campbell was 33
years of age, and had been in the regiment since 1872.  He had served
through the Egyptian campaigns, and had received the Egyptian and
Khedive's stars and the clasp for Suakim.  His remains were interred at
Norwich Cemetery with full military honours on the 13th.  Private Moore
on June 11th was presented at the Cavalry Barracks, on the occasion of a
full-dress parade of the regiment, with the silver medal and certificate
of the Royal Humane Society, handed to him by Colonel Blake, the officer
commanding; and with a purse, containing 45, presented by the Mayor (Mr.
J. Farrar Ranson) on behalf of the citizens.

24.--The western portion of the Castle Gardens at Norwich was thrown open
to the public at noon.

27.--Lydia Baker, widow, of Alburgh, completed her 100th year, and was
entertained with her nearest relatives at the rectory by the Rev. C. W.
and Mrs. Lohr.  Among the many presents received by the old lady was a
stocking containing 100 shillings.

27.--Died, at Longford, Derby, the Hon. Edward Wentworth Coke, aged 64.
A son of the first Earl of Leicester, he for five years represented the
old Division of West Norfolk, for which he was elected on August 16th,
1847, as a Liberal, in conjunction with Mr. William Bagge, the Tory and
Protectionist.  Mr. Coke was formerly a captain, in the Scots Fusiliers,
and was widely known as a breeder of shire horses.


JUNE.


1.--Heavy and destructive thunderstorms occurred throughout Norfolk, and
especially in the western portion of the county.  Immense damage was done
to the growing crops.

6.--The Church of England portion of Attleborough Cemetery was
consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich.  The ceremony had been delayed by a
prolonged and unpleasant controversy.

8.--The 1st Volunteer Brigade Norfolk Artillery went into camp at
Yarmouth.  During the night of the 9th tents and marquees were overturned
by a heavy gale from the north, accompanied by torrents of rain.  The
camp was struck on the 12th.

18.--The Norwich Town Council decided to purchase the Carrow Bridge
undertaking, under powers conferred by the new Corporation Act, at a cost
not exceeding 3,000, towards which sum Messrs. J. and J. Colman offered
to contribute 1,500.

19.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association opened at
Swaffham.  Mr. Anthony Hamond was president.

21.--The Sheriff of Norwich and Mrs. White entertained 700 of the aged
poor of the city to dinner at St. Andrew's Hall in celebration of the
marriage of their daughter, Miss Ellen Constance White.

--Died, at Antingham Rectory, the Rev. John Dolphin, in his 85th year.
"He was among the few survivors of the University elevens that first
competed for cricketing honours in the year 1827, when he played as an
old Etonian captain for Cambridge."

22.--An aeronaut named Grais made a balloon ascent from the Newmarket
Road Cricket Ground, Norwich, and upon attaining an altitude of about
3,000 feet descended by means of a parachute.  Grais made a similar
descent at East Dereham on August 10th.

25.--Died, at West Lodge, Easton, Mr. Edward Fountaine, aged 68.  He was
a son of Mr. Andrew Fountaine, of Narford Hall, and was much devoted to
the pursuit of ornithology.  Mr. Fountaine achieved some fame as a
breeder of eagle owls and was a regular contributor to "The Ibis."


JULY.


1.--The sale of Mr. T. Fulcher's herd of red polled cattle was conducted
at Elmham Park by Mr. John Thornton.  Thirty-nine heifers realised 1,026
18s., an average of 26 6s. 7d.; and eight bulls 159 12s., an average of
19 19s.

2.--The first biennial sale of shorthorn cattle and Southdown sheep, the
property of the Prince of Wales, took place at Wolferton.  His Royal
Highness, accompanied by Prince George of Wales, was present at the
luncheon, and during the subsequent proceedings.  The total amount
realised for the cattle was 3,000 guineas, an average of 50 each.  The
sheep made high prices.  Mr. John Thornton was the auctioneer.

5.--The Ven. William Lefroy, Archdeacon of Warrington, was installed Dean
of Norwich in succession to the Very Rev. E. M. Goulburn, D.D., resigned.
Dean Lefroy preached his first sermon at the Cathedral on October 15th,
on the occasion of the festival of the Church of England Temperance
Society.

10.--Died, at Walpole House, Thorpe, Mr. William Houghton Clabburn, aged
69.  He was for many years a partner in the firm of Clabburn, Sons, and
Crisp, shawl manufacturers, whose products achieved for Norwich a
world-wide celebrity.  Mr. Clabburn was chairman of the directors of the
Norwich Crape Company, and served the office of Sheriff in 1866-67.

16.--The Norwich Town Council voted a loyal and dutiful address to the
Prince and Princess of Wales on the approaching marriage of Princess
Louise with the Earl of Fife.  The wedding on the 27th was celebrated in
Norwich by the ringing of St. Peter Mancroft bells, and the display of
flags on public buildings.  The ladies of Norfolk presented to her Royal
Highness a diamond bracelet and a grand pianoforte, and the farmers on
the Sandringham estate gave a handsome diamond cross.

21.--Thunderstorms were general throughout the county.  At Beechamwell
seventeen sheep were killed by lightning, and everywhere the ripening
corn crops were greatly damaged by rain and hail.

27.--The four Volunteer Battalions of the Norfolk Regiment went into
brigade camp on Rushford Heath, under the command of Brigadier-General
Bulwer.  The marching in state was 1,563.  General Buchanan, C.B.,
inspected the brigade on the 30th, and the camp was struck on August 1st.


AUGUST.


1.--The chancel of Cromer church, which had been restored at the cost of
6,800, under the superintendence of Sir A. W. Blomfield, A.R.A., was
re-opened.

6.--The Royal Archaeological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland
visited Norwich, and held its inaugural meeting at St. Andrew's Hall.
The proceedings were attended by the Mayor and Corporation and by the
members of the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society.  The Duke of
Norfolk, as president for the week, delivered an opening address; and
from this day until the closing meeting on the 15th many places of
interest in the city and county were visited.  On the 8th the Mayor and
Mrs. Hanson gave a _conversazione_ at St. Andrew's Hall in honour of the
visit of the Institute.

7.--The Norwich Cricket Week theatrical performance, organized by Sir
Kenneth Kemp, Bart., was given at the Theatre Royal.  It consisted of the
production of the comedy, "Upper Crust."  The piece was performed again
on the 9th.


SEPTEMBER.


2.--A violent thunderstorm occurred, accompanied by torrents of rain,
which did excessive damage to unharvested crops.

19.--An amateur performance of "Lady Deadlock's Secret" was given at
Norwich Theatre in aid of the funds of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.
Lady Monckton sustained the character of Lady Deadlock, and was supported
by Mr. Charles Colnaghi, Mr. George Nugent, Mr. E. F. Nugent, Mr. C. H.
Clark, Mr. Eustace Ponsonby, Mr. C. W. A Trollope, and other
distinguished amateurs.  The performance was repeated on the 20th.

27.--Lieut.-Colonel Bignold, leader of the Conservative party in Norwich,
was presented with his portrait, painted by W. B. Richmond, A.R.A., and
with an album containing an illuminated address and list of
subscribers--members of the Conservative party in city and county.  The
presentation was made by Sir Harry Bullard at a garden party given by
Colonel Bignold at Harford Lodge.

29.--Died, at St. Benedict's Plain, Norwich, Mr. George Branwhite Jay,
aged 43.  He was a native of Great Yarmouth, where his father practised
as surgeon.  Mr. Jay devoted much time to the study of parish and other
registers, and for some time before his death had been engaged in
preparing for the press a work, entitled, "Transcript of St. George of
Tombland Register."


OCTOBER.


15.--A conference of members of the Church of England Temperance Society,
held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, was addressed by the Bishop of
London.

23.--The lifeboat Elizabeth Simpson, presented to the National Lifeboat
Institution by Miss Elizabeth Simpson Stone, of Norwich, was launched at
Gorleston.  On the 24th the boat was towed up the river to Norwich in
order that the donor, who was unable to be present at the launch, might
inspect the craft.

25.--The Higher Grade School, erected in Duke Street by the Norwich
School Board, was opened.  Mr. A. J. Mundella, M.P., gave an address, and
the Mayor, Sheriff, and members for the city also took part in the
proceedings.  In the evening the Sheriff (as Chairman of the School
Board) and Mrs. White gave a _conversazione_ at St. Andrew's Hall.  The
school, which occupies the site of the old Duke's Head Inn, was designed
by Mr. J. H. Brown, architect to the Board, and built by Messrs. J.
Youngs and Son.

--Wroxham House, the residence of Mrs. Blake-Humfrey, was destroyed by
fire.  Soon after the fire was discovered a great quantity of wine was
stolen from the cellars, and at the Petty Sessions held at the Shirehall,
Norwich, on November 2nd, seven persons were convicted of the theft.  It
was alleged that one of the accused was taking away the wine in a bucket.


NOVEMBER.


2.--The Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture passed a resolution affirming that
the suppression of pleuro-pneumonia should be placed in the hands of the
Government, and that compensation for compulsory slaughter be paid out of
the National Exchequer, and not from the local rates.

7.--The Baroness Burdett-Coutts delivered an address at the Guildhall,
Norwich, in support of the objects of the Norwich Band of Mercy.

9.--Mr. William Howard Dakin was elected Mayor and Mr. Edward Orams
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

13.--Died, at Tunbridge Wells, in his 81st year, Sir S. Morton Peto.  He
received his baronetcy for having contracted, in December, 1854, to
construct a railway from Balaclava to Sebastopol, and other works,
without profit or remuneration for superintendence.  He was Liberal
member for Norwich from 1847 to 1855, and successively represented
Finsbury and Bristol.  Sir Morton Peto was a civil engineer, and formerly
a member of the firms of Grissell and Peto and of Peto and Betts.

16.--Died, Mr. Charles Edward Tuck, of St. Giles' Street, Norwich, and
the Grove, Blofield, in his 81st year.  He was the fourth son of Mr.
Thomas Tuck, of Strumpshaw Hall, and for many years practised as
solicitor, and took an active part in public affairs.  A Conservative in
polities, he was elected in 1864 Mayor of Norwich.  Mr. Tuck was a
justice of the peace for the city, and vice-president of the Norwich
Union Fire Office.


DECEMBER.


4.--Died, at Mount Pleasant, Norwich, Mrs. E. Ling, aged 101 years.

9.--The Duke and Duchess of Edinburgh arrived at Didlington Hall on a
visit to Mr. and Mrs. Tyssen Amherst.

10.--Sir Harry and Lady Bullard entertained the members of the Norwich
and Norfolk Conservative Club, and their friends, to a _soiree_ given at
St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.

17.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council it was reported that notice
had been received from the solicitor to the Norwich Tramways Company of
their intention to abandon the tramway scheme authorised by the Norwich
Tramway Order, 1887.  (_See_ January 19th, 1897.)

--A resolution in favour of petitioning the Queen for an Order in Council
authorising the alteration in the number or boundaries of the wards of
the city, was adopted by a nominal majority of the Norwich Town Council.
A majority of two-thirds of the members of the Corporation was necessary
in order to make the motion effective.  (_See_ July 21st, 1891.)

--Died, at Taplow, aged 62, Colonel J. E. Harvey, of Thorpe, Norwich, and
Springfield, Taplow.  He was the eldest son of Mr. Kerrison Harvey, and
entered the Army as ensign in the 36th Regiment.  He took part in the
suppression of the insurrection in Cephalonia, when that island was
placed under martial law in 1849, and served with the 41st Regiment in
the Crimean campaign.  In 1869 he was appointed staff officer of
pensioners, and served in that capacity in Jersey and at Great Yarmouth
until 1881, when he retired into civilian life.  Colonel Harvey married,
in 1858, Octavia, daughter of the Rev. Richard Stevens, vicar of
Belgrave, Leicestershire.

21.--Mr. George Ginnett's Circus opened for the season at the
Agricultural Hall, Norwich.

26.--Lord Hartington arrived at Westacre as the guest of Sir Henry James.
After three days' shooting his lordship proceeded to Sandringham on a
visit to the Prince and Princess of Wales, and remained there until
January 6th, 1890, when he left for Merton Hall on a shooting visit to
Baron de Hirsch, the then tenant of the Hall.  Lord Hartington was taken
ill immediately on his arrival, and was confined to bed for nearly three
weeks by severe congestion of the lungs.  His lordship was enabled to
return to town on January 30th.



1890.


JANUARY.


7.--Died, at St. John's House, Norwich, Mr. Samuel Grimmer, in his 76th
year.  Mr. Grimmer for many years sat in the Town Council as a
representative of the Second Ward, and was chairman of the Sewerage and
Irrigation Committee.  He was Mayor in 1880-81, and entertained the
Prince and Princess of Wales and other distinguished visitors on the
occasion of the opening of the Fisheries Exhibition.

8.--Maria Brown, aged 62, wife of a labourer, was murdered at Pulham St.
Mary Magdalene, by Elijah Snelling, her son-in-law.  Snelling was tried
at the Norfolk Assizes on March 5th before Mr. Justice Denman, found
guilty, and sentenced to death.  The sentence was afterwards commuted to
penal servitude for life.

10.--A white-tailed eagle of nine pounds weight was shot near Wretham
decoy.

--Died, at Brundall, Mr. George Lovick Coleman, in his 78th year.  He was
for more than half a century proprietor of a well-known drapery
establishment in St. Giles' Street, Norwich.  In 1843 Mr. Coleman was
appointed Sheriff, and four years subsequently was elected Mayor, and at
the close of his term of office was presented by the citizens with a
handsome epergne in recognition of his services to the city.  He took
great interest in the Volunteer movement, served originally in the Rifle
Corps, afterwards in the Norwich Light Horse, and finally in the
Artillery, of which he ultimately became captain commandant.  In his
early days Mr. Coleman professed Liberal principles, but became
Conservative.

11.--Mr. C. S. Read gave an address at the Norfolk Chamber of
Agriculture, in which he adversely criticised the working of the
Agricultural Holdings Act, and moved and carried a resolution affirming
that the failure of the Act demanded the attention of the President of
the Board of Agriculture.  Mr. Read addressed the Farmers' Club, in
London, on the same subject, on March 31st, when a similar resolution was
adopted.

14.--Mrs. Punt, of East Wretham, the oldest pauper upon the relief books
of the Thetford Union, attained her 102nd year.

18.--Many persons in Norwich were reported to be suffering from
influenza.  Several men at the Cavalry and the Britannia Barracks were
attacked by the complaint, which, however, was not of an aggravated
character.

21.--The Town Council of Norwich voted the honorary freedom of the city
to Mr. William Cadge "in recognition of the services he has rendered to
the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, and especially in the noble gift
recently made to its funds."  The certificate of freedom was formally
presented in a silver casket to Mr. Cadge at the Guildhall on March 21st.


FEBRUARY.


7.--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. W. H. Dakin) presided at a common hall at
which a resolution was passed calling upon the Charity Commissioners to
remove from their scheme certain obnoxious clauses affecting the
administration of the local charities.  On March 28th the Mayor received
from the Charity Commissioners a letter explaining that the restrictions
in the scheme against the benefits of the charities being extended to
persons who were, or who had recently been in receipt of Poor-law relief,
were in the view of the Commissioners calculated to encourage habits of
thrift and to give effect to the well-known law against persons in
receipt of Poor-law relief participating in such charities.  In the
circumstances the Commissioners did not consider that they would be
justified in entertaining the application to amend the scheme with the
view of allowing those in receipt of Poor-law relief to benefit by the
funds.

15.--The Rev. O. W. Tancock, it was announced, had resigned the
headmastership of King Edward VI. School, Norwich, on accepting the
living of Little Waltham, near Chelmsford.  He was succeeded by the Rev.
E. F. Gilbard.

18.--Mr. Melton Prior, special artist on the staff of the "Illustrated
London News," lectured at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich, on "What I saw in
Burmah."

21.--Two large granaries at North Walsham, belonging to Messrs. Cubitt
and Walker, were destroyed by fire.  The damage amounted to 4,000.

22.--Died, at the residence of her sister, at Weybridge, Surrey, Lady
Sophia Jane Beevor, in her 66th year.  She was the daughter of the Rev.
Clement Chevallier, of Bedingham, Suffolk, and was twice married.  Her
first husband was Mr. Isaac Jermy Jermy, one of the victims of the
terrible murders committed by James Blomfield Rush at Stanfield Hall on
November 28th, 1848.  In that outrage Mrs. Jermy Jermy narrowly escaped
with her life; she was hit in the arm by a bullet, and the limb was
afterwards amputated.  In 1850 she married Sir Thomas Beevor, Bart., and
became greatly esteemed at Hingham, where she resided for many years.

24.--A military tournament given by the 20th Hussars in aid of the city
charities, commenced at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, and was continued
until March 1st.

25.--The Norwich Town Council addressed a memorial to the
Postmaster-General praying for the cessation of the Sunday delivery of
letters.  The Post Office authorities declined to accede to the request.

--The City Committee recommended the Norwich Town Council to sanction the
opening of St. Andrew's Hall on Sunday evenings for two months for the
purpose of giving recitals of sacred music therein by and under the
direction of the committee.  A memorial, signed by the clergy and
Nonconformist ministers, was presented, protesting against the proposal,
and requesting the Corporation to receive a deputation upon the subject.
The meeting declined to accede to the latter request, and the
recommendation of the committee was deferred.  Meanwhile sermons were
preached in churches and chapels for and against the proposal, and public
meetings were held at which remarkable opinions were expressed.  At the
adjourned meeting of the Council, held on March 4th, the committee's
recommendation was negatived by 30 votes against 14.


MARCH.


1.--Severe wintry weather was experienced in Norfolk; snow fell heavily
on the 2nd, accompanied by a keen north-east wind and frost of great
intensity.

--The Rev. Ambrose Johnson, rector of Toftrees, arrived at Norwich for
the purpose of consulting a firm of solicitors about bankruptcy
proceedings.  After transacting his business he was seen walking in
Prince of Wales Road in the direction of Thorpe railway station; then all
trace was lost of him.  On the 12th the unfortunate gentleman was
discovered in a shrubbery at Bramerton Hall, in a weak and emaciated
condition.  He was at once removed to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital,
and upon recovering somewhat, stated that he took shelter in the
shrubbery during a heavy snowstorm on the 1st or 2nd, and had remained
there up to the time of his discovery.  His feet were severely
frostbitten and he was in a most feeble state of mind and body, the
result of starvation and exposure.  One foot dropped off upon his
admission to the Hospital, and it was found necessary to amputate the
other.  Mr. Johnson lingered until May 2nd, when death put an end to his
sufferings.

5.--The course of "Science Lectures for the People," arranged by the
Corporation of Norwich, was continued at St. Andrew's Hall.  The lecturer
was Mr. Louis Fagan, of the Prints and Drawings Department, British
Museum, and the subject, "Egyptian, Assyrian, and Babylonian
Antiquities."  The concluding lecture was given on the 26th by Mr. Henry
Seebohm on "Adventures in Siberia."  It was descriptive of the lecturer's
travels with Captain Wiggins, whom he described as "a Norwich man whose
father drove one of the coaches which ran between Norwich and London in
those dark days before railways were introduced.  Captain Wiggins as a
young man did not think that driving a coach was sufficiently ambitious
for him, and he therefore made up his mind to drive a ship."  Another
course was commenced on November 13th, when Sir Robert Ball lectured on
"An Astronomer's Thoughts about Krakatoa."  (_See_ January 6th, 1891.)

7.--The Norwich School Board agreed by a majority to petition Parliament
to enact that public elementary schools be thrown open free of all
charge, and that they be placed under "popular control."

12.--Died, at Old Post Office Street, Norwich, Mr. John Goldsmith
Atkinson.  A son of Mr. Funnell Goldsmith Atkinson, he was born July
14th, 1814, and was admitted a solicitor in the Easter Term of 1836.  He
represented the Second Ward as a Conservative from 1872 to 1881, and had
served for twenty-nine years in the Norwich Artillery Volunteers, of
which he was honorary quartermaster.

12.--Died, at Oby Rectory, the Rev. Wm. Cufaude Davie, M.A.  He was born
at Yarmouth on November 13th, 1822, and educated at the Grammar School in
that town and at St. John's College, Cambridge.  After fulfilling for two
years the duties of assistant mathematical master at Eton, he was in 1846
appointed headmaster of Yarmouth Grammar School.  In 1852 he became
curate-in-charge of Intwood and Keswick, and from 1858 to 1875 was
principal of the Norwich Diocesan Training College.  Mr. Davie was
closely identified with educational work in the diocese, and was a
candidate for the headmastership of Norwich Grammar School in opposition
to the Rev. Dr. Jessopp.

23.--Father Ignatius held a mission service at the Agricultural Hall,
Norwich, and on the 24th preached to a crowded congregation at the church
of St. John de Sepulchre.

26.--Died, at Rokeles, Watton, Mr. Henry Woods, agent for the Merton
estate.  He was a well-known authority upon the breeding and management
of sheep.


APRIL.


2.--A meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, for the purpose of
furthering the efforts made by Mr. T. W. Richardson and Mr. W. S.
Warlters for the formation in the city of a bearer company of the
Volunteer Medical Staff Corps.  A few weeks afterwards Mr. Richardson was
gazetted surgeon, Mr. Warlters acting surgeon, and Mr. Frederic Mills
quartermaster.

10.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference met at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich,
under the presidency of the Lord Bishop.  The session was concluded on
the 11th.

20.--Died, at Northrepps Hall, Mr. John Henry Gurney, in his 71st year.
The only son of Joseph John Gurney, of Earlham Hall, so prominently
associated with Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton in his efforts to abolish
slavery in the West Indies, Mr. Gurney married Mary Jary, daughter of
Richard Hanbury Gurney, of Thickthorn.  Of the marriage there were two
sons, Mr. J. H. Gurney and Mr. Richard J. H. Gurney.  In 1854 he entered
Parliament as member for King's Lynn, and sat for that borough until his
resignation in 1865.  As a naturalist Mr. Gurney was a recognised
authority both in Europe and America, more especially on raptorial birds,
and the magnificent collection in the Norfolk and Norwich (now the
Castle) Museum owes its existence almost entirely to his energy and
liberality.  He was for many years a member of the East Anglian banking
firm of Gurneys and Birkbecks, a justice of the peace for Norfolk, senior
member of the Norwich Bench, and a magistrate for Lynn.

23.--Bellringers from all parts of the diocese assembled at Aylsham to
ring opening peals on the church bells, which had been re-hung at the
cost of 301.

26.--Died, at Cromer, where he was staying for the benefit of his health,
Mr. Henry Blake Miller, Town Clerk of Norwich, aged 65.  He was a son of
Mr. Henry Miller, solicitor, of the Town Close, and had been officially
connected with the Corporation since 1853.  For upwards of twenty years
Mr. Miller was clerk to the Board of Health, and on the death of Mr. W.
L. Mendham, in July, 1876, when the two offices were amalgamated, he was
appointed Town Clerk and clerk to the Sanitary Authority.  Legal work of
great importance had devolved upon Mr. Miller.  He was entrusted with the
drafting of the Norwich Act, 1867, relating to the sewerage and drainage
of the city, and after his appointment as Town Clerk he prepared the way
for the passing of the Norwich Improvement Act.  He acted for the
Corporation in the Mousehold Heath litigation, and in the dispute with
the freemen as to the Town Close Estate; he had also much to do with the
London and Castle Street improvements, the Chapel Field improvement, and
the framing of the Norwich Corporation Act, 1889.  A Liberal and
Nonconformist, Mr. Miller was senior deacon of Princes Street
Congregational church, and for twenty years treasurer to the Norfolk
Auxiliary of the London Missionary Society.  He was also some time
president of the Norwich Solicitors' Amicable Society.

30.--The stables and coach-houses at Merton Hall, a range of buildings
sixty yards in length, were destroyed by fire.  The horses, including two
valuable stallions and twelve carriage horses, were rescued uninjured.


MAY.


3.--A disorderly scene occurred at a fire at the furnishing shop of Mr.
H. Cole, St. Giles's Gates, Norwich.  The Chief Constable (Mr. Hitchman)
was hooted by the mob, who also impeded the work of the fire brigade.
The contents of the shop were destroyed.

5.--A remarkable charge was investigated at Grimston Petty Sessions.  Mr.
Algernon Charles Fountaine, of Narford Hall, was summoned for obstructing
a railway engine "by placing himself in the four-foot-way of the Lynn and
Dereham branch of the Great Eastern Railway, and making signals thereon,
on March 18th, at East Winch."  The defendant wished to travel to
Narborough by a fast train which was not advertised to stop at East
Winch, and notwithstanding the warning of the station master, he placed
himself in the four-foot-way, and as the train approached made the
customary signal for it to stop.  The engine-driver obeyed the signal and
brought the train to a standstill, whereupon Mr. Fountaine entered one of
the carriages and travelled to Narborough.  Proceedings were taken
against him under Section 36 of 24 and 25 Vic., chapter 95, and the
magistrates committed defendant for trial.  On July 9th, at the adjourned
Norfolk Quarter Sessions, at Swaffham, the defendant pleaded guilty, and
was sentenced by Lord Walsingham to pay a fine of 25 and to enter into
his recognisances of 100 to be of good behaviour and to keep the peace
for six months.

10.--A fire occurred at Messrs. Boulton and Paul's timber yard at
Norwich, and resulted in damage to the amount of between 4,000 and 5,000.

13.--Mr. George Buttler Kennett, clerk to the justices, was appointed
Town Clerk of Norwich, in place of Mr. H. B. Miller, at the salary of
1,200 per annum.

15.--Died, at his residence, Pine Banks, Thorpe, Mr. John Oddin Howard
Taylor.  The son of Mr. John Oddin Taylor, he was born March 2nd, 1837,
and received his education under the tuition of his uncle, the celebrated
Dr. Brewer, at Mile End School, Norwich, and was afterwards placed with
the Rev. Francis Valpy, rector of Garvestone.  Having adopted the legal
profession, he became a partner with his father in the firm of Taylor and
Son.  In addition to carrying on a large and responsible private
practice, they acted as local solicitors to the Great Eastern Railway
Company.  As secretary to the undertaking for the improvement of the
Cattle Market and the construction of Prince of Wales Road, Mr. Taylor
discharged the duties relating to the legal and Parliamentary business
with great efficiency.  In October, 1862, he was appointed secretary to
the Norfolk and Norwich Musical Festival.  In collaboration with Bishop
Fraser he was instrumental in bringing about a change of the law with
reference to the system of employing women, and children of tender years,
in hard agricultural labour.  In later years Mr. Taylor devoted himself
to the task of developing the fisheries of East Anglia, and was the
principal author, in conjunction with Mr. Field, of the Act for the
preservation of the inland waters of Norfolk and Suffolk.  His literary
ability was of a very high order.  He was a great chess player, and as a
writer on that game acquired world-wide fame by his "Chess Brilliants"
and "Chess Skirmishes."

16.--Mr. Gladstone visited Norwich.  The right hon. gentleman,
accompanied by Mrs. Gladstone, arrived by special train at Thorpe
station, where he was received by Mr. Colman, M.P., and Mrs. Colman, and
by the representatives of Liberal associations in the city.  On his way
to Carrow Abbey, the residence of the senior member for Norwich, Mr.
Gladstone was warmly welcomed by the citizens.  In the evening a great
meeting was held at the Agricultural Hall, under the presidency of Mr.
Henry Birkbeck, at which Mr. Gladstone was presented with an illuminated
address by the Liberal and Radical associations and trades unions in
Norwich and Norfolk.  After addressing the vast assemblage Mr. Gladstone
proceeded to Stoke Holy Cross as the guest of Mr. Birkbeck.  Returning to
the city on the 17th, the ex-Premier visited the Castle and the
Cathedral, and in the afternoon left for Lowestoft, _en route_ to Corton,
where he remained as the guest of Mr. Colman until the 20th.

21.--Mr. Sims Reeves made his farewell appearance at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich.

28.--Died, at Norwich, Mr. John Gunn, M.A., F.G.S., many years rector of
Irstead with Barton Turf, aged 89.  "It was with painful surprise that
the public received a few years ago the announcement of Mr. Gunn's
retirement from the Church on the ground of conscientious scruples
concerning certain Biblical statements which he conceived to be
irreconcilable with the teachings of Natural Science, and of his desire
no longer to be addressed by his clerical title.  He did not dissociate
himself from the observances of religion, for he was a constant attendant
at the Cathedral services."  Mr. Gunn, in 1864, was one of the founders
of the Norwich Geological Society, and its first president.  "He has left
behind him in his great collection of fossils a monument, _aere
perennius_.  His association with the investigation of the Mammalian
remains of the Cromer beds is recorded in the classics of English
geology, and will be handed down to posterity long after the fossils in
our Museum have crumbled into dust."


JUNE.


2.--Major F. A. Cubitt was presented by past and present officers,
non-commissioned officers, and men of the 1st Volunteer Battalion Norfolk
Regiment with a silver candelabrum upon retiring from the adjutancy of
the battalion, after nearly fifteen years' service.

6.--Mr. W. R. Cooper, solicitor, was elected Clerk to the Norwich
magistrates in succession to Mr. G. B. Kennett, resigned.

11.--Died, at Unthank's Road, Norwich, Mr. James Calthrop Barnham, aged
82.  He was descended from an old Norwich family, and one of his
ancestors, James Barnham, was a Sheriff of the city in 1738.  Mr. Barnham
was a governor of Norwich Grammar School, and one of the original members
of the Norfolk and Norwich Horticultural Society.

12.--Died, at Newmarket Terrace, Norwich, Mr. Samuel Daynes.  Born in
December, 1815, he was a member of the Town Council, and a persistent
advocate of the adoption of the wood pavement scheme.  A Guardian of the
Poor, he was thoroughly versed in the details of Poor-law administration,
and as a member of the School Board he displayed great earnestness as a
public economist.  Mr. Daynes was prominently associated with the
Manchester Unity of Oddfellows, and in 1851-52 served the office of
"Grand Master" of that body.

--The Rev. William Pelham Burn, curate of St. Mary Abbot, Kensington, was
elected vicar of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, in succession to the Rev.
F. Baggallay, who had accepted the living of Holy Trinity, Weymouth.

13.--At a meeting of the Yare Preservation Society, it was resolved,
"That the society be called the Yare and Bure Preservation Society, whose
objects shall be the preservation of the rivers Yare and Bure, and their
tributaries, from illegal fishing."

14.--Died, at Park Lane, Norwich, Mrs. Phillips, widow of Mr. Frederick
Lawrence Phillips, aged 77.  Mrs. Phillips was well known to playgoers of
a past generation as the beautiful and accomplished Miss Ellen Daly, a
favourite actress in London and provincial theatres.

--An outbreak of rabies occurred in Norfolk.  A mad dog ran through the
southern portion of the county, and bit several persons; it was
ultimately shot at New Buckenham.  On June 30th the Norwich Town Council
adopted the muzzling order, and similar regulations were introduced by
the Norfolk County Council.  A fund was raised for the purpose of sending
to Paris for treatment by Pasteur the eight persons who had been bitten
by the dog.  The muzzling regulations in Norwich were withdrawn in the
last week in October.

19.--The annual meeting of the East Anglian, Cambridge, and
Huntingdonshire branches of the British Medical Association was held in
Norwich under the presidency of Dr. Beverley, who, with Mrs. Beverley,
received on the 20th a large number of distinguished visitors at a garden
party given by them at Brundall.

23.--Two squadrons of the 20th Hussars marched from Norwich for
Aldershot.  The headquarters of the regiment left on the 24th under the
command of Colonel Graves.

27.--Died, at his residence, Grove House, Chapel Field, Norwich, Mr.
Robert Leeds, aged 79.  Mr. Leeds devoted much time to several important
undertakings connected with the agricultural interest.  He became a
member of the Royal Agricultural Society in 1852, and in 1869 was elected
to the Council; in 1862 he assisted in the formation of the company which
built the Agricultural Hall, Islington; and it was greatly owing to his
influence that the Smithfield Club removed their annual show from Baker
Street to the new hall.  Mr. Leeds gave his practical aid to the
establishment of the Salisbury Hotel Company, and to founding the
Farmers' Club; he was a member of the Norfolk Agricultural Association,
and an energetic supporter of the Royal Agricultural Benevolent
Institution.

28.--The portrait of Mr. Cadge, painted by Professor Herkomer, was
unveiled at the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  Mr. Cadge announced that
Mr. B. E. Fletcher, of Marlingford, had munificently offered to build at
Cromer a Convalescent Home for the reception of Hospital patients, and
the Earl of Leicester, with like generosity, had promised to endow it
with 15,000, or, if necessary, with 20,000.  Mr. Cadge retired from the
office of senior surgeon on October 4th.  (_See_ April 25th, 1893.)

30.--H.M.S. Howe entered Yarmouth Roads, and on July 1st was joined by
the Anson, the flagship of Rear-Admiral Richard E. Tracey, and the
Rodney.  The officers and men of the squadron were invited to various
entertainments provided ashore by the townspeople, and the vessels sailed
on July 4th.


JULY.


9.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened at
Yarmouth, and concluded on the 10th.  Sir Edward Birkbeck, Bart., was
president.

26.--The 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Volunteer Battalions of the Norfolk Regiment
went into camp at Yarmouth.


AUGUST.


2.--The coming of age of Mr. Herbert H. Bullard, eldest son of Sir Harry
Bullard, was celebrated at Norwich.

5.--The attainment of his majority on March 5th by Mr. Roland le Strange
was celebrated on this date at Hunstanton Park.  On the 6th a ball was
given, at which many distinguished guests were present.

6.--The Cricket Week theatricals at Norwich Theatre commenced with the
production of "Caste," which was repeated on the 7th.  "County Courted,
or the Beadle's Bride," an operetta adapted from "Oliver Twist," by Mr.
Arthur Waugh, with music by Mr. Claud Nugent, was performed on the 8th,
followed by "My Uncle's Will," and the farce, "B.B."

7.--Died, at Heigham Road, Norwich, Mr. Ambrose Winter, aged 100 years
and 41 weeks.  Mr. Winter was a native of Norwich, where he had resided
throughout his life.

15.--Died, at Yarmouth, Mr. Charles Gibbon, aged 47.  A Scotsman by
birth, he commenced his career upon the staff of a Glasgow journal, and
removed to London in 1859, where he became a novelist.  Among his best
known works were "Beyond Compare," "Queen of the Meadow," "A Family
Secret," "By Mead and Stream," "The Dead Heart," "Auld Robin Grey," &c.
"He wrote interactively, always purely, and at times even vividly."  Mr.
Gibbon took up his residence in Yarmouth in 1886.

20.--Died, at Coltishall, Sarah Weeds, in her 100th year.

23.--Messrs. Grout and Co., of Norwich, gave notice to several hundreds
of their workpeople that their engagements with the firm would terminate
on the 30th.  "Their factory, a modern building of large dimensions, is
fitted with machinery of the most improved construction, and contains
every appliance for carrying on the manufacture of fabrics which have
gained for Norwich world-wide reputation.  The firm has a branch factory
at Yarmouth, where about 1,000 persons are engaged, and other
establishments at Ditchingham and Ponder's End."


SEPTEMBER.


10.--Died, at Costessey, Frederick Viner, formerly in the 13th Light
Dragoons.  He took part in the light cavalry charge at Balaclava, and his
name was officially recorded in the list of survivors.

24.--A new reservoir constructed near Mousehold by the Norwich Waterworks
Company was opened.  "It contains over 600,000 gallons of water, and by a
curious coincidence 600,000 bricks were used in its construction."

29.--Died, at Heggatt Hall, Captain Arthur Rodney Blane, R.N., second son
of Sir Hugh Seymour Blane, Bart.  Captain Blane, who had seen much active
service in Chinese waters, was placed upon the retired list in 1881.


OCTOBER.


1.--The headquarters of the 8th Hussars arrived at Norwich, under the
command of Colonel St. Quintin.

14.--The Norfolk and Norwich Musical Festival commenced at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich, with an evening performance of "Judas Maccabaeus."  On the
morning of the 15th "L'Allegro ed il Pensieroso," composed expressly for
the Festival, and conducted by the composer, Dr. C. H. Parry, and the
"Stabat Mater," were produced.  The evening programme included the
prelude and entr'actes to "Ravenswood" (Mackenzie) and "The Dream of
Jubal" (Joseph Bennett), conducted by the composer.  "The Martyr of
Antioch," conducted by its composer, Sir Arthur Sullivan, and "Hear My
Prayer" (Mendelssohn), were performed on the morning of the 16th; in the
evening a miscellaneous concert took place.  "Elijah" was produced on the
morning of the 17th; and in the evening a miscellaneous concert was
preceded by the second act of the opera of "The Flying Dutchman."  The
Festival produced a profit of 501 10s. 7d., of which sum 250 was
distributed among the local charities.  The principal vocalists were
Madame Nordica, Miss Liza Lehmann, Miss Mackintyre, Miss Grace Damian,
and Miss Marian McKenzie; reciter, Miss Julia Neilson; Mr. Edward Lloyd,
Mr. Maldwyn Humphreys, Mr. Ben Davies, Mr. Henschel, Mr. Franco Novara,
Mr. Brockbank, and Mr. Alex Marsh.

23.--A peal of nine bells, cast by Messrs. Taylor and Sons, of
Loughborough, at the cost of 500, for the parish church of
Wells-next-the-sea, was dedicated.

27.--Died, the Rev. John Edmund Cox, D.D., F.S.A., formerly vicar of St.
Helen's, Bishopsgate, London, aged 78.  A native of the city, and
educated at the Cathedral school, he became Bible Clerk at All Souls
College, Oxford, and in 1837 was ordained by Bishop Stanley, and
presented to the incumbency of Aldeby.  He afterwards became minister of
St. Mary, Southtown, Yarmouth, and whilst there edited the well-known,
"Memoir of Sarah Martin."  Subsequently he went to Stepney, and in 1849
was presented by the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's to his city living.
Dr. Cox was the author of "A Life of Cranmer," "Principles of the
Reformation," "A life of Luther," and of "Protestantism compared with
Romanism."  He also edited several historical treatises for the Parker
Society.

29.--The Norwich Town Council confirmed a contract entered into with Mr.
R. A. Cooper for the purchase of certain land at Thorpe Hamlet required
for the construction of the proposed Riverside Road.  The amount to be
paid to the owner was 3,022, and the estimated cost of the road between
2,000 and 3,000.


NOVEMBER.


10.--The Norwich Town Council elected Mr. Walter Overbury to the office
of Mayor, and appointed Mr. Geoffrey Fowell Buxton as Sheriff.  Mr.
Oyerbury having declined to qualify, Mr. Edward Wild was on the 24th
elected to fill the vacancy.

--Died, aged 79, the Rev. Charles Turner, formerly rector of Bixley and
Framingham Earl.  He was the son of Mr. Charles Turner, the last Mayor of
Norwich previous to the passing of the Municipal Reform Act, and held the
living of St. Peter Mancroft from 1848 to 1878.

24.--The Prince of Wales opened, at the Athenaeum, King's Lynn, a
sporting and art exhibition in aid of the covert funds of the West
Norfolk Hunt.  His Royal Highness was accompanied by the Princess of
Wales.

--The Princess of Wales, accompanied by Princesses Victoria and Maud,
arrived at Melton Constable on a visit to Lord and Lady Hastings.  Their
Royal Highnesses were afterwards joined by the Prince of Wales and the
Duke of Clarence and Avondale.  The visit terminated on the 29th.

25.--The weather became exceedingly severe, and frost and snow prevailed
to the end of the year.


DECEMBER.


1.--Died, at his residence, Thickthorn, near Norwich, Mr. Francis Hay
Gurney, in his 65th year.  Mr. Gurney was a son of Mr. Daniel Gurney, of
North Runcton, by Lady Harriet Hay, daughter of William, sixteenth Earl
of Errol.  In 1847 he married Margaret Charlotte, daughter of Sir W. H.
Browne ffolkes, Bart.  A partner in the banking firm of Messrs. Gurneys
and Co., he discharged with conspicuous courtesy and ability all the
duties that devolve upon a country gentleman.  For many years he presided
as chairman of the Committee of Management of the Norfolk and Norwich
Musical festival, and in politics was a staunch Conservative.  In 1859 he
took an active part in the Volunteer movement; subsequently he raised and
commanded a troop of Light Horse, and ultimately joined the Suffolk
Yeomanry Cavalry, from which he retired with the brevet rank of
Lieutenant-Colonel.

2.--The first lecture of a series inaugurated by the Norwich Free Library
Committee was given at Blackfriars' Hall, Norwich, by the Rev. H. H.
Snell on "Books and Readers."  (_See_ January 12th, 1891.)

5.--Died, at his residence, 43, Ennismore Gardens, South Kensington, Mr.
Baron Huddleston, formerly member of Parliament for Norwich.  The son of
a merchant captain, Thomas Huddleston, he was born in 1817, and
matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin.  He came to England to seek his
fortune as usher in a school, but afterwards made a more promising start
in life as a barrister at the Central Criminal Court.  Admitted a student
at Gray's Inn on April 18th, 1836, and called to the Bar by that society
in the summer of 1839, he accepted silk in 1857 from Lord Cranworth, then
Lord Chancellor.  He had unsuccessfully contested, as a Conservative,
Worcester, Shrewsbury, and Kidderminster, but was returned for Canterbury
in 1865.  In 1870 he made an unsuccessful assault on Norwich, but four
years later defeated Mr. Tillett by forty-seven votes.  In 1875 he was
appointed judge in the Court of Common Pleas, was duly knighted, and
ultimately transferred to the Court of Exchequer on the death of Mr.
Baron Pigott.  He married Lady Diana Beauclerk, sister of the Duke of St.
Albans.

14.--Died, at Clermont Terrace, Queen's Road, Norwich, Sarah, widow of
John Barnard, formerly of Beccles, in her 101st year.

18.--Mr. S. Hoare, M.P., delivered a farewell address to his
constituents, at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, previous to his departure
for India.

19.--A heavy fall of snow, accompanied by sharp frost, occurred on this
date.  Skating became general throughout the county.

26.--Ginnett's Circus opened for the winter season at the Agricultural
Hall, Norwich.

27.--Died, at Lynn, Mr. John Osborne Smetham, aged 78.  He was six times
Mayor of the borough, and had been an alderman thirty-four years, and
held various public offices in the town.

30.--An influential meeting, convened by the Mayor, was held at the
Guildhall, Norwich, to inaugurate a fund for the relief of the unemployed
and necessitous poor of the city.  About 900 was subscribed in the room,
and active measures were taken for the relief of public distress.



1891.


JANUARY.


1.--A sudden break-up occurred of the severe frost, which had lasted
twenty-one consecutive days, but at sunset it froze again with increased
severity.  This was stated to have been the longest frost recorded in
Norfolk since 1813.  On the 20th another thaw took place, followed by
heavy rain; but during the night the frost reasserted itself, and became
very severe on the 21st and 22nd.  Then the temperature gradually
increased, bright sunshine followed, and the wind having veered to the
south rain fell.  On the 24th the river steamer Alpha cut her way through
the ice on the Yare, and opened up between Norwich and Yarmouth the
traffic which for five weeks had been suspended.

2.--Died, at Weasenham, Mr. Henry Overman, aged 65.  He established a
wide reputation as a breeder of shorthorns, Southdown, and Oxford Down
sheep, hackneys and cart horses.  Mr. Overman was an extreme Radical,
"but his political extravagancies were amply condoned by his warmth and
kindliness of heart."

6.--The last of the "Science Lectures for the People" was delivered at
St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, by Dr. Andrew Wilson on "Sea Serpents and
other curious Animals, real and fictitious."  (_See_ January 19th, 1892.)

9.--The Cambridge crew, owing to the river Cam being icebound, had rowing
practice upon the Estuary Cut, at Lynn.

10.--An "ice carnival" took place on Diss Mere.  The performers and
spectators numbered five thousand.

12.--The second lecture of the course arranged by the Norwich Free
Library Committee was given at Blackfriars' Hall by Mr. G. C. Davies on
"Life and Scenery Abroad."  The Rev. W. F. Creeny, F.S.A., lectured on
February 3rd on "Sweden and Gothland"; Mr. Bosworth Harcourt on March 3rd
on "An Hour with Douglas Jerrold"; and Mr. H. F. Euren on April 14th on
"Our Fens and Marshes."  (_See_ February 24th, 1892.)

17.--Mr. R. E. Crosse was appointed house surgeon at the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital on the resignation of Mr. H. C. Nance.

19.--Died, at Unthank's Road, Norwich, Mr. Benjamin Viny Winch, aged 60.
Mr. Winch had been upwards of twenty years postmaster of Norwich.  He
entered the service at the General Post Office, St. Martin's le Grand, in
February, 1852, and continued there until August 31st, 1870, when he was
appointed to Norwich on the retirement of Mr. Samuel Base, the former
postmaster.  The postal arrangements in the city were greatly developed
during Mr. Winch's tenure of office.  The business was removed from Post
Office Street (now Exchange Street) to the Crown Bank premises, where the
work in the various departments commenced on August 16th, 1875.  Mr.
Winch was an enthusiastic yachtsman, had filled the office of Commodore
of the Norfolk and Suffolk Yacht Club, and was one of the principal
founders of the Yare Sailing Club.

20.--Immense quantities of sprats were captured at Lynn.  Such enormous
shoals had never before, it was stated, been found in the Wash.

--The Norwich Town Council considered a report upon the proposed purchase
of the Waterworks, and appointed a special committee to determine the
value of the undertaking, with the view of making an offer to the
company.  On May 26th the Council proposed to offer a sum not exceeding
10 per cent., the actual market value of the shares and capital of the
company.  The offer was declined, and on December 15th it was decided
that no further steps be taken in the matter.  (_See_ February 22nd,
1898.)

21.--"General" Booth visited Norwich in furtherance of a new "social
scheme" advocated in his recently-published book, "In Darkest England."
He attended a conference at Noverre's Rooms in the afternoon, and
addressed a large meeting which took place at St. Andrew's Hall in the
evening.


FEBRUARY.


7.--Mr. B. N. Thoms, assistant surveyor at the General Post Office, was
appointed to fill the postmastership of Norwich, vacant by the death of
Mr. Winch.  Mr. Thoms was a son of Mr. William J. Thoms, the originator
and editor of "Notes and Queries," and a librarian of the House of Lords.
In the month of April Mr. Thoms removed to Nottingham, and was succeeded
by Mr. Sturgeon, of Birkenhead, who, in the Egyptian campaign of 1882-85,
commanded the Army Post Office Corps.  For his valuable services he was
decorated by the Queen in person, and granted the rank of
Lieutenant-Colonel, with permission to wear the uniform of his corps, the
24th Middlesex (Post Office) Rifle Volunteers.

21.--Died, at his town residence, 8, Portman Square, the Right Hon.
George Thomas Keppel, sixth Earl of Albemarle.  He was born June 13th,
1799, and was second son of William Charles, fourth earl, by his marriage
with Elizabeth Southwell, fourth daughter of Edward Lord De Clifford.  In
1815 he received an ensign's commission in the 14th Regiment of Foot, and
within a month joined the Army in Flanders.  He was present at the battle
of Waterloo, and at the engagement which immediately preceded it.  "The
very youngest officer on the field of Waterloo, he was, with one
exception, the very last of the survivors of all the Waterloo officers."

22.--Died, at 7, Hertford Street, Mayfair, Mr. Charles Wild, eldest son
of Mr. Edward Wild, Mayor of Norwich, aged 29.  Educated at King Edward
VI. Grammar School, he pursued his medical studies at the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital; afterwards proceeded to Cambridge University, and
finally entered the London School of Medicine.  Mr. Wild gained the
Brodie scholarship at St. George's Hospital, and was awarded the Thompson
gold medal.


MARCH.


7.--Died, aged 60, Mr. Edmund Beck, agent for the Sandringham estate.
Mr. Beck was a member of an old family of Norfolk farmers, and was born
at Mileham.  For a considerable time he was in partnership with his
father as an auctioneer and estate agent, and was one of the best known
agricultural authorities in the kingdom.

31.--Mr. Samuel Hoare, M.P., arrived at Cromer on his return from his
tour in India.  He sailed for the East on January 4th, accompanied by his
daughters, the Misses Annie and Muriel Hoare, and formally opened the
Bengal and Nagpur Railway, of which he was chairman.


APRIL.


2.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference commenced at Noverre's Rooms,
Norwich, under the presidency of the Bishop of the Diocese, and was
concluded on the 3rd.

2.--The Countess of Leicester performed the opening ceremony at a grand
Venetian _Fete_ and Bazaar held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, in aid of
the Norfolk County Cricket Club.  The proceedings were continued on the
3rd.

5.--Died, at Gaywood Hall, King's Lynn, Mr. Richard Bagge, aged 80.  He
was twin brother of Sir William Bagge, M.P., and was educated at
Charterhouse, and by private tutor.  In 1831 Mr. Bagge was elected a
member of the old Corporation of Lynn, and served the office of Mayor of
that borough in 1836 and 1857.  He was a justice of the peace, and a
Deputy Lieutenant for the county, and was High Sheriff in 1880.  As a
sportsman Mr. Bagge was well known in the coursing and cricket fields,
and in politics was a staunch Conservative.

7.--Died, at Melbourne, during a tour in Australia for the benefit of his
health, the Rev. R. Hobson, pastor of the Old Meeting Congregational
chapel, Norwich.  Mr. Hobson, who was in his 52nd year, was appointed to
the chapel in 1878; he took part in many social and philanthropic
movements in the city, and was most highly esteemed by Churchmen and
Nonconformists.  He was the founder of the St. George's Home for Working
Girls.

--Mr. Samuel Hoare, M.P., and Mrs. Hoare celebrated their silver wedding
at Cliff House, Cromer, and received many congratulations and presents
from their friends in the town and district.  On April 20th Mr. and Mrs.
Hoare were presented, at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, with a valuable
silver tea and coffee service and an illuminated address by the members
of the Conservative associations and clubs in the city.

11.--At the annual meeting of the Governors of the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital the Board of Management reported that Miss Adams, the Lady
Superintendent, had been received into the Roman Catholic Church.  In
view of the matter forming the subject for discussion there was a large
attendance, but the Lord Bishop, who presided, ruled the question to be
"special," and that it was necessary for formal notice to be given before
a resolution could be moved.

--The fastest run made by a special train on the Great Eastern Railway
was accomplished on this date, when the Prince of Wales travelled from
St. Pancras to Lynn, a distance of 98 miles, in one hour fifty-five
minutes.

18.--The memorial stone of a new church for East and West Beckham was
laid by Mrs. Hoare, wife of Mr. Samuel Hoare, M.P.  The church was
consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich on October 13th.

20.--Viscount Cross, Secretary of State for India, visited Norwich and
formally opened the Patteson Conservative Club.  In the evening his
lordship addressed a large meeting held at St. Andrew's Hall under the
auspices of the National Union of Conservative Associations.

25.--Dr. F. C. Burton, of Adenbrook's Hospital, Cambridge, was appointed
to the vacancy in the medical staff of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital
occasioned by the retirement of Dr. Shepherd Taylor.

27.--The South-West Norfolk Conservative Association met at Swaffham
under the presidency of Lord Walsingham, and adopted Mr. Thomas Leigh
Hare Conservative candidate for the constituency in place of Mr. Tyssen
Amherst, M.P., who had expressed his intention to retire at the next
General Election.


MAY.


14.--The Very Rev. E. M. Goulburn, formerly Dean of Norwich, preached
from a new pulpit erected by public subscription in the choir of the
Cathedral as a memorial of his twenty-three years' devoted ministry.  The
pulpit was designed by Mr. John Pollard Seddon, F.R.I.B.A., and executed
by Mr. Harry Hems, of Exeter.

18.--On this day (Whit-Monday) occurred the memorable fall of snow which
covered the ground to the depth of five inches, and occasioned the
abandonment of all out-door sports and holiday amusements.  On the
previous Wednesday (the 13th) the shade temperature registered in the
neighbourhood of Norwich was 72.7; at 9 a.m. on the 16th it stood at
37.2; and on the same day the thermometer in the screen fell to 29.8, and
on the grass to 21.5.  On Sunday, the 17th, there were frequent storms of
hail and snow, and at 2 p.m. the temperature registered 37.4.

--A military tournament given by the 8th Hussars in aid of the local
charities, commenced at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, and concluded on
the 23rd.

21.--The Duke of Clarence and Avondale (in the absence of the Prince of
Wales, who was unable to attend in consequence of indisposition) opened a
bazaar at Yarmouth in aid of a fund for the restoration of the parish
church; and in the evening was present at a ball given by the officers of
the Norfolk Artillery.

23.--The Norfolk County Council resolved to offer scholarships of the
value of 10 each per annum, and not exceeding fifty in number, to boys
and girls who, having passed the 6th and 7th Standards in elementary
schools, were prepared, after examination, to attend for three years some
secondary school possessing to the satisfaction of the committee the
necessary qualifications for technical instruction.  On the 26th the
Norwich Town Council decided to provide a school for technical education
and manual instruction.

30.--The Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture adopted, by 66 votes against 32,
a resolution in favour of making legal in England the practice of the
dishorning of cattle.


JUNE.


8.--Mr. Wilson Barrett commenced a week's engagement at Norwich Theatre,
in the character of Belphegor.  His other impersonations included Claud
Melnotte, Chatterton, The Stranger, and Hamlet.

12.--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. Edward Wild) unveiled at Norwich Cathedral
a window inserted in the south aisle to the memory of officers of the
Norfolk Regiment.  The window was the gift of the officers and men of the
regiment.

--The British Training Squadron, consisting of the Active, the Calypso,
the Volage, and the Ruby, entered Yarmouth Roads, and sailed on the 14th
for the north.  Each ship's company numbered about 500 men and boys.

15.--A Select Committee of the House of Commons inquired into the merits
of the St. Faith's Allotment Bill, by which it was sought to obtain
Parliamentary sanction to the compulsory purchase of 18.5 acres of land
owned by the Countess de Rechberg, in the parish of Horsham St. Faith's,
for the purpose of providing allotments for forty applicants under the
Allotments Acts, 1887 and 1890.  On the 17th the chairman (Sir Stafford
Northcote) announced that the Committee were of opinion that the preamble
of the Bill was proved, and that the order should be confirmed, but they
thought the justice of the case would be met if 10a. 2r. 6p. were given
up for allotments, and the Countess de Rechberg be ordered to pay her own
costs and one-third of the costs of the promoters.  The Local Government
Board subsequently held an inquiry to decide the amount to be paid to the
Countess for the compulsory purchase of the land.  The Countess demanded
1,291 6s. (originally 1,451); the County Council offered 1,025 8s. 6d.;
and the Local Government Board inspector awarded 1,131 15s. 6d.

16.--Lord Walsingham was elected High Steward of Cambridge University,
and received the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws.  His lordship was
introduced as a distinguished member of the Eton and Cambridge elevens,
as an excellent shot, and as a great authority on shooting game.
Further, he was a Fellow of the Royal Society, and had given special
attention to the study of microlepidoptera.

24.--The Goulburn pulpit, erected in the nave of Norwich Cathedral, was
dedicated on this date.  It was the gift of the Very Rev. E. M. Goulburn,
formerly Dean of Norwich, and was executed in Caen stone by Mr. James
Forsyth, of Hampstead, from designs by Mr. R. Herbert Carpenter, F.S.A.,
and Mr. Benjamin Ingelow.

27.--The Norwich Census returns were published on this date, as
follow:--Tenements of less than five rooms, 7,654; inhabited houses,
23,268; uninhabited, 1,739; building, 205.  Persons: Males, 46,615;
females, 54,348; total, 100,964.


JULY.


8.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association commenced at
Wymondham, and was continued on the 9th.  The Earl of Kimberley was
president for the year.

10.--A prolonged strike in the building trade, at Norwich, was settled on
this date.  The bricklayers' strike commenced on May 4th, and that of the
carpenters and joiners on June 1st.  In both cases the men demanded an
extra payment of one penny per hour, and the acceptance by the masters of
a code of rules framed by them.  The employers declined to accede to
these demands, but submitted a code of their own, and offered a halfpenny
advance.  The Mayor (Mr. Wild) intervened, and although at the time his
action had no effect, the men ultimately accepted the masters' code of
rules.

14.--Dedication services were held at the parish church of Great Yarmouth
on the completion of the extensive and protracted work of restoration.
The undertaking was commenced in 1847 by the Rev. Henry Mackenzie,
afterwards Suffragan Bishop of Nottingham, and continued from time to
time by the three successive vicars, Bishop Hills, of British Columbia,
Archdeacon Nevill, and Canon Venables.  The latest portion of the work
was begun in the spring of 1890, and cost about 1,500.  About 40,000 was
expended upon the entire restoration.

17.--Died, at Eastbourne, Mr. Willoughby Smith, the distinguished
electrician, who was born at Yarmouth on April 16th, 1828.  He
superintended the manufacture and laying of the first submarine cable.
In 1866 he was electrician on board the Great Eastern steamship during
the laying of the first successful Atlantic cable and on the recovery and
completion of the cable that had been lost the year before.  For these
services Mr. Smith received a gold medal and an address from the
Liverpool Chamber of Commerce.  In 1883 he was President of the
Institution of Electrical Engineers, and in 1888 published a work,
entitled "Yarmouth Past and Present."

21.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council a letter from the Privy
Council was read, in which it was stated, with reference to a scheme for
altering the boundaries of the wards of the city, that such alteration
could not be permitted unless an alteration was also made in the number
of the wards.  (_See_ March 15th, 1892.)

25.--An exhibition of the works of Edward Thomas Daniell, comprising
etchings, water-colours, and oil paintings, was held at the rooms of the
Norwich Art Circle.

--The 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Volunteer Battalions Norfolk Regiment, encamped
at Great Yarmouth under the command of Brigadier-General Bulwer.

27.--Lord Walsingham presided at a meeting of the subscribers to the
Norwich Castle Museum scheme, at which it was decided to extend, at an
additional cost of between 4,000 and 5,000, the original scheme for
converting the Castle and the surrounding buildings to the purposes of a
Museum.  It was announced that the Prince of Wales had contributed to the
fund a further donation of fifty guineas.  (_See_ August 4th, 1894.)

30.--A thunderstorm of extraordinary severity burst over Ellingham Park,
the seat of Mr. Henry Smith.  "The lightning seemed literally to sweep
the park with a sheet of fire, and immediately after the storm six
bullocks and heifers were found lying dead under an elm tree.  Other
cattle were injured, and the tree itself was split in half, and some of
the branches hurled a considerable distance."  Further thunderstorms
occurred in other parts of the county on August 2nd.


AUGUST.


3.--Norwich Cricket Week commenced.  Matches were played against the Eton
Ramblers, and the Lincolnshire and Hertfordshire Clubs, and in each
instance the Norfolk County Cricket Club was victorious.  "The
achievement of three victories in the week had not previously been
accomplished since the institution of the festival in 1881."  On the 6th
and 7th Sir Kenneth Kemp's company of amateurs gave performances of "The
Bookmaker" at the Theatre Royal.

7.--The Norwich School Board decided to abolish the fees in all their
schools, the Higher Grade School excepted, from September 1st, the date
on which the Free Education Act came into operation.

8.--Lord Ashbourne, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, addressed a great
Primrose League gathering at Didlington Park, held in celebration of the
inauguration of the Margaret Tyssen Amherst Habitation.


SEPTEMBER.


5.--The Norfolk County Council decided to found an agricultural side for
technical education in connection with the County School at Elmham.

7.--The Countess of Leicester laid the foundation-stone of a public hall
to be erected at Burnham Thorpe as a memorial of Lord Nelson, who was
born in the parish, where his father was rector, in 1758.  The hall,
which formed part of a scheme initiated by the Prince of Wales, the main
feature of which was the restoration of the parish church at the cost of
10,000, was opened on June 9th, 1892.

30.--Mr. Harry Furniss gave his lecture, "The Humours of Parliament," at
the Agricultural Hall, Norwich.

--The first annual show of the Mitford and Launditch Agricultural
Association was held at East Dereham.  General Bulwer presided at the
dinner, at which the principal speakers were Mr. R. T. Gurdon and Mr. C.
S. Read.


OCTOBER.


13.--A severe gale did great damage inland, and resulted in many shipping
casualties on the Norfolk coast.

15.--Died, at King's Lynn, Mr. John Dyker Thew, in his 68th year.  He was
proprietor of the "Lynn Advertiser," and for many years represented the
South Ward in the Town Council.  In 1871, 1876, and 1885 Mr. Thew was
elected to the office of Mayor of the borough, and in the last-named year
was appointed alderman.  He was leader of the Conservative party at Lynn.

16.--The Lord Mayor of London (Sir Joseph Savory) and the Lady Mayoress
visited Norwich for the purpose of opening the new buildings of the
Asylum and School for the Indigent Blind.

17.--The prospectus of the Norwich Electricity Company was published.  A
capital of 50,000 was raised in 5,000 ordinary shares of 10 each, and the
company was formed "for the purpose of supplying electricity for lighting
and motive purposes."

19.--Died, at Beeston Park, Sir Jacob Henry Preston, Bart., aged 79.  He
was a Deputy Lieutenant and magistrate for the county, and in 1847 served
the office of High Sheriff.

25.--A severe storm commenced on this date, and continued until the 27th.
Several vessels were wrecked and lives lost on the coast.

31.--A meeting in furtherance of a scheme for providing playing fields
and open spaces for the city was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under
the presidency of the Mayor (Mr. Wild).  A committee known as the Norwich
Playing-fields and Open Spaces Committee was appointed.


NOVEMBER.


1.--A serious fire at Sandringham House did damage to a considerable
amount.

9.--Mr. G. M. Chamberlin was elected Mayor, and Mr. Harry Reeve appointed
Sheriff of Norwich.

11.--A gale which swept over many parts of England did much injury in
Norfolk, and was severely felt at Yarmouth and at other places on the
coast.

14.--The Duke of Clarence and Avondale, accompanied by the Duke and
Duchess of Fife and the Duke and Duchess of Connaught, opened a trades
and industrial exhibition at St. James's Hall, Lynn.


DECEMBER.


7.--At the annual distribution of prizes to the 1st Volunteer Battalion
Norfolk Regiment, at Norwich, Major Dawson was introduced to the corps as
the future commanding officer, on the retirement of Lieutenant-Colonel
Mansel.  At about this date the Dean of Norwich was appointed chaplain to
the corps in place of the Rev. Canon Patteson.

9.--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. G. M. Chamberlin) sent, on behalf of the
citizens, letters of congratulation to the Prince and Princess of Wales,
the Duke of Clarence and Avondale, and the Princess Victoria Mary of
Teck, upon the announcement of the intended marriage of the Duke and
Princess.

11.--A storm of great severity raged throughout the county, and much
damage, was reported, especially in Mid Norfolk.  In several places the
Yare and Bure overflowed their banks.

14.--The church of St. Mary, Great Plumstead, was severely damaged by
fire.  The building, in the Perpendicular style, consisted of nave,
chancel, and tower, which were restored in 1876 and 1878.  The fire
completely destroyed the interior fittings and roof.  On December 14th,
1892, the church was re-opened after thorough restoration.

18.--A severe frost set in, and on the 22nd skating became general.

--The Duke of Clarence and Avondale terminated a visit to Mr. Tyssen
Amherst, M.P., at Didlington Hall.

20.--Died, at Honingham vicarage, the Rev. Canon John Robert Feilden,
vicar of Honingham and East Tuddenham, in his 65th year.  He was the
fourth son of Mr. Joseph Feilden, M.P., of Whitton Park, Blackburn, and
was educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford.  After ordination he
served a curacy at Malpas, Cheshire, and was chaplain to George Horatio,
second Marquis Cholmondeley.  In 1861 he was presented to the rectory of
Baconsthorpe, and in 1881 to the living which he held at the time of his
death.  Mr. Feilden was a Commissioner under the Pluralities Act, for the
Archdeaconry of Norfolk, and for nine years was a member of the Board of
Management of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  He was appointed
honorary canon of Norwich Cathedral in 1888.  Canon Feilden married, in
1861, Frances Blanche Ann, second daughter of Frederick, fourth Baron
Calthorpe.

26.--Ginnett's Circus opened at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, for the
winter season.

--Upwards of one thousand of the aged poor of Norwich were entertained by
the Mayor (Mr. G. M. Chamberlin) and the Sheriff (Mr. Harry Reeve), at
St. Andrew's Hall.

27.--Died, at Saham, the Rev. Coker Adams, for fifteen years rector of
the parish.  Mr. Adams was the author of several pamphlets on Church
doctrine and defence.



1892.


JANUARY.


2.--A meeting, convened by the Lord Lieutenant of the county (the Earl of
Leicester) and the High Sheriff (Mr. S. Gurney Buxton), was held at the
Shirehall, Norwich, to consider what steps should be taken to provide a
present from Norfolk to the Duke of Clarence and Avondale and Princess
Mary Victoria on the occasion of their marriage.  It was resolved to open
a public subscription.  A similar movement was inaugurated by the
citizens of Norwich.

--The Norfolk County Council appointed Mr. H. C. Bolingbroke "accountant
officer" to fill the vacancy occasioned by the retirement of Mr. H. W.
Day from the office of County Treasurer.

14.--Died, at Sandringham, his Royal Highness the Duke of Clarence and
Avondale.  The intelligence of the death of the young Prince was received
in Norwich with many manifestations of public sorrow and sympathy.  The
church bells were tolled, flags were hoisted at half-mast upon all public
buildings, and the windows of business establishments and private
residences were shaded.  The High Sheriff at once sent to the Comptroller
of the Household of the Prince and Princess of Wales a telegram of
sympathy on behalf of himself and the whole county of Norfolk, and on the
15th a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council was held, and
addresses of condolence were ordered to be sent to the Queen, the Prince
and Princess of Wales, and Princess Victoria Mary of Teck.  On Sunday,
the 17th, many touching references to the sad event were made in Church
and Nonconformist places of worship; and on the 20th, on which day the
remains of the deceased Prince were removed from Sandringham to Windsor
for interment, a memorial service, attended by the Mayor and Corporation,
was held at Norwich Cathedral, and the Dean preached an eloquent sermon.
At Prince's Street Congregational church, at Trinity Presbyterian church,
and at St. Mary's Baptist chapel similar services were held, business was
suspended in the city, and the licensed victuallers and hotel proprietors
closed their establishments from two o'clock until five o'clock.  In
every town and village the day was observed with profound solemnity.

18.--An important meeting was held at the Deanery, Norwich, to discuss
what measures should be taken to complete the sum of 2,500 then being
raised by the Church Schools' Aid Association for the special purpose of
increasing and improving the accommodation of the Church day schools in
the city.  It was resolved that it was the imperative duty of Churchmen
to preserve the Church schools in a state of efficiency, and with this
object it was decided that the clergy and laity form local branches to
augment the fund.

19.--Another series of "Science Lectures for the People" commenced at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich, when Sir Robert Stawell Ball spoke on "Invisible
Stars."  On February 16th the Rev. J. Miller Hamilton lectured on "The
Forth Bridge"; and on March 14th Dr. Andrew Wilson on "The Curiosities of
Brain Action, Dreams, Mesmerism, and Ghost Seeing."  A second course
began on November 16th with a lecture by Sir Robert Ball on "How came the
Great Ice Age?"  (_See_ January 12th, 1893.)

23.--Influenza raged with great severity in city and county, and many
prominent people were attacked by the complaint.  "It is producing many
deaths among the aged; the mortality in Norwich last week was 40.1 per
thousand."  In the week ending January 30th the mortality in the city had
increased to 44 per thousand.

30.--Died, at the Shrubbery, St. Stephen's Road, Norwich, Mr. Jacob Henry
Tillett.  He was born November 1st, 1818, at Quay Side, St.
Martin-at-Palace, Norwich, and was son of Mr. Jacob Tillett, a dyer.  His
grandfather was a schoolmaster, whose attainments in mathematics,
navigation, and gunnery brought him into some prominence in his day.
Young Tillett was educated at King Edward VI. Grammar School, and on
leaving school served his articles with Mr. John Rising Staff, then a
leading solicitor in Norwich.  In 1839 he opened an office for himself in
Post Office Street, and obtained a large and lucrative connection.
Literary rather than legal work best accorded with Mr. Tillett's natural
tastes.  In 1845 he founded the "Norfolk News," and with the conduct of
that journal he was thenceforward associated throughout his life, as
chairman of the company and as editor, in which position he not only
controlled the policy of the paper, but weekly contributed its leading
articles.  For many years Mr. Tillett was a member of the Town Council,
and twice served the office of Mayor, first in 1859-60 and again in
1875-76.  He was twice returned to a seat on the Norwich School Board,
and on the second occasion was elected Chairman.  In 1874 he was
appointed a justice of the peace, but he never qualified.  Although he
was not attached to any particular sect, he identified himself with
various religious movements in the city.  Mr. Tillett was the most potent
political personal force that the century produced in Norwich.  He
contested the city in 1868 unsuccessfully, Sir Henry Stracey and Sir Wm.
Russell being returned.  That election was invalidated on petition.  In
May, 1870, when a new writ was issued for the vacant seat, Mr. Tillett
was returned by 4,236 votes against 3,874 polled by Mr. J. W. Huddleston.
A petition followed, and Mr. Tillett was unseated.  At the dissolution in
1874 the Conservatives brought forward Sir Henry Stracey and Mr.
Huddleston, and the Liberal cause was again championed by Mr. Tillett,
with Mr. Colman as his colleague.  Mr. Colman was returned at the head of
the poll with 6,138 votes, and Mr. Huddleston was the other successful
candidate, with 5,823 votes.  Mr. Tillett polled 5,776 and Sir Henry
Stracey 5,290 votes.  Early in 1875 Mr. Huddleston was raised to the
judicial bench, and at the bye-election Mr. Tillett entered the lists
against Colonel Wilkinson.  The contest took place on March 5th, and
resulted in Mr. Tillett's return by a majority of 799.  Then came the
third petition, on which Mr. Tillett was again unseated, and a Royal
Commission followed.  The writ was suspended until the dissolution in
1880, when the Conservatives were represented by Mr. H. Harben and the
Hon. Massey Mainwaring.  The seats were carried by Mr. Colman and Mr.
Tillett on a poll of 6,549 for the former and 6,512 for the latter, the
votes for the Conservative candidates being 5,242 for Mr. Harben and
5,032 for Mr. Mainwaring.  The successful candidates were allowed to
retain their seats undisturbed; but Mr. Tillett reached the goal of his
ambition too late to derive any satisfaction from it, and the five years
he spent in Parliament were among the most irksome and worrying of any in
his life.  At the dissolution in 1885 he announced his intention not to
again offer himself for the representation of the city; but in 1886 he
was once more induced to stand, and, with Mr. Colman, opposed the return
of Mr. Samuel Hoare and Mr. C. S. Read.  The result of the poll was as
follows:--Colman, 6,295; Hoare, 6,156; Tillett, 6,119; Read, 5,564.  With
this campaign Mr. Tillett practically closed his electioneering career.
Whatever the Conservative party may have thought of his political faults
and shortcomings, Mr. Tillett was no Socialist or Revolutionist.  He was
staunch in his loyalty to the Throne, and would have strongly opposed any
attack upon the free monarchial constitution.  Although he stood at the
1886 election as a Gladstonian, his convictions were in favour of the
maintenance of the Union.  For the private character of this eminent
citizen it was impossible to entertain but one sentiment, that of the
highest esteem and regard, for he was naturally of a kind, considerate,
and affectionate disposition.


FEBRUARY.


6.--Official notice was received at Norwich of the final settlement of
the scheme proposed by the Attorney-General for the administration of the
Norwich Town Close Estate Charity.  The scheme provided that the charity
and its property and endowments should be vested in an official trustee
of charity lands for the city of Norwich, and the management,
preservation, and letting of the estate and the collecting of the income
by a receiver would be exercised by trustees consisting of the trustees
for the time being of the municipal charities of the city, known as the
General Charities, as _ex-officio_ trustees of the Town Close Estate, and
by six representative trustees appointed by the freemen for a term of
five years.

15.--The Compton Comedy Company commenced, at the Theatre Royal, Norwich,
an engagement, during which were produced several favourite comedies of
the old English stage.

18.--Archdeacon Perowne unveiled, at the church of St. Laurence, Norwich,
a bronze memorial in commemoration of the work done by Miss Sarah Ann
Glover in the cause of sol-fa music.  Miss Glover was the author of the
sol-fa notation, from which sprang the tonic sol-fa system.

20.--Died, at his residence, Unthank's Road, Norwich, Mr. Henry Norton,
F.G.S., in his 81st year.  He was the eldest son of Mr. William Norton,
of Old Buckenham, and in his early days was articled to Messrs. Mitchell
and Clarke, a well-known firm of solicitors at Wymondham.  Much of his
time was subsequently spent in roaming over the greater part of Europe,
and in about 1860 he settled in Norwich.  As a scholar and a man of
science Mr. Norton was possessed of a store of information such as few
had acquired.  Sanskrit and geology were his favourite studies.  He was
an omnivorous reader and lover of books, and bequeathed his valuable
library and collection of manuscripts to the Norfolk and Norwich Library.

24.--The course of lectures arranged by the committee of the Norwich Free
Library was continued at Blackfriars' Hall, when Mr. M. P. Squirrell
spoke on "The Orkney and Shetland Islands."  Mr. C. Stacy Watson, on
March 23rd, lectured on "The Herring."


MARCH.


1.--Died, at Gimingham Rectory, the Ven. Ralph Blakelock, aged 88.  He
was born at Red Hall, Leeds, and was educated at St. Catherine's College,
Cambridge, of which he became Fellow and tutor.  In his Cambridge days he
published some mathematical treatises, which added considerably to his
reputation as a college tutor.  On withdrawing from the University he
became rector of Gimingham in 1833, and an active worker on behalf of
many diocesan organizations.  He paid special regard to the social
improvement of the labourers, and was known as "the father of the
allotment system."  For many years Mr. Blakelock was Archdeacon of
Norfolk.

9.--Died, at Rippon Hall, Hevingham, the Rev. Henry Philip Marsham, aged
75.  He was a son of Mr. Robert Marsham, of Stratton Hall, and his taste
for country life and love of nature had descended to him from his great
grandfather, Robert Marsham, the ardent naturalist and frequent
correspondent with White, of Selborne.  The annual records of the
earliest dates, when many common plants were observed to flower, together
with similar natural history data, as commenced by the elder naturalist,
were continued by the younger.

14.--The memorial stones of a permanent building, to be used as the
headquarters of the Salvation Army in Norwich, were laid by Mr. George
White and other prominent Nonconformists, on a site at the rear of
Mortimer's Hotel, St. Giles' Street.  The building, which, inclusive of
the site, cost about 4,000, was opened on October 30th.

15.--A scheme for altering the number and bounderies of the wards in
Norwich was unanimously adopted by the Town Council.  The Privy Council
on June 16th were petitioned to approve the scheme, and on July 8th the
formal order was received for dividing the city into sixteen wards.  Mr.
Charles Neve Creswell, the Commissioner appointed to prepare the scheme
for determining the boundaries of the wards and for apportioning
councillors among them, held a public inquiry at the Guildhall on July
28th, at which evidence was given by representatives of the Town Council
and others.  The first municipal elections under the provisions of the
redistribution scheme took place on November 1st, when members were
returned for sixteen wards instead of for eight.

16.--The first sale of shire horses, the property of the Prince of Wales,
was held at Wolferton by Messrs. Sexton and Grimwade.  Forty-nine animals
were sold for the total sum of 5,200.

21.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Mathew and a special
jury, was tried the action, Bullard and others _v._ Saul.  The case was
brought by the plaintiffs as trustees of the charities of St. Swithin,
Norwich, for an alleged slander uttered by the defendant at an inquiry
held before an assistant Charity Commissioner at Norwich on January 15th.
By the words that the defendant used on that occasion the plaintiffs said
they understood him to mean that they had been guilty of
maladministration of the charity funds, and had administered them for
base and political purposes, and as vehicles of all sorts of corruption.
The defendant denied that the words set out in the statement of claim
were a correct report of the words used by him at the inquiry, and he
further denied that they had any slanderous meaning.  A verdict was given
for the plaintiffs--damages 5.

25.--In the Court of Arches Lord Penzance decided in favour of the Bishop
of Norwich, who had convicted the appellant, the Rev. Mr. O'Malley, of
drunkenness, and sentenced him to two years' suspension.  Lord Penzance
declined to hear Mr. O'Malley's appeal until he had given security for
the Bishop's costs, and limited the time during which the appellant
should find such security to four months.  (_See_ June 1st, 1899.)

26.--Died, at Unthank's Road, Norwich, Mrs. Sarah Fletcher, aged 87.
Mrs. Fletcher had given active support to many philanthropic movements,
and was one of the founders of the Orphan Home for Girls, originally
started in Pottergate Street, and afterwards transferred to Chapel Field.

27.--Died, at Unthank's Road, Norwich, the Rev. Charles Heath Hosken,
Baptist minister, in his 81st year.  In his early days he was sent to
Ireland for missionary work by the Baptist Irish Missionary Society, and
subsequently laboured at Belize in the Bay of Honduras; at West Troy in
the State of New York, and at Crayford in Kent.  "The Rev. C. H. Spurgeon
sent his first two students to Mr. Hosken to be trained; thus the
deceased was really associated with the foundation of the Pastors'
College."

28.--Sir Harry and Lady Bullard celebrated their silver wedding at
Hellesdon House, Norwich, and were the recipients of many presents from
friends in county and city, and from the staff of the Anchor Brewery.

30.--Died, at Sheringham Hall, Mr. Henry Ramey Upcher, aged 82.  He was a
son of the Rev. Abbot Upcher, and coming to the estate when only nine
years old, he had probably been in possession of his property longer than
any landowner in England.  When at Harrow he played in the cricket
eleven, and on leaving Cambridge University took a leading part in
athletic games, and was well-known throughout the country as a clever
cricketer, a good horseman, and an excellent shot.  Mr. Upcher married,
on July 3rd, 1838, Miss Caroline Morris.  In politics he was a Liberal of
the old school, and a valued supporter of his party.


APRIL.


21.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference was opened at Noverre's Rooms,
Norwich, under the presidency of the Lord Bishop, and continued on the
22nd.

25.--The Norina Grand Opera Company appeared at Norwich Theatre in "La
Fille de Madame Angot" and "The Daughter of the Regiment."

26.--Mr. J. J. Colman, M.P., was presented with a piece of plate by the
Gladstonian party in Norwich in recognition of his twenty-one years'
Parliamentary services.


MAY.


12.--The Gildencroft Recreation Ground, the site of which, with the
buildings thereon, was purchased by the Corporation of Norwich for the
sum of 2,700, was formally opened to the public by the Mayor.  (_See_
June 6th, 1894.)

14.--A new lifeboat, the gift of Mrs. Burch, in memory of her late
husband, Mr. John Burch, was launched at Yarmouth.  The craft was named
by Miss Jane Burden the Abraham Thomas.

24.--The name of Dr. Frederic Bateman, senior physician of the Norfolk
and Norwich Hospital, was included in the list of gentlemen who were to
receive the honour of knighthood.  Dr. Bateman, on July 5th, was
presented to the Queen at Windsor Castle.

25.--Died, at Cromer Hall, Mr. Benjamin Bond Bond-Cabbell.  He had
devoted himself largely to the public life of the county, and was a major
in the 3rd Volunteer Battalion Norfolk Regiment.  Mr. Bond-Cabbell, who
had been nominated for the office of High Sheriff in the ensuing year,
was one of the most popular men in Norfolk, and his death was widely
lamented.


JUNE.


15.--Died, at Norwich, Dr. William Guy, aged 57.  In 1871, when the city
was visited by a serious outbreak of smallpox, Dr. Guy was brought
prominently into public notice.  With characteristic courage and zeal he
undertook the medical charge of the isolation hospital; and was
afterwards appointed to the post of public vaccinator.  It was said that
for years Norwich was the best vaccinated town in the kingdom.

16.--The Didlington herd of red polled cattle, the property of Mr. Tyssen
Amherst, M.P., was sold by auction by Mr. John Thornton.  Forty-one cows
and nine bulls were disposed of, and the total amount realised was 892
guineas--an average for the cows of 47 10s. 7d., and for the bulls of 24
4s. 2d.

21.--The Mayor and Mayoress of Norwich (Mr. and Mrs. G. M. Chamberlin)
were presented with a "silver cradle" to commemorate the birth on March
11th of their soil, Geoffrey Lefroy.

28.--A thunderstorm of extraordinary severity burst over the county, and
was said to have been the most alarming that had been experienced for
many years.  It was remarkable more for its long duration than for any
serious results.

29.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened
at King's Lynn under the presidency of Mr. Thomas Leigh Hare.  The
exhibition was continued on the 30th.


JULY.


1.--The nomination took place at East Dereham of candidates for the
representation of Mid Norfolk.  The Unionist candidate was Mr. Robert
Thornhagh Gurdon, and the Gladstonian candidate Mr. Clement Higgins,
Q.C., Trebovir Road, South Kensington, S.W.  The polling was on the 13th,
and the declaration on the 14th: Higgins, 4,069; Gordon 3,599.

2.--The following candidates were nominated for the representation of
Norwich:--Mr. James Bedford, 388, Bethnal Green Road, E., tailor
(Gladstonian); Mr. Jeremiah James Colman (Gladstonian), and Mr. Samuel
Hoare (Conservative).  The polling on the 6th resulted as
follows:--Hoare, 7,718; Colman, 7,407; Bedford, 6,811.

--The nomination of candidates for South Norfolk was held at the Town
Hall, Aylsham.  Mr. John Cator, of Woodbastwick Hall, was the Unionist,
and Mr. Herbert Hardy Cozens-Hardy, the Gladstonian candidate.  The
polling was on the 16th, and the declaration on the 18th:--Cozens-Hardy,
4,561; Cator, 3,278.

--For the representation of Lynn were nominated Mr. Thomas Gibson Bowles,
of Newton Tony, Salisbury, hon. lieutenant in the Royal Naval Reserve
(Unionist), and Mr. Thomas Richardson Kemp, Q.C., 5, Queen's Gate
Terrace, London (Gladstonian).  The polling on the 4th resulted as
follows:--Bowles, 1,319; Kemp, 1,308.

5.--The nominations for East Norfolk were made at the Shirehall, Norwich.
Sir Edward Birkbeck, Bart., was nominated by the Unionists, and Mr.
Robert John Price, barrister-at-law, 104, Sloane Street, S.W., by the
Gladstonians.  The polling took place on the 12th, and the poll was
declared on the 13th as follows:--Price, 4,743; Birkbeck, 4,303.

--The nomination of candidates for South Norfolk was held at the
Shirehall, Norwich.  Mr. Francis Taylor, of Diss, was the
Liberal-Unionist, and Mr. Albert George Kitching, Chase Court, Enfield,
the Gladstonian nominee.  The polling took place on the 11th, and the
declaration on the 12th: Taylor 4,288; Kitching, 3,535.

--Polling took place at Yarmouth.  The candidates were Mr. J. M. Moorsom,
Q.C., London (Gladstonian), and Sir Henry Tyler (Conservative).  The
contest resulted as follows:--Moorsom, 2,972; Tyler, 2,704.

7.--Mr. Justice Romer delivered judgment in the action, Micklethwaite
_v._ Vincent, which raised an important question as to the rights of the
public over the Norfolk broads.  The plaintiff asked for an injunction to
restrain the defendant from shooting or fishing on that part of the
Hickling Broad which was in the parish of Hickling, and from boating over
it except in a certain channel.  The defendant contended that the Broad
was open to the public for all purposes, and that he as one of the public
was entitled to shoot and fish over it.  The judge held that the
plaintiff had established his right to the part of the Broad in question.
Admittedly there was a public way over the Broad, but this was restricted
to the channel.  The plaintiff asked for an injunction to restrain the
defendant from going on the Broad at all except in this channel.  He was
satisfied on the evidence that this right of way was not so restricted,
and that part of plaintiff's claim failed and must be dismissed.  It was
not necessary for his lordship to decide how far the plaintiff's right
extended beyond the channel.  The plaintiff must get from the defendant
the bare costs of the action, except so far as those costs had been
increased by the claim to restrict the right of way to the channel, which
had failed.  So far as the defendant's costs had been increased by the
last mentioned claim he would get them from the plaintiff with the
set-off.

8.--Mr. P. P. Marshall, City Engineer, of Norwich, resigned his office,
in which he was succeeded by Mr. Buchan.

14.--Polling took place in North-West Norfolk.  The candidates were Mr.
Joseph Arch, President of the National Agricultural Labourers' Union, of
Barford, Warwickshire (Gladstonian), and Lord Henry Bentinck, of Congham
Hall, and 58, Sloane Street, S.W. (Unionist).  Result: Arch, 4,911;
Bentinck, 3,822.

15.--The South-West Norfolk election took place.  The candidates were Mr.
Thos. Leigh Hare, Stow Bardolph (Unionist), and Mr. Henry Lee Warner, the
Paddocks, Swaffham, (Gladstonian).  The poll was declared at Swaffham on
the 16th as follows:--Hare, 4,077; Lee Warner, 3,739.

16.*--"The 'London Gazette' announces that the Victoria Cross is
conferred upon Lieutenant J. Manners Smith for his conspicuous bravery
when leading the storming party at the attack and capture of a strong
position occupied by the enemy near Nilt in the Hunza-Nagur country on
December 20th, 1891.  Lieutenant Smith, who was serving in the Indian
Staff Corps, is a Norfolk man, and was educated at the Norwich Grammar
School."

19.--The Norwich Town Council decided to create and issue 3 per cent.
redeemable stock, and on October 11th a series of formal resolutions in
completion of the scheme was adopted.

21.--The St. George's Vase was won at the Bisley meeting by Private Gray,
1st Volunteer Battalion Norfolk Regiment, with the highest possible score
of 35 points.

22.--In the High Court of Justice, Chancery Division, before Mr. Justice
North, the action, Boswell _v._ Coaks, came on for hearing.  It was
brought for the purpose of re-opening the question which, after
protracted litigation, had been settled in the House of Lords.  The
present action was founded on allegations of fraud on the part of one of
the successful litigants in the conduct of the litigation.  The judge did
not call for a reply.  He said he had come to the conclusion that each
allegation of fraud afforded no probable cause for thinking that the
plaintiff could possibly succeed at the trial.  After this matter had
been thrashed out at such an enormous expenditure of time and money he
thought there would be a grievous miscarriage of justice if he did not,
so far as he could, put a closure to steps to open up a matter upon
suggestions so unfounded and baseless as he considered the plaintiff's
pleadings to make.  He did not mean to suggest that plaintiff's advisers
had instituted the action for the purpose of vexation, but in his opinion
nothing could be more vexatious than that an action should be proceeded
with in which any chance of success was absolutely hopeless.  Notice of
appeal was given by the plaintiff on August 17th.  In the Court of Appeal
on November 2nd the case was re-opened, and after a hearing which lasted
several hours their lordships reserved judgment.  Mr. Justice A. L. Smith
read the judgment of the Court on November 5th, which was in favour of
the respondent, with costs.  Judgment was confirmed in the Court of
Appeal on February 9th, 1893, by Lords Justices Lopes and Kay.  (_See_
December 14th, 1893.)

23.--The 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Volunteer Battalions Norfolk Regiment went
into camp at Yarmouth.

31.--The greater portion of the tower of Hindolveston church collapsed,
carrying with it a large part of the nave, and forcing one of the chancel
windows some distance into the churchyard.  The tower had already been
reported to be unsafe, and a fund had been opened for its restoration.


AUGUST.


2.--The Cricket Week theatricals at Norwich Theatre included performances
of "Old Cronies," "In Honour Bound," and "Done on Both Sides."  This was
the last occasion upon which performances were given by Sir Kenneth
Kemp's company.  The Cricket Week was continued in subsequent years in
the first week of August.

3.--Mr. Arthur Wilson Fox, one of the assistant Commissioners appointed
by the Royal Commission on Labour, held an inquiry at the Assembly Rooms,
Swaffham, with the view of ascertaining the position and earnings of
agricultural labourers.  Similar inquiries were held in other parts of
the county.

7.--Died, at Eastbourne, the Rev. George Charles Hoste, in his 79th year.
He was born in Norwich, and was the eldest son of Colonel Sir George
Hoste, of the Royal Engineers.  He graduated at Caius College, Cambridge,
in 1835, and in 1856 was presented by Bishop Hinds to the important
parish of Heigham.  In 1847 he married Anne, daughter of Mr. John
Brenchley, of Wombwell Hall, near Gravesend.  Mr. Hoste made great
efforts to provide increased church accommodation in Heigham, and in 1861
secured sufficient money to build the church dedicated to the Holy
Trinity.  On retiring from Heigham he was given the living of Boyton,
Suffolk.

20.--The Queen, it was announced, had conferred the dignity of a peerage
upon Mr. William Amhurst Tyssen-Amherst, of Didlington Hall.  The "London
Gazette" of September 23rd announced that the new peer had adopted the
title of Baron Amherst of Hackney.

30.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council it was decided to rescind a
former resolution of the Council passed with the view of preventing the
erection of the Roman Catholic church presbytery beyond the building line
at Unthank's Road, and permission was granted for carrying out the
original plans.  (_See_ August 29th, 1894.)


SEPTEMBER.


1.--The students entered into occupation of the Norwich and Ely Training
College for female teachers in elementary schools.  The cost of the
college was about 10,000, and of the practising schools 2,122.  The
buildings were designed by Messrs. Oliver and Leeson, of
Newcastle-on-Tyne, and erected by Messrs. J. Youngs and Son.  The college
was formally opened on October 12th by the Bishops of Norwich and Ely.

--Died the Rev. John Marjoribanks Nisbet, Canon of Norwich Cathedral, and
rector of St. Giles-in-the-Fields, London.  He was 67 years of age, and
was appointed to his canonry in 1867.  In 1885 Canon Nisbet was elected
proctor in Convocation for the Norwich Chapter.

5.--Thorpe Market church was re-opened after extensive restoration.  The
building was erected in 1796 by the second Lord Suffield on the site
formerly occupied by the original church, which had fallen into decay,
and was in consequence demolished.

--A fire of a most disastrous character occurred at Norwich in the
north-east angle of the large block of buildings lying between Bank
Street and Queen Street.  The outbreak was confined to a three-storey
building occupied by Mr. R. A. Cooper, wholesale confectioner, of Queen
Street.  Police-constable Hook was struck by falling masonry, and
sustained a fractured spine, from which he died in Hospital on the 10th.

12.--Mr. C. E. Cooke, of Litcham, sold his famous eight-years-old hackney
stallion.  Cadet 1,251, for 3,000 to Mr. Alexander J. Cassatt, president
of the American Hackney Horse Society.

14.--Mr. Ben Greet's company of pastoral players performed the garden
scenes in "Twelfth Night" in the grounds of Mr. A. R. Chamberlin, the
Grove, Ipswich Road, Norwich, in aid of the funds of the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital.

17.--Died, at Weston House, Colonel Sir Hambleton Custance, K.C.B., aged
82.  He was a son of Mr. Hambleton Thomas Custance, of Weston, by Mary,
only child of Miles Bower, and was born at Norwich.  He married, in 1840,
Frances, daughter of Sir Edmund Bacon, premier baronet of England, and
widow of the Rev. Henry Walpole Nevill.  For more than fifty years he
held a commission in the old First or West Norfolk Militia, from the
command of which he retired in 1881 with the rank of honorary colonel,
when he received the dignity of K.C.B.  From 1863 to 1878 he was
vice-chairman of the General Committee of the Norfolk and Norwich Musical
Festival, a justice of the peace, and Deputy Lieutenant for Norfolk, and
in 1859 served the office of High Sheriff.  Lady Custance died on October
4th.

22.--Died, Mr. Thomas R. Tallack, formerly secretary of the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital.  He had done useful archaeological work, and among the
most important of his undertakings was the putting of the city archives
into good order and making them easy of access for reference.  Mr.
Tallack had also made a valuable transcript for the Norfolk and Norwich
Archaeological Society of the Tanner MS.


OCTOBER.


3.--The annual provincial meeting of the Incorporated Law Society
commenced at Norwich.  The Mayor and Mrs. G. M. Chamberlin held a
reception at St. Andrew's Hall; a banquet was given on the 4th; and the
Sheriff and Mrs. Reeve invited the members to a ball on the 5th.  Mr.
Richard Pennington presided at the meetings of the society.

4.--Died, at Lynn, aged 61, Mr. William Thompson, who was elected Mayor
of the borough in 1877, and again served the office from April to
November, 1880, on the sudden death of Mr. Seppings.

12.--Madame Adelina Patti, supported by Mdlle. Donilly, Mdlle. Alice
Gomez, Mr. Charles Chilley, Signor Novara, Miss Fanny Davies, Mdlle.
Levallois, and M. Sieveking, appeared at a grand concert given at the
Agricultural Hall, Norwich.

--Died, at Bramerton Lodge, Major John Penrice, aged 73.  He was a
justice of the peace for Norfolk, and took an active part in the
administration of county business.  Major Penrice was chairman of the
Yarmouth Port and Haven Commission.

16.--Died, at Saxlingham Rectory, the Rev. George King, M.A., honorary
canon of Norwich Cathedral, in his 90th year.  Canon King was one of the
oldest clergymen in the Church of England.

17.--A complimentary dinner, attended by 300 guests, was given at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich, under the presidency of the Mayor (Mr. G. M.
Chamberlin), to Mr. Henry Flowers in commemoration of his election to the
Grand Mastership of the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows.

20.--Mr. D. L. Moody, the "American Evangelist," opened a three days'
mission at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich.

21.--A heavy fall of snow occurred in Norfolk, and was followed by severe
frost.  The weather for some time previously had been unprecedently wet,
and the heavy rainfall had swollen the rivers and flooded the marshes and
low-lying lands.  During the first half of the month more than 4.5 inches
of rain were registered at Sprowston.  It was the wettest October that
had been experienced for years past.

22.--Died, at 45, St. Giles' Street, Norwich, Mr. Thomas William Crosse,
F.R.C.S., in his 67th year.  He was a son of the distinguished John Green
Crosse, and was educated at Mr. Perowne's school, Norwich, and at King's
College School, London.  After a course of study at St. Bartholomew's
Hospital, and at the Dublin, Leeds, and Norwich Hospitals, Mr. Crosse
became, in 1847, M.R.C.S. and L.S.A., and in 1860, after examination, was
admitted a Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons.  In Norwich he gained
the reputation of being a bold, skilful, and successful surgeon.  He was
appointed assistant-surgeon to the Hospital in 1857, became full surgeon
on October 26th, 1872, and retired from the staff in 1888.  In April,
1892, having previously filled the office of vice-chairman, he was made
chairman of the Board of Management.  For many years Mr. Crosse
discharged with conspicuous ability the honorary duties of curator of the
pathological museum at the Hospital.  He was a member of the Council of
the British Medical Association, and among his contributions to surgical
literature were articles on "Urinary Calculus" in Heath's "System of
Surgery."  Mr. Crosse was a governor of the Grammar School and of the
Middle School, and an _ex-officio_ member of the Norfolk and Norwich
Museum.  For some years he represented the Sixth Ward in the Conservative
interest, and was appointed on January 21st, 1873, Medical Officer of
Health for the city, and continued to discharge his duties until within a
short time of his death.  Mr. Crosse married, in 1857, a daughter of Mr.
Adam Taylor.

--Died, at his residence, Beechamwell Hall, Mr. Joshua Fielden, aged 44.
He was a son of Mr. John Fielden, of Green Bank, Caton, near Lancaster,
and was educated at Eton and Cambridge.  Mr. Fielden was a justice of the
peace and a Deputy Lieutenant for Norfolk, and served the office of High
Sheriff in 1884.

26.--A "World's Fair," promoted in aid of the funds for paying off the
debt on the vicarage house and the completion of the restoration of the
tower of St. Peter Mancroft church, was opened at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, by the Mayor.  The bazaar, which closed on the 28th, produced
receipts to the amount of 575.


NOVEMBER.


2.--The inmates of Norwich Workhouse were entertained by Mr. Hoare, M.P.,
and Mrs. Hoare in celebration of the marriage of their daughter.  Miss
Elma Hoare, with the Rev. H. L. Paget, on October 27th.

9.--Mr. Alexander Robert Chamberlin was elected Mayor, and Mr. Russell J.
Colman appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

16.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council the Liberal members elected
a committee to select the names of persons to be submitted to the Lord
Chancellor for appointment as magistrates.  The Conservative members
declined to take part in the proceedings on the ground that the movement
was purely political.  On December 20th the special committee reported
that their proceedings had been abortive.

26.--Mr. C. S. Read made an important speech at the Norfolk Chamber of
Agriculture in opening a discussion upon the question of agricultural
depression.  It was decided to support the proposed National Agricultural
Conference to be held in London.  At an adjourned meeting of the Chamber
on the 10th the proceedings of the Conference were discussed, and a
resolution adopted in favour of the formation of an Agricultural Union by
widening and popularising the Central Chamber of Agriculture and kindred
societies.

29.--The Earl of Leicester, in a letter to the "Daily Telegraph," gave a
remarkable account of the annual rents on the Holkham Estate when he
entered into possession in 1842, in 1878, when they were at their
highest, and in 1891, when the last payment was made.  Summarised the
statement was as follows:--

                   _Year ending at Michaelmas_, _1842_.

                                    s.          d.
Annual rents           40,419        1        5.25
Expenditure             7,608        4         5.5
      Net income       32,810       16       11.75

                   _Year ending at Michaelmas_, _1878_.
                            (Highest rental.)

                                    s.        d.
Annual rents           60,218        1       6.5
Expenditure            20,653       12         3
      Net income       39,564        9       3.5

                   _Year ending at Michaelmas_, _1891_.

                                    s.         d.
Annual rents           43,790       15       7.75
Expenditure            20,323        2       11.5
      Net income       23,467       12       8.25

REMARKS.--Decrease 27.25 per cent.  The tithe was paid by the landlord in
1878 and 1891, and three-fourths by the tenants in 1842.

                                                     s.       d.                     s.       d.
The amount expended by the late                                        536,992        0        0
Earl of Leicester in buildings
and repairs from 1776 to
Michaelmas, 1841, was
The amount expended by the             367,981        0        0
present Earl of Leicester in
buildings and repairs, gates
and fences, and under-draining,
from Michaelmas, 1841, to
Michaelmas, 1891, was
For purchase of estates                190,175        0        0
                                                                       558,156        0        0
                                                                     1,095,148        0        0

DECEMBER.


1.--The first lecture of a series on Ecclesiastical History was delivered
in the nave of Norwich Cathedral by Archdeacon Farrar on "Ignatius and
Polycarp."  (_See_ January 5th, 1893.)

8.--Died suddenly, at Bristol, Mr. William James Metcalfe, Q.C., Recorder
of Norwich, and judge of the Bristol County Court.  He was a son of the
Rev. W. Metcalfe, of Foulmire, Cambridgeshire, and was born in 1818.
Educated at St. John's College, Cambridge, where he took his M.A. degree,
he was called to the Bar at the Inner Temple in 1845, and became Queen's
Counsel in 1873.  Mr. Metcalfe was Recorder of Ipswich from 1866 to 1874,
and succeeded Mr. P. O'Malley, Q.C., in the Recordership of Norwich.  In
1879 he was appointed to his County Court judgeship.  He was succeeded as
Recorder of Norwich by Mr. Thomas Richardson Kemp, Q.C.

12.--Captain Lugard addressed two influential meetings at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich, upon the situation in Uganda.  A resolution expressive of
satisfaction with the action of the Government was adopted.

18.--Died, at Portland Place, Bath, Mr. James Hunt Holley, aged 88.  He
was a son of Mr. James Hunt Holley, of Blickling, and was educated under
Valpy at Norwich School.  Possessed of considerable landed property, he
took great interest in agriculture, and in 1858 purchased the estate of
Oaklands, Okehampton, in Devonshire, on the borders of Dartmoor, where,
remote from railways, agriculture had been neglected.  The improvements
which he carried out in the district gave great impetus to trade.  He was
an active magistrate, and during the earlier part of his life a staunch
Free-trader and a Whig of the old school; but being unable to follow the
extreme views of his party he ultimately withdrew from politics.  Mr.
Holley married a daughter of Admiral Windham, of Felbrigg Hall.

19.--The Prince of Wales presided at a dinner given at the Hotel
Metropole, London, to Lord Suffield, on his retirement from the command
of the Prince of Wales's Own Norfolk Artillery.

26.--The Compton Comedy Company commenced a twelve nights' engagement at
Norwich Theatre, and Ginnett's Circus began its winter season at the
Agricultural Hall.



1893.


JANUARY.


1.--The issue of second-class tickets was abolished throughout the system
of the Great Eastern Railway Company, except in the case of trains
running in the metropolitan suburban districts.

2.--"Sidney Carton," a dramatised version of Dickens' "Tale of Two
Cities," was performed for the first time on any stage at Norwich Theatre
by the Compton Comedy Company.

5.--The frost continued to be very severe.  Large numbers of skaters
visited Wroxham and Surlingham Broads.

--The course of lectures on Ecclesiastical History was continued at
Norwich Cathedral by the Rev. J. A. Robinson, Fellow of Christ's College,
Cambridge, who dealt with "The Apology of Aristides."  On February 1st
the Rev. Prebendary Meyrick lectured on "The Life and Times of Justin
Martyr"; and on March 8th the Rev. Stanley Leathes, D.D., Prebendary of
St. Paul's, on "The Life and Times of Irenaeus."  The second course was
commenced by the Rev. G. A. Schneider, who lectured on "Tertullian: His
Life and Times," on December 1st, and on "The Works on Tertullian," on
December 19th.  (_See_ April 2nd, 1895.)

7.--Died, at Woodbastwick, William Fryer, for seventy-four years parish
clerk, in his 92nd year.  He entered into office in June, 1819, and
continued to discharge his duties to within a short period of his death.
If not the oldest parish clerk in point of age, there was reason to
believe that Fryer had held office longer than any other parish clerk in
the kingdom.  He was for many years postmaster, general shopkeeper, and
village carpenter and blacksmith.

11.--The first meeting in Norfolk of the National Agricultural Union
promoted by Lord Winchilsea was held at the Corn Hall, Harleston, under
the presidency of Mr. J. Sancroft Holmes.  Other meetings of the Union
were held during the year in various parts of the county.

12.--The series of Science Lectures for the People was resumed at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich, by Dr. Andrew Wilson, on the subject of "The
Distribution of Animals, and what it Teaches."  On February 8th Dr.
Drinkwater lectured on "Light and Colour from the Sun."

21.--At the instance of the Rate Basis Committee of the County Council a
conference of delegates from all the Unions of Norfolk was held at
Norwich, to consider the advisability of adopting a uniform system of
assessment through the county.  A resolution was carried recommending
Assessment Committees to make the annual value of property as determined
for the purpose of Schedule A the basis of rating.  It was also decided
that the Rate Basis Committee send out to the different Unions a general
or consolidated scale of deductions.

25.--The Norwich Board of Guardians resolved to request the Local
Government Board to repeal parts of the Norwich Poor Act of 1863 in order
to make the general law as to franchise and election of Guardians
applicable to Norwich.

28.--It was authoritatively announced that the Bishop of Norwich had
placed his resignation in the hands of the Archbishop of Canterbury.  An
Order in Council, passed in the presence of her Majesty, on May 16th,
declared the See of Norwich vacant.  (_See_ May 31st.)

31.--Archdeacon Crosse was installed a Canon Residentiary of Norwich
Cathedral.


FEBRUARY.


2.--At a full-dress parade of the 1st Volunteer Battalion Norfolk
Regiment Brigadier-General Bulwer decorated several officers of the
battalion with the new Volunteer Decoration.

20.--Miss Grace Hawthorne appeared at Norwich Theatre in Sardou's play,
"Theodora."  A feature of the performance was the introduction of a cage
of live lions in act I., scene 3.


MARCH.


7.--The honorary freedom of Norwich was presented to Mr. J. J. Colman,
M.P., by the Town Council, in recognition of his distinguished services
to the city.

12.--The thermometer on the afternoon of this date registered 60 deg.
Fah. in the shade; on the 17th there was a downfall of snow.

23.--The Norwich Isolation Hospital, erected upon a site near the
Cemetery, was opened by the Mayor (Mr. A. R. Chamberlin).  It was
designed by Mr. P. P. Marshall, City Engineer, and the tender for its
erection amounted to 4,290.

25.--Particulars were published of the measures to be adopted in Norwich
in the event of the threatened outbreak of cholera.  During the week
ending this date official visits were made to Yarmouth, Cromer, and other
places on the Norfolk coast by Dr. S. Monckton Copeman, one of the
Medical Officers of the Local Government Board.

27.--Died, at Bracondale, Norwich, Mr. Thomas Gabriel Bayfield, aged 76.
In his school days he formed the acquaintance of Mr. B. B. Woodward,
afterwards Queen's Librarian, and of Mr. S. P. Woodward, the subsequent
author of the manual on Mollusca, both sons of Samuel Woodward, and from
them he imbibed a love for archaeology and natural history.  Mr. Bayfield
was regarded as an authority on ancient seals, and rendered great
assistance to Dean Goulburn in the compilation of his work on Norwich
Cathedral.  In geology he laboured at the chalk and Norwich crag, and
made a valuable collection of fossils; those from the chalk were
subsequently acquired by the British Museum.  He was one of the most
active members of the Norwich Geological Society, and an enthusiastic
member of the Norwich Science Club and of the Norfolk and Norwich
Naturalists' Society.  Upon relinquishing his business as an ironmonger
in Magdalen Street, Mr. Bayfield obtained the appointment of master of
the Blind School.

30.--Died Mr. Richard Charles Browne, of Elsing Hall, East Dereham, in
his 63rd year.  "A son of the Rev. Richard Browne, he was head of one of
the oldest houses in England, the Hastings, of Elsing.  He was lineally
descended from Hugh Hastings, of Elsing, and consequently from Malcolm,
King of Scotland.  On the death of Hugh Hastings in the sixteenth
century, the Barony of Hastings (1264) fell into abeyance between the two
daughters, Anne, the elder, and Elizabeth.  Mr. Browne descended from the
latter.  The abeyance lasted till about 1840, when Lord John Russell
advised her Majesty to terminate it in favour of Sir Jacob Astley, who
descended from Hugh Hastings' brother.  It was thought that Lord John's
decision was not unconnected with politics."


APRIL.


6.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference commenced its two days' sittings at
Noverre's Rooms, Norwich.  Bishop Pelham presided for the last time, and
in his presidential address alluded to his approaching retirement.

8.*--"The Hon. Robert Marsham having received Royal Licence to take the
additional name of Townshend, the surname of himself and his family will
henceforth be Marsham-Townshend instead of Marsham."

21.--A great Unionist demonstration took place at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, as a protest against the Home Rule Bill.  Colonel Bignold,
leader of the Conservative party, presided, and Lord Ashbourne was the
principal speaker.

--Died, at Bradenham Hall, Mr. William Meybohm Rider Haggard, aged 76.
Mr. Haggard came of a Scandinavian family, and for several generations
his ancestors had been Norfolk squires.  He was lord of the manor of West
Bradenham, a Deputy Lieutenant, and one of the most active magistrates in
the county.  For many years he acted as a Chairman of Norfolk Quarter
Sessions held by adjournment at Swaffham, and afterwards at Lynn, and for
a long period was a member of the Committee of Visitors to Norwich
Castle.  After the passing of the Local Government Act, by which the
business previously transacted at Quarter Sessions was transferred to the
County Council, Mr. Haggard, like so many representatives of the old
county gentry, retired from active participation in public affairs.  He
was educated at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, called to the Bar in 1842, and
married, in 1844, Ella, elder daughter of Mr. Doveton, of the Bombay
Civil Service.  Mrs. Haggard was an exceedingly gifted woman, and
possessed of brilliant literary powers.

23.--Died, at Cambridge, Mr. Robert Lubbock Bensly, M.A., Senior Fellow
of Gonville and Caius College, and Lord Almoner's Professor of Arabic,
aged 61.  Professor Bensly, who was widely known as an Oriental scholar,
was the eldest surviving son of Mr. Robert Bensly, of Eaton.  He was
educated at King's College, London, and afterwards at Gonville and Caius
College, where he graduated in the Classical Tripos in 1855, and was
elected Tyrwhitt Hebrew Scholar in 1857.  After spending two years at the
Universities of Bonn and Halle, he returned to Cambridge, where he was
appointed Hebrew lecturer at his college, and subsequently became the
Senior Fellow.  He was an active and valued member of the Old Testament
Revision Committee, and was for many years an examiner in the theological
and Semitic languages triposes, and succeeded the Hon. Ion Keith Falconer
as Lord Almoner's Professor of Arabic.  Afterwards he was appointed
University lecturer in Oriental Languages.  The closing work of his life
was connected with a discovery of extreme importance and value, which he
made in company with his former pupil, Mr. F. C. Burkett, of a manuscript
found by Mrs. Lewis, of Cambridge, in 1892, in the Convent of St.
Catharine on Mount Sinai.  A careful examination of photographs taken by
her from this MS., which was a palimpsest, revealed the important fact
that the nearly obliterated Syriac characters bore a close resemblance to
the fragmentary text found by Cureton in 1842, and that the newly-found
text comprised nearly all the four Gospels.  This discovery led to an
expedition in the present year (1893) to Mount Sinai, where the intricate
task of deciphering and transcribing the MS. was undertaken by Professor
Bensly, Mr. Burkett, and Mr. Rendel Harris.  The Professor was well known
as the discoverer and editor of "The Missing Fragment of the Fourth Book
of Ezra."  He also edited the Harklean version of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and at the time of his death was engaged in preparing other
important works for the press.

24.--In a letter to the Press on this date Mr. James Emery, of Stibbard,
wrote:--"This is the earliest spring for more than one hundred years in
Norfolk.  I have this day gathered some hawthorn in full blossom.  I have
seen more than sixty summers; my father lived to be seventy-four, and he
has told me many times he never saw hawthorn in flower by the first of
May.  Nor have I ever seen it till this season before the first of May."

25.--The Fletcher Convalescent Home, at Cromer, built by the munificence
of Mr. B. E. Fletcher, and endowed by the Earl of Leicester, as an
adjunct to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, was opened by the Countess
of Leicester.  Mr. Edward Boardman, of Norwich, was the architect.  The
cost of the building was not disclosed by the donor; the endowment fund
amounted to 15,000, which Lord Leicester augmented to 20,000 in February,
1894.


MAY.


5.--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. A. R. Chamberlin) sent to the Prince and
Princess of Wales, the Duke and Duchess of Teck, and the Duke of York and
Princess Victoria Mary, the congratulations of himself and the citizens
on the announcement of the betrothal of the Duke and Princess.  On June
30th the Mayor, the Sheriff (Mr. Russell J. Colman), and the Deputy-Mayor
(Mr. G. M. Chamberlin) proceeded to Marlborough House, and presented to
the Duke of York a valuable dessert service, the gift of the citizens,
with a richly-illuminated vellum containing a congratulatory address and
the names of the subscribers.

17.--Died, at Heigham Grove, Norwich, Mr. William John Utten Browne,
barrister-at-law, aged 88.  Mr. Browne had been for many years an active
and painstaking magistrate, and in the early decades of the century
occupied a very prominent position in the public life of the city.  In
1833 he served as one of the Sheriffs of Norwich, and was elected Mayor
in 1860.  In July, 1837, he contested in the Conservative interest the
borough of Ashburton, Devonshire, and was defeated by Mr. Lushington.  On
attaining his 80th birthday he was entertained to a banquet by his
colleagues on the Bench.  Mr. Browne was a staunch Tory and High
Churchman.

20.*--"A meeting of owners and occupiers of property at Thorpe St. Andrew
was recently held to protest against a proposal of the Norwich Town
Council to annex Thorpe to their municipal district.  It was resolved
that a fund be guaranteed for the purpose of opposing by every possible
means any attempt at annexation on the part of Norwich.  The sum of 5,000
was guaranteed in the room."

21.--Mrs. Brown, a woman in humble circumstances, living at Winterton,
celebrated her one hundredth birthday.  She had been a widow from her
81st year, and was entirely dependent upon her daughter, aged 77, with
whom she lived.  Mrs. Brown had never travelled further than the
neighbouring town of Gorleston.

27.--A special meeting of the Norfolk County School Association was held
at the Shirehall, Norwich, at which the chairman of the directors and
trustees, the Rev. H. Smith, proposed, and it was agreed, "That it has
been proved to the satisfaction of the association that it cannot by
reason of its liabilities continue its business, and that it is desirable
that the same should be wound up voluntarily, and that the company be
wound up accordingly."  The original scheme, it was stated, was too large
and ambitious, and the association was weighted at the outset with a
capital expenditure and an annual working outlay beyond its strength and
capacity.  On September 9th it was announced: "After struggling for some
years under heavy mortgage and liabilities the Norfolk County School
Association has been compelled to wind up.  The property has passed into
the hands of Lord Leicester, who has made arrangements which will enable
the late head-master, Mr. W. E. Humphreys, to re-open next term."

--The Conservative and Unionist voters of East Norfolk adopted Colonel
McCalmont, C.B., Unionist candidate for the constituency.  Colonel
McCalmont retired in March, 1895.  Mr. H. Rider Haggard was then
announced as the Conservative candidate.

31.--The _conge d'elire_ for the election of a new Bishop of Norwich
having been received, a meeting of the Dean and Chapter was held at the
residence of Canon Heaviside, when the Rev. John Sheepshanks, M.A., of
St. Margaret's, Anfield, Liverpool, was elected.  The election was
confirmed at Bow Church, Cheapside, London, on June 28th; the ceremony of
consecration was performed at St. Paul's Cathedral on the 29th; and
Bishop Sheepshanks did homage to her Majesty at Windsor Castle on June
30th.  His lordship was enthroned and installed at Norwich Cathedral on
July 13th with the usual ceremonial.  The Dean afterwards entertained a
large company to luncheon at the Deanery, and in the afternoon the clergy
waited upon his lordship at the Palace and presented him with an address.


JUNE.


1.--A meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, to protest against
the Suspensory Bill for the Church in Wales.  Lord Egerton of Tatton
presided, and Mr. Stanley Leighton, M.P., and Mr. W. S. de Winton, M.P.,
were among the speakers.

22.--Mr. Albert Chevalier gave his first recital in Norwich at the
Agricultural Hall, and repeated the entertainment on the 23rd.

27.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened
at the Grove, Ipswich Road, Norwich, the residence of the Mayor (Mr. A.
R. Chamberlin), who was this year president of the society.  The
exhibition closed on the 29th.  This was the only occasion upon which a
three days' show had been held by the association.


JULY.


6.--The marriage of the Duke of York and Princess Victoria Mary of Teck
was celebrated throughout the county.  At Norwich the Artillery
Volunteers and the 1st Volunteer Battalion Norfolk Regiment paraded in
the Market Place and fired a _feu-de-joie_, and a Royal salute was fired
upon Mousehold Heath by the mounted battery of the first-named corps.
One thousand persons above sixty-five years of age were presented with
gifts by the Mayor and Sheriff at the Agricultural Hall; and in the
afternoon the 8th Hussars and the Volunteers were reviewed on Mousehold.
An illuminated _fete_ was given in the evening in Chapel Field Gardens,
and the day's festivities concluded with a ball given by the Mayor at St.
Andrew's Hall.

8.--A severe thunderstorm occurred after very close and sultry weather.
Another storm took place on the 9th and 10th, and on the 11th it raged
with increased violence, and did much damage in various parts of the
county.  A man was killed by lightning at Long Stratton.

13.--The third biennial sale of shorthorns and Southdowns, the property
of the Prince of Wales, was conducted at Wolferton by Mr. John Thornton,
and resulted in a total of 2,151.

18.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Mathew, Sarah Bligh (22),
domestic servant, was indicted for the wilful murder of her child, Isaac
Bligh, at Holme Hale, on June 7th.  She was found guilty and strongly
recommended to mercy.  The judge, without assuming the black cap, passed
sentence of death.  The capital sentence was subsequently commuted.

19.--The first squadron of the 8th Hussars marched from the Cavalry
Barracks, Norwich, and the remaining squadrons left on the 20th.  Prior
to their departure the non-commissioned officers were presented with
gifts for their mess, subscribed for by the citizens.  The 1st (King's)
Dragoon Guards, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel H. P. Douglas Willan,
marched in on the same dates.

22.--Mr. Clement Higgins, Q.C., M.P., intimated his intention to the
electors of Mid Norfolk not to seek re-election for the division at the
next election.  Mr. F. W. Wilson was subsequently adopted the Gladstonian
candidate.

28.--Mr. and Mrs. J. J. Dawson Paul celebrated their silver wedding at
Norwich.

29.--The 3rd and 4th Volunteer Battalions Norfolk Regiment went into camp
at Colchester.


AUGUST.


30.--A meeting was held at Norwich at which it was decided to take steps
for the formation of golf links.  On November 8th an adjourned meeting
took place, at which it was announced that land had been acquired for the
purpose at Hellesdon.  The Royal Norwich Golf Club, with the Duke of York
as president, was then formed, and the links were opened on February 1st,
1894.


SEPTEMBER.


7.--In consequence of a telegram received from the War Office the 1st
(King's) Dragoon Guards left Norwich for the scene of the colliery riots
in the Midland counties.  The regiment entrained at Trowse, the horses
being conveyed in bullock trucks.  A Squadron proceeded to Mansfield, B
to Rotherham, C to Wakefield, and D to Dewsbury.  On the 8th 50 men of
the Norfolk Constabulary, under the Chief Constable (Mr. Paynton Pigott),
were drafted to Nottingham, and on the 9th 20 men of the Norwich city
police proceeded to the scene of the disturbances.


OCTOBER.


2.--Died, in London, Lady Eastlake, widow of Sir C. L. Eastlake, a former
President of the Royal Academy.  Her ladyship, who was in her 84th year,
was a daughter of Dr. Edward Rigby, of Norwich, and was distinguished for
her literary work.

3.--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  The principal vocalists were Madame Albani, Mrs.
Helen Trust, Miss Anna Williams, Madame Belle Cole, Madame Marion
McKenzie, Mr. Edward Lloyd, Mr. Ben Davies, Mr. George Henschel, Mr.
Bantock Pierpoint, Mr. J. H. Brockbank, and Mr. Norman Salmond.  The solo
instrumentalists were M. Paderewski (pianoforte) and Senor Sarasate
(violin).  The principal productions were: On the evening of the 3rd,
"St. Paul"; on the 4th, morning, "The Golden Legend" and New Symphony in
A minor, No. 2 (Edward German); evening, new Polish Fantaisie
(Paderewski), first time of performance, pianoforte solo by Paderewski;
new cantata, "Una" (A.  R. Gaul), first time of performance, and a
miscellaneous selection; 5th, morning, "Judith," first time of
performance in Norwich; evening, new cantata, "The Wishing Bell" (J.  F.
Barnett), first time of performance, and a miscellaneous selection;
Pibroch (Mackenzie), Rondo Capriccioso (Saint Saens), for violin and
orchestra, Senor Sarasate; 6th, morning, "The Messiah"; evening, "The
Water Lily" (Cowen), first time of performance.  The gross receipts
amounted to 5,082 13s. 3d., the gross payments to 4,456 7s. 6d.  Of the
balance of 626 5s. 9d., the sum of 325 was distributed among the
charities.

14.--An influential meeting was convened at the Guildhall by the Mayor of
Norwich (Mr. A. R. Chamberlin) for the purpose of affording the Dean an
opportunity of calling attention to the necessity of undertaking the
reparation of Norwich Cathedral, the estimated cost of which was 12,000.
(_See_ May 2nd, 1894.)

16.--Died, the Rev. William Cowper Johnson, Honorary Canon of Norwich
Cathedral.  He was a son of the Rev. John Johnson, LL.D., a near relative
of the Poet Cowper, and addressed by him as "Johnnie of Norfolk" and "My
dearest of all Johnnies."

25.--Lord Randolph Churchill addressed a great Conservative meeting held
at Yarmouth Aquarium under the presidency of Sir Edward Birkbeck.


NOVEMBER.


9.--Sir Peter Eade was elected Mayor and Mr. John Barwell appointed
Sheriff of Norwich.

19.--A gale of great severity swept over the county after a day of
exceptional brilliancy.  Several wrecks occurred on the coast, lives were
lost, and much damage done inland.

20.--The Duke and Duchess of York arrived at Didlington Hall on a visit
to Lord and Lady Amherst of Hackney.

25.--An important meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, presided
over by Mr. R. Harvey Mason, for the purpose of urging that effectual
measures be taken for the preservation of order, the suppression of
nuisances, and the protection of property upon the public navigable
waters of Norfolk and Suffolk.


DECEMBER.


4.--Miss Fortescue, supported by her London company, commenced a three
nights' engagement at Norwich Theatre in "Moths" and "The School for
Scandal."

--A special vestry meeting was held at the church of St. Peter Mancroft,
Norwich, under the presidency of the vicar (the Rev. W. Pelham Burn), "to
read correspondence that had taken place between himself and the Hospital
Board relative to the skull of Sir Thomas Browne, alleged to have been
stolen from the church and now in possession of the Hospital."  The
Hospital authorities asked the vestry not to press for the return of the
skull.  The vicar dwelt upon the crime of sacrilege and maintained that
it was the duty of the Hospital to make restitution of the skull.  In
support of his contention he adduced the doctrine of the Church as to the
resurrection of the body.  After much discussion it was resolved to refer
the matter to Bishop Pelham.  At an adjourned meeting of the vestry on
the 15th the Board of Management intimated that the reference of the
question to an arbitrator would not release them from their obligation to
protect the property of the Hospital.  Ultimately it was agreed that no
further steps be taken in the matter.

14.--The Judicial Council of the House of Lords heard a petition from Mr.
Coaks asking for the dismissal of the plaintiff's petition in the action,
Boswell _v._ Coaks, on the ground of its being frivolous and vexatious.
Mr. Coaks' petition was dismissed and the appeal ordered to proceed.
(_See_ April 30th, 1894.)

18.--The extensive maltings of F. and J. Smith, Limited, at East Dereham,
were seriously damaged by fire, which destroyed several hundred coombs of
grain.

26.--Mr. Edward Compton's Comedy Company commenced their Christmas
engagement at Norwich Theatre; and Mr. George Gilbert, a native of
Norwich, began the first of his successful series of circus seasons at
the Agricultural Hall.

31.--Mrs. Pelham, wife of the Bishop of Norwich, died at Sunny Hill,
Thorpe.  She was second daughter of Thomas William Tatton, of Withenshaw,
Cheshire, was born in 1811, and married in 1845, during her husband's
incumbency of Bergh Apton.



1894.


JANUARY.


1.--Severe frost set in, and continued until the 9th.  The snowfall was
very heavy, serious inconvenience was caused to railway and other
traffic, and many casualties were reported upon the coast as the result
of a north-east gale.

2.--The Duke of York made his first public visit to Lynn, and opened the
new Technical School erected by the Corporation at the cost of 3,000.

10.--A furious gale which sprung up from the south-west did not subside
until the 12th.  Much damage was done in town and country, and many
casualties were reported among the Yarmouth fishing fleet.

11.--Died at his residence, Burlingham House, the Hon. Harbord Harbord,
in his 58th year.  Mr. Harbord was the sixth and posthumous son of the
third Lord Suffield, and was twice married; first to Constance Adelaide,
third daughter of Sir H. J. Stracey, and afterwards to Barbara Sophia
Harriot, daughter of Mr. Edgar Disney, of Ingatestone, and widow of Major
Philip Bennet, of Rougham Hall.  Having acquired a practical knowledge of
agriculture under Mr. Robert Leeds he undertook the management of the
estates of his friends and relatives.  "In Norfolk his relationship to
the landowners whom he represented gave him a status and influence with
the tenantry altogether above and beyond that of the ordinary estate
agent."  Mr. Harbord, who was a Deputy-Lieutenant and magistrate for
Norfolk, and upon the commission of the peace for Wiltshire, for many
years acted as foreman of the grand jury at the Norfolk Assizes.

18.--The whole county of Norfolk, including the city of Norwich and the
boroughs, was declared an infected area in consequence of the prevalence
of swine fever.  Major Tennant, chief inspector of the Board of
Agriculture, attended a meeting of the Executive Committee at the
Shirehall, Norwich, and discussed the subject of the swine fever
regulations; and on October 17th an Order of the Board was published
revoking restrictions upon the sale and movement of swine within the
county as from October 23rd.

19.--After the lapse of many years, Blondin, "the most famous and
intrepid of all rope walkers," appeared at Norwich in fulfilment of an
engagement at Gilbert's Circus.  On the 28th of the month he attained his
70th year.


MARCH.


6.--Father Ignatius visited Norwich and addressed a crowded audience at
the Agricultural Hall.

--A special meeting of the Norwich Town Council adopted a scheme for
repaving the streets of the city with wood, at the estimated cost of
38,500.

22.--A yachting and fishing exhibition was opened at St. Giles' Hall,
Norwich, and was continued until the 29th.

29.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference opened its two days' proceedings at
Noverre's Rooms, Norwich.  The principal subjects discussed were the
Local Government Act, 1894, and religious education in Board schools.
Bishop Sheepshanks presided for the first time.

30.--The Rev. G. S. Barrett, B.A., minister of Prince's Street
Congregational Church, Norwich, was invested with the honorary degree of
Doctor of Divinity at the University of St. Andrew's.  Mr. Barrett was
introduced as "the minister of one of the most influential Congregational
churches in England; he had made several important contributions to
theological literature, and had this year been chosen chairman of the
Congregational Union of England and Wales."


APRIL.


9.--Died, the Rev. George Willoughby Barrett, Minor Canon and Precentor
of Norwich Cathedral, aged 45.  He was a native of Bristol, where his
father was well known as a musician.  At an early age he was a chorister
at Bristol Cathedral, and after completing his school life, entered at
Worcester College, Oxford, where in 1872 he graduated B.A. and in 1877
proceeded M.A.  He was ordained deacon in 1873 and appointed to the
curacy of Easton Royal, Wiltshire.  On his admission to priest's orders
he was engaged from 1875 to 1887 in ministerial work at Hampton Lucy,
near Stratford-on-Avon.  After his appointment as Minor Canon and
Precentor at Norwich Cathedral in the latter year, Mr. Barrett did much
useful work in promoting the interests of the Norfolk and Norwich Church
Choral Association, and in cultivating a taste for the higher class of
Church music.  He was for several years in succession nominated by the
Bishop and Dean chaplain of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.

10.--Died in London, Mr. William Waring, formerly a tenant of Taverham
Hall.  A partner in the firm of Waring Brothers, contractors for public
works, he had constructed railways in Belgium and India.  In association
with the firm of Brassy and Peto, his firm had the contract for the
construction of the greater portion of what is now known as the Inner
Circle of the Underground Railway in London.  Mr. Waring was a magistrate
for Norfolk, and a munificent supporter of the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital and other local charities.

14.--Died, the Rev. John Nassau Simpkinson, rural dean of Burnham and
rector of North Creake, aged 77.  He was a son of Sir Francis Simpkinson,
was educated at Rugby under Dr. Arnold, and afterwards won a scholarship
at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took his degree in 1838 with a
first class in the Classical Tripos and a Junior Optime in the
Mathematical Tripos.  After some years' service as curate at
Hurstmonceux, he was appointed assistant master at Harrow, under Dr.
Vaughan, his brother-in-law, and there remained from 1845 to 1855.  Mr.
Simpkinson was then presented to the rectory of Brington, Northants, and
in 1868 to that of North Creake.  He was the author of a "Life of Wagner"
(1858), of "The Washingtons: a Tale of the Seventeenth century" (1860),
and of many articles in the "Edinburgh Review."

30.--In the House of Lords, before Lords Selborne, Watson, McNaughton,
Shand, and Morris, was heard the action, Boswell _v._ Coaks.  This was an
appeal from the judgment of the Lords Justices in the matter of the
Harvey life interest.  The case for the appellant set forth that this was
an appeal from an order of the Court of Appeal, made on November 5th,
1892, in an action in the Chancery Division in which the appellant, on
behalf of himself and of other unsatisfied creditors of the late Sir
Robert Harvey, was plaintiff and the respondent and others defendants.
The order of the Court of Appeal affirmed an order of Mr. Justice North,
dated July 27th, 1892, made upon the several motions of the respondent,
dismissing the action as against all the defendants, except one, on the
ground that it was vexatious and oppressive.  The appellant only appealed
against the order of the Court of Appeal so far as it affirmed the
dismissal of the action as against the respondent.  The action commenced
on March 11th, 1892, and the object of it was to establish that the
judgment of Mr. Justice Fry in a former action, Boswell _v._ Coaks, 1881,
which judgment was reversed by the Court of Appeal, but was subsequently
restored by the House of Lords, was not binding on the appellant or the
other unsatisfied creditors of Sir Robert Harvey, or of the firm of
Harvey's and Hudson's, on the ground that it was obtained by the fraud of
the respondents, and to secure for the appellant and the creditors
certain consequential relief.  Mr. Crackanthorpe, Q.C., and Mr. Brabant
were for the appellant; and the Attorney-General (Sir John Rigby, Q.C.),
Mr. H. H. Cozens-Hardy, Q.C., M.P., and Mr. Lawrence for the respondent.
Lord Selborne delivered judgment, and said it was not necessary to hear
counsel for the respondent.  The question was whether anything material
to disturb the judgment of the House had been newly discovered by the
appellant.  That involved a double proposition--that something new had
been discovered, and that that something new was material.  There was a
total defect both of allegation and of evidence as to that which alone
could make it material.  He had no hesitation in saying that in his
opinion it had been dealt with most properly by the Court of Appeal, and
that their lordships ought now to dismiss this action with costs, which
he accordingly now moved.  Their lordships concurred, and the appeal was
dismissed with costs.  (_See_ November 13th, 1895.)


MAY.


1.--Died at Sunny Hill, Thorpe, the Hon. and Right Rev. Bishop Pelham,
aged 82.  He was the second son of the second Earl of Chichester,
Secretary of State for the Home Department in Addington's short Ministry
of 1801, by Lady Mary Henrietta Juliana, daughter of the fifth Duke of
Leeds.  Born on June 21st, 1811, he was educated at Westminster and
Christ Church, Oxford, and took his degree in 1832.  His ordination was
followed by his appointment, on the presentation of the Earl of
Abergavenny, to the rectory of Bergh Apton, where he remained for fifteen
years, during which time he was Hon. Canon of Norwich Cathedral, and in
1847 chaplain to the Queen.  Two years prior to the latter appointment
Mr. Pelham married Henrietta, daughter of Mr. Thomas Tatton, of
Withenshaw, Cheshire.  In 1852 the living of Christ Church, Hampstead,
was offered to Mr. Pelham by Mr. Gurney Hoare.  On the death of Dr. Spry,
in 1854, he was nominated by Lord Palmerston to the important Crown
living of St. Marylebone.  In 1857, on the resignation of Bishop Hinds,
he accepted the bishopric of Norwich.  "His administration of the diocese
covered a period of 36 years, and in the matter of time, was surpassed
only by three of the sixty-three bishops who had presided over the see
during 800 years; and it was as wise in its broad and tolerant spirit as
it was faithful in its discharge of duty."  The remains of the deceased
prelate were interred at Bergh Apton on May 5th.

2.--The choir of Norwich Cathedral was re-opened on the completion of the
great work of reparation which had been in progress for two years.  The
"reporting architects" were Sir Gilbert Scott and Mr. John L. Pearson,
R.A., and the work was superintended by Mr. C. J. Browne, surveyor to the
Dean and Chapter.  The total sum raised in aid of the undertaking
amounted in the month of December, 1893, to 3,357, and the Dean and
Chapter contributed upwards of 2,000 out of their personal income.  At
the opening service the sermon was preached by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who was afterwards presented with an address by the Mayor and
Corporation.  The Dean and Mrs. Lefroy entertained a distinguished
company to luncheon, and the Bishop and Mrs. Sheepshanks gave a garden
party at the Palace.  (_See_ April 7th, 1898.)

15.--Died, the Right Rev. Sidney Linton, D.D., Bishop of Riverina.  He
was a son of the Rev. H. Linton, rector of St. Peter le Bailey, Oxford,
and Hon. Canon of Christ Church, and was educated at Rugby and at Wadham
College, Oxford, where he graduated and took second class in law and
history in 1864.  From 1877 to 1884 he was vicar of St. Philip, Heigham,
and in the latter year, on the foundation of the see of Riverina, was
appointed the first bishop.  In the same year he received the honorary
degree of D.D.

16.--Died at West Dereham, Mr. Hugh Aylmer, aged 77.  Mr. Aylmer had a
world-wide reputation as a breeder and exhibitor of stock.  He commenced
his career as a sheep breeder by introducing into Norfolk some of the
best specimens of Cotswold sheep that he could procure, and with these,
by the process of selection, he was enabled to produce annually a number
of rams which, when distributed among the flocks of the county, had the
effect of increasing both the quality and the quantity of wool and
mutton.  Mr. Aylmer was a noted shorthorn breeder, and his herd was one
of the most famous in the country.

28.--Died at Mill Hill Road, Norwich, Mr. Samuel Linay, solicitor, aged
57.  He was a well known practitioner in petty sessional courts
throughout East Anglia, and from 1881 to 1887 represented the old Fourth
Ward in the Norwich Town Council.

29.--The Mayor of Norwich (Sir Peter Eade) entertained upwards of 1,500
of the aged poor of the city to dinner at St. Andrew's Hall.


JUNE.


2.--The Earl of Winchilsea and Nottingham addressed a large meeting
convened at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, by the Norfolk Chamber of
Agriculture, on the subject of the National Agricultural Union.  A
resolution affirming the desire of the Chamber to co-operate with the
Union was adopted.

6.--The Mayor of Norwich formally opened an additional portion of the
Gildencroft Recreation Ground, and afterwards declared open for public
use the adjoining churchyard of St. Augustine, which had been converted
into a public garden and resting-place through the action of the Playing
Fields and Open Spaces Society.

15.--Mr. Ben Greet's company of "Woodland Players" gave pastoral
representations at Bracondale Woods, Norwich, of "As You Like It" and of
scenes from "The Tempest," in aid of the funds of the Jenny Lind
Infirmary.

23.--Intelligence was received in Norwich of the birth of the first child
to the Duke and Duchess of York.  Congratulatory telegrams were sent to
their Royal Highnesses, to the Queen, and to the Prince and Princess of
Wales, by the Mayor, on behalf of the citizens.


JULY.


4.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened at
Yarmouth under the presidency of Lord Suffield, and was continued on the
5th.

12.--A three days' military tournament, in which the 1st King's Dragoon
Guards, the depot of the Norfolk Regiment, and the Norwich Artillery
Volunteers took part, commenced at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, in aid
of the clothing fund of the Cadet Corps.  Exhibition boxing was given by
Frank Slavin and Jim Young.

--Mr. A. Morley, M.P., Postmaster-General, addressed a Liberal meeting at
St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.

17.--The Norwich School of Music was established at a meeting held at the
Guildhall.

--Mr. A. E. Collins, M.I.C.E., of Reading, was appointed by the Norwich
Town Council, city engineer and architect in place of Mr. Buchan,
resigned.

25.--Mr. Joseph Arch, M.P., at a meeting held at New Buckenham, delivered
to the agricultural labourers his famous address which was quoted
throughout the country for some time afterwards.  "You poor, craven
milk-and-water fools," said the hon. member for North-west Norfolk, "why,
you button up your pockets at the thought of paying 2.25d. a week when
you are told by a lot of lying scampery and scandalism that I have run
away with your money. . . .  Professor Rogers once said when speaking of
the tenant farmers, that their heads were as soft as the mangolds they
grew.  I think some of the labourers' heads are as soft as the mangolds
they hoe."

28.--The Norfolk Volunteer Brigade camp commenced at Yarmouth.  The four
battalions numbered 1,923 of all ranks.  Brigadier-General Bulwer was in
command.


AUGUST.


1.--Gunton church, erected in the park on the site of the ancient parish
church by Sir William Harbord, Bart., in 1769, was re-opened after
restoration.

4.--The old buildings of the Norfolk and Norwich Museum were closed prior
to the removal of the specimens, &c., to the new museum at Norwich
Castle.  (_See_ October 23rd.)

17.--The West Dereham Cotswolds, bred by Mr. Hugh Aylmer, deceased, were
sold by Mr. John Thornton and Messrs. Salter and Simpson.  Averages: 156
shearlings, 52s. 3d.; 64 two-shear, 51s. 2d.; 128 full-mouthed, 46s.; 100
ram lambs, 31s.; 20 old sheep, 7; 79 shearling rams, 7 5s.; 100 ewe
lambs, 7 1s.  Total proceeds of the sale, 2,601 18s. 6d.

22.--The sixth annual conference of the Institute of Journalists was
opened at Norwich, under the presidency of Mr. J. J. Colman, M.P.  Mr. P.
W. Clayden, general editor of the "Daily News," delivered the inaugural
address on the 23rd, and the business proceedings concluded on the 24th.
A garden party was given at Carrow Abbey by Mr. Colman, the Mayor and
Mayoress held a reception at St. Andrew's Hall, and the conference dinner
took place at Yarmouth Aquarium.  Cambridge was visited on the 27th.

28.--Died, William Coutts, seventh Earl of Albemarle.  He was born in
1832, and succeeded to the title on the death of his father in 1891.
Lord Beaconsfield, recognising the services he had rendered to the
Conservative party, elevated him to the House of Peers in 1876 as Baron
Ashford.  In 1857, as Lord Bury, he, with Mr. Schneider, contested
Norwich in the Liberal interest and achieved a victory over Sir Samuel
Bignold.  At the election which took place two years afterwards the same
two candidates were returned.  Lord Bury then had the honour to be
appointed Treasurer of her Majesty's Household, and this rendered it
necessary for him to again contest the constituency.  Sir Samuel Bignold
again unsuccessfully opposed him; but a petition was presented against
Lord Bury's return, and the election was declared void.  In 1860 Sir
William Russell and Mr. E. Warner became members for the city.  From 1860
to 1865 Lord Bury represented Wick, and from 1868 to 1874 Berwick.  On
the Liberal disruption he changed sides and contested Stroud in the
Conservative cause in 1875, but he was unsuccessful.  In early life his
lordship did military service in the Scots Guards, and served in India as
_aide-de-camp_ to General Lord FitzClarence.  For a time he acted as
secretary to Earl Russell, and was created a Privy Councillor in 1860 and
K.C.M.G. in 1870.  In 1855 he married Sophia, daughter of Sir Allan
McNab, Prime Minister of Canada.

29.--The Roman Catholic church, erected on the site of the old City Gaol
at Norwich, at the sole cost of the Duke of Norfolk, was opened.  The
building, which was only partially completed, was designed by Sir Gilbert
Scott, and is dedicated to St. John Baptist.  The sermon at the opening
ceremony was preached by the Rev. Dr. Headley, Bishop of Newport and
Menevia.


SEPTEMBER.


3.--The Trades Union Congress was opened at Norwich under the presidency
of Mr. John Burns, M.P.  The delegates, 400 in number, were entertained
at Cromer by Mr. Samuel Hoare, M.P., and at Carrow Abbey by Mr. Colman,
M.P.  The proceedings closed on the 8th with a "trades procession"
through the streets of the city.

4.--A new lifeboat, the gift of Mrs. Upcher, was launched at Sheringham.
The vessel, which was "christened" by the donor the Henry Ramey Upcher,
replaced a lifeboat named the Augusta given by the squire fifty years
previously.

10.--Died at Moseley, Birmingham, Mr. John Hawkes, aged 100 years.  For
many years he was a clerk in Messrs. Gurney's Bank at Norwich, and was
pensioned by the firm in 1865.

--Died at Lees Court, Faversham, Earl Sondes.  His lordship was born in
1824, and was formerly a captain in the Royal Horse Guards and
lieutenant-colonel of the East Kent Mounted Rifles.  From 1868 to 1874 he
was Conservative member for East Kent.  In 1859 he married a daughter of
Sir H. J. Stracey, of Rackheath.

24.--The Mayoress of Norwich (Lady Eade) unveiled at the Jenny Lind
Infirmary a medallion terra-cotta bust of Madame Jenny Lind Goldschmidt,
presented to the institution by her husband, Mr. Otto Goldschmidt.
Madame Albani, who was on a professional visit to the city, attended the
proceedings.

25.--A concert was given at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, at which the
principal performers were Madame Albani, Mdlle. Antoinette Trebelli,
Madame A. Gomez, Mr. Edward Lloyd, Mr. Charles Santley, Mr. Braxton
Smith, Mr. Norman Salmond, the Meister Glee Singers.  M. Emile Sauret
(violin), Mr. B. Patterson Parker (violoncello), Mr. John Thomas (harpist
to the Queen), and the Swiss Ladies' Orchestra.  Performances were also
given on the 26th, 27th, and 28th.

29.--Died at West Rudham Hall, Mr. John Morton, aged 55.  He was a great
authority on all agricultural matters, an eminent breeder of horses and
cattle, and a frequent judge at shows in England and on the Continent.


OCTOBER.


3.--Mr. Jerome K. Jerome, the well-known author of "Three Men in a Boat"
and "Idle Thoughts of an Idle Fellow," gave a lecture at the Assembly
Room, Agricultural Hall, Norwich, on "Humour, Old and New."

12.--At the Norwich Consistorial Court application was made to Mr.
Chancellor Blofeld by the vicar and churchwardens of St. John Timberhill
for a faculty to confirm the erection of a rood or crucifix, and its
accompanying figures, on a rood loft in the church.  The application was
supported by Sir Walter Phillimore.  The Chancellor delivered judgment on
November 10th.  A faculty to confirm the erection of the rood loft and of
the figures then on the rood beam and to authorise the placing of other
figures there was refused.  A faculty to confirm the erection of a screen
without a rood loft, and to authorise the placing of gates in an existing
screen, the erection of proposed side screens with gates in them, and the
erection of choir stalls with a screen behind them, was granted.

15.--A great meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, presided
over by the Hon. Ailwyn Fellowes, M.P., to protest against the proposed
disestablishment of the Church in Wales.  The principal speaker was the
Rev. Thomas Moore, author of "The Englishman's Brief on behalf of his
National Church."

17.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, before Mr. J. B. R. Bulwer, Q.C.,
George Chapman, William Chapman, Robert Howard, John Howard, and William
Furness were indicted for "unlawfully and riotously assembling with other
persons to the number of 200 and more to disturb the public peace," at
Horsham St. Faith's, on August 10th.  The disturbance arose in
consequence of a local farmer, Mr. W. W. Cook, employing imported labour
because he was unable to arrange terms with the St. Faith's men.  The
prisoners, with the exception of Furness, pleaded guilty.  The jury were
unable to find a verdict in the case of Furness.  Another jury were
empanelled, and a verdict of guilty returned.  Furness was sentenced to
two months' imprisonment with hard labour, and the other prisoners were
bound over to keep the peace for twelve months, George Chapman to pay in
addition a fine of 5.

18.--The Rev. Arthur Thomas Lloyd, D.D., vicar and Hon. Canon of
Newcastle-on-Tyne, was at Westminster Abbey consecrated Suffragan Bishop
of Norwich, by the Archbishop of Canterbury.  The right reverend Bishop
had previously been collated and instituted--on October 16th--to the
rectory and parish church of North Creake, and on the same day collated
to the Archdeaconry of Lynn formed out of the Archdeaconries of Norfolk
and Norwich under an order of her Majesty, dated August 23rd, 1894.  "By
26th Henry VIII., c. 14, provision was made for the appointment of two
Suffragans within the diocese, to bear the titular names of Thetford and
Ipswich.  In 1536 John Salisbury and Thomas Manning were consecrated by
Archbishop Cranmer as Suffragan Bishops of Thetford and Ipswich, and now
again after the lapse of three centuries and a half the Bishopric of
Thetford is revived."

20.--Died, in his 84th year, Mr. William Henry Cooke, Q.C., County Court
judge for Oxfordshire, and Recorder of the city of Oxford.  He was some
time judge of the Norfolk County Court, and a justice of the peace for
the county.  Mr. Cooke was the eldest son of the Rev. W. Cooke, vicar of
Bromyard, Herefordshire.

--Died at Wilby Hall, aged 79, Mr. Samuel Colman.  He was one of the
eleven sons of Mr. Robert Colman, of Rockland, who constituted the famous
team of cricketers.

23.--The Duke and Duchess of York visited Norwich and opened the Castle
Museum and Fine Art Gallery.  Their Royal Highnesses arrived from
Sandringham, and were received at Thorpe Station by the Mayor (Sir Peter
Eade), the Sheriff (Mr. Barwell), the High Sheriff of Norfolk (Mr. J. H.
Gurney), and other prominent officials.  Escorted by the 1st King's
Dragoon Guards the Royal visitors drove to the Castle, where they were
received by a distinguished gathering, and presented with an address by
the Corporation.  The Duke having declared the building open, their Royal
Highnesses made a tour of the Museum, and were afterwards entertained to
luncheon in the Fine Art Gallery.  Leaving the Castle under escort of the
Loyal Suffolk Hussars, the Duke and Duchess proceeded to the Girls'
Technical School, St. George's Plain, where they were received by the
Countess of Leicester and Mr. and Mrs. Gurney Buxton.  Their Royal
Highnesses having inspected the School of Cookery, visited the Cathedral,
and thence drove to Thorpe Station, en route to Wolferton.  The streets
of Norwich were decorated in honour of the visit, and in the evening the
city was illuminated.  The Mayor and Mayoress held a reception at the
Cattle, and a military tattoo in which the pipers of the Scots Guards,
the depot companies of the Norfolk Regiment, and the Volunteers took
part, was given on the Recreation-ground, Earlham Road.


NOVEMBER.


9.--Lieut.-Col. Bignold was elected Mayor of Norwich, and Mr. Samuel
Garerd Hill appointed Sheriff.

13.--Died at Eckling Grange, East Dereham, Mr. Charles Norton Elvin, M.A.
He was well known as an authority on heraldry, and was the author of
several standard works on the subject.

17.--The Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture considered the report of a
special committee appointed to enquire into the condition of agriculture
in Norfolk.  The committee reported that the fall in the value of the
Norfolk corn crops, comparing 1894 with 1874, was nearly, if not quite,
3,000,000.  In 1874 Norfolk had 762,000 sheep and 128,000 cattle; in 1894
519,000 sheep and 126,000 cattle.  Recommendations were made that the
whole question of the appreciation of gold, and of the fluctuation of
current values, and the incidence of rates and taxes to meet the altered
position of agriculture, be reconsidered; that the law of assessments be
amended; that the Tithe Commutation Act be revised, so that lands which
could no longer be cultivated with corn at a profit should not be tithed
on a corn basis; and that a Pure Beer Act be passed charging an extra
duty upon all beer made from substances other than barley, malt and hops.
The report and recommendations were adopted.  At about this date Mr. R.
Henry Rew, assistant commissioner, conducted enquiries in various parts
of the county into the condition of agriculture.  (_See_ November 2nd,
1895.)

23.--Died at Cathedral Street North, Norwich, Miss Emily Stannard, aged
67.  She was the only child of Joseph and Emily Stannard, both painters
of the Norwich School.

28.--The autumnal conference of the Church Association opened at Norwich,
and concluded on the 29th.

29.--Lord and Lady Amherst of Hackney and their daughters, Lady William
Cecil, and the Hon. Sybil, Florence, Margaret, and Alicia Amherst, were
presented with valuable testimonials subscribed for by persons of all
shades of political opinion in South-west Norfolk.  The gift to his
lordship, in recognition of the public services he had rendered in
Parliament, was a portrait of himself painted by the Hon. John Collier,
to Lady Amherst was given a silver writing set, and to her daughters
pearl and gold duster bracelets, as tokens of the esteem in which they
were held throughout the constituency.  Mr. T. L. Hare, M.P., made the
presentations in the presence of a large company who had been invited to
luncheon in the museum at Didlington Hall.


DECEMBER.


4.--The first meetings of Parish and District Councils elected under the
new Local Government Act, 1894, were held.  The percentage of unopposed
returns at the elections in Norfolk was 72.4.  The first election of
Guardians for Norwich under the Act took place on the 17th.

6.--Died at his residence, 6, Cavendish Square, in his 82nd year, Horatio
Walpole, fourth Earl of Orford.  He was educated at Eton and Trinity
College, Cambridge, and afterwards when reading for the Bar occupied the
same chambers as Disraeli, who took great interest in him.  His lordship
married, in 1841, Harriet Bettina Frances, daughter of the Hon. Sir
Fleetwood Broughton Reynolds Pellew.  He was succeeded by his nephew,
Robert Horace Walpole, elder son of the Hon. Frederick Walpole.

13.--The officers of the 1st King's Dragoon Guards gave an amateur
dramatic performance of "The Area Belle" and Burnand's burlesque,
"Black-eyed Susan," at Norwich Theatre, in aid of the Soldiers' Widows
Fund.  The performance was repeated on the 14th and 15th.

21.--A gale of great violence occurred and lasted throughout the 22nd.
Much damage was done in the county to farm buildings and other premises.
At Brundall the river Yare overflowed its banks and flooded the railway;
at Mundesley the tide was higher than was ever before known, and at
Yarmouth the low-lying parts of the town were submerged, and the water
entered many granaries and stores.  Another high tide and gale were
recorded at Yarmouth on the 29th.  "The barometric fall accompanying the
gale was most remarkable, the mercury having descended 1.26 inches in
twenty-four hours."

26.--"The Midsummer Night's Dream" was produced upon a magnificent scale
as the Christmas attraction at Norwich Theatre, by Mr. Ben Greet's
company.

29.--Died at Torquay, Colonel Dickson, who was Conservative candidate for
Norwich with the Marquis of Douro in 1852.  Colonel Dickson was in his
89th year.



1895.


JANUARY.


1.--Severe weather was experienced throughout the county.  The snowfall
was heavy, and deep drifts everywhere impeded traffic, especially in West
Norfolk.  On the 23rd the Yare overflowed its banks, and during a fearful
storm at Yarmouth the water rose to an alarming height.  Elaborate
precautions were taken to prevent a recurrence of the catastrophe of the
previous mouth, and although the Hall Quay was flooded the water was kept
out of the dwellings sad store-houses.  The Beach Gardens narrowly
escaped destruction.  On the same day Eccles tower, which had been a
landmark for generations, fell through the force of wind and waves.  In
the last week of the month the frost was more intense than it had been at
any time during the winter, and in Norwich pedestrian and vehicular
traffic was rendered difficult by the snow.  Observations taken at
Blofield on February 6th showed that the thermometer in screen, four feet
above ground, fell to four degrees Fahrenheit, and the exposed
thermometer on the grass to three and a half degrees below zero.  This
was said to have been three degrees colder than on any night during the
severe frost of 1890-91, and it was the coldest night since January 26th,
1881.  On the 9th the frost was more severe in certain districts than had
hitherto been recorded in the century, and remarkably low readings were
received from various parts of the county.  Skating was everywhere
general.  At Diss an ice carnival held on the Mere was attended by
between 2,000 and 3,000 people attired in fancy costumes, and similar
displays of a minor character took place in other localities.  On the
17th the frost showed unmistakable signs of breaking up.  For
twenty-eight successive nights, from January 20th to February 17th, the
mercury had fallen below freezing point, a longer period of continuous
frost in the opening months of the year than had probably been recorded
for half a century.

8.--Avenue Road Board School, Norwich, built at the cost of nearly
12,000, was opened by an inaugural meeting held under the presidency of
the Mayor (Col. Bignold), at which addresses were delivered by the Lord
Bishop and Sir G. W. Kekewich, K.C.B., Secretary to the Education
Department.

19.--A meeting of the owners of marshes lying near the Yare and Bure was
held at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, to consider the advisability of
adopting a plan for the protection of the level from high tides by a
commission who would have the power of maintaining the river walls.  The
question was adjourned for further consideration, and on March 30th the
proposed scheme was rejected.

31.--M.  Paderewski gave a pianoforte recital at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich.


FEBRUARY.


1.--The Sandringham shire horses, the property of the Prince of Wales,
were sold by auction at Wolferton by Mr. A. Beck.  The total amount
realised was 5,231 gs., and the average per animal 119 3s. 8d.

--Died at Stoke Holy Cross, Mr. Henry Birkbeck.  He was the only son of
Mr. Henry Birkbeck, of Keswick, and was born on February 10th, 1821.  His
mother was the eldest daughter of Mr. Joseph Gurney, who left to his
grandson his share in the great Norwich bank of Messrs. Gurneys and Co.
Mr. Birkbeck began his training in the bank on January 1st, 1839, and
became a partner in the concern on his coming of age.  He married in
October, 1849, the eldest daughter of Mr. Anthony Hamond, of Westacre.
She died in 1862, and 1871 he married Miss ffolkes, only sister of Sir W.
H. B. ffolkes, of Hillington.  In 1853 Mr. Birkbeck served the office of
Sheriff of Norwich, and in 1860 was High Sheriff of Norfolk.  For several
years he represented the old Fourth Ward as a member of the Norwich Town
Council.  He was a most generous supporter of local charities and
benevolent institutions, was honorary treasurer of the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital, and chairman of the executive bodies of the Great
Hospital and the Bethel.

18.--By invitation of Mr. Thomas Crammer, Lindahl, the renowned
Scandinavian skater, visited East Dereham for the purpose of meeting
"Fish" Smart in a skating contest.  Upwards of 2,000 persons assembled on
the ice.  The first race of one and a half miles was won by Smart in 5
minutes 48 4.5ths seconds; Lindahl won the second race over the same
course.  Owing to the bad condition of the ice the competitors were
unable to establish a record.


MARCH.


4.--Died at St. Faith's House, Norwich, Mr. John Hotblack, aged 74.  He
was a justice of the peace for the city and for the county, and for
several years represented the old First Ward in the Town Council.  In
November, 1884, Mr. Hotblack was elected Mayor of Norwich.

7.--Died at Soham Vicarage, the residence of his son, the Rev. Cyprian T.
Rust, LL.B.  For twenty-two years he was a clergyman in Norwich, and held
successively the livings of St. Michael-at-Thorn and Heigham; in 1875 he
was presented to the living of Westerfield, near Ipswich.  Mr. Rust was
born of Baptist parents, and after serving as a clerk in a London
counting-house became a Baptist minister at Colchester, where he worked
from 1838 to 1841.  Thence he went to Queen's College, Cambridge, and
took his LL.B. degree in 1852, in which year he was ordained deacon by
Bishop Hinds, and in 1853 priest by the Bishop of Ely.  Mr. Rust did much
literary work in the form of magazine articles, and was in many ways very
successful as an essayist.  He was the author of "Higher Criticism: Some
Account of its Labours upon Primitive History," published in 1889;
"Essays and Reviews"; "The Break of Day in the 18th Century: a History
and a Specimen of the first book of English Song" &c.

11.--A meeting of Norwich traders was held at the Guildhall, at which it
was resolved to re-establish a Chamber of Commerce in the city.

15.--Died at Bracondale, Mr. Henry Colman, last surviving son of Mr.
Robert Colman, of Rockland St. Andrew's, in his 82nd year.  He was one of
the eleven brothers Colman who constituted the famous cricket team.  Mr.
Colman for several years represented the old Sixth Ward as a member of
the Norwich Town Council.

19.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council the City Engineer (Mr. A.
E. Collins) presented a report which stated that a further sum of 200,000
ought to be expended upon the Norwich sewerage works.  The Council
adopted a scheme involving the expenditure of 72,000 beyond the sum of
80,000 authorised by the Norwich Corporation Act.  (_See_ January 22nd,
1896.)

21.--Brigadier-General Bulwer presented the long-service medal to past
and present members of Volunteer battalions in Norfolk.  The
presentations were made at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.

24.--A hurricane such as had never been known in living memory occurred
on this day (Sunday).  It swept over city and county, and its effects
were experienced in the greater portion of the south-eastern district.
Houses were unroofed and partially demolished, great chimney stacks
destroyed, strong walls levelled, and solid masonry overthrown.  There
was not a park in the county which was not despoiled, and many thousands
of trees were torn from the soil.  Fortunately the storm happened upon a
day when people were able to keep to their houses, otherwise the loss of
life must have been serious.  Only one casualty was admitted to the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  The storm was of short duration.  At dawn
a blustering March wind prevailed, as the day advanced the weather became
squally, then the wind blew from W.S.W. and attained cyclonic intensity,
at 4.30 p.m. the hurricane subsided.  On the 25th Norfolk presented a
vast scene of devastation.

30.--Died at his residence, the Abbey, Westacre, Mr. Anthony Hamond, in
his 61st year.  The eldest son of Mr. Anthony Hamond, he was educated at
Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, and entered upon the duties and
pursuits of a country gentleman.  He became very popular as master of the
West Norfolk Foxhounds, and on his retirement from the mastership was
presented with his portrait.  In the dark days of agricultural depression
the tenantry on the estate experienced the practical sympathy of Mr.
Hamond, who was a most kind and generous landlord.  In the breeding of
cattle and horses he took great interest.  His shorthorns obtained wide
celebrity, and his shires were equally well known.  Mr. Hamond first
conceived the idea of a stud-book for the Norfolk hackney; he was one of
the founders of the Hackney Horse Society, was elected first president in
June, 1883, and held office until June, 1885.  He consistently supported
the policy of the moderate Liberals, but when the great disruption came
he unhesitatingly threw in his lot with the Unionists.  On the death of
Sir William Bagge in 1880 Mr. Hamond was approached by the Liberal
electors of West Norfolk with the view of obtaining his consent to his
nomination in opposition to Mr. Tyssen Amherst, but he declined, and the
Conservative candidate was returned without a contest.  A General
Election took place a month afterwards, when Mr. Hamond was induced to
stand against Mr. Amherst and Mr. Bentinck, and was defeated.  He was
much interested in the administrative work of the county, was a member of
the County Council, and chairman of the Small Holdings and Allotments
Committee.  Mr. Hamond, who was a magistrate and a Deputy-Lieutenant for
the county, married the only daughter of Sir Thomas Hare, of Stow.


APRIL.


2.--The lectures on ecclesiastical history were resumed at Norwich
Cathedral by Archdeacon Sinclair, of London, who gave an address on "The
Life and Times of Cyprian."  On the 17th the Rev. J. T. Kingsmill, D.D.,
vicar of Hockering, lectured on "The Life and Times of St. Chrysostom."
Another series commenced on November 21st with a lecture by the Rev.
Professor Gwatkin, of Cambridge, on "The Life and Times of Eusebius";
followed on November 28th by the Rev. Professor Ince, D.D., of Oxford, on
"The Life and Times of Athanasius"; and on December 5th, by the Rev. A.
E. Brooke, M.A., of King's College, Cambridge, on "The Life and Times of
Origen."  (_See_ February 5th, 1896.)

2.--Mr. Clement Higgins, Q.C., M.P., for Mid Norfolk, applied for the
stewardship of the Chiltern Hundreds, and on the 4th the Unionist party
in the constituency opened the election campaign, and at a large meeting
at Wymondham Mr. R. T. Gurdon was unanimously adopted a candidate in
opposition to Mr. F. W. Wilson.  The writ was issued by the House of
Commons on the 8th, and the nomination took place at East Dereham on the
16th.  Great activity was displayed by both parties up to the day of
polling on the 23rd.  The result was declared at Dereham on the 24th as
follows:--Gurdon, 4,112; Wilson, 3,904.

4.--Died at his residence, the Woodlands, Norwich, Mr. Robert Fitch, in
his 93rd year.  Mr. Fitch, who was a native of Ipswich, was a partner in
the firm of Fitch and Chambers, chemists and druggists, Norwich.  In 1858
he was appointed upon the commission of the peace, and in 1867 became
Sheriff of Norwich.  He was connected with the directorate of several
public companies, and for more than thirty years was an honorary
secretary of the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society.  Among his
literary contributions to the society's proceedings was an admirable
description of "The Gates of Norwich."  Mr. Fitch was widely known as a
collector, and possessed one of the finest private collections in the
kingdom, which some years before his death he handed over to the trustees
of the Norfolk and Norwich Museum.

29.--Died at Letheringsett Hall, Mr. William Hardy Cozens-Hardy, aged 88.
A son of Jeremiah and Mary Ann Cozens, of Sprowston, he assumed the name
of Cozens-Hardy in 1842.  In 1830 he married Sarah, daughter of Thomas
Theobald; on July 21st, 1880, he celebrated his "golden" wedding, and in
1890 his "diamond" wedding.  Mrs. Cozens-Hardy died in 1891.  In his
early life he was articled to Messrs. Foster and Unthank, solicitors.
Mr. Cozens-Hardy was a regular attendant at Quarter Sessions, and was for
many years chairman of the Holt bench of magistrates.  A Liberal in
politics he conferred many benefits upon his immediate neighbourhood.  In
1851 he built the British school at Holt; he was the promoter of the Holt
Literary Society, and the founder of the Reepham Provident Society, one
of the most important organizations of the kind in the Eastern Counties.
For fifty years he was connected with the Erpingham Union, and it was
mainly due to him that the workhouse was erected at West Beckham in 1851.


MAY.


18.--A severe gale wrought much havoc on the Norfolk coast.  The Short
Blue fishing fleet suffered severely, the Yarmouth smack Royal Standard
was lost, many other casualties occurred, and remarkable escapes were
recorded.

19.--Died at his residence, Harford Lodge, Lieutenant-Colonel Charles
Edward Bignold, Mayor of Norwich.  Col. Bignold, whose age was 64, was
fourth son of Sir Samuel Bignold, some time Member of Parliament for the
city.  In his boyhood he became associated with his father in the
official direction of the Norwich Union Fire Insurance Society; from 1858
until the death of Sir Samuel in 1875, he was his assistant; and after
that date he filled the office of secretary of the society.  In 1852 he
joined the West Norfolk Militia as lieutenant, and ultimately attained
the rank of lieutenant-colonel.  He married in 1856, Cecilia, third
daughter of Mr. J. F. Graver Browne, of Morley Hall, Wymondham.  On five
occasions Col. Bignold was elected to the Norwich Town Council as
representative of the old Fifth Ward; in 1889 he sustained his only
electoral defeat, and was thereupon elected to an aldermanic seat.  A
staunch and earnest Churchman and Conservative he was for many years
president of the old Eldon Club, and shortly before the death of his
father was elected leader of the Conservative party in Norwich, and
enjoyed until the close of his life the loyal and enthusiastic adherence
of the rank and file of the party.  Col. Bignold was a Deputy-Lieutenant
and magistrate for the county of Norfolk, and a justice of the peace for
the city, and one of the original members of the Norfolk County Club.
["It is nearly a century and a quarter since any Mayor of Norwich died in
his official year.  The last event of the kind occurred in 1774--Mr. John
Langley Watts."]  Upon the death of Col. Bignold votes of sympathy and
condolence were passed by various public bodies, and on the 26th the
Bishop of Exeter preached the funeral sermon at the church of St. Mark,
Lakenham.

21.--The Prince of Wales arrived at Yarmouth, and on the 22nd attended a
ball given at the Royal Assembly Rooms by the officers of the Norfolk
Artillery Militia.  On the 23rd his Royal Highness, as hon. colonel,
inspected the regiment, and on the 24th left by special train for
Norwich.

24.--The Prince of Wales visited Norwich for the purpose of unveiling the
Pelham memorial throne at the Cathedral.  His Royal Highness was received
at Thorpe railway-station by the Dean, the Deputy-Mayor (Sir Peter Eade),
and the Sheriff (Mr. S. G. Hill), and escorted by a detachment of the 1st
King's Dragoon Guards was driven to the Cathedral.  The Bishop and the
Cathedral body met his Royal Highness at the great west door, whence a
procession was formed to the choir, where a vast congregation had
assembled to witness the ceremony.  The Prince having unveiled the
throne, was thanked for his gracious presence by Mr. Samuel Hoare, M.P.,
on behalf of the diocese.  His Royal Highness afterwards inspected
various points of interest in the Cathedral, and was entertained to
luncheon at the Deanery by the Dean and Mrs. Lefroy.  At 3.10 p.m. he
proceeded to town by ordinary train.  The memorial throne was designed by
Mr. John L. Pearson, R.A., and with the exception of the sculptured
figures, which were carved by Mr. N. Hitch, of London, the work was
executed by Messrs. Cornish and Gaymer, of North Walsham.

28.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, Sir Peter Eade was
elected to fill the casual vacancy of Mayor, occasioned by the death of
Col. Bignold.  The Mayor-elect nominated Mr. C. R. Gilman as his deputy.


JUNE.


1.--The 1st Volunteer Battalion Norfolk Regiment formed a marching column
of 200 of all ranks, and under the command of Col. Dawson proceeded to
Stratton Strawless, where a camp was formed in the park.  On the 2nd the
march was resumed to Blickling Park, where the column encamped, and in
the afternoon attended service at the parish church.  On the morning of
the 3rd outpost duty was practised, and in the afternoon the column
marched to Norwich, and was dismissed at the Drill Hall.

2.--A serious fire occurred on board the Jenny Lind steamboat at Foundry
Bridge, Norwich.

11.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Lord Chief Justice Russell of
Killowen, Frederic Butcher, 15, carpenter's apprentice, was indicted for
feloniously shooting at the Rev. Arthur Hamilton Upcher, with intent to
do him grievous bodily harm, at Baconsthorpe, on January 3rd.  The
prisoner was found guilty, and recommended to mercy on account of his
youth.  He was sentenced to nine calendar months' imprisonment.

--At the Norwich Assizes, before the Lord Chief Justice, Frederick Miles,
27, labourer, was indicted for the wilful murder of Mildred Miles, his
wife, at St. John Timberhill, Norwich, on June 1st.  The jury returned a
verdict of guilty, but strongly recommended him to mercy on the ground
that he had received great provocation.  His lordship passed sentence of
death, which was afterwards commuted to penal servitude for life.

15.--Died at 24, Fairfax Road, South Hampstead, London, Mr. Philip Soman,
senior proprietor of the "Norfolk Daily Standard," aged 60.

18.--The old Toll House premises at Yarmouth were opened as a museum.

19.--Mr. Henry Staniforth Patteson was elected leader of the Conservative
party in Norwich, in place of Lieut.-Col. Bignold, deceased.

21.--A terrible tragedy occurred near Yarmouth.  George Stanford, a bank
clerk, aged 25, in the employment of Messrs. Gurneys and Co., drowned his
_fiancee_, Edith Mary Argyle, in the Steam Mill dyke, at Caister, and
then committed suicide by drowning himself.

29.--The foundation-stone of the new church of St. Peter, Sheringham, was
laid by Mrs. Upcher, the principal contributor of the total sum of 7,000,
the estimated cost of the building.  The church was designed by Messrs.
St. Aubyn and Wadling, of Lamb Buildings, Temple, London, and the
contractors were Messrs. Bardell Bros., of King's Lynn.


JULY.


1.--The election campaign was opened in Norwich by a meeting of the
Liberal Two Hundred held at the Agricultural Hall under the presidency of
Mr. George White, when Mr. Thomas Terrell, Q.C., 13, St. Petersburg
Place, Paddington, W., was adopted as the colleague of Mr. F. W. Verney.
The Conservative electors met at St. Andrew's Hall on the 3rd, under the
presidency of Mr. Patteson, and the name of Sir Harry Bullard was
announced as the colleague of Mr. Samuel Hoare.  On the 6th Earl Spencer
addressed a Liberal meeting at St. Andrew's Hall, and on the 8th at the
same place Mr. Goschen was the principal speaker at a Conservative
meeting.  Sir Harry Bullard, who had been absent in Norway, returned to
Norwich on the 10th, and was received with an extraordinary demonstration
of popular enthusiasm.  The nomination took place on the 12th, and the
polling on the 16th, and the result was declared as follows:--Hoare,
8,166; Bullard, 8,034; Terrell, 7,330; Verney, 7,210.

4.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened at
Wymondham.  In the absence of the president, Mr. J. J. Colman, the public
luncheon was presided over by Mr. R. Harvey Mason.  The show closed on
the 5th.

5.--Died at the Clyffe, Corton, Caroline, wife of Mr. J. J. Colman.  Mrs.
Colman was the eldest daughter of Mr. W. H. Cozens-Hardy, of
Letheringsett Hall, and was in her 64th year.  Her death was lamented by
all classes of citizens, and the representatives of all political parties
attended the funeral, which took place at the Rosary on the 10th.

12.--Mr. T. Gibson Bowles (C.) and Mr. Hubert George Beaumont, Piccadilly
Chambers, London (L.), were nominated candidates for the representation
of King's Lynn.  Polling took place on the 15th: Bowles, 1,395; Beaumont,
1,326.

--Sir John Colomb (C.) and Mr. J. M. Moorsom (L.) were nominated for
Great Yarmouth.  Polling took place on the 16th: Colomb, 3,528; Moorsom,
2,893.

13.--The nomination of candidates for South Norfolk took place at the
Shirehall, Norwich.  Mr. Thomas Hamer Dolbey, Stratford House, Sutton,
Surrey, barrister-at-law, was proposed by the Liberals, and Mr. Francis
Taylor, of Diss, brewer, by the Unionists.  Polling on the 17th: Taylor,
4,281; Dolbey, 3,445.

--At the Shirehall, Norwich, Mr. Henry Rider Haggard, of Ditchingham
House, land owner and occupier, was nominated Unionist candidate, and Mr.
Robert John Price, of 104, Sloane Street, Chelsea, barrister-at-law,
Liberal candidate, for East Norfolk.  On the polling day, the 19th, the
Unionist candidate and his supporters were attacked at Ludham by a gang
of Liberal roughs, and Mrs. William Hartcup, who occupied one of the
carriages, received a severe wound on the head from a stone thrown by a
person in the crowd.  The incident gave rise to many expressions of
public indignation.  The result of the election was declared at the
Shirehall, Norwich, on the 20th: Price, 4,606; Haggard, 4,408.  (_See_
July 30th.)

--The nomination of candidates for North Norfolk took place at Aylsham.
Mr. Herbert Hardy Cozens-Hardy, Q.C., of Letheringsett Hall, was
nominated by the Liberals, and Sir Kenneth Hagar Kemp, Bart., of Mergate
Hall, Braconash, banker, by the Unionists.  The polling on the 22nd
resulted as follows: Cozens-Hardy, 4,246; Kemp, 3,738.

17.--Mr. Robert Thornhagh Gurdon, of Letton Hall, Unionist, and Mr. F. W.
Wilson, newspaper proprietor and farmer, of the Dale, Scarning, Liberal,
were nominated at East Dereham as candidates for Mid Norfolk.  Polling
took place on the 24th: Wilson, 4,220; Gurdon, 4,086.

--At Swaffham candidates were nominated for the representation of
South-west Norfolk.  Mr. Thomas Leigh Hare, of Stow Bardolph, was
proposed by the Unionists, and Mr. Richard Winfrey, Long Sutton,
Lincolnshire, farmer and newspaper proprietor, by the Liberals.  The
polling took place on the 25th: Hare, 3,968; Winfrey, 3,762.

18.--Mr. Joseph Arch, of Barford, Warwickshire, officially described as a
labourer, was at King's Lynn nominated Liberal candidate for North-west
Norfolk.  The Unionist nominee was Mr. Edward Kendrick Bunbury Tighe,
Woodstock, Kilkenny, Ireland, and Albany Chambers, Piccadilly, London,
lieutenant in the Army Reserve, and justice of the peace for Kilkenny.
The polling took place on the 26th: Arch, 4,817; Tighe, 3,520.

--A shocking catastrophe occurred on Ormesby Broad.  A sailing boat
occupied by nine young fishermen capsized in a sudden squall, and six of
the party were drowned.

21.--Died, the veteran actor and theatrical manager, Mr. William Sidney
(Mr. Sidney Young), who for many years in the old days of stock companies
controlled the destinies of the Norwich Theatre.  Mr. Sidney was a
capable exponent of character parts.  Of late years he had devoted
himself almost entirely to stage management, and was responsible for the
staging of several of the most successful productions at the Adelphi and
other London theatres.

30.--At Smallburgh Petty Sessions, Lord John Wodehouse was summoned for
assaulting Mr. John Gaymer, builder and contractor, at North Walsham, on
July 17th; and William Saul, a dealer, was charged with aiding and
abetting.  The complainant was presiding at a Conservative meeting held
in North Walsham, marketplace, when Lord Wodehouse seized him by the
coat, dragged him from the chair, and using most foul language offered to
fight him for 50.  In this he was abetted by Saul.  The chairman of the
Bench (Sir H. J. Preston, Bart.) said the redeeming part of the case was
that there was no actual violence that had resulted in injury.  Lord
Wodehouse was fined 3 7s. 6d., and costs 1 12s. 6d., and Saul 1, and
costs to the like amount.  The Lord Chancellor afterwards removed the
name of Lord Wodehouse from the commission of the peace.  At the same
court nine persons were summoned for taking part in the riot at Ludham on
the day of the East Norfolk election, and the majority were convicted and
fined in various amounts.


AUGUST.


1.--The parish church of Burnham Thorpe, restored at the cost of about
7,000 as a memorial to Nelson, who was a native of the village, was
opened for public worship on this the anniversary of the battle of the
Nile.  The work was carried out from designs by Sir A. Bloomfield.

8.--Mr. John Edmund Wentworth Addison, Q.C., who had been appointed to
fill the vacancy in the judgeship of the Norfolk County Court on the
retirement of Mr. E. P. Price, Q.C., took his seat for the first time at
the Aylsham Court.  Mr. Addison was formerly Member of Parliament for
Ashton-under-Lyne, and Recorder of Preston.

12.--Dramatic performances were given at Norwich Theatre by the 1st
King's Dragoon Guards on this and the five succeeding nights in aid of
the funds of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  The pieces produced were
"Easy Shaving," and a burlesque of "Faust."

14.--The Elmham shorthorns and red polls, the property of Mr. Fulcher,
were sold by Mr. John Thornton, and realised the total sum of 1,961 3s.
6d.

25.--The Hunstanton yawl, Princess of Wales, with sixteen persons on
board, capsized whilst on a trip to Skegness, and five were drowned.

29.--The 1st King's Dragoon Guards, after being quartered in Norwich for
over two years, marched for Colchester.  The headquarters of the 7th
Dragoon Guards marched in on September 18th.


SEPTEMBER.


12.--The premises of Messrs. Sullivan and Co., wholesale confectioners,
West End Street, Norwich, were destroyed by fire.

19.--The Channel Squadron arrived in Yarmouth Roads.  The vessels
included the Royal Sovereign (flagship of Vice-Admiral Lord Walter Kerr),
Empress of India, Resolution, and Repulse, battleships; the Blenheim,
Endymion, and Bellona, cruisers; the Halcyon, gunboat; and the Speedy,
torpedo gunboat.  The officers and men numbered 4,500.  Civic and public
entertainments were given in honour of the visit.  The squadron steamed
south on the 24th.

23.--Climatic variations of a remarkable character were recorded.  The
thermometer on the grass in the morning fell to freezing point (32
degrees), at two p.m. it stood at 77.2 degrees in the shade, one degree
higher than the point known as summer heat, and about seven degrees
higher than the average _maximum_ day readings for the month of July.  In
the screen the thermometer fell to 38.4 degrees, the range of temperature
for the day being nearly 40 degrees.  The _minimum_ was about 12 degrees
below, and the _maximum_ about 12 degrees above the usual standard for
September.  On the 24th the _maximum_ shade temperature was 75.8 degrees.

25.--At the Guildhall, Norwich, the honorary freedom of the city was
conferred upon the Mayor (Sir Peter Eade).  At the conclusion of the
proceedings the members of the Corporation proceeded to the Castle
Museum, where a portrait of the Mayor, painted by Mr. Stanhope A. Forbes,
was unveiled by Lord Walsingham.

27.--Died at Welborne Rectory, the Rev. George Robert Winter, Hon. Canon
of Norwich Cathedral, in his 69th year.  He was a son of Mr. Roger
Winter, barrister-at-law, Calcutta, and grandson of Mr. John Winter, of
Acton, many years solicitor to the Bank of England.  Educated at Eaton
and at Brasenose College, Oxford, Canon Winter was for many years vicar
of Swaffham.  In his University days he was a famous athlete, president
of the Boat Club, stroke of the Brasenose boat, and a bold and fearless
horseman.  In addition to his other accomplishments Canon Winter was a
very clever artist.

28.--Died at Ipswich, Dr. John Ellor Taylor, F.G.S., F.L.S., aged 60.
Dr. Taylor was the son of a foreman in a Lancashire cotton factory, and
early in life was sent to the engineer's shop of the London and
North-Western Railway, at Crewe.  He subsequently removed to Manchester,
and contributed to the newspapers, and on adopting journalism as an
occupation secured an appointment on the "Norwich Mercury."  During the
smallpox epidemic in 1872 he contributed a remarkable series of articles
to the "Eastern Daily Press" on "Haunts and Homes of Smallpox in
Norwich," the materials for which he obtained by personal visits to the
dwellings of the stricken people.  Resolutely declining to be vaccinated,
he contracted the disease, which considerably marred his hitherto
handsome features.  He left Norwich to become the curator of Ipswich
Museum and editor of "Hardwick's Science Gossip," and in 1885 visited
Australia on a lecturing tour.  Dr. Taylor was the author of several
works, notably "Geological Stories," "The Playtime Naturalist,"
"Half-hours in the Green Lanes," "Half-hours at the Seaside," "The
Sagacity and Morality of Plants," &c.


OCTOBER.


8.--The Church Congress commenced its proceedings at Norwich.  The
members were welcomed at the Guildhall by the Mayor (Sir Peter Eade),
after which the Congress sermons were preached at the Cathedral by the
Archbishop of York, and at St. Peter Mancroft by the Bishop of Salisbury.
The sessional proceedings were opened at the Agricultural Hall at two
p.m. by the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, who delivered the inaugural
address, and afterwards an address of welcome was presented by the
Nonconformist bodies.  Sectional meetings took place day by day at St.
Andrew's Hall, the Conservative Club Assembly Room, St. Giles' Street,
and in the Assembly Room at the Agricultural Hall.  An ecclesiastical art
exhibition was held at St. Giles' Hall (the old Skating Rink), and during
the week meetings of various Church societies took place.  The Mayor and
Mayoress held a reception at the Castle Museum on the 11th, and the
farewell sermon was preached at the Cathedral on the 13th by the Bishop
of Peterborough.

21.--Died at Christchurch, Mr. Henry Reeve, C.B., D.C.L.  The son of a
physician, he was born at Norwich in 1813, and educated at the Grammar
School under Valpy.  He afterwards proceeded to Geneva, where he
completed his education.  Mr. Reeve began his literary career by a
translation of De Tocqueville's "Democracy in America," published in
1835.  It was followed, in 1840, by a translation of M. Guizot's
"Washington."  In 1837 Mr. Reeve was appointed Registrar of the Privy
Council, and occupied the post for exactly fifty years.  He was a
frequent contributor to the "Edinburgh Review," of which he ultimately
held the editorship for forty years.

22.--The first of several meetings held in furtherance of a projected
line of railway between Forncett and Haddiscoe took place at Hempnall.
The distance proposed to be covered was fourteen miles, and the estimated
cost of a single line, 1,500 per mile, or a total of 21,000.  The
directors of the Great Eastern Railway in October, 1896, intimated that
they did not see their way to provide the railway communication
suggested.  (_See_ April 23rd, 1898.)

27.--The sixth specimen recorded in Norfolk of Ray's bream (_Brama Raii_)
was taken in the nets of a Yarmouth drifter.


NOVEMBER.


2.--The Norwich Volunteer Medical Staff Corps was disbanded.

--A public meeting representative of the agricultural and trading
interests, convened by the Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture, was held at
the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, to consider what action should be taken
in consequence of the publication of the report of the Royal Commission
on Agriculture by the Assistant-Commissioner (Mr. R. Henry Rew) to bring
the disastrous condition of agriculture in Norfolk under the attention of
the Government.  Resolutions were adopted requesting the Prime Minister
to receive a deputation of Norfolk agriculturists.  On the 6th Lord
Salisbury replied that he was so well aware of the existing state of
things that he would be reluctant to put a deputation to the trouble of
attending to lay their views before him especially as the whole question
was occupying the attention of the Government.  He promised to give
special attention to certain points afterwards submitted to him by the
secretary to the Chamber.  (_See_ February 7th, 1896.)

9.--Mr. John Moore was elected Mayor and Mr. George Arthur Coller
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

13.--In the High Court of Justice, Chancery Division, before Mr. Justice
Romer, was heard the action Gould _v._ Coaks.  This was a new phase of
the prolonged litigation arising from the Crown Bank failure.  This
action was brought by the plaintiff, the trustee in the bankruptcy of
Harvey and Hudson's Bank, against Mr. Coaks, and the representatives of
Mr. E. C. Bailey, deceased, and of Mr. Hill, deceased.  The plaintiff
asked for an account of all monies received, for an enquiry of all
purchases, leases, and profits which had been made or received by Mr.
Coaks in connection with the estate, and also that interest upon the sums
found due should be calculated as from the date of the receipt until time
of payment.  The argument in support of the plaintiff's case lasted until
the 15th, when Mr. Warmington, Q.C., by whom he was represented, said
that an arrangement had been arrived at by counsel on both sides.  The
plaintiff proposed to take an order of a general character as between
himself and Mr. Coaks of all sums he had received in respect of the
estate of Sir Robert Harvey.  Mr. Coaks also gave up all the purchases
that he had made either of the bankrupt's estate or the separate estate,
and there would be the usual enquiry with regard to them in order to
bring out those which were profitable and those which were not, giving to
the plaintiff the opportunity of taking those which were profitable and
to leave the others according to the usual plan, and there would be an
account of profits.  There would also be an enquiry as to balances in Mr.
Coaks' hands in respect to which he would be charged with interest.  The
costs were to be moderated, and so moderated as that no costs were to be
allowed which had been charged elsewhere.  (_See_ August 5th, 1896.)


DECEMBER.


8.--Died at Parham, Suffolk, in his 80th year, the Right Rev. George
Hills, D.D.  He became in 1848 vicar of Yarmouth, and was appointed in
1853 Honorary Canon of Norwich Cathedral.  In 1859 he was consecrated
first Bishop of British Columbia.  In 1892 Bishop Hills exchanged
colonial work for the country benefice where he died.

14.--Died at 32, Albert Hall Mansions, London, Mrs. Jones, widow of the
Rev. Canon Herbert Jones, and daughter of Mr. Daniel Gurney, of North
Runcton.  She was the authoress of several works, including "Memoirs of
Princess Charlotte," and "Sandringham, Past and Present."  Mrs. Jones had
also contributed many interesting articles to the "Edinburgh Review."

15.--Died at Diss, Mr. Thomas Edward Amyot, F.R.C.S., eldest son of Mr.
Thomas Amyot, F.R.S., F.S.A., aged 78.  Of geology Mr. Amyot had much
practical knowledge, was one of the first to write about the famed Hoxne
pits, and he also assisted Canon Greenwell in his examination of the
Grimes' graves.  With his pencil he was very clever, rather after the
style of Caldicott, and quite as original.  His facility in writing verse
was well known.  His "Legend of Cologne" was criticised as being not
inferior to "Ingoldsby"; and his "Oleum Jecoris Aselli," after the rhythm
of "Hiawatha," was pronounced by Bishop Goodwin as being one of the
cleverest things of the kind he had ever read.  Astronomy was also one of
Mr. Amyot's favourite studies.

19.--Lord Wolseley, Commander-in-Chief of the British Army, visited
Norwich for the purpose of inaugurating the Soldiers' and Sailors' Home
in Queen Street.  His lordship was escorted from Thorpe railway-station
to the Home by a detachment of the 7th Dragoon Guards.  After inspecting
the premises he proceeded to the Guildhall, where he was entertained to
luncheon by the Mayor (Mr. John Moore).  His lordship afterwards attended
the inaugural meeting held at St. Andrew's Hall, and delivered an
address.



1896.


JANUARY.


21.--The Norwich Town Council approved a scheme formulated by the Charity
Commissioners for the administration of Anguish's endowment for boys.  It
involved the expenditure of about 1,000 per year for the education, under
certain conditions, of poor boys in the city.

--The announcement was made that Mr. Clare Sewell Read had decided to
relinquish farming in Norfolk and to settle in or near London.  Mr. Read
gave a farewell address at East Dereham Market Tea on January 31st; and
on September 19th the Norfolk Executive Committee adopted, on the motion
of Mr. R. T. Gurdon, a resolution recording the valuable services
rendered to the county by Mr. Read, as chairman of the committee, in all
matters relating to the diseases of animals.  At Honingham on September
21st Mr. and Mrs. Read were presented with farewell gifts by the
inhabitants of that and adjoining parishes on the occasion of their
departure after thirty years' residence in the district.  (_See_
September 25th, 1897.)

22.--Mr. F. H. Tulloch, an inspector of the Local Government Board, held
an inquiry at the Guildhall, Norwich, as to an application by the Town
Council for sanction to borrow 72,000 for sewerage purposes, and to
appropriate the New Mills estate for the purposes of a power-station for
the City works.  On September 29th the Council accepted tenders for the
construction of sewerage and surface water sewers in district No. 5 for
17,480, and for the construction of river works and power-station
buildings on the New Mills estate for 5,039.  (_See_ October 17th, 1899.)

28.--A burglary was committed at the shop of Mr. Edward Morley, jeweller
and silversmith, the Walk, Norwich, and property to the value of nearly
2,000 stolen.  The thieves were never discovered.


FEBRUARY.


3.--Died at Billingford Hall, East Dereham, Lady Parry, widow of
Rear-Admiral Sir William Edward Parry, the distinguished Arctic
navigator.  Her ladyship, who was in her 88th year, was a daughter of the
Rev. Robert Hankinson, of Walpole, and first married, in 1831, Mr. Samuel
Hoare, of Hampstead.  Her second marriage took place on June 29th, 1841.

5.--The Ecclesiastical Lectures were resumed at Norwich Cathedral by
Bishop Barry, who dealt with "The Life and Times of St. Ambrose."  The
concluding lecture was given on March 4th by the Rev. H. C. G. Moule,
D.D., Principal of Ridley Hall, Cambridge, on "The Life and Times of St.
Augustine."

7.--A deputation representing the Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture waited
upon the First Lord of the Treasury (Mr. Balfour) and the Minister of
Agriculture (Mr. Walter Long) for the purpose of urging various points
for the alleviation of the distressed condition of agriculture.

10.--Mr. Henry Bowyer Sparke, son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Bowyer Sparke, of
Gunthorpe Hall, was presented with a massive silver punch bowl by the
tenantry on the estate on the occasion of his coming of age.

15.--A conference of delegates representing the Boards of Guardians in
the county was held at the Shirehall, Norwich, to consider a proposal
adopted at a meeting held the previous year in favour of the amalgamation
of workhouses.

17.--The infant Prince of the Duke and Duchess of York was christened at
Sandringham church by the Bishop of Norwich in the names of Albert
Frederick Arthur George.

28.--Mr. H. S. Patteson was entertained at a banquet given at the Maid's
Head Hotel, Norwich, in recognition of his life-long services to
Conservatism and in celebration of the attainment of his 80th year.  Mr.
Patteson was presented with a replica in silver gilt of three pieces of
ancient plate in the possession of the Corporation.


MARCH.


3.--Dr. Thomson, medical superintendent of the Norfolk County Asylum,
delivered a lecture before the Norfolk and Norwich Medico-Chirurgical
Society on "The New Photography," and gave a practical demonstration of
the Rontgen rays.

10.--Died at Cincinnati, while travelling in the United States as a
member of Sir Henry Irving's company, Mr. Henry Howe.  Born in Norwich on
March 31st, 1812, he was the son of a Quaker gentleman named Hutchinson,
and was educated at the Ackworth School of the Society of Friends in
Lancashire, where, for a time, he had John Bright as a fellow scholar.
At the age of 19 he absconded from home and joined a strolling company.
Mr. Howe made his first appearance in London at the Victoria Theatre in
October, 1834, and afterwards became a member of the Covent Garden
company under Macready.  In 1881 he joined the Lyceum company and
remained with them uninterruptedly until the time of his death.


APRIL.


8.--Captain Wiggins, the Arctic explorer and navigator, who had recently
returned from Siberia, lectured in Norwich upon the Nansen expedition.

9.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference commenced at the Town Hall, Ipswich,
under the presidency of the Bishop of the Diocese, and was continued on
the 10th.

12.--Died at Lady Lane, Norwich, Mr. Edward Samuel Bignold.  Born on
October 13th, 1821, he was son of Mr. Thomas Bignold, and nephew of Sir
Samuel Bignold.  Mr. Bignold held several public appointments, including
the office of City Coroner, to which he succeeded on the death of Mr.
William Wilde in 1866.

--Thanksgiving services were held at the church of St. Peter Mancroft,
Norwich, on the occasion of the re-opening of the tower after restoration
at the cost of 1,200.

13.--A military tournament by the 7th Dragoon Guards commenced at the
Agricultural Hall, Norwich, and concluded on the 18th.

18.--Dr. Bunnett was presented at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, with an
illuminated address and a cheque for 280, on the attainment of his
"musical jubilee."

23.--A deputation of Norfolk farmers and graziers waited upon Mr. Walter
Long, President of the Board of Agriculture, and requested that a clause
might be inserted in the Government Cattle Diseases Bill permitting the
importation of live Canadian cattle.  Mr. Long was unable to comply with
the demands of the deputation.


MAY.


1.--At a special meeting of the Board of Governors of the Jenny Lind
Infirmary, held at the Guildhall, Norwich, Mr. Colman offered to present
to the charity, as a memorial to his late wife, the necessary site upon
which to erect a new infirmary.  The offer was gratefully accepted, and
the Committee of Management were empowered to take steps for collecting
funds and for preparing plans.  (_See_ January 23rd, 1897.)

5.--Mr. R. W. Ladell, solicitor, was elected by the Norwich Town Council
to the office of City Coroner, rendered vacant by the death of Mr. E. S.
Bignold.

7.--Mr. and Mrs. Kendal and their London company appeared at Norwich
Theatre in "A Scrap of Paper."  "A White Lie" was produced on the 8th,
and "The Ironmaster" on the 9th.

12.--Mr. J. L. Toole with his London company appeared at the Assembly
Room, Agricultural Hall, Norwich, in the comic sporting play
"Thoroughbred."

15.--Lord Tweedmouth, as president of the Norwich Gladstone Club,
delivered his inaugural address to the members at the Assembly Room,
Agricultural Hall, Norwich.

21.--The annual training of the Loyal Suffolk Hussars (Yeomanry Cavalry),
commanded by Lieut.-Col. A. G. Lucas, commenced at Yarmouth.

25.--Louis Tussaud's exhibition "All the World in Wax" was opened at the
Agricultural Hall, Norwich.  One of the attractions was the display for
the first time in Norwich of the cinematograph or "living pictures."


JUNE.


1.--Dr. Jameson, of Transvaal raid fame, travelling as Dr. Johnson,
accompanied by Dr. Rutherford Harris, visited Norwich, and stayed at the
Maid's Head Hotel.

2.--The coming of age of Mr. John Calthorpe Blofeld, eldest son of Mr.
Blofeld, of Hoveton House, was celebrated by the tenantry on the Hoveton
estate.

11.--Died at Wreningham Rectory, the Rev. Arthur Wilson Upcher, who for
48 years was rector of Ashwellthorpe and Wreningham.  Born at Sheringham
in 1815, he was an excellent oar, and rowed number seven in the Cambridge
boat when the first University boat race was contested from Westminster
to Putney in 1836.  Mr. Upcher was also a remarkably good shot.

13.--The announcement was made that Messrs. Gurneys and Co. had issued a
circular stating the completion of arrangements for an important
amalgamation of the businesses of certain private banks as a company
under the name of Barclay and Co., Limited.  The registered capital was
6,000,000.  On October 31st the members of the old firm of Messrs.
Gurneys and Co. were presented with a massive silver shield mounted on
solid oak, and an illuminated address in which the subscribers, the
citizens of Norwich, expressed their high appreciation of the long and
honourable career of the firm and the influence for good exercised
individually by the members.  The presentation was made by the Mayor (Mr.
John Moore).

19.--In the Queen's Bench Division, before the Lord Chief Justice and a
special jury, the action Austin _v._ the Central News, Limited, and
several provincial newspapers, the "Norfolk News" included, came on for
trial.  Mr. Austin, M.P. for West Limerick, complained that the
defendants had published a libel concerning him, in a paragraph stating
that in a speech he had sympathised with dynamiters.  The jury found a
verdict for the plaintiff, damages 1,000, of which the "Norfolk News"
Company were adjudged to pay 100.

30.--A recumbent effigy placed in the north transept of Norwich Cathedral
to the memory of the late Bishop Pelham was unveiled by the Rev. Canon
Patteson.  It was the work of Mr. James Forsyth, sculptor, of Finchley
Road, Hampstead.


JULY.


1.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association opened at
East Dereham.  The Hon. Ailwyn E. Fellowes, M.P., presided at the
luncheon.  The exhibition closed on the 2nd.

--The octo-centenary thanksgiving services commenced at Norwich
Cathedral.  The opening service was attended by the high official
dignitaries of county and city, who entered the Cathedral in procession,
marshalled by officers of the 7th Dragoon Guards.  The Archbishop of
Armagh preached to a vast congregation, and at the conclusion of the
service the Dean and Mrs. Lefroy entertained a large and distinguished
company to luncheon in a marquee erected in the Deanery grounds.  The
services were continued throughout the week.

1.--A party of American Congregationalists on a tour through Europe
arrived at Norwich from Ely, attended the commemoration service at
Norwich Cathedral, and were included among the guests at the Dean's
luncheon.  In the evening they were present at a gathering held in their
honour at the Old Meeting House, "the oldest home of Congregationalism in
the city."  The Mayor (Mr. John Moore) presided, and the visitors were
accorded an enthusiastic reception.

9.--Three sisters, Clara, Eleanor, and Ida Elizabeth Louisa Vipan, were
drowned whilst wandering upon the treacherous sands at Holkham.

10.--The old colours of the 2nd Battalion Norfolk Regiment, brought from
Aldershot by Colonel Shepherd and other officers, were laid up in the
choir of Norwich Cathedral.  The colours were borne under escort from the
west door to the choir, the band of the 4th Battalion playing "The March
of the Israelites."  With the usual ceremony the colours were then handed
over to the care and custody of the Dean and Chapter.

21.--Mr. Ben Greet's Company of Woodland Players gave at Bracondale
Woods, Norwich, open air representations of "Twelfth Night" and of scenes
from "Much Ado about Nothing," in aid of the building fund of the Jenny
Lind Infirmary.

22.--The marriage took place at Buckingham Palace of Princess Maud and
Prince Charles of Denmark.  Their Royal Highnesses were enthusiastically
received at Lynn and Sandringham on their way to Appleton Hall.  At
Norwich the marriage was celebrated by the ringing of bells and by the
display of flags on the public buildings.  The county of Norfolk
presented to their Royal Highnesses as a wedding gift an oak chest
containing a service of plate, and the citizens of Norwich gave a
handsomely appointed victoria.  Gifts were also sent by the boroughs of
Yarmouth and Lynn, and by the tenantry on the Sandringham estate.


AUGUST.


2.--The Norfolk Volunteer Infantry Brigade went into camp at Colchester
under the command of Brigadier-General W. E. G. L. Bulwer.

5.--The Lord Chief Justice, with whom was Mr. Justice Lawrence, sitting
as a divisional court, delivered judgment in an application "in _re_ a
solicitor, _ex parte_ the Incorporated Law Society."  In this case the
Statutory Committee of the society on July 10th, 1896, made a long and
elaborate report, in which they stated that a certain number of
allegations of professional misconduct had been proved to their
satisfaction.  The Lord Chief Justice dealt at considerable length with
various points in the case, and concluded by saying: "The court would be
failing in its duty if it did not in the most emphatic way mark its sense
of the scandalous story disclosed in this report."  The order of the
court was "that Isaac Bugg Coaks, of Bank Plain, Norwich, be struck off
the rolls, and that he do pay the costs of the inquiry before the
Statutory Committee and the costs of this application."

26.--Mr. Fred Morgan, lessee of Norwich Theatre, was presented with a
massive silver Monteith punch bowl and a purse of gold by members of the
theatrical profession and personal friends.


SEPTEMBER.


2.--Died at Adelaide Place, Windsor, in her 91st year, Miss Jane Rigby,
"second daughter and last surviving child of Dr. Edward Rigby, of
Norwich."

12.--A demonstration took place at Norwich in aid of the funds of the
Royal National Lifeboat Institution.

27.--Died at St. Andrew's Parsonage, Norwich, the Rev. Arthur Charles
Copeman, M.B., vicar of St. Andrew's, Honorary Canon of Norwich
Cathedral, and rural dean of Norwich, aged 72.  He was the youngest son
of Mr. Edward Breese Copeman, and was born at Coltishall.  At the age of
15 he was placed under the care of his eldest brother, Dr. Edward
Copeman.  On entering King's College, London, as a medical student, he
obtained his M.B. degree at the London University, won the gold medal in
anatomy and physiology, and became an associate of King's College.  At
the end of his student days he was offered, on the nomination of the
Chancellor of the University, and accepted it, a commission on the Army
Medical Staff.  He soon resigned it, however, and commenced private
practice at Epsom, when it became his ambition to enter the Church, and
forthwith he applied himself to reading for Holy Orders.  Ordained by the
Bishop of Worcester, he was in 1851 admitted deacon and priest, and for
the next five years held curacies at Warwick, Bury St. Edmund's, and
Wisbech.  In the last-named town he worked single-handed among the
cholera-stricken inhabitants, and received from them in recognition of
his services an address, a collection of theological works, and a cheque
for 100.  Mr. Copeman's work in Norwich began in January, 1857, when he
was elected vicar of St. Andrew's.  He was appointed rural dean in 1870,
and honorary canon in 1877.  In 1881, on the death of Mr. Field, he
became chairman of the Norwich Board of Guardians.  He had been a member
of the School Board, and was identified with the managing bodies of the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital and other charitable institutions.

29.--The Norwich Town Council, on a representation of the
Inspector-General of Cavalry that the city would cease to be the
headquarters of a cavalry regiment unless the drill-ground on Mousehold
Heath were enlarged, authorised the hiring of 62 acres of land adjoining
the drill-ground for a term not exceeding five years, at a rent to be
agreed upon.


OCTOBER.


6.--The Norfolk and Norwich Musical Festival commenced at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich, with a performance of "Jeptha."  On the morning of the 7th
was produced the dramatic oratorio "The Rose of Sharon," and in the
evening Suite No. 1 "Peer Gynt" (Grieg), "Blest Pair of Sirens" (C.
Hubert H. Parry), conducted by the composer; a new violin concerto in D
Minor (Frederic Cliffe), composed expressly for the Festival, and
conducted by the composer, and the dramatic cantata "Fridolin" (A.
Randegger), conducted by the composer.  "Elijah" was performed on the
morning of the 8th; and in the evening was produced the poetic cantata,
"Hero and Leander" (Liugi Mancinelli), composed expressly for the
Festival, and conducted by the composer.  On the morning of the 9th was
performed the sacred trilogy, "Redemption" (Gounod); and in the evening,
overture, "Leonora," No. 9 (Beethoven); Irish ballad for chorus and
orchestra, "Phaudrig Crohoore" (C. V. Stanford), first time of
performance, and conducted by the composer; suite in D Minor (Edward
German), conducted by the composer; and Act 3, "Lohengrin" (Wagner).  The
principal _artistes_ were Madame Albani, Miss Gertrude Izard, Madame Ella
Russell, Miss Katherine Fisk, Miss Sarah Berry, Mr. Edward Lloyd, Mr.
Reginald Brophy, Mr. Ben Davies, Mr. Watkin Mills, Mr. J. H. Brockbank,
Mr. Andrew Black, and M. Tivadar Nachez (violin).  Mr. Alberto Randegger
was conductor.  The receipts amounted to 5,191 17s. 2d., and the payments
to 4,738 4s. 7d.  Of the balance 200 was allocated to the local
charities.

7.--The Prince of Wales visited Norwich on the occasion of the Musical
Festival.  Princess Louise, who with the Marquis of Lorne, was staying at
Sheringham as the guest of Lord and Lady Battersea, arrived at Thorpe
Station at 11.45, and awaited the arrival of the Royal train from
Wolferton.  The Prince of Wales, who was accompanied by the Duke and
Duchess of York, arrived at twelve o'clock, and was received by Lord
Suffield, who presented to their Royal Highnesses the Mayor and Mayoress
and the Sheriff.  Joined by Princess Louise the Royal party drove to St.
Andrew's Hall, where they were received by Mr. F. Oddin Taylor, honorary
secretary to the Festival Committee, Mr. H. C. Bolingbroke, chairman of
the Orchestral Committee, and Mr. C. R. Gilman, Deputy-Mayor and chairman
of the Committee of Management.  During an interval their Royal
Highnesses were entertained to luncheon by the Mayor in the old Crypt of
the Friars of the Sack; and at the conclusion of the performance they
proceeded to the County Club.  The Duke and Duchess of York and Princess
Louise afterwards drove to the Cathedral, where they were received by the
Dean, and had afternoon tea at the Deanery; and the Prince of Wales
attended a Masonic gathering at the Agricultural Hall, where his Royal
Highness unveiled a bust of Lord Suffield, presented to his lordship to
mark the conclusion of his twenty years of office as Provincial Grand
Master.  His Royal Highness subsequently visited the Soldiers' and
Sailors' Home, and proceeded to the Deanery.  The Royal visitors
afterwards dined at the County Club, and attended the evening performance
at St. Andrew's Hall.  They left early, the Prince of Wales and the Duke
and Duchess of York for Sandringham, and Princess Louise for Overstrand.

9.--Princess Louise, accompanied by the Marquis of Lorne, M.P., arrived
at Norwich from Cromer, and proceeding to the High School for Girls
distributed the prizes.

11.--A memorial service was held at Norwich Cathedral on the death of the
Archbishop of Canterbury.  "The late Archbishop's sister, Miss Benson,
was for some years head-mistress of the Norwich High School for Girls
when that institution had its home in St. Giles' Street at the house now
occupied by Sir Peter Eade."

16.--Died at Norwich, Mr. William Alexander Delaselle Eden, better known
as William Herbert, the actor.  Before adopting the stage as a profession
he held a commission in the 33rd (Duke of Wellington's) Regiment.  His
remains were interred at West Runton.

17.--A recommendation by the Norfolk Highways Committee that the
management of main roads in the county should in future be imposed upon
the District Councils constituted therein, was rejected by the Norfolk
County Council by 44 votes against 20.

21.--The first celebration of the anniversary of Trafalgar was observed
in Norwich, on the initiation of the Navy League, by the decoration of
the Nelson statue in the Cathedral Close.


NOVEMBER.


9.--Mr. Charles Rackham Gilman was elected Mayor and Mr. Henley Curl
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

18.--It was reported at a meeting of the Norwich Town Council that plans
had been deposited at the Town Clerk's office for a proposed tramway
scheme.  At a meeting of the Council on December 15th it was stated that
another scheme had been introduced, and was known as the Norwich and
District Light Railways.  Its object was to bring into closer connection
with the city the outlying hamlets of Costessey, Thorpe St. Andrew,
Trowse Newton, and Eaton, and plans had been deposited by the New General
Traction Company, Limited.  Both schemes were referred to committee.
(_See_ January 19th, 1897.)

21.--The Duke of York, as president of the Norfolk and Norwich Christmas
Show Association, arrived at Norwich and visited the exhibition of the
association at the Agricultural Hall.  His Royal Highness, on leaving the
show, had luncheon with Mr. Colman, at Carrow Abbey, and in the afternoon
left Trowse station for Sandringham.

25.--At a meeting of the Norwich Board of Guardians a deputation was
appointed to visit towns where the rate-books were made out in street
older, and to obtain information upon the subject of an improved method
of collecting the rates.  This important matter, originally introduced by
Mr. William Coke Gee, resulted in the adoption of a system by which the
rate-books were made out in street order, the daily collection of rates
introduced, the rate collectors' districts redistributed, and the
half-yearly collection ended in March and September.

27.--Died at Hill House, Mill Hill Road, Norwich, Mr. Thomas Ballan
Stead, permanent secretary of the Ancient Order of Foresters.  Mr. Stead
came from Dundee on the removal of the headquarters of the society to
Norwich.  Prior to his election as secretary to the Foresters, Mr. Stead
was engaged in journalism, and devoted himself mainly to studying
questions affecting the social well-being of the artizan classes.


DECEMBER.


2.--Mr. Bancroft, the actor, gave a reading of Charles Dickens'
"Christmas Carol" at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, in aid of the Blind
School and the Norwich Lying-in Charity.

9.--A regimental ball given at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, by Colonel
Rough and officers of the 7th Dragoon Guards.

12.--Mr. Caleb Barker was elected secretary to the Norfolk Agricultural
Association in place of Mr. James Bacon, resigned.

14.--A poll was opened for the election of a vicar for the parish of St.
Andrew, Norwich.  The candidates were the Rev. A. G. Copeman, son of the
late vicar, the Rev. S. A. D. Suffling, and the Rev. R. Middleton.  Mr.
Copeman received 170 votes, Mr. Suffling 129, and Mr. Middleton 46.

28.--Died at Park Lane, Norwich, Mr. Manning Prentice Squirrell, aged 61.
He was a son of Mr. Robert Squirrell, of Stowmarket, and head of the firm
of Squirrell and Utting, merchants.  In 1887 Mr. Squirrell was returned
as a Liberal member of the Norwich Town Council, but dissented from his
party, and at a subsequent election was defeated at the poll.  A well
informed man, he took great interest in economic and fiscal questions,
and was an active member of the Norwich Science Gossip Club.



1897.


JANUARY.


19.--The Norwich Town Council ordered a petition to be presented to
Parliament against a scheme for the construction of electric tramways in
the city.  This course was adopted not in a hostile spirit, but with the
object of making the best terms possible for the citizens.  On February
9th the Corporation gave its consent to the Tramways Bill then before
Parliament, and on February 23rd a petition signed by nearly 23,500
inhabitants of the city was presented to the Town Council, asking them to
support the projected electric tramways as distinct from the proposed
scheme of light railways.  The Parliamentary and By-laws Committee on
April 13th reported that they had considered side by side the merits and
proposals of the New General Traction Company, Limited, to construct
electric tramways in the city and Thorpe, and of the British Electric
Traction Company, Limited, to construct light railways in the city and
district, and were of opinion that the interests of the city would be
best served by making an arrangement with the former company.  It was
understood that the company had given an undertaking to withdraw their
Bill from Parliament at any time upon the request of the Corporation.  On
April 23rd the Council adopted the following motion:--"(a) To enable the
New General Traction Company, Limited, to carry their Bill through
Parliament if terms can be arranged with the company satisfactory to the
committee, for the construction of electric tramways in the city; (b) to
oppose the application of the British Electric Traction Company, Limited,
for an order by the Light Railway Commissioners authorising the company
to construct light railways in the city and adjoining districts; (c) that
the committee be authorised to take such action and incur such costs as
may in their opinion be necessary to carry out the above resolutions."
On May 31st the Norwich Electric Tramways Bill was considered by a Select
Committee of the House of Commons, and it was announced that all
opposition had been withdrawn; and on July 20th it was stated that the
Bill had passed through the House of Commons and been read a second time
in the House of Lords.  (_See_ February 5th, 1898.)

19.--The resignation of Mr. Robert Hitchman, of the office of Chief
Constable, which he had held for 38 years, was received by the Norwich
Town Council, who granted him a retiring pension of 273 6s. 8d.

--The Norwich Town Council accepted the offer of Messrs. Gurneys and Co.
to present to the Corporation a set of civic robes.

22.--The roads in many parts of the county were rendered impassable by
snowdrifts; the river traffic between Norwich and Yarmouth was impeded by
ice, and in the stormy weather which prevailed much damage was occasioned
to the Yarmouth fishing fleet and coast-bound vessels.

23.--A public meeting convened by the Lord-Lieutenant of the county (the
Earl of Leicester) and the Mayor (Mr. C. R. Gilman) was held at the
Guildhall, Norwich, to decide upon the method of celebrating locally the
Diamond Jubilee of her Majesty the Queen.  The Dean of Norwich moved
"That subscriptions be invited in order to raise a sum of money, to be
called the Diamond Jubilee Fund, for the purpose of building a new Jenny
Lind Infirmary for Sick Children, it being the strong feeling of the
meeting that no memorial could be found more typical of the tender
sympathy and interest ever shown by her Majesty in the sufferings and
needs of her people."  Viscount Coke seconded the resolution, and a
committee was appointed to raise the fund.  (_See_ March 15th, 1898.)

25.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Cave, Henry Greaves
Corsbie (37), clerk, pleaded guilty to feloniously endorsing and uttering
a banker's cheque for the payment of 31 12s. 1d. with intent to defraud
the Norfolk and Norwich Savings Bank on July 15th, 1893, and was
sentenced to seven years' penal servitude.  The prisoner had been guilty
of frauds extending over a period of ten years.

--John George Foster (35) was indicted at the Norwich Assizes, before Mr.
Justice Cave, for the wilful murder of Alice Maria Newby, at 60,
Pottergate Street, Norwich, on December 8th, 1896.  He was found guilty
of manslaughter, and sentenced to penal servitude for life.


FEBRUARY.


2.--The Girls' Home in Botolph Street, Norwich, established by the Board
of Guardians with the object of removing young children from workhouse
surroundings, was opened by the Mayor (Mr. C. R. Gilman).

6.--A sudden thaw accompanied by heavy rain caused extensive floods in
low-lying districts of the county.  Great alarm was occasioned in Norwich
by the rising of the Wensum and the flooding of premises in Heigham
Street.  The waters subsided on the 7th.

7.--Died at Luxor, Egypt, Mr. Alan Cozens-Hardy Colman, aged 30, son of
Mr. J. J. Colman, of Carrow House, Norwich.  Mr. Colman, who was a member
of the Norfolk County Council, was of a studious disposition, and applied
himself to mechanics.  Although in affluent circumstances he voluntarily
became a pupil at the Stratford works of the Great Eastern Railway
Company, was for a number of years an active confrere of the workmen
employed there, adapted himself to their conditions of labour, and made
himself generally popular.

11.--Died at Hackford Hall, Reepham, Georgina Frances Amy, widow of Mr.
John Collyer, and eldest daughter of Sir William Johnston, of that ilk,
of Hilton House, Woodside, Aberdeen.  Mrs. Collyer, who was in her 92nd
year, was at the time of Wellington's great campaign being educated at
Brussels, where her parents resided, and were among the guests who
attended the Duchess of Richmond's ball on the night before Waterloo.
She had a vivid recollection of June 15th, 1815.  With her younger
sisters, she in the early dawn watched from the windows of her parents'
house the troops passing to the field.  Later in the day the girls
attended school as usual, and soon became aware that the battle had
begun.  The servant sent to fetch her from school lost herself in the
crowd, and the children made their way home alone, groping by the walls
and passing through the throng of troops marching to the field and the
thickening stream of prisoners and wounded returning.  On the 17th and
18th she was all day helping her parents to hand water and wine to the
wounded as they passed the door.  Mrs. Collyer had personal recollections
of Mendelssohn, whose wife was long her intimate acquaintance, and of
Spohr, whose playing she had often heard and admired.

18.--The members at Norwich of the National Union of Boot and Shoe
Operatives resolved to go out on strike.  On April 17th it was stated
"the desertions from the ranks of the shoe strikers and their return to
work have been steady and persistent during the week, although many
hundreds are still out."  Several charges of intimidation from time to
time occupied the attention of the magistrates.  On July 20th the Mayor
made an appeal to masters and men to endeavour to formulate a plan for
the settlement of their differences, but without effect.  The strike
having lasted six months, a meeting of the men was held at the Victoria
Hall, at which it was stated that 10,000 had been expended in strike pay,
and it was resolved that the struggle be continued.  After lasting
thirty-four weeks the strike came to an end on October 22nd, when terms
were signed by the representatives of the masters and of the men.  The
last distribution of strike pay was made on the 23rd, and the men
returned to work on the 25th (St. Crispin's Day).


MARCH.


5.--Died at his residence in the Close, Norwich, the Rev. Canon James
William Lucas Heaviside.  In 1838 he was professor of mathematics at
Haileybury College, in 1843 examiner in mathematics and natural
philosophy at the University of London, and in 1858 examiner for the
Council of Military Education.  He was appointed Canon residentiary of
Norwich Cathedral in 1860, and afterwards became examiner in mathematics
to Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught, who, when stationed at Norwich with
his regiment, the 7th Hussars, was a frequent visitor at Canon
Heaviside's residence.  Her Majesty the Queen, to mark her appreciation
of his services, presented him with a massive silver inkstand and a
portrait of the Duke.  For many years Canon Heaviside was chairman of the
governors of the Grammar and Commercial Schools, a trustee of Norman's
Endowed School, and one of the trustees for the management of the local
charities.  When the first Norwich School Board was formed in 1872 Canon
Heaviside was elected chairman.

6.--The removal of Judge Addison from the Norfolk County Court Circuit to
Southwark, and the appointment of Mr. William Willis, Q.C., as judge in
his place, was announced.

--Died, the Rev. Ebenezer Cobham Brewer, LL.D., compiler of the
"Dictionary of Phrase and Fable," and of other well-known works.  Dr.
Brewer, who was nearly 87 years of age, spent his younger days in Norwich
as a teacher in his father's school.  In 1832 he went to Trinity Hall,
Cambridge, took his degree in Civil Law in 1835, and obtained his degree
as LL.D. in 1844.  He was ordained in 1834 in the diocese of Ely.  At the
time of his death he was residing with his son-in-law, the Rev. H. T.
Hayman, vicar of Edwinstowe, Newark.

16.--Died at his London residence, 37, Hyde Park Gardens, W., the Right
Hon. Sir Edward Ebenezer Kay, of Thorpe Abbots, Scole.  He was a son of
Mr. Robert Kay, of Bury, Lancashire, and brother Sir J. Kay Shuttleworth.
Born January 2nd, 1822, he studied for the law, began his career as law
reporter, and became Queen's Counsel in 1866.  At the General Election in
1874 he contested Clitheroe in the Liberal interest, and was defeated.
In 1878 he gave up exclusive practice in Vice-chancellor Bacon's Court
and became a special.  On the retirement of Vice-Chancellor Malins in
1881 Kay was made a "journeyman judge" of the Chancery Division, and in
that position he remained until the resignation of Vice-Chancellor Bacon
in 1886.  In 1890, on the retirement of Sir Henry Cotton, Mr. Justice Kay
was promoted to the Court of Appeal.  He was on the commission of the
peace for the county, and was formerly a chairman of Norfolk Quarter
Sessions.

17.--Sir William Harcourt, leader of the Opposition in the House of
Commons, addressed a meeting of the National Liberal Federation at the
Agricultural Hall, Norwich.  The Earl of Kimberley presided and delivered
an address, which elicited severe strictures from Lord Salisbury in the
House of Lords on March 19th.

21.--Died at the Cheshire Cheese Hotel, Surrey Street, Strand, when
fulfilling a professional engagement in London, Mr. Mark Knights, chief
reporter on the staff of the "Eastern Daily Press."  Mr. Knights was
suffocated by an escape of gas in his bed-room, and at the inquest the
jury returned a verdict of accidental death.  He was the author of
several works on archaeological and other subjects.  His "Highways and
Byways of Norwich" and "Peeps at the Past" are regarded as standard
works.  Relinquishing the study of antiquarian matters, which by his
skilful treatment interested a wide circle of readers, Mr. Knights had
taken up the work of interpreting Shakespeare in the light of Scripture,
a subject that appealed to a very limited section.  He published in 1893
a book entitled "Hamlet Interpreted," which failed to bring him a
reputation such as he achieved by his archaeological works.  Mr. Knights
was 53 years of age, and had been thirty-five years engaged on the Press.


APRIL.


13.--Mr. Edwin F. Winch, Chief Constable of Truro, was appointed Chief
Constable of Norwich at the salary of 350 per annum.

14.--Mr. Sydney Cozens-Hardy, clerk to the Norwich School Board, was
presented with an illuminated address by the officials of the Board on
the attainment of his twenty-one years' service.

18.--Died at Orford Hill, Norwich, the Rev. William Frederic Creeny,
M.A., F.S.A., aged 72.  Mr. Creeny graduated at St. John's College,
Cambridge, in 1853, and was soon afterwards ordained.  After serving as
curate at St. Mark, Lakenham, he removed to Wellingborough, and
subsequently became chaplain to the Bishop of St. Helena, and chaplain of
St. Leonard and Isle of Ryde, Sydney, where he remained until 1872.  In
1873-4 he was curate of St. John, Upper Norwood, and in 1876 curate of
Soham, Cambridgeshire.  In the latter year he was presented by Lady
Lothian to the living of St. Michael-at-Thorn, Norwich.  Mr. Creeny
enriched the transactions of the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological
Society by many valuable contributions relating to the history of
Norwich, and in 1884 he published his magnificent work on "Monumental
Brasses on the Continent of Europe," a field of labour "hitherto almost
untilled."  Another scarcely less laborious task was achieved by the
publication by Mr. Creeny, in November, 1891, of "Illustrations of
Incised Slabs."  Mr. Creeny had visited India, China, and Palestine, and
his experiences in the Holy Land were afterwards published in a small
book entitled "Notes of a Journey to Jerusalem."

22.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference was opened at Noverre's Rooms,
Norwich, and concluded on the 23rd.  A special meeting was held on June
10th to discuss the subject of local taxation as affecting tithe
rent-charge.

30.--The Countess of Leicester opened at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, a
"Foreign Fair," in aid of the building fund of the St. George's Home for
Working Girls.


MAY.


2.--Died at Tunbridge Wells, the Very Rev. Edward Meyrick Goulburn, D.D.,
formerly Dean of Norwich, aged 79.  Born in London on February 11th,
1818, he was a son of Mr. Serjeant Goulburn, Q.C., and was educated at
Eton, whence he proceeded to Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained
his B.A. degree in 1839.  In 1842 he was admitted into deacon's orders by
Dr. Bagot, Bishop of Oxford, and in the same year was ordained priest.  A
Fellow of Merton College, Dr. Goulburn was, on the elevation of Dr. Tait
to the deanery of Carlisle in 1849, appointed to the head-mastership of
Rugby School.  He resigned the post in 1858, and became minister of
Quebec Chapel, St. Marylebone.  In 1859 he was nominated by the Bishop of
London to St. John's, Paddington, and was appointed prebendary of St.
Paul's Cathedral.  Upon the deanery of Norwich becoming vacant in 1866 by
the death of the Hon. and Very Rev. Dean Pellew, who had held it since
1828, Dr. Goulburn was appointed thereto.  He was the author of several
theological works.  A learned antiquary, he succeeded Sir John Boileau,
F.S.A. (who died in 1869), as president of the Norfolk and Norwich
Archaeological Society.  He did much for the restoration of Norwich
Cathedral, and expended upon the work from his own private means the sum
of 10,000, and raised the further amount of 4,000.  In conjunction with
Precentor Symonds, Dean Goulburn wrote the greater portion of the
valuable work "The Ancient Sculptures in the Roof of Norwich Cathedral";
and in 1876 published a life of Herbert de Losinga.  One of his last
works was the "Life of Dean Burgon."  Dean Goulburn was also the author
of the "Book of Rugby School."

24.--The Queen's birthday was observed at Norwich by a military review on
Mousehold Heath.  The 7th Dragoon Guards, the depot company of the
Norfolk Regiment, the 3rd Battalion Norfolk Regiment (Militia), and the
Artillery and Rifle Volunteers took part.


JUNE.


1.--The centenary of the Norwich Union Fire Insurance Society was
celebrated at Norwich.  A banquet was held at St. Andrew's Hall, under
the presidency of Mr. H. S. Patteson, and was attended by the society's
representatives from all parts of the world.

10.--At the Norwich Assizes, which commenced on this date, before Mr.
Justice Mathew, John Furness, aged 64, solicitor, was indicted for
fraudulently appropriating to his own use a deed of mortgage on December
30th, 1887.  He was found guilty, and recommended to mercy on account of
his age, and sentenced to three months' imprisonment without hard labour.

16.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened
at Fakenham.  Viscount Coke presided at the public luncheon.  The show
closed on the 17th.

20.--The celebration of the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria began at
Norwich this day (Sunday) with special thanksgiving services at the
Cathedral, St. Peter Mancroft, and other churches.  On the 21st 125
carcases of sheep and 20 quarters of beef allotted to Norwich out of the
gift sent from Australia for distribution among the poor in the large
towns of Great Britain, were divided among 1,500 recipients at
Blackfriars' Hall.  The Jubilee day was celebrated on the 22nd.  Early in
the morning the bells of St. Peter Mancroft were rung, and a Royal salute
of twenty-one guns fired on Mousehold Heath by the mounted batteries of
the Artillery Volunteers.  Later 9,000 children from the public
elementary schools assembled in the Market Place and sang the National
Anthem, and Mr. George White, Chairman of the School Board, announced,
amid great enthusiasm, that the Queen had conferred the honour of
knighthood upon the Mayor (Mr. C. R. Gilman).  A service of praise and
thanksgiving was held at the Cathedral at 11 o'clock, and was attended in
state by the Mayor and Corporation.  At noon the Artillery and Rifle
Volunteers, with the depot company of the Norfolk Regiment, fired a _feu
de joie_ in the Market Place, and at one o'clock Sir Charles and Lady
Gilman held a reception at the Guildhall, where the company were invited
to drink the Queen's health.  In the afternoon there was a floral
procession through the streets of the city, sports took place on the
Earlham Road Recreation Ground, a "costume" cricket match was played on
the Lakenham ground, and a captive balloon made frequent ascents from the
Cattle Market.  In the evening the city was illuminated, a firework
display was given, on Castle Meadow, and a bonfire lighted on St. James's
Hill.  On the 24th the Mayor and Sheriff gave a dinner at St. Andrew's
Hall to upwards of 1,000 of the aged poor, and in the evening Sir Charles
and Lady Gilman held a brilliant reception at the Castle Museum.  The
Jubilee was observed at Yarmouth, Lynn, Thetford, and at all towns and
villages in the county.


JULY.


16.--The Wild-Collins voting apparatus, for expediting and facilitating
voting at Parliamentary and Municipal elections, invented by Mr. Edward
Wild and Mr. A. E. Collins, City Engineer, was exhibited at the Municipal
offices, Norwich.

17.--Died at Old Buckenham, Mr. William Thomas Simpson, in his 67th year.
A native of Bury St. Edmund's, where his father was master of the Grammar
School, he was the senior partner of the old established firm of Salter
and Simpson, auctioneers and valuers.  Mr. Simpson had great practical
knowledge of agriculture, and was an excellent breeder and judge of
cattle.


AUGUST.


2.--The proceedings of the High Court of the Ancient Order of Foresters
opened at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich.  The delegates had been
received on July 31st by Sir Charles and Lady Gilman at St. Andrew's
Hall.  A _fete_ took place at Catton Park on the 2nd, and a garden party
was given at Hellesdon House by Sir Harry and Lady Bullard on the 3rd.

3.--A fire occurred on Ringland Hills.  It extended over an area of
between seven and eight acres, and destroyed many trees in the adjoining
plantation.

6.--Great damage was done by a fire which occurred at Cullingford's paper
mills, St. Martin's Plain, Norwich.

12.--Relays of cyclists belonging to the four battalions of the Norfolk
Volunteer Infantry Brigade, conveyed a message from Lynn to Yarmouth,
_via_ Norwich and Brandon, and back, a distance of 162 miles in 12 hours
55 minutes.  The cyclists carried their usual equipment, which included
rifle and bayonet, water bottle, and haversack.

--A fire occurred on premises in Denmark Street, Diss, and caused damage
estimated at 6,000.

18.--The Mayor of Norwich (Sir Charles R. Gilman) received honour of
knighthood at the hands of the Queen at Osborne House.

20.--The Wayside Chapel at Houghton St. Giles' was opened.  The building,
which had been used at a barn, is an interesting example of the
transition from the Decorated to the Perpendicular style.  It was built
about 1380, and had become by purchase the property of Miss Boyd, of
Kilburn, a wealthy Roman Catholic lady, who undertook its restoration.  A
party of "pilgrims" from London formed a procession at Walsingham, and
headed by a crucifix and lighted tapers, and attended by a priest, walked
to the chapel, where a private service was held.

31.--The China Cup, won at the Bisley meeting by a team of Norfolk
Volunteers, was ceremoniously handed over to the custody of the Mayor
(Sir Charles R. Gilman) at the Castle Museum, Norwich.  The Cup was first
won by Norfolk in 1877.


SEPTEMBER.


2.--Died at Gressenhall Workhouse, Peter Pentney, in his 101st year.  He
was a native of Mattishall, and "unlike most reputed centenarians he was
able to produce a duly certified copy of his baptismal register."

4.--A waterspout occurred off Cromer in wet and stormy weather.  It
struck the trawler Strive about six miles south-west of Smith's Knoll.
The vessel was turned on her beam ends, and considerably damaged.  The
waterspout, which towered above the mast of the trawler, travelled at a
rapid rate, and in three minutes was out of sight.

8.--Died at Park Lane, Norwich, Mr. James Spilling, editor of the
"Eastern Daily Press."  Mr. Spilling was a native of Ipswich, where he
was born in 1825, and came to Norwich in 1863 to fulfil an engagement on
the "Norfolk News."  He was the author of a series of sketches in the
East Anglian vernacular illustrative of rural life and humour; his more
solid work was devoted to the exposition of the philosophy and theology
of Swedenborg, in whose teachings Mr. Spilling had a sincere belief.
These books included "The Evening and Morning," "Amid the Corn," "Among
the Flowers," "The Wreath and the Ring," and "Our Society."

13.--Died at 35, King Street, Norwich, Mr. William Philip Barnes Freeman,
aged 84.  He was the eldest son of Mr. William Freeman, Mayor of Norwich
in 1843, and received his early education under Capt. Bailey, at
Hellesdon.  Afterwards he went to the Yarmouth Academy under the Rev. Mr.
Bowles, where he obtained lessons in drawing from John Sell Cotman, and
his education was completed at Norwich Grammar School under Valpy.  His
art studies were continued under Cotman for water colour and under T. B.
Ladbrooke for oil painting, and he was intimate with David Cox, Stark,
Henry Bright, Vincent, and other artists of his day.  Mr. Freeman was a
contributor to the exhibitions of the Royal Academy and of the Royal
Society of Artists.  His grandfather, Jeremiah Freeman, his father, and
his uncle, Philip Barnes, were all members of the old Norwich Society of
Artists founded by Old Crome.

20.--A Military and Naval Exhibition was opened at the Agricultural Hall,
Norwich, by Colonel Burton, commanding the 9th Regimental District.

23.--Mr. Paynton Pigott, Chief Constable of Norfolk, was presented by the
officers and men of the County Constabulary with a gift of silver plate
on the occasion of the seventeenth anniversary of his election to the
office.

25.--At the Shirehall, Norwich, was unveiled by Mr. R. T. Gurdon a
portrait of Mr. Clare Sewell Read, subscribed for by the county in
acknowledgment of his valuable services in the interests of agriculture.
The portrait, which was painted by J. J. Shannon, R.A., was afterwards
hung at the Castle Museum.


OCTOBER.


15.--A special Church mission commenced at Norwich and was concluded on
the 29th.

18.--St. Clement's churchyard, Norwich, laid out as a public garden by
the Norwich Playing Fields and Open Spaces Society, was opened by the
Mayor (Sir Charles R. Gilman).

24.--Died, at Oberlin House, St. Leonard's Road, Ealing, in his 90th
year, the Rev. John Stoughton, D.D.  The son of a Norwich solicitor he
was born in the parish of St. Michael-at-Plea, and was for sixty-five
years in the Congregational ministry.  Among his literary works was his
book entitled "Recollections of a Long Life."

--Died at Cranley Place, London, Mr. Francis Turner Palgrave, formerly
Professor of Poetry at Oxford.  The eldest son of Sir Francis Palgrave,
he was born at Great Yarmouth in 1824, and was educated at the
Charterhouse and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he was a scholar.  In
1847 he took his degree with a first in Classics, and was elected to a
Fellowship at Exeter College.  From 1850 to 1855 he was Vice-Principal of
the training college at Kneller Hall, and after acting as secretary to
Earl Granville, became assistant secretary to the Committee of the Privy
Council on Education.

26.--A serious outbreak of typhoid fever was reported at Lynn; and by
December 18th 440 cases and 43 deaths had occurred.  The disease was
occasioned by the impurity of the water supply, and it was stated that at
least 75 per cent. of the cases could be traced to the drinking of
unboiled water.

--Mr. T. Richmond Pinder resigned the head-mastership of King Edward VI.
Middle School, Norwich, to which he was appointed in 1862.  Mr. William
Robert Gurley, M.A., of the Perse Grammar School, Cambridge, was on
February 8th, 1898, elected to fill the vacancy.

--Died at Old Lakenham, Norwich, Mr. Carlos Cooper, barrister-at-law.  He
was the second son of Mr. Charles Cooper, and was born February 12th,
1815.  Educated at Norwich Grammar School he was called to the Bar by the
Society of Lincoln's Inn in 1839, and was appointed Recorder of Thetford
in 1865.  He afterwards became Recorder of King's Lynn, was placed on the
commission of the peace for the city of Norwich in 1873, and shortly
afterwards appointed judge of the Guildhall Court of Record on the death
of Mr. Nathaniel Palmer.


NOVEMBER.


1.--At Terrington Petty Sessions, the Norfolk and Norwich Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals instituted proceedings against two
persons for cruelty to 130 geese by plucking them alive on October 4th
and 5th.  Remarkable statements were made in the course of the hearing.
The practice, it was said, was not uncommon a quarter of a century
previously, but it had since ceased except in remote localities.
Evidence was given to the effect that the process was unquestionally
barbarous and cruel.  A witness for the defence, who described himself as
a "goose puller," stated that for twenty years he had plucked 1,500 live
geese annually, and 5,000 or 6,000 were so plucked every year in his
village.  It was the custom to pluck the same birds four times a
year--first on June 18th, and afterwards at intervals of three weeks; and
every goose so plucked weighed two pounds more at Christmas than those
which had not been plucked, and the flesh was of better quality.  The
magistrates dismissed the cases.

4.--Mr. A. J. Balfour, First Lord of the Treasury, addressed a large
meeting of the Conservative party at the Agricultural Hall, Norwich, at
which Lord Amherst of Hackney presided.  Mr. Balfour stayed at Catton
Park, as the guest of Mr. S. Gurney Buxton.

9.--Mr. Clement Charles Rix Spelman was elected Mayor and Mr. Alfred
Haldinstein appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

16.--The new Royal Hotel, erected on the site of Messrs. Foster and
Burroughes' offices and of a stonemason's yard and other premises on Bank
Plain, Norwich, was opened by a public luncheon at which Mr. Blofeld,
chairman of the Directors, presided.  The building was designed by Mr. E.
T. Boardman, of the firm of Messrs. Boardman and Son, and the contractor
was Mr. John Youngs.

28.--A severe gale visited the eastern coast, and continued on the 29th.
At Yarmouth a high sea flooded the Beach Gardens, and the river
overflowed its banks, and entered private houses, offices, and warehouses
on the Quay.  At Cromer a portion of the jetty was washed away, and at
Horsey serious breaches were made in the sea wall and thousands of acres
of salt marshes submerged.  The fishermen and others on the coast
sustained great damage, and a fund was opened by the Mayor of Norwich for
their relief.  On December 30th Capt. Vereker, the professional adviser
to the Harbour Department of the Board of Trade, held an inquiry at the
King's Arms Inn, Martham, for the purpose of receiving suggestions as to
the best methods of preventing future encroachments.


DECEMBER.


7.--The Norwich Town Council elected Mr. Ernest Edward Wild,
barrister-at-law, judge of the Guildhall Court of Record, in place of Mr.
Carlos Cooper, deceased.

22.--Died at 14, Trinity Street, Norwich, Mr. William Hunter, aged 77.
He was a native of Bury St. Edmund's, was elected Mayor of Norwich in
1881, and appointed a justice of the peace in 1893.

26.--Died at Belper, the Rev. Edwin Augustus Hillyard, vicar of Christ
Church, in that town.  He was formerly rector of St. Lawrence, Norwich,
and the pioneer of ritualistic observances in the churches of the city.
"Mr. Hillyard was the first to have celebrations for the departed, and
they have been held in one church or another in Norwich ever since."

27.--A disastrous fire occurred at Lynn, and caused destruction of
tradesmen's stock and property of the value of 150,000.  It originated on
the premises of Messrs. Jermyn and Perry and Jermyn and Son, wholesale
and retail drapers and furniture and general warehousemen.



1898.


JANUARY.


14.--At Aylsham County Court, before Judge Willis, Q.C., was tried the
action Astley and Wyrley-Birch _v._ MacLean.  The plaintiffs sought to
recover 50 damages from the defendant, who was master of the Baconsthorpe
Harriers, for trespassing upon their lands and for disturbing game
thereon.  The defence was that a fair but unsuccessful attempt had been
made to prevent the hounds from getting into the cover, and as soon as
possible they were drawn out.  The jury found a verdict for the
plaintiffs, damages 1, and stated that in their opinion the trespass was
unintentional.  Under the circumstances his Honour refused to grant an
injunction to restrain the defendant from committing similar trespasses.

23.--Honingham church, restored by the Hon. Ailwyn Fellowes, M.P., as a
memorial of the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria, was opened.

27.--Died at Catton, Mr. Donald Steward, eldest son of Mr. Timothy
Steward, and a member of the firm of Messrs. Steward, Patteson, Finch,
and Co.  He was appointed to the office of Sheriff of Norwich, in 1878,
and was formerly a captain, in the Norwich Battalion of Rifle Volunteers.

29.--A great fire took place at Press's mills, Great Yarmouth, and
resulted in the destruction of property to the amount of 20,000.


FEBRUARY.


1.--Died at the Mount, Thorpe Hamlet, Mrs. Hannah Elizabeth Jarrold,
widow of Mr. Thomas Jarrold.  She was the author of the popular
"Household Tracts," and was for many years an active worker amongst the
poor.

5.--At the Guildhall Police-court, Norwich, Mr. Edmund Reeve, on behalf
of the Norwich Electric Tramways Company, applied to the justices, under
the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act, for a magistrates' certificate that
the capital of the company had been subscribed.  The capital was stated
to be 240,000, and 50 per cent. thereof had been paid up.  The
application was granted.  The work of laying the tramways was commenced
on the Earlham and Thorpe routes on June 22nd.  (_See_ April 19th, 1900.)

8.--Mr. Edward Wild was elected leader of the Conservative party in
Norwich in place of Mr. H. S. Patteson, resigned.

11.--A great sale of shire horses, the property of the Prince of Wales,
was conducted at Wolferton by Messrs. Sexton, Grimwade, and Beck.
Fifty-four lots averaged 224 7s. 9d., and the sale realised 12,117.  The
three-year-old filly, Sea Breeze, was bought by Sir Blundell Maple for
1,150 guineas.

22.--A shocking boat disaster occurred at Wells-next-the-Sea.  Five
members of the coastguard were drowned through the capsizing of their
boat, and five men of the crew of the gig of H.M.S. torpedo boat Alarm,
Sub-Lieutenant William Lowther, lost their lives through a like mishap.
The second disaster, which was discovered when search was being made for
the missing coastguard, was the indirect outcome of the first; for when
the coastguard boat did not arrive in response to the Alarm's signals to
take off stores intended for use at the Wells coastguard station, it was
decided on board the Alarm to launch the gig and execute the commission.

22.--Mr. Arthur F. Gentry, borough accountant of Colchester, was
appointed City Accountant of Norwich, at the salary of 400 per annum.

--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, it was decided that the
Norwich City Waterworks Bill, 1898, be referred to the Law and
Parliamentary Committee with the object of obtaining powers in the Bill
for the Corporation to purchase the Waterworks.  The Bill, which was
promoted by the City of Norwich Waterworks Company for raising additional
capital and for obtaining powers to make additional works, came before a
Select Committee of the House of Commons on March 15th.  The committee
stipulated that the proposed new capital should be reduced from 100,000
to 60,000, and the borrowing powers to 15,000, which with the unused
capital and stock would give the company 90,000.  On October 18th the Law
and Parliamentary Committee reported that having regard to the importance
and magnitude of the acquisition of the undertaking by the Corporation,
and the limited time within which steps must be taken to promote a Bill
in the next session of Parliament, they recommended that further action
be delayed until next year.  The recommendation was adopted.

24.--A party of members of the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society
visited Tasburgh for the purpose of viewing a site known as the Chapel
Piece, where a quantity of ancient human remains had been unearthed.
"There is little doubt that the site was used as a burial-ground by the
inhabitants of the Roman station over the river upon the adjacent hill,
in the enclosure of which the present church of Tasburgh stands."

25.--Dr. Nansen, the Arctic explorer, delivered at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, his lecture entitled "Across the Polar Region."


MARCH.


5.--Died at his residence, South Kensington, Mr. Edmund Tattersall, head
of the well-known firm of horse auctioneers.  Mr. Tattersall was born at
Sculthorpe, neap Fakenham, in 1816, and at an early age went to London to
assist his uncle, whom he succeeded as sole partner in 1858.

12.--The freehold of the old Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, it was announced,
had been purchased for 9,500, by a syndicate who proposed to erect upon
the site a modern theatre to be called "The Norwich Opera House and
Theatre of Varieties," at an estimated cost of between 25,000 and 30,000.
On the 19th particulars were published of another new theatre to be
erected upon a site south of Prince of Wales Road.  Plans of both the
proposed theatres were prepared and were approved by the Corporation.  In
due course the foundations of the first-named theatre were laid, after
which the work came to an abrupt termination.

15.--At a special meeting of the governors of the Jenny Lind Infirmary,
at Norwich, plans for the new building were adopted, and an offer made by
Mr. J. J. Colman to purchase such portion of the old infirmary premises
as would not be required for the out-patient department, for presentation
to the city as a playground for children, was accepted.  (_See_ December
13th.)

18.--Died at Upper Norwood, aged 78, Mr. Frederic Grimmer, formerly of
Haddiscoe, who was appointed Sheriff of Norwich in 1871.

--Died at St. Moritz, the Engadine, the Rev. Thomas Parry Garnier, rector
of Banham, and honorary canon of Norwich.  Born February 22nd, 1841, he
was the second son of the Very Rev. Thomas Garnier, Dean of Lincoln, and
one of the most distinguished clergymen in the diocese of Norwich.  He
was the author of "The Parish Church," "The Title Deeds of the Church of
England," "Church and Dissent," "A Story in Outline of the Church of
England," "The First Book of Worship," "The First and Second Book of
Church Principles," "The First Book on the Church," &c.  Both at
Winchester College and Oxford University he greatly distinguished himself
in scholastic work and in sport.  In 1858 and 1859 he played with the
Winchester team against Eton, and for four years, from 1860 to 1863, did
admirable service for his University in the matches with Cambridge.  He
also played in 1861 with the Gentlemen of England in their match with the
Players.  Canon Garnier married in 1873 the Hon. Louisa Warren Vernon,
daughter of the fifth Lord Vernon.

25.--St. Paul's church, Great Yarmouth, was consecrated by the Bishop of
Norwich.

29.--Died at the Great Hospital, Norwich, Susan Rope, aged 101 years five
months.  She was a native of Earl Soham, and had been upon the foundation
of the Hospital since October 31st, 1865.


APRIL.


7.--Died at Cringleford, Mr. Henry Staniforth Patteson.  He was a son of
Mr. John S. Patteson, and was born in November, 1816.  For more than
thirty years he was an alderman of Norwich, was appointed Sheriff in
1858, and in 1862 was elected Mayor.  He was actively identified with the
Norwich Rifle Volunteers for more than a quarter of a century, and
retired with the rank of major, and he succeeded Col. Bignold as leader
of the Conservative party in the city.

--Mr. Samuel Hoare, M.P., and Mrs. Hoare, in a letter to the Dean of
Norwich on this date, the thirty-second anniversary of their wedding day,
offered to defray the whole cost of removing from the walls, columns, and
other portions of the nave of the Cathedral the thick coating of
whitewash which for centuries had defaced and obscured the masonry.
Shortly afterwards was initiated the fund for the provision of a new
organ for the Cathedral.  (_See_ May 25th, 1899.)

13.--Sir Charles R. Gilman was presented by the district managers and
inspectors of the Norwich and London Accident Insurance Association with
a piece of silver plate weighing 150 ozs., "as a mark of their esteem and
to commemorate the honour conferred upon him by the Queen during the
second term of his mayoralty of the city."

14.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference opened at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich,
and was concluded on the 15th.

18.--A Missionary Loan Exhibition was opened at the Agricultural Hall,
Norwich, by the Countess of Leicester, in celebration of the jubilee of
the Church Missionary Society.  It was closed on the 23rd.

23.--Notice was published of an intended application to the Light Railway
Commissioners for powers to construct a light railway from Trowse, _via_
Arminghall, Brooke, and Loddon, to Beccles.  On July 12th Lord Jersey,
chairman of the Light Railway Commission, and Col. Boughey, R.E., C.S.I.,
sat at the Shirehall, Norwich, for the purpose of receiving information
on the subject.  It was stated that the length of the proposed line would
be 17.5 miles; the capital to be authorised by the Bill was 100,000, with
borrowing powers for 33,000, and Sir Douglas Fox, consulting engineer,
stated that the contractor would be able to construct the line for
93,000.

27.--Mr. John Cross tendered his resignation of the office of Clerk to
the Norwich Board of Guardians, and on May 25th Mr. E. R. Woodward was
elected to fill the vacancy.


MAY.


7.--Died at Kirkley, Lowestoft, Mr. Robert Hitchman, formerly Chief
Constable of Norwich, aged 72.  He was appointed Chief Constable on March
24th, 1859, and retired on April 30th, 1897.

12.--Polling took place in the Southern Division of the county in
consequence of the resignation of Mr. Francis Taylor (Liberal Unionist).
The candidates were Mr. J. Sancroft Holmes, of Gawdy Hall, Harleston
(Conservative), and Mr. A. W. Soames, architect, of London (Liberal).
The poll was declared at the Shirehall, Norwich, on the 13th: Soames,
4,626; Holmes, 3,296.

19.--Intelligence was received in Norwich of the death of Mr. Gladstone.
Both political parties paid becoming respect to the memory of the
deceased statesman.  Resolutions of sympathy were passed by the members
of the Norwich and Norfolk Conservative Club and of the Gladstone Club,
and on the day of interment, the 28th, a memorial service, attended by
the Mayor and Corporation, was held at the Cathedral.

24.--The Norwich Town Council considered a report of the Executive
Committee containing recommendations for the alteration of the names of
various streets and roads in the city.  The report, with certain
modifications and amendments, was adopted at a subsequent meeting.

26.--A new Voluntary school for the accommodation of 400 boys, erected on
Hall Road, Lakenham, by the supporters of Church education in Norwich at
the cost of 2,600, was opened by the Lord Bishop.

27.--Died at Mulbarton, Mr. George Frederick Cooke, formerly District
Registrar of the High Court of Justice, and Registrar of the County
Court, Norwich, in his 80th year.  He was the youngest son of the Rev.
William Cooke, vicar of Bromyard, Herefordshire, and brother of Mr.
Cooke, a former judge of the Norfolk County Court.

28.--The members of the Automobile Club of Great Britain arrived at
Norwich in the course of a Whitsuntide tour through East Anglia.


JUNE.


9.--A verdict of accidental death was returned by a coroner's jury at
Norwich in the case of Henry Skepworth, a sergeant in the 7th Dragoon
Guards, who died from injuries received when returning from Wymondham,
where a party of non-commissioned officers and men of the regiment had
given a military display at the athletic sports.  It was subsequently
announced that "certain irregularities having lately occurred at sports
and other displays in which soldiers have taken part, and notably in the
Colchester district, where a sergeant met with his death, the
Commander-in-Chief has refused applications for their services on such
occasions."

16.--Mr. Ben Greet's company gave pastoral representations of "As You
Like It" and "The Comedy of Errors" at Bracondale Woods in aid of the
endowment fund of the Jenny Lind Infirmary at Norwich.

20.--The railway from North Walsham to Mundesley was opened for goods
traffic.  The first passenger trains were run on July 1st.

21.--The Norwich Corporation Baths at the old Museum premises, St.
Andrew's Broad Street, were opened by the Mayor (Mr. C. C. R. Spelman).

--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Hawkins, Samuel Frederick
Steele (27), railway carman, was indicted for the wilful murder of Thurza
Ann Bensley, at Yarmouth, on February 23rd.  The jury found him guilty,
but considered him insane when he committed the act, and expressed the
hope that he would be kept in strict custody for the rest of his life.
His lordship said he would add that as a rider to the verdict.

--It was reported at a meeting of the Norwich Town Council that Messrs.
Hughes and Lancaster had completed their contract, amounting to 21,522
for supplying Shone's ejectors, &c., in connection with the sewerage
works.

22.--George Watt (44), labourer, was indicted at the Norwich Assizes,
before Mr. Justice Hawkins, for the wilful murder of his wife, Sophia
Watt, at Sprowston, on April 14th, and was found guilty, and sentenced to
death.  The execution (by Billington) took place at Norwich Prison on
July 12th.

25.--The championship meeting of the National Cyclists' Union was held on
the Earlham Road Recreation Ground, Norwich.  The five miles'
professional championship was won by H. E. Meyers, Dutch Cyclists' Club,
in 15 minutes 36 1-5th seconds; the five miles' amateur championship by
A. S. Ingram, Polytechnic Club, in 14 minutes 11 2-5ths seconds; and the
25 miles' amateur championship by H. W. Payne, West Roads Cyclists' Club,
in 1 hour 4 minutes 52 4-5ths seconds.

29.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened
at King's Lynn.  Sir William ffolkes, Bart., was deputed by the
president, the Duke of York, to perform his duties at the show in
consequence of his Royal Highness' absence on naval service.  The Duchess
of York arrived from London by special train, and was received at Lynn
railway station by Sir William ffolkes, and at the entrance to the show
ground by the High Sheriff (Mr. Simms Reeve) and the show officials.  Her
Royal Highness before returning to London was entertained to tea by Lady
ffolkes in a marquee erected on the grounds.  The show closed on the
30th.


JULY.


9.--Died at Surrey Street, Norwich, Mr. Henry George Barwell.  Born on
February 4th, 1829, he was the fourth son of Mr. John Barwell, and was
educated at Hofwyl, near Berne, and at Norwich Grammar School.  He was
engaged as private secretary to Mr. Birkett, brother-in-law of Sir Morton
Peto, and was afterwards employed in the construction of a portion of the
Great Northern Railway between Lincoln and Newark, and on its completion
was sent out to Flensburg as one of the staff in the making of the Royal
Danish Railway.  In 1856 he joined the firm of Barwell and Sons.  Taking
up the practical study of art in 1870, he became a frequent exhibitor at
the Royal Institution of Painters in Water Colours; he was one of the
founders of the Norwich Art Circle, and for twenty-five years was hon.
secretary of the Norwich School of Art.

15.--The Norfolk Infantry Volunteer Brigade went into camp at Colchester
under the command of Col. G. S. Burton, commanding the 9th Regimental
District.  The four battalions numbered about 2,000 men.

--The 7th Dragoon Guards left Norwich by train for Bulford Camp,
Salisbury Plain, to take part in the cavalry manoeuvres.

25.--In the Court of Appeal, before Lords Justices A. L. Smith, Rigby,
and Vaughan Williams, judgment was given in the long pending appeal the
Corporation of Thetford _v._ the County Council of Norfolk.  This was an
appeal from a judgment of Mr. Justice Wills.  The question was whether in
the case of a borough of not less than 10,000 inhabitants and having
separate courts of Quarter Sessions and Petty Sessions, the salaries of
the recorder and the clerk of the peace, and of the clerk to the borough
justices in Petty Sessions in such borough, and certain other expenses
connected with the Quarter Sessions and Petty Sessions were transferred
from the borough fund to the county fund.  Thetford was a borough
containing a population of less than 10,000, and was situated for
administrative purposes within the county of Norfolk.  It had a separate
court of Quarter Sessions presided over by a recorder, who was paid a
salary of 40 per annum, and there was a clerk of the peace who was paid
by fees.  Before and since the Local Government Act of 1888 the salary of
the recorder and the fees (with certain exceptions) of the clerk of the
peace were paid out of the borough fund, and the clerk to the borough
justices was paid a salary out of the same fund.  The plaintiffs
contended that by the Act of 1888 the liability for the expenses was
transferred to the defendants, and they claimed a declaration to that
effect, and they further claimed to be reimbursed the expenses paid by
them.  There was also a question raised by cross-appeal as to the payment
of the salary of the clerk of the Petty Sessions.  The court dismissed
the appeal, and allowed the cross-appeal.

26.--Dr. J. E. Talmage lectured at Victoria Hall, Norwich, on "Utah and
its People."

--The Norwich Town Council adopted the report of a special committee
appointed to enquire into the sanitary condition of the courts and yards
of the city.  The effect of the recommendations was to enforce upon the
owners of property the fulfilment of the provisions of the Public Health
Act and the Norwich Corporation Act of 1889.


AUGUST.


1.--On this date occurred the most serious and destructive fire that had
taken place in Norwich during the century.  At an early hour in the
morning the premises of Mr. Daniel Hurn, rope maker, Dove Street, were
discovered to be on fire.  The flames spread southwards to Messrs.
Chamberlin and Sons' wholesale warehouse, northwards towards Pottergate
Street, and westward to the Public Library.  The premises in which the
fire originated, the warehouse, and a portion of the property on the
north were speedily destroyed, and ultimately the Library building was
consumed with its 60,000 volumes and the valuable Norton library.  On
August 5th the Edinburgh public-house, at the corner of Dove Street and
Pottergate Street fell with a crash, and two or three persons were
severely injured.

2.--Died at Scone Palace, near Perth, William David Murray, fourth Earl
of Mansfield, K.T., aged 93.  The deceased nobleman was better known to
Norwich politicians of a by-gone generation as Lord Stormont, who with
Sir James Scarlett, afterwards Lord Abinger, was returned as Conservative
member for the city at the first Parliamentary election after the passing
of the Reform Act.  It was not until 1895 that the Conservative party
once more obtained the undivided Parliamentary representation of Norwich
by the return of Mr. Samuel Hoare and Sir Harry Bullard.

12.--Died at Swaffham, Mr. Herbert William Day, aged 76, who for upwards
of twenty-five years held the office of County Treasurer, and retired
shortly after the passing of the Local Government Act, 1889.

23.--At the Norwich Police-court, Samuel Matthews, of Raglan Street,
Dereham Road, was charged on eight summonses with unlawfully using the
name and title of doctor and of surgeon, thereby implying that he was a
registered medical practitioner.  The Bench decided that Mr. Matthews, in
using the word "doctor," did not wilfully and falsely pretend to be
registered as such, and, therefore, dismissed the case; but they
considered there had been an infringement of the law in the use of the
word "surgeon," for which the defendant was fined 1, and 12s. costs.  At
the Norwich County Court on the 24th Mr. Matthews was sued by the Master,
Wardens, and Society of the Art and Mystery of Apothecaries of the City
of London to recover the sum of 20 for unlawfully acting as an apothecary
by attending, advising, and supplying medicines to certain persons.  A
special jury was empanelled to try the case, which was admitted.
Judgment was entered for the plaintiff society for 20 and costs.  Mr.
Matthews was afterwards presented with a gift of plate weighing 300
ounces, subscribed for by the citizens as a mark of their esteem and
sympathy.

26.--The promises of Messrs. Pinchen and Co., brewers and mineral water
manufacturers at South Creake, were destroyed by fire.  The damage was
estimated at 3,000.

28.--The church of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, was re-opened upon the
completion of the work of restoring the chancel to its original level.
This portion of the great work of restoration was carried out at the
expense of an anonymous donor.

30.--At the Episcopal Consistorial Court, held at Norwich Cathedral,
before Mr. Chancellor Blofeld, was heard an application for a faculty in
which citation had been granted against the Rev. Robert Middleton, rector
of St. Michael-at-Coslany, Norwich, for illegally, without any faculty
and in spite of remonstrance of William Joseph Simmons, one of the
churchwardens, removing a re-table from its position above the communion
table, and moving from the church certain ornaments which stood there,
namely, a cross of brass, two candlesticks, and two flower vases, and for
refusing to replace them.  Mr. Middleton was cited to appear and show
cause why a faculty should not be granted to the churchwardens directing
them to replace the articles.  The faculty was granted as prayed, with
costs against Mr. Middleton.


SEPTEMBER.


1.--A ball was given at Drayton House in celebration of the silver
wedding of Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Walter, who were the recipients of many
presents and congratulations.  On the 3rd the workmen employed at the
Taverham and Bawburgh mills and the labourers on the estate were
entertained to dinner.

6.--Barnum and Bailey's great show visited Norwich, and was located upon
a piece of land on Unthank Road.  The performances were repeated on the
7th.  Upwards of 42,000 persons visited the show.  (_See_ July 29th,
1899.)

13.--Died at Earlham Road, Norwich, Mr. John William Sparrow, solicitor,
for many years Registrar of the Guildhall Court of Record.

--The coming of age of Mr. Robert Hamilton Kemp, eldest son of Sir
Kenneth Kemp, Bart., was celebrated at Gissing Old Hall.

18.--Died at the Clyffe, Corton, Mr. Jeremiah James Colman, of Carrow
House, Norwich, aged 68.  Mr. Colman came of an old family of Norfolk
yeomen.  One of his ancestors, Jeremiah Colman, who was born in 1777,
established a flour mill at Bawburgh, and afterwards carried on business
at Norwich, whence he removed to Stoke Holy Cross, where was formed the
nucleus of the great commercial undertaking now existing at Carrow.  The
subject of this notice was the son of James Colman, and was born in 1830.
In 1856 he married Caroline, daughter of Mr. W. H. Cozens-Hardy, of
Letheringsett.  Mr. Colman was interested in agricultural pursuits and
the breeding of stock, and his famous herd of red-polls, and equally
well-known flock of Southdowns were for years represented at all the
great shows.  Art and literature obtained his attention, and he collected
an unrivalled library of local works at Carrow Abbey.  Mr. Colman
embarked largely in commercial enterprises connected with the Press.
With Mr. Jacob Henry Tillett he was instrumental in founding the "Norfolk
News" and other newspapers published by that company, and was largely
interested in the "Star," the "Morning Leader" and the "East Anglian
Daily Times."  In 1862 Mr. Colman was appointed Sheriff of Norwich, and
in 1867 was elected Mayor.  He was first nominated for Parliamentary
honours upon the unseating on petition of Mr. Tillett in 1871.  His
Conservative opponent was Sir Charles Legard, whom he defeated by 1,200
votes.  This was the last election contested by open voting, in Norwich.
At the General Election of 1874 Mr. Tillett, freed of his disabilities,
was nominated as colleague of Mr. Colman; the Conservative candidates
were Mr. Huddleston, Q.C., and Sir Henry Stracey, Bart.  Mr. Colman and
Mr. Huddleston were returned.  The next election took place in 1880, when
the Liberal party once more made a strenuous effort to secure the return
of Mr. Tillett by the aid of Mr. Colman's popularity.  The Conservative
nominees were Mr. Henry Harben and the Hon. W. F. B. Mainwaring.  The
Liberals were returned by an overwhelming majority.  At the election of
1885 occurred the first indication of the disasters which were to befall
Liberalism in Norwich.  Mr. Harry Bullard was nominated to oppose Mr.
Colman, with whom as second Liberal candidate was Mr. R. S. Wright.  For
the first time in his political career Mr. Colman had to be content with
second place, for Mr. Bullard was returned at the head of the poll with
7,297 votes, against 6,666 polled by Mr. Colman, and 6,251 by Mr. Wright.
Mr. Bullard was unseated on petition, and it was stated at the time that
Mr. Colman was opposed to the course taken by his party.  Mr. Samuel
Hoare was then elected unopposed in the place of Mr. Bullard.  At the
General Election in 1886 Mr. Colman regained his former position at the
head of the poll with 6,295 votes as against 6,156 polled by Mr. Hoare,
who had Mr. C. S. Read as his colleague.  This election was noteworthy as
the last occasion upon which Mr. Tillett was nominated.  In 1892 Mr.
Colman made his last appearance as a Parliamentary candidate, and with
him was nominated Mr. James Bedford.  Mr. Hoare, Conservative candidate,
was returned by a majority of 311 above Mr. Colman; and the
representation of the city remained thus until the General Election of
1895, when Mr. Colman retired, and for the first time in sixty years the
Conservative party returned two members, Mr. Hoare and Sir Harry Bullard.
Mr. Colman, who was one of the greatest benefactors in Norwich, was held
in deserved esteem alike by political friends and opponents, and many
expressions of public regret were recorded.  He was predeceased (on the
15th) by his mother, Mrs. Mary Colman, who died at Town Close Lodge, in
her 93rd year.  It was announced at a meeting of the Norwich Town Council
on October 18th that Mr. Colman had bequeathed to the Castle Museum, free
of duty, his collection of oil paintings and water colours by Norfolk and
Norwich artists.  The collection was valued at 5,000.


OCTOBER.


16.--Died at Fairstead House, Newmarket, aged 82, Mr. John F. Clark, the
famous racing judge.  Mr. Clark was a native of Norwich, and on leaving
school joined his father as a builder.  He afterwards became an
architect, and during his professional career designed many
ecclesiastical buildings, and restored others.  He also planned most of
the modern grand stands upon the principal race courses in England.  Mr.
Clark was appointed judge by the Jockey Club in 1852, and was the third
member of his family who had held the office, from which he retired at
the close of 1888.

18.--The Norwich Town Council decided to widen Fye Bridge from 22 feet to
36 feet at the estimated cost of 1,000, two-fifths of which were payable
by the Norwich Electric Tramways Company.

24.--The National Union of Women Workers of Great Britain and Ireland
opened its annual conference at Prince's Street Rooms, Norwich; and on
the 27th the Mayor and Mayoress held a reception at St. Andrew's Hall.

30.--Died at Lowestoft, Mr. Frederick Elwin Watson, aged 88.  He twice
served the office of Mayor of Norwich, in 1866-67 and in 1870-71.  He was
for many years a warm supporter of the Norwich Church of England Young
Men's Society.


NOVEMBER.


8.--Died at Wymondham Vicarage, in his 96th year, the Rev. Robert Eden,
M.A., Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and honorary canon of
Norwich Cathedral.  He was the author of several works, including "The
Churchman's Theological Dictionary," "Some Thoughts on the Inspiration of
the Holy Scriptures," "A History of Preaching," "The Title Page of the
Revised Version of the Holy Bible," &c.  In his young days Canon Eden was
acquainted with Whately, the famous divine, and was for a time assistant
librarian at the Bodleian Library.

9.--Mr. George Henry Morse was elected Mayor and Mr. Henry Skelton
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

18.--The Norwich and Norfolk Conservative Club was opened in its new
premises, the Royal Arcade, Norwich.  Sir Alfred Jodrell, Bart., presided
on the occasion.

26.--The remarkable recovery of a lost register belonging to the parish
of Gressenhall was reported.  "The books, which dated from 1538 to 1710,
were discovered lying on a shelf in an upper room with a number of other
old documents, at Docking Hall.  A certain Hon. Hugh Charles Hare, who
was rector of Docking from 1708 to 1711, was also rector of Gressenhall,
and probably to him may be traced the removal of the books to Docking,
where they had remained for nearly two hundred years."

28.--The 7th (Queen's Own) Hussars, arrived by train at Norwich, from
Southampton, where they had disembarked the same day from the Simla.


DECEMBER.


13.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, Mr. Edward Wild moved the
adoption of a report of the City Committee affirming "that the inadequate
and unsuitable existing accommodation for the transaction of the public
work of the city is a hindrance to the proper dispatch of the business,
detrimental to the health of the officials and members of the
Corporation, and disproportionate to and unworthy of the position and
dignity of this important city."  The subject was referred to a committee
to report thereon to the Council.  (_See_ September 5th, 1899.)

13.--The foundation stone of the new Jenny Lind Infirmary, Unthank Road,
Norwich, was laid by Geoffrey R. R. Colman, son of Mr. Russell J. Colman.
In a cavity of the stone was a brass plate with the following
inscription:--"The Jenny Lind Infirmary was founded 1853; rebuilt 1898,
foundation-stone laid by G. R. R. Colman.  Norwich population, 113,000;
fastest train to London 2 hours 37 minutes; electric tramways commenced.
Price of a large sheep 63s.; bricklayers' wages 7.5d. per hour."  (_See_
June 30th, 1899.)

14.--Died, Mr. Robert Wortley, of Suffield.  He was one of the best known
agriculturists in Norfolk, an excellent judge of stock, and a noted
hackney breeder.

24.--Shernbourne church, restored from designs by Mr. Herbert J. Green,
and Sir Arthur Blomfield (consulting architect), was re-opened.  The
Prince and Princess of Wales, accompanied by the Duke and Duchess of
York, Princess Victoria of Wales, and Prince Alexander of Teck, attended
the service.  The Prince of Wales had taken great interest in the work,
and had subscribed to the restoration fund, which was raised mainly
through the efforts of the rector, the Rev. F. J. W. Girling.

--A young man named Horace Alfred Cox entered a cafe in St. Benedict's
Street, Norwich, and fired three shots with a revolver at Ellen Parker,
one of the assistants.  The bullets missed Parker, and Cox then turned
the weapon upon himself.  He sustained injuries to the head, from which
he died shortly after removal to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.



1899.


JANUARY.


1.--In the list of New Year's Honours appeared the name of Mr. Robert
Thornhagh Gurdon, of Letton, upon whom her Majesty had conferred the
dignity of peerage.  Mr. Gurdon assumed the title of Baron Cranworth.

5.--Cringleford church, after restoration at the cost of about 1,400, was
re-opened by the Bishop of Norwich.

7.--Died, aged 78, Mr. Samuel Culley, of Grove Avenue, Norwich, who held
the office of City Accountant from 1887 to 1898.  He was a son of Mr.
Richard Culley, and at an early age learned farming in order to fit him
for Colonial life.  In 1841 he went to New Zealand, but left on the
outbreak of the Maori War, and shipping on board an American whaler
obtained the post of second mate.  On the voyage the crew mutinied, and
the captain lost his reason.  Mr. Culley put the ringleaders in irons,
took command of the vessel, and brought her to Rhode Island.  On
returning to Norwich he set up business as a corn merchant, and
afterwards as a public accountant.  He was identified with the formation
of the Norwich Steam Laundry and Baths Company and the Norwich Omnibus
Company.

13.--The Bishop of Norwich acknowledged the receipt of a memorial signed
by 365 clergymen, 123 lay members of Conference, and 100 magistrates,
resident in the diocese, who had expressed their resolve to strengthen as
far as possible the hands of the bishops in their efforts to check
unsound teaching and to restrain illegal practices in the Church.  The
memorial gave rise to much dissatisfaction and to a considerable amount
of acrimonious correspondence in the public Press.

14.--At a meeting of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital it was announced
that Mr. Cadge had subscribed the munificent gift of 10,000 to the
Leicester Perpetual Endowment Fund.  Mr. Cadge had previously presented
to the institution an anonymous gift of 10,000.


FEBRUARY.


3.--Mrs. Garrett Anderson, M.D., delivered a lecture at Noverre's Rooms,
Norwich, on "The History and Effect of Vaccination."  The Dean of Norwich
presided, and a committee was formed in order to circulate information on
the subject.

7.--Died at Diss rectory, the Rev. Charles Robertson Manning, M.A.,
F.S.A., honorary canon of Norwich Cathedral, rural dean of Redenhall, and
for 42 years rector of Diss, aged 73.  Canon Manning was a magistrate for
the county, and a member of the Diss School Board, but he was best known
for his labours in archaeology.  He published "A List of Monumental
Brasses remaining in England," and shortly before his death compiled "A
List of Monumental Brasses omitted by Blomefield."  Canon Manning was a
well-known authority on church plate, and among other subjects upon which
he wrote were church architecture, lecterns, fonts, heraldry, seals,
coins, mediaeval patens, and antiquarians objects of almost every kind.

13.--Mr. Leo Trevor's play, "Brother Officers," which was produced at the
Garrick Theatre in October, 1898, and became one of the successes of the
London season, was performed at Norwich Theatre by Miss Muriel Wylford's
company.

17.--A "silver cradle"--a massive silver bowl--was presented to the Mayor
of Norwich (Mr. G. H. Morse) in commemoration of the birth during his
Mayoralty of his son Christopher Charles on November 19th, 1898.

21.--Died at Denver rectory, in his 67th year, the Rev. James Mourant Du
Port, rector of Denver, honorary canon of Norwich Cathedral, and rural
dean.  Canon Du Port formerly held the living of Mattishall, took great
interest in educational work in the diocese, and was one of the
secretaries of the Norwich Diocesan Conference.

23.--It was announced that her Majesty the Queen had been pleased to
approve the appointment of Mr. H. H. Cozens-Hardy, Q.C., M.P., as one of
the justices of the High Court of Justice.

25.--Died at Marham Hall, aged 73, Mr. Thomas Brown, a well-known breeder
of pedigree sheep and cattle.  He was the originator of the successful
gatherings held for so many years at Marham in celebration of the annual
ram letting.


MARCH.


3.--Died at Christiania, Mr. Joseph Stanley, who formerly practised as a
solicitor at Norwich.  He for several years represented the First Ward in
the Town Council, and on the death of Mr. Robert Culley was elected
County Coroner after an exciting contest.  He it was who served a writ
upon the Mayor of Norwich in the matter of the Town Close Estate, with
the result that the estate, which had long been regarded as the exclusive
property of the freemen, was declared to be a charity.  Mr. Stanley had
resided in Norway ten years preceding his death.

4.--Died, Mr. James R. Bulwer, Q.C., one of the Masters in Lunacy.  Mr.
Bulwer was the eldest son of the Rev. J. Bulwer, rector of
Hunworth-with-Stody, and was born in 1820.  He was called to the Bar by
the Inner Temple in 1847, and became treasurer in 1880.  He took silk in
1865.  From 1861 to 1866 he was Recorder of Ipswich, and from 1866 to
1898 he held the like office at Cambridge.  He was also a justice of the
peace for Norfolk, and was one of the chairmen of Norfolk Quarter
Sessions, a post which he resigned on December 31st, 1898.  Mr. Bulwer
was Conservative member for Ipswich from 1874 to 1880, and represented
Cambridgeshire from 1881 to 1885.  From 1873 to 1884 he was
lieutenant-colonel of the Inns of Court Volunteers.

12.--Mrs. Keeley, for many years one of the leading actresses on the
English stage, died at her residence in London, in her 93rd year.  She
was a native of Ipswich, and in her young days, as Miss Annie Goward, was
a popular member of the Norwich Company.

16.--Paderewski, the famous pianist, appeared at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich.

--The election of a member to fill the vacancy in the representation of
North Norfolk by the elevation of Mr. H. H. Cozens-Hardy to the judicial
bench, took place on this date.  The candidates were Sir Kenneth Kemp,
Bart. (U.), and Sir William Brampton Gurdon, Bart. (L).  The poll was
declared at Aylsham Town Hall on the 17th as follows: Gurdon, 4,775;
Kemp, 3,610.

19.--After a winter of exceptional mildness very severe weather set in.
In some localities the readings of the thermometer were the lowest since
1895.  On the 20th a remarkable whirlwind, which did considerable damage
to three cottages, occurred at Worstead.  February 10th was recorded as
"the hottest day for half a century for the time of year."

25.--An effort was made at Norwich to inaugurate a public subscription
for the erection of a memorial to Sir Thomas Browne, the famous author of
"The Religio Medici" and other works.

--Died at Thorpe Road, Norwich, Mr. Joshua Womersley, an alderman of the
city, aged 77.  A native of Yorkshire, he came to Norfolk in 1811 and
took employment with the firm of Messrs. Colman at Stoke.  He devised a
method of making starch from rice, and received the congratulations of
the Patent Office on having overcome difficulties in starch making which
had hitherto been considered insurmountable.  In politics Mr. Womersley
was strongly Liberal, and admitted at the Royal Commission in 1868
"having kept certain voters in tow with the object of preventing them
being tampered with by the other side."

28.--The sale took place at Easton Lodge Farm by Mr. John Thornton of the
red-poll herd of Mr. J. J. Colman.  The total sum realised was 4,262.5
guineas, of which 1,114 guineas were paid for the bulls.  The average per
head was a little over 77.  The sale of Mr. Colman's flock of Southdowns
took place at Crown Point on August 9th, and was attended by leading
sheep breeders and flock masters from all parts of the kingdom.  Mr.
Thornton disposed of 999 lots, which realised a grand total of 5,347 6s.
6d.


APRIL.


1.--Strangers' Hall, Norwich, it was announced, had been purchased by Mr.
L. G. Bolingbroke.

6.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference met at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich, and
continued its deliberations on the 7th.

17.--The memorial stone of the Norwich Technical Institute was laid by
the Mayor (Mr. G. H. Morse).  The building was designed by the City
Engineer (Mr. A. E. Collins), and erected by Mr. T. H. Blyth, of
Foulsham.

--The centenary celebration of the Church of England Missionary Society
commenced at Norwich with services at the Cathedral and the city churches
and a meeting at St. Andrew's Hall.


MAY.


1.--The Great Eastern Railway Company introduced a restaurant car service
on their system between London, Cromer, and Lowestoft.

--The 7th Hussars marched from Norwich _en route_ to Colchester, where
they were temporarily stationed during the renovation of Norwich Cavalry
Barracks.  Among the officers was Prince Alexander of Teck.  The regiment
encamped on Stuston Common on the first night, at Broom Hill on the
second night, and completed the march on the 3rd.

6.--Died at Northrepps Hall, Mr. Richard Hanbury Gurney, aged 44 years.
He was a son of Mr. John Henry Gurney, and served the office of High
Sheriff in 1896.

--Lord Wolseley, Commander-in-Chief of the Army, arrived at Norwich,
accompanied by Major-General Kelly-Kenny, Inspector-General of the
Auxiliary Forces, Col. Gough, military secretary, and Col. Allen,
_aide-de-camp_.  On the 7th his lordship, with Major-General Sir W. F.
Gatacre, commanding the Eastern District, attended service at the
Cathedral, and afterwards inspected a number of old soldiers in the
cloisters, and visited the Soldiers' and Sailors' Home.  Lord Wolseley on
the 8th inspected the depot and the 3rd Battalion Norfolk Regiment at the
Britannia Barracks, and in the afternoon proceeded to Yarmouth, where he
inspected the troops.

17.--The Duke of York's Own Loyal Suffolk Hussars assembled at Norwich
for the annual training, which concluded on the 25th.  Lieut.-Col. Lucas
was in command of the regiment.

23.--The Sandringham hackneys, the property of the Prince of Wales, were
sold by auction at the Wolferton Stud Farm.  His Royal Highness, who was
accompanied by the Duke of York, attended the public luncheon, at which a
distinguished company was present.  The total amount of the sale was
11,611 guineas, an average price per head of 178.

24.--The list of Birthday Honours, commemorative of the 80th birthday of
the Queen, included the name of Mr. Samuel Hoare, M.P., upon whom her
Majesty conferred a baronetcy.

25.--The nave of Norwich Cathedral was re-opened after restoration, the
cost of which was generously undertaken by Sir Samuel Hoare, Bart., M.P.,
and Lady Hoare.  The Mayor and Corporation attended the service, at which
the sermon was preached by the Dean of Norwich.

--The Prince of Wales, accompanied by Prince Alexander of Teck, Admiral
Sir Henry Keppel and others, arrived at Yarmouth, and on the 26th
inspected the Prince of Wales' Own Norfolk Artillery Militia, the 3rd
Norfolk Militia, and other troops.  In the evening his Royal Highness
attended a ball given by Viscount Coke and the Artillery officers, and on
the 27th terminated his visit.

--The Royal Arcade, Norwich, erected on the site of the old Royal Hotel,
was opened.  The Arcade was built by Messrs. J. Youngs and Son from plans
by Messrs. G. J. and F. W. Skipper.

27.--The Duke and Duchess of York visited King's Lynn, and in the grounds
of the West Norfolk and Lynn Hospital received purses on behalf of a fund
to defray the cost of a children's wing added to the Hospital as a
memorial of the Queen's Diamond Jubilee.


JUNE.


1.--At the Norwich Consistory Court, before Mr. Chancellor Blofeld, the
Bishop of the Diocese pronounced sentence of deprivation on the Rev.
Bryan O'Malley, vicar of Flitch am, and made an order upon the defendant
for the payment of the costs of the proceedings.

2.--At a meeting of the Scots Society of St. Andrew, Norwich, held at the
Maid's Head Hotel, the president, Dr. Thomson, unveiled portraits of Dr.
John Murray and of his wife, Mary Boyles Murray, presented to the society
by Mr. Bronson Murray, of New York, in recognition of the work done by
the society in restoring the tomb of Dr. Murray in the churchyard of
Wells-next-the-Sea.  The portraits were copied by Mrs. Leslie Bush-Brown,
great great grandniece of Dr. Murray, from the original works belonging
to the Guion family, of Senica Falls, New York.

27.--Died at St. Stephen's House, Norwich, Mr. John Copeman, aged 87.
Senior partner in the firm of Messrs. Copeman and Sons, wholesale
grocers, Castle Street, he was for several years a member of the Town
Council and some time alderman.  It was he who suggested the purchase of
the sewerage farm by the Corporation.  He was a member of the Norwich
Board of Guardians, and took part with Mr. J. H. Tillett and the Rev.
George Gould and others in securing the passing of the Norwich Poor Act
of 1863.  Mr. Copeman was one of the founders of the "Norfolk News," and
for some time edited it.

28.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened
at Diss.  Mr. Edward Mann presided at the luncheon.  The exhibition
closed on the 29th.


JULY.


10.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council a report was
received from a joint committee of the Corporation and the Board of
Guardians upon the subject of the rating of city property, and a
resolution was adopted recommending important alterations in the
assessments.  The Guardians on December 20th accepted a recommendation
for the appointment of valuers to undertake the work of reassessment.

17.--Died at Ivy Lodge, Eaton, Mr. C. C. Rix Spelman, Deputy-Mayor of
Norwich, aged 55.  He was a son of Mr. Benjamin Rix, of Ipswich, and was
born at Yarmouth.  In 1858 he became associated with the firm of Messrs.
Spelman, and on joining as a partner in 1874 took the name of
Spelman--his mother's surname--in addition to his own.  In 1897 he was
elected Mayor of Norwich, and was in politics a Liberal.  He was twice
married--first to Miss Franklin, of Norwich, who died in 1877, and
secondly, in 1880, to Mrs. R. E. Gibson, sister of Mr. F. Oddin Taylor.

22.*--"The Earl of Leicester has forwarded to the governors of the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital a cheque for 5,000 for building new quarters
for nurses at the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital."

23.--The Norfolk Volunteer Brigade went into camp at Colchester.

29.--Barnum and Bailey's great show visited Norwich.  It came by special
trains from Yarmouth, and on leaving Norwich proceeded to Bury St.
Edmund's.

31.--Died, the Rev. Canon Hinds Howell, aged 91.  He was seventh son of
Mr. C. A. Howell, Treasurer of the Island of Barbados, where he was born.
Canon Howell was many years rector of Drayton, and one of the most
energetic clergymen in the diocese.


AUGUST.


1.--Died at Stanley Avenue, Thorpe, Norwich, Mr. Edwin Plumer Price,
Q.C., formerly Recorder of York, and judge of the Norfolk County Court,
aged 81.  In his younger days he unsuccessfully contested Sheffield in
the Conservative interest.

2.--The Norfolk and Norwich Library was opened after reconstruction at
the cost of 1,719.

7.--A fire occurred at Messrs. Leake and Sons' oil mill at Lynn.  The
damage was estimated at from 10,000 to 12,000.

--Mr. Robert Borrett sold by auction at Wacton the wheat and barley on
about 170 acres of land in the parishes of Moulton St. Michael, Pulham
Market, Tivetshall St. Margaret, and Wacton, in the occupation of Mr.
Fisher.  The auctioneer's advertisement stated that the growing crops
were offered in consequence of there being a scarcity of labour--a
circumstance unprecedented in Norfolk.

11.--Died while on a yachting cruise off the coast of Iceland, Sir Edmund
Broughton Knowles Lacon, Bart., head of the banking firm of Lacons,
Youell, and Kemp.  He was born May 9th, 1842, and in 1892 served the
office of High Sheriff of Norfolk.

17.--The 50 miles' championship of the National Cyclists' Union, Eastern
Counties Centre, was won on the Earlham Road Recreation Ground, Norwich,
by C. F. Morley (champion 1897-98) in 2 hours 20 minutes 49 4-5ths
seconds.

19.--Died at Hilgay rectory, Downham, the Rev. St. Vincent Beechey,
rector of the parish, and honorary canon of Manchester, in his 94th year.
Canon Beechey was born August 7th, 1806, at Harley Street, Cavendish
Square, and was the son of Sir William Beechey, the eminent painter and
friend of Lord Nelson, whose portrait, limned by him, is one of the most
valuable of the pictures in St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  Young Beechey
was educated at Boulogne, where he not only acquired a thorough knowledge
of the French language, but became an expert swordsman.  Thence he
proceeded to a school at Sidcup, kept by the father of Sheridan Knowles,
and at the age of 16 he matriculated at Gonville and Caius College,
Cambridge, and obtained two scholarships.  While preparing for Holy
Orders he studied medicine at the Western Hospital.  In 1829 he was
ordained by the Bishop of Rochester, and received the curacy of
Aylesford, near Maidstone.  He next became curate of Hilgay, and in 1841
was appointed to the living of Thornton le Fylde, with Fleetwood,
Lancashire.  Acting on the suggestion of a Corsican named Vantine, he
established Rossall School, one of the most successful educational
institutions in the north, and of which he was secretary for 28 years.
In 1852 he was appointed to the vicarage of Worsley, near Manchester, and
in 1872, at the age of sixty, he accepted the living of Hilgay, where for
27 years he faithfully ministered to the parishioners.  Canon Beechey
took great interest in astronomical studies, and was a popular lecturer.
His favourite topics were the expansion of the empire, the origin of
writing, and, in the last years of his life, the Rontgen rays.

20.--A serious fire occurred on the premises of Mr. Thomas Wright, boot
manufacturer and clothier, High Street, East Dereham.  The damage was
estimated at upwards of 1,000.

26.--Kimberley Hall, the seat of the Earl of Kimberley, narrowly escaped
total destruction by fire.  The outbreak was confined to one portion of
the house, and the damage was estimated at 2,000.

27.--North Walsham Town Hall was destroyed by fire.


SEPTEMBER.


5.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council a report was received from
the City Committee recommending that they be empowered to submit a scheme
for the erection of municipal buildings.  The debate was adjourned, and
Mr. L. J. Tillett gave notice of his intention to move "That the
financial position of the city at the present time is such that it is
undesirable to now embark upon any scheme of whatsoever nature for the
erection of a new town-hall, which would involve the expenditure of a
large amount, and thereby greatly increase the rates and the debt of the
city, and that the preparation of such scheme do stand over until the
re-valuation of the city has been completed."  At an adjourned meeting on
the 26th a resolution was adopted empowering the City Committee to submit
a scheme to the Town Council.  Meanwhile the proposal was adversely
criticised by the citizens, and at a meeting of ratepayers held at
Noverre's Rooms on October 11th, a strong protest was made in opposition
to the scheme.  At a special meeting of the Town Council on December 8th
a petition was presented against the scheme, and ultimately a resolution
was adopted for rescinding the former motion.

9.*--"Messrs. J. H. Walter and Co., proprietors of Taverham Mills, the
last remaining of the old paper mills in Norfolk, have issued a circular
stating: 'Early in the year we had to submit to a very heavy reduction in
the price of our paper.  We felt that we could only carry on the mills at
a serious loss, and the balance-sheet, which we have just got out, fully
confirms our impression.  We have, therefore, decided to shut down as
soon as possible.'  Messrs. Delane, Magnay, and Co. took over the mills
in 1846, and the present proprietors in 1884."

29.--A violent gale occurred on the east coast.  "At Yarmouth the
velocity of the wind reached 55 miles per hour, and the rainfall was 1.25
inches."


OCTOBER.


3.--The twenty-sixth Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival
commenced at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  The principal vocalists were
Madame Albani, Miss Clara Butt, Miss Marie Brema, Miss Ethel Wood, Miss
Kelyn Williams, Miss Edith Nutter, and Mrs. Julia Franks; Mr. Edward
Lloyd, Mr. Ben Davies, Mr. Andrew Black, Mr. David Bispham, Mr. Whitworth
Mitton, Mr. Robert Radford, and Mr. F. Ranalow.  Mr. Alberto Randegger
conducted.  At the opening performance "Faust" (Berlioz) was produced;
4th: morning, symphony in B minor (Schubert), "Biblical Songs" (Dvorak),
"Hymn of Praise" (Mendelssohn), evening, opera, "Sampson and Delilah" (C.
Saint-Saens), first time in Norwich; 5th: morning, Meditation (Edward
Elgar), first time in Norwich, conducted by the composer, sacred trilogy,
"Passion of Christ" (Don Lorenzo Perosi), first performance in England,
ode, "A Song of Darkness and Light" (C. Hubert H. Parry), first time in
Norwich, conducted by the composer, evening, overture, "Mignon" (Ambroise
Thomas), cycle of songs, "Sea Pictures" (Edward Elgar), composed
expressly for the Festival and conducted by the composer, trio des
flutes, "Dall' Aurora" (Weyerbeer), new suite, "The Seasons" (Edward
German), composed expressly for the Festival and conducted by the
composer, "Ode to the Passions" (written by William Collins, 1721-1759,
set to music for chorus and orchestra by Frederic H. Cowen), first time
in Norwich, and conducted by the composer, "Tristan and Isolde" (Wagner),
scena, "The Dream of Endymion" (F.  F. Cowen), conducted by the composer,
overture, "Di Ballo" (Sullivan); 6th: morning, "The Messiah," evening,
cantata, "Hiawatha's Wedding Feast" (S. Coleridge Taylor), first time in
Norwich, conducted by the composer.  The receipts amounted to 5,398, and
the payments to 4,998.

16.--Mr. Peter E. Hansell was presented by the magistrates and officials
of the North Erpingham division with a massive silver Irish bowl on the
occasion of this retirement after twenty years' honourable and efficient
service as clerk to the justices.

--A meeting of the party was held at the Norwich and Norfolk Conservative
Club, to express approval of the policy of her Majesty's Government in
relation to the conduct of affairs in South Africa.  Mr. W. T. Stead,
author of a notorious pamphlet, "Shall I slay my brother Boer?" essayed
to address a meeting in the Agricultural Hall Assembly Room on November
6th, on the subject "Is England Doomed?"  Mr. Henry Broadhurst, M.P.,
presided, and a strongly antagonistic audience offered resistance to the
proceedings.  The National Anthem and patriotic songs were song, and Mr.
Stead and his supporters were compelled to leave the platform.  A
collection was then made for the widows and orphans of soldiers in South
Africa, and a resolution adopted affirming that Great Britain must be the
paramount power in South Africa, and expressing the hope that the
Government would prosecute the war to its final issue with the utmost
vigour.  On November 9th meetings were held in various parts of Norfolk
under the auspices of the National Union of Conservative and
Constitutional Associations, at which resolutions were adopted expressive
of confidence in the Government.  Funds were opened in county and city
for the relief of the widows and orphans of soldiers who had fallen in
the war, and for the assistance of soldiers' wives and families.  On
December 27th the reservists of the Norfolk Regiment, assembled at the
Britannia Barracks to the number of 320, and on the 28th, amid a great
demonstration, left the city _en route_ to South Africa.  Early on the
morning of the 31st a second contingent of reservists, numbering 320,
left Norwich for Aldershot.  Their departure from Thorpe Station was
witnessed by the Mayor (Mr. James Clabburn), Sir Harry Bullard, M.P., and
other prominent citizens.  (_See_ January 2nd, 1900.)

17.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, the Sewerage Committee
reported that the main drainage of the city, referred to in the report of
the City Engineer on February 2nd, 1895, had been completed in accordance
with the recommendations laid down therein.  It was believed that the
City Engineer's estimate of 152,000 would nearly cover the whole cost of
the works, the excess of expenditure not being more than two per cent. of
the total.

25.--Died at Hingham, Mr. Charles Crawshay.  He was a son of Mr. Richard
Crawshay, of Rowfant, Surrey, and was born February 26th, 1815.  His
father settled at Hingham as a brewer, and afterwards opened a brewery in
St. Stephen's Street, Norwich.  Young Crawshay was sent to Messrs.
Charington, Head, and Co.'s brewery in London, where he received an
excellent training, and returning to Norwich took charge of the St.
Stephen's brewery.  Ultimately he became partner with Mr. John Youngs in
the King Street brewery, and retained his connection with the firm of
Youngs, Crawshay, and Youngs until his death.  Mr. Crawshay was one of
the foremost sportsmen in the county, a skilled whip, an excellent judge
of a horse, a clever shot, and as a yachtsman he held his own in Norfolk
waters with his well-known yacht, the Kestrel.  In 1856 Mr. Crawshay
married the daughter of Sir William Cubitt, the constructor of Lowestoft
harbour.  In 1857 he was appointed Sheriff of Norwich.  Mr. Crawshay was
a famous breeder of Southdown and cross-bred sheep, a great benefactor of
Hingham, and in dress, manners, and tastes he retained all the best
characteristics of a country gentleman of the old school, and paid little
heed to modern innovations.

27.--The portrait of Mr. J. J. Colman, painted by Professor Hubert
Herkomer, R.A., at the cost of 600 guineas, was unveiled by Sir Harry
Bullard, M.P., at St. Andrew's Hall.  The portrait is identical with the
one at Carrow Abbey, painted by the same artist three years previously,
but with the addition of certain details.


NOVEMBER.


7.--The High Sheriff of Norfolk (Mr. H. M. Upcher) gave, at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich, a county ball, which was attended by 500 guests.

9.--Mr. James Clabburn was elected Mayor, and Mr. Samuel Wainwright
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

10.--The Norwich and Norfolk Conservative Club was formally opened by Mr.
Walter Long on the occasion of the conference of the Eastern Division of
the National Union of Conservative and Constitutional Associations.  Sir
Harry Bullard, M.P., president, and Lady Bullard gave a _conversazione_
at St. Andrew's Hall in the evening.

15.--The Norwich Omnibus Company wound up its affairs in consequence of
the approaching completion of the tramways scheme.  The company was
formed in 1878 with a capital of 5,920.

25.--The German Emperor and Empress arrived at Sandringham on a visit to
the Prince and Princess of Wales.  Their Majesties, who were accompanied
by the Prince of Wales, were met at Wolferton station by the Princess of
Wales, the Duke and Duchess of York, Princess Victoria of Wales, and Sir
William and Lady ffolkes.  The Emperor and Empress accompanied the Prince
and Princess of Wales to church on the 26th, the Sandringham preserves
were shot over on the 27th, and their Majesties departed on the 28th.

28.--Killed in action at the battle of Modder River, Lieut.-Col. Horace
Robert Stopford, commanding 2nd Battalion Coldstream Guards.  Col.
Stopford was a resident of Sheringham, captain of the Sheringham Golf
Club in 1895, and a member of the Improvement Committee.  He was in his
44th year.


DECEMBER.


12.--The new organ erected at Norwich Cathedral at the cost of 6,000,
with the celestial organ given by Mr. Hugh G. Barclay, was opened at a
special service attended by the Mayor and members of the Corporation.
The sermon was preached by the Dean, and a recital was given by Dr. A. L.
Peace, organist of St. George's Hall, Liverpool.

30.--The extensive premises known as "Free Trade House," Swaffham Road,
East Dereham, occupied by Mr. F. Vincent, grocer, factor, and general
warehouseman, were destroyed by fire.  The loss was estimated at 2,500.

--Died at 5, Park Square, Regent's Park, London, Sir James Paget, Bart.
The son of Mr. Samuel Paget, merchant, of Yarmouth, he was born in that
town on January 11th, 1814.  After a most distinguished medical career he
was appointed Serjeant-Surgeon to the Queen, and surgeon to the Prince of
Wales.  He was created a baronet in 1871.  His third son, the Rev. H.
Luke Paget, vicar of St. Pancras, married a daughter of Sir Samuel Hoare,
Bart., M.P.



1900.


JANUARY.


1.--Died at Booton rectory, the Rev. Whitwell Elwin.  He was born in
Norfolk on February 25th, 1816, and entering Caius College, Cambridge,
graduated B.A. in 1839.  After his marriage with his cousin, Miss Frances
Elvin, in that year, he was ordained, and became curate of Hemington with
Hardington, in Somersetshire.  In 1849 he was presented to the family
living of Booton, where he resided until his death.  During his
incumbency he undertook the great work of re-building his parish church
in the Early Decorated style upon the old ground plan.  Elwin was best
known as editor of the "Quarterly Review," the personal friend of
Thackeray and Bulwer Lytton, of Dickens and Forster, and of many other
famous people in the literary world.  It was in 1843 that he wrote for
the "Quarterly Review" his first article--on the "Histoire du Chien" of
Elzear Blaze.  When Lockhart's illness made it necessary for him to go
abroad in 1853 he asked Elwin to do the work of editing the "Quarterly
Review."  Lockhart died in 1854, and Elwin then succeeded him in the post
of editor.  He lived at home in Norfolk and went up to London for the
publication of each number.  Thackeray gave to him the gold pen with
which he had written most of "Vanity Fair," and has left a pleasant
sketch of him in his "Roundabout Paper" on "Screens in Dining Rooms."
Elwin wrote the review of "The Newcomes" in the "Quarterly" for
September, 1855.

2.--The formal presentation of gifts subscribed by the residents of
Norfolk and the citizens of Norwich for the men of the Norfolk Regiment
took place at Aldershot by a deputation consisting of the High Sheriff
(Mr. Upcher), the Deputy-Mayor of Norwich (Mr. G. H. Morse), Col.
Shepherd, D.S.O., Mr. P. E. Hansell (Under-Sheriff of Norfolk), and Mr.
E. J. Caley, honorary secretary to the fund.  The battalion left
Aldershot on the 4th for Southampton, and embarked on the P. and O. liner
Assaye for South Africa.  The strength of the battalion was just under
1,000.  On this day (January 2nd) the non-commissioned officers and men
of the Loyal Suffolk Hussars and many civilians, who had volunteered for
active service in South Africa with the Imperial Yeomanry, attended at
the Maid's Head Hotel, Norwich, for the purpose of being medically
examined and attested.  About 46 members of the Loyal Suffolk Hussars and
112 civilians were accepted.  On the 12th the commanding officers of the
four Volunteer battalions of the Norfolk Regiment met at Norwich and
arranged details for the clothing and equipment of men who had
volunteered for the front.  Three officers were appointed to the service
company--Capt. Archdale, 3rd Volunteer Battalion, Lieut. B. H. L. Prior,
1st Volunteer Battalion, and Lieut. H. L. Willett, 4th Volunteer
Battalion.  The company consisted of four sergeants, five corporals, two
buglers, and 99 rank and file--total 115.  On the 25th the 3rd Battalion
Norfolk Regiment (Militia), commanded by Col. Custance, was embodied at
the Britannia Barracks, Norwich, and on the same day left for Fermoy for
garrison duty.  The Yeomanry and Volunteers attended a farewell service
at Norwich Cathedral on the 26th; and in the evening the Volunteers were
entertained to dinner at the Drill Hall by public subscription.  The
Yeomanry (43rd Company) were similarly entertained on the 27th by Mr.
Alfred Haldinstein, whose eldest son had volunteered for service with the
company.  On the 30th the 43rd Company paraded on Tombland, and, headed
by the band of the 7th Hussars, marched to Trowse, where they entrained
with their horses for Southampton, and on the 31st embarked on the Goth.
The officers, non-commissioned officers, and men of the 44th Company left
Norwich by special train at 4.50 on the morning of February 3rd for
London, where they were inspected at Albany Street Barracks by the Prince
of Wales.  They returned to Norwich in the evening.  On the 5th they were
entertained to dinner at the Assembly Room, Agricultural Hall, under the
presidency of the Deputy-Mayor.  The Norfolk Volunteer Service Company
left Norwich on February 11th, under the command of Lieut.-Col. Diver,
2nd Volunteer Battalion, who had been appointed in place of Capt.
Archdale, incapacitated by illness; the same day they arrived at
Southampton and embarked on the Donne Castle.  Meanwhile the 3rd
Battalion Norfolk Regiment (Militia) had volunteered for service at the
front, and the battalion on February 25th left Fermoy for Queenstown,
where they embarked on board the Orotava.  Col. Custance was in command,
and there were 22 officers and 550 non-commissioned officers and men.  On
March 1st news was received in Norwich of the relief of Ladysmith.  A
boom was fired from the Castle, the city flags hoisted upon public
buildings, and the bells of St. Peter Mancroft rung.  Bands of music
paraded the streets, and in the evening the city was illuminated.
Similar rejoicings took place throughout the county.  On the 3rd, at two
a.m., the 44th Company, Imperial Yeomanry, paraded on Tombland, and
headed by torch bearers and the band of the Artillery Volunteers marched
to Thorpe Station, whence they proceeded to London, and on the same day
embarked on the Cornwall at the Albert Docks.  News of the relief of
Mafeking reached Norwich on May 18th at 10 p.m., and was received with
great enthusiasm.  On the 19th the city was decorated, and Sir Harry
Bullard, M.P., on visiting the corn market, was loudly cheered by the
farmers and merchants and compelled to make a speech.  In the evening the
Volunteers paraded the streets, which were illuminated, and a great
gathering was held at the Conservative Club, under the presidency of Sir
Harry Bullard.  Thanksgiving services were held on the 20th in all places
of worship in the city and county.  The occupation of Pretoria, the
crowning point in the success of British arms, was made known in Norwich
on June 5th, and on the 6th a great demonstration took place in
celebration of the event.  A procession, in which the naval and military
forces were represented, marched round the city, and afterwards a dense
crowd witnessed a cinematographic exhibition in the Market Place.  On
December 15th a meeting was held under the presidency of Viscount Coke,
at the Shirehall, Norwich, at which was inaugurated a movement for the
erection of a memorial to Norfolk men who had died whilst on active
service in South Africa.

8.--A meeting was held at Costessey, under the presidency of Mr. Stafford
H. Jerningham, for the purpose of discussing the projected construction
of a light railway between Norwich and Dereham.  The line, which was to
be constructed under the Light Railways Act, was to be fifteen miles in
length, and a capital of 85,000 was required.  The suggested route was
from East Dereham, between North Tuddenham and Mattishall, on to
Hockering and East Tuddenham, thence to Honingham, and by Easton and
Costessey to Hellesdon, where the Eastern and Midlands line to Norwich
would be joined.  Meetings were held at other places along the suggested
route.  On July 26th an inquiry was held at the Royal Hotel, Norwich, by
Mr. Gerald A. Fitzgerald and Col. Boughey, C.S.I., Light Railway
Commissioners, into an application made for a provisional order for
authorising the construction of the railway.  After hearing evidence the
commissioners stated that they could not see any prospect of a return of
capital such as would lead the public to become investors, and,
therefore, they did not feel justified in recommending the Board of Trade
to grant the order.

11.--Died at his residence, Gordon Square, W.C., Dr. James Martineau,
aged 95 years.  A son of Thomas Martineau, a manufacturer of bombazines
and camlets, he was born at Norwich on April 21st, 1805.  His sister was
the famous Harriet Martineau.  From his tenth to his fourteenth year he
was educated at Norwich Grammar School, and on leaving school studied
medicine, but as the work was not congenial to him he gave it up, with
the view of becoming a minister of the denomination to which his family
belonged.  They were Unitarians, and thenceforward he was prominently
identified with that body.  He was the author of several theological
works, and had conferred upon him by Harvard College, Mass., the honorary
degree of LL.D.

31.--Information was received at Norwich that an outbreak of foot and
mouth disease had occurred at Fritton.  All sales necessitating the
movement of cattle were prohibited, and public markets in the district
closed.  On February 7th a deputation of farmers, cattle salesmen,
butchers, and others from the county waited upon Mr. Walter Long,
President of the Board of Agriculture, for the purpose of asking him to
relax in some degree the stringent restrictions placed upon the movement
of cattle.  Shortly afterwards an amended order was issued, and on March
31st Norwich Cattle Market was re-opened.  At Loddon Petty Sessions on
May 19th three farmers were summoned for contravention of an order of the
Board of Agriculture by the wrongful removal of cattle and sheep.  It was
urged by the defendants that "it was a case either of removal or
starvation," and the magistrates inflicted nominal penalties.  Mr. George
Holmes, one of the justices, protested against the false position in
which they were placed by the orders of the Board of Agriculture, which
could not possibly be obeyed by many owners of stock in the district.
During the sitting of the court a memorial was signed by the magistrates
and others and sent to Mr. Long, praying for a modification of the
restrictions in the Loddon and Clavering Union.

--Died at the Close, Norwich, the Rev. Edward Bulmer, M.A., minor canon
of Norwich Cathedral, aged 67.  His father was vicar-choral and custos of
Hereford Cathedral, and rector of Morton-on-Lugg, and his grandfather on
his mother's side the famous organist, Dr. Clarke Whitfield, composer of
the well-known anthem, "In Jewry is God known."  In addition to writing
the libretto to Dr. Bunnett's "Rhine Maiden," Canon Bulmer for some years
contributed to "The Argosy," and other magazines, articles end poems,
which were characterised by versatility and graceful diction.


FEBRUARY.


12.--Mr. Lewis Barton, of Elvin Road, East Dereham, attained his 100th
year.  He was born at Old Buckenham on February 12th, 1800.

15.--Severe weather was experienced in Norfolk.  In south Norfolk many of
the roads were blocked by snowdrifts.  During a storm on the coast the
brigantine Lizzie and Edith was wrecked off Eccles and four of the crew
drowned.

16.--Died at Teignmouth, Mr. Peter Paul Marshall, aged 69.  For fourteen
years he was City Engineer at Norwich, and resigned his appointment in
1891.  Mr. Marshall, who was a native of Edinburgh, was an artist of
considerable merit, and had exhibited works at the Royal Academy and the
British Institution.

22.--Among the officers reported wounded at the battle of Colenso on this
date was Major H. L. Smith, of the 2nd Surrey Regiment, eldest son of Mr.
Henry Smith, of Ellingham Hall.  Major Smith took part in the Afghan War
in 1879, and in the Egyptian War in 1885.

23.--Died at the Britannia Barracks, Norwich, Mr. George Francis
Archdale, aged 34.  He was the eldest son of Major Archdale, of
Coltishall, and was appointed to the command of the Norfolk Volunteer
Service Company for active duty in South Africa.  Shortly after taking up
his quarters at the barracks he was seized with influenza, and fatal
complications ensued.  Mr. Archdale, who was educated at Wellington
College, was a partner in the firm of Messrs. Hogge and Seppings.  He
held a commission in the 3rd Volunteer Battalion Norfolk Regiment, was a
crack shot, and for several years captained the China Cup team for
Norfolk.


MARCH.


15.--Died suddenly at Norwich, Mr. Horace Hill, Mus. Doc., aged 67.  He
was a son of Mr. John Hill, the compiler of the once popular "Norwich
Tune Book," and was largely identified with musical matters in Norwich
and Norfolk.

29.--Cromer Gas Works, constructed at the cost of upwards of 13,000, were
opened.


APRIL.


19.--The Norwich Diocesan Conference opened at Noverre's Rooms, Norwich,
and was concluded on the 20th.

--A trial trip over the completed portion of the Norwich electric
tramways was run.  A memorial signed by clergy and others was presented
to the Town Council, protesting against the proposed introduction of
Sunday traffic over the system.  The overhead wires erected by the
Tramway Company were inspected on June 12th by Mr. A. P. Trotter,
electric adviser to the Board of Trade; and on July 26th Col. Yorke,
R.E., of the Railway Department of the Board of Trade, made an inspection
of 22 miles of route on about 16 miles of roads.  On the 30th the cars
commenced running over the Magdalen Road, Earlham Road, Dereham Road, and
Thorpe Road routes.  Twenty-five thousand persons were carried on this
day.  The Newmarket Road route was opened on August 9th, and the Unthank
Road route on December 22nd.

20.--Two men, Pratt, of Tunstead, and Thomas Stafford, from Surrey, were
at work in a seven foot cylinder, 90 foot below the surface of the
ground, at North Waltham Waterworks, when the earth fell in and they were
entombed.  The accident occurred at fire p.m.  Strenuous efforts were
made to rescue the men, and mainly through the exertions of one Tom
Holford they were brought to the surface much exhausted, but otherwise
uninjured, at 9.15 p.m. on the 21st.

25.--The centenary of the death of the poet Cowper at East Dereham on
April 25th, 1800, was observed.  Cowper spent the closing years of his
life in a house in the Market Place, on the site of which the Cowper
Congregational church is now erected.  His body was interred in St.
Edmund's Chapel, in the north transept of the parish church.  At the
commemoration service the sermon was preached by the Rev. John Callis,
rector of Holy Trinity, Norwich.

26.--The Duke of York visited Yarmouth and attended the opening and
dedication of the Missions to Seamen Church and Institute.


MAY.


1.--The 7th Hussars, after eighteen months' service in Norwich, left for
Aldershot, under the command of Col. the Hon. R. T. Lawley.  The regiment
proceeded by three special trains from Trowse.  There were 642 men, 362
horses, 28 officers' chargers; 30 women and 60 children.

10.--The reservists and recruits of the 13th Hussars, who relieved the
7th Hussars at Norwich Cavalry Barracks, arrived at Trowse Station by
special train.  There were between 300 and 400 men.

13.--The death occurred at Parsonage Square, Norwich, in his 65th year,
of Thomas Mitham, who was regarded as the last representative in the city
of the old watchmen who shouted the hour to the public.  He was for many
years watchman at Gurney's Bank, and announced the hour once during the
night, namely, at 11 o'clock.  Prior to his entering the service of the
bank he was keeper of the old toll-gate at Thorpe.  In his early days he
was a schoolmaster in Cambridgeshire, his native county; with his
watchman's duties he combined the work of collecting for various
societies, was door-keeper at the Corn Hall, and was a man of great
integrity.

26.--A reredos of richly carved alabaster, designed by Messrs. Hicks and
Charlwood, architects, of Newcastle-on-Tyne, was dedicated at
Letheringsett church by the Bishop of Norwich.  It was the gift of
members of the Jodrell family, who had done much to restore and beautify
the church.


JUNE.


11.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Bigham, William Jimby,
38, was indicated for feloniously setting fire to a straw stack at
Surlingham.  The chief warder informed the judge that the prisoner was,
or pretended to be, deaf; he understood nothing and was unable to read or
write.  The judge thereupon had a jury sworn to decide whether the
accused was "mute of malice or by the visitation of God."  They found him
to be mute of malice, and the judge ordered a plea of not guilty to be
taken, and the case proceeded, with the result that the jury returned a
verdict of guilty.  His lordship remarking that he had not the slightest
doubt prisoner was pretending he could not hear the proceedings,
sentenced him to twelve months' imprisonment.

17.--The celebration of the bi-centenary of the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel commenced at Norwich.

25.--Died at Cleveland House, Newmarket Road, Norwich, Mr. George Clayton
Eaton, in his 66th year.  A son of Mr. Thomas Damant Eaton, on whose
death he succeeded to a liberal competency, Mr. Eaton followed no
business occupation, but devoted his time to literary pursuits, gave most
valuable aid to various charitable organizations, and took part in
furthering the usefulness of several scientific institutions.  During the
transition of the Norfolk and Norwich Museum from its old quarters in St.
Andrew's to the Castle, Mr. Eaton laboured incessantly, wrote one of the
descriptive guides to the Museum, and compiled the catalogue of the
pictures.  He was vice-president of the Norfolk and Norwich Library.
When the library was destroyed by fire in 1898, Mr. Eaton was appointed a
member of the special committee who advised upon the purchase of new
books, and it was in this respect that his literary knowledge proved
valuable.  One of his latest acts of public generosity was to give, in
conjunction with his brother, the Rev. William Ray Eaton, the site on
which the mission-hall for the parish of St. Peter Mancroft is erected.

29.--A sale of the Sandringham shorthorns and Southdowns, the property of
the Prince of Wales, was conducted at the Home Farm, Wolferton, by Mr.
John Thornton.  His Royal Highness and a large party from Sandringham
were present.  Forty-one heifers made a total of 2,954 14s., an average
of 72 1s. 3d.; 13 bulls realised 780 3s.  The 54 lots of heifers and
bulls made 3,724 17s., an average of 69.  The sheep made less
satisfactory prices than on previous occasions.

30.--The Prince and Princess of Wales visited Norwich for the purpose of
opening the new Jenny Lind Infirmary.  His Royal Highness arrived at
Trowse by saloon train from Wolferton at 1.10 p.m., and was received by
Mr. Russell J. Colman, chairman of the Committee of Management of the
Infirmary.  Four minutes later the train by which the Princess travelled
from London entered the station.  Their Royal Highnesses, escorted by the
13th Hussars, were driven to Carrow Abbey, where a large and
distinguished party had been invited to meet them at luncheon; and
afterwards they proceeded to the new Infirmary, where they were presented
with an address read by Mr. Colman, to which the Prince of Wales replied,
and declared the building open.  The Princess of Wales then accepted
purses in aid of the endowment fund, a short address was delivered by the
Dean, and the Bishop offered prayer.  On leaving the Infirmary their
Royal Highnesses proceeded to the Cathedral, and after hearing a short
organ recital, took tea at the Palace.  In the evening they left Thorpe
station for Sandringham.


JULY.


4.--The Summer Show of the Norfolk Agricultural Association was opened at
Downham Market, under the presidency of Mr. T. L. Hare, M.P., and
concluded on the 5th.

16.--Mr. J. Roots, of East Dereham, who had undertaken for a wager of 50
to drive his horse from Dereham to Yarmouth and back once every day for
six consecutive days, was stopped at Thorpe on the fourth day's journey,
by an officer of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals,
who prohibited the continuance of the task.  The animal was then
perfectly sound and in good condition.

16.--The opening of the first portion of the new pier at Cromer took
place.

19.--Mrs. Mary Ann Towler, of Keppel Street, Lynn, entered upon her 100th
year.

20.--A severe thunderstorm passed over Norfolk.  Many cattle and sheep
were killed by lightning in various parts of the county.  Very hot
weather was recorded in the following week.

21.--The Norfolk Volunteer Brigade, under Col. Shepherd, D.S.O., acting
Brigadier-General, went into camp at Colchester.

27.--A fire took place in the timber-yard of Messrs. J. Porter and Sons,
Norwich, and caused damage to the amount of several thousands of pounds.


AUGUST.


3.--A severe gale swept over the county and did serious damage to
orchards, in which thousands of tons of unripe fruit were destroyed.
Many shipping disasters occurred upon the coast.

4.--A new lifeboat named the Licensed Victualler, provided by liberal
contributions from the Licensed Victuallers' Fund, was received by
Commander Holmes, R.N., at Hunstanton.  A ceremonial launch was dispensed
with in consequence of the roughness of the sea.

--Died at Heigham House, Norwich, aged 69, Mr. John Boyce, who had for
many years been identified with the firm of Messrs. Bullard and Sons, of
the Anchor Brewery.  Mr. Boyce, who was a son of Mr. Samuel Boyce, of
East Dereham, was elected a representative of the old Second Ward in
November, 1867, and served continuously until 1892, when, on the
redistribution of seats, he was transferred to the Earlham Ward.  He
retired in 1894, and on June 18th, 1895, was elected an alderman on the
death of Col. Bignold.  Mr. Boyce, who was a magistrate for the city, was
in politics a Conservative.

5.--Died at Eaton, Norwich, Mr. Philip Back, aged 76.  He entered the
Corporation in 1873 as member for the old Fourth Ward, and on his
re-election in 1876, with Mr. Ladyman, the memorable election petition
was presented by his Liberal opponents, Mr. J. D. Smith and Mr. S.
Newman, against the return of himself and his colleague.  The
commissioner gave judgment in favour of the respondents, with costs, and
Mr. Back retained his seat.  In 1879 he was appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

10.--The time ball, erected on the north-west angle of the battlements of
Norwich Castle, was used for the first time.  It announces Greenwich time
every day at 10 a.m.

14.--Lord Walsingham addressed a letter to the Press announcing that an
attempt was being made to re-introduce the great bustard in what was
formerly one of the favourite haunts of this fine bird on the borders of
the Norfolk fens.  The experiment, his lordship stated, was due to the
public spirit of an English gentleman living abroad, and he appealed to
the public for the protection of the birds.

21.--Prince Pura Chatra of Siam and his brother, Prince Yugula, arrived
at Norwich from Cromer, and visited several places of interest in the
city.

24.--Dr. A. H. Mann, of Cambridge, was elected chorus master of the
Norwich Festival, in succession to Dr. Horace Hill, deceased.


SEPTEMBER.


17.--The Prince of Wales' Own Norfolk Artillery Militia commenced a route
march through Norfolk, under the command of Col. Viscount Coke.  The
regiment left Yarmouth in two river steamers, and landing at Buckenham
Ferry marched to Langley Park, the seat of Sir Reginald Proctor
Beauchamp, where they encamped for the night.  The march was resumed on
the 18th to Dunston Park; on the 19th to Wymondham; on the 20th to
Dereham; on the 21st to Westacre; and on the 22nd to Hempton Green, where
Sunday, the 23rd, was spent, and the regiment attended service at
Fakenham church.  On the 24th the column marched to Holkham, and encamped
in the park; on the 25th the march was continued to Melton Constable
Park; on the 26th to Aylsham; on the 27th to North Walsham; and on the
28th to Woodbastwick Park, where the last camp was formed.  On the 29th
the column marched from Woodbastwick to headquarters at Yarmouth.  The
actual distance marched in the twelve days was 150 miles.

22.--The body of a woman was found on the south beach at Yarmouth.  The
medical evidence proved that death was due to strangulation caused by a
bootlace bound tightly round the neck.  The deceased had been lodging at
Yarmouth since the 15th, and had stated that her name was Hood.  On
November 9th the London police arrested at Woolwich a man named Herbert
John Bennett, who was brought to Yarmouth and charged with the murder of
the woman--his wife.  On November 24th he was committed for trial at the
Norfolk Assizes, but owing to the prejudice excited against the prisoner
by a certain section of the Press, the venue of trial was removed to the
Old Bailey, where he was found guilty and sentenced to death.  (Bennett
was executed at Norwich Prison in March, 1901.)

25.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council it was resolved that the
question of applying to Parliament for powers to purchase compulsorily
the Norwich Waterworks undertaking, be referred to a committee, and if in
their judgment it was considered to be in the interests of the city to
obtain such powers, they be empowered to take steps for the promotion of
a Bill for that purpose, and further that they negotiate with the
Waterworks Company for the purchase, if possible, by agreement.

29.--Sir Samuel Hoare, Bart., and Sir Harry Bullard were nominated at the
Guildhall, Norwich, representatives of the city in Parliament.  The
Liberal party offered no opposition, and the Sheriff (Mr. S. Wainwright)
declared the Conservative candidates duly elected.

--Sir John Colomb, K.C.M.G., Conservative, was returned unopposed member
of Parliament for Great Yarmouth.

29.--Mr. T. Gibson Bowles (C.) and Mr. F. Handel Booth (L.) were
nominated for the representation of King's Lynn.  The polling on October
1st resulted as follows: Bowles, 1,499; Booth, 1,332.


OCTOBER.


1.--The nomination of candidates for East Norfolk took place at the
Shirehall, Norwich.  Mr. William Louis St. Julian Prioleau, of Plumstead
Hall, was proposed by the Unionists, and Mr. Robert James Price by the
Liberals.  The polling on the 5th was as follows: Price, 4,563; Prioleau,
3,733.

--At the Town Hall, Aylsham, Major Henry Speaker Follett, 7th Dragoon
Guards, of Coney Weston, Suffolk, was nominated Unionist candidate for
North Norfolk; Sir William Brampton Gurdon, K.C., of Assington Hall,
Suffolk, was nominated by the Liberals.  The polling took place on the
8th: Gurdon, 4,490; Follett, 3,493.

4.--Polling took place for South Norfolk.  The candidates were Mr. Edward
Mann, of Thelveton Hall (Unionist), and Mr. A. W. Soames (Liberal).  The
result was declared at the Shirehall, Norwich, on the 5th: Soames, 3,986;
Mann, 3,566.

--The nomination took place at the Town Hall, Lynn, of Sir William
ffolkes, Bart., of Hillington (Unionist), and Mr. George White, of Eaton
Grange, Norwich, manufacturer (Liberal), as candidates for North-West
Norfolk.  The polling was on the 11th, and the result was declared on the
12th: White, 4,287; ffolkes, 3,811.

--Mr. William Lewis Boyle, of Elsing Hall (Unionist), and Mr. F. W.
Wilson, of the Dale, Scarning (Liberal), were nominated at East Dereham
for the representation of Mid Norfolk.  The election took place on the
8th, and the poll was declared on the 9th: Wilson, 3,996; Boyle, 3,422.

5.--At Swaffham, Mr. Thomas Leigh Hare, of Stow Hall (Unionist), and Mr.
Richard Winfrey, of Sutton House, Peterborough, and Stanley House,
Swaffham (Liberal), were nominated candidates for South-West Norfolk.
The polling on the 12th resulted as follows: Hare, 3,702; Winfrey, 3,636.

6.--Died at Pinetown Bridge, South Africa, Mr. Walter Waring, surgeon
Norwich.  He had gone out to the seat of war as captain in the Militia
Medical Staff Corps, and the cause of his death was dysentery.  Formerly
medical-officer to the Norwich Dispensary, he was known as Mr. Walter
Scott Walters; he afterwards assumed the name of Waring.

17.--Died at the Close, Norwich, the Ven. Henry Ralph Nevill, Archdeacon
of Norfolk and a canon of Norwich Cathedral.  He was fourth son of Mr.
Richard J. Nevill, of Llangennech Park, Carmarthenshire, and was born
June 17th, 1821.  For four years he was travelling tutor to the Earl of
Ducie.  His first curacy was at Yarmouth, in 1848, and he ultimately
became vicar of that parish in 1859.  In 1873 he received a residentiary
canonry in Norwich Cathedral, and in 1874 Bishop Pelham appointed him
Archdeacon of Norfolk, in succession to Archdeacon Blakelock.  In 1881
Archdeacon Nevill was elected vicar of St. Peter Mancroft, and held the
living until 1884.  He was a member of the governing body of the Grammar
School, and was well known throughout the diocese as an able organiser
and administrator.

19.--The Earl of Albemarle was welcomed with great enthusiasm at
Quidenham Park on his return from active service in South Africa in
command of the City of London Imperial Volunteers.


NOVEMBER.


6.--Madame Albani appeared at a concert at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.
The other _artistes_ included Miss Ada Crossley, Mr. William Green, Mr.
Douglas Powell, Mr. Tivadar Nachez (solo violin), and Mr. Frederick
Dawson (solo pianoforte).

9.--Mr. J. J. Dawson Paul was elected Mayor, and Mr. Sydney Cozens-Hardy
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

23.--Died at Southrepps rectory, the Hon. and Rev. John Harbord, aged 68.
He was an accurate investigator of the genealogy of county families, and
a student of college antiquities.


DECEMBER.


2.--Died at Ketteringham Park, Sir Francis George Manningham Boileau,
Bart.  He was born March 26th, 1830, and was the son of Sir John Boileau,
F.R.S., who was created first baronet in 1838, and died in 1869.  Sir
Francis was educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford, and was called to
the Bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1855.  He took a prominent position in public
life, and in the administration of county business; and was president of
the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society and of the Norfolk and
Norwich Naturalists' Society.  On the formation of the Norwich Light
Horse he held a commission in the corps, and subsequently transferred his
services to the 3rd Volunteer Battalion Norfolk Regiment, of which he was
for several years lieutenant-colonel.  In politics Sir Francis Boileau
was formerly a Liberal, but he became strongly Unionist, and one of his
last acts was to write, on behalf of the Unionists of South Norfolk, an
address presented to Mr. Edward Mann for his services to the party at the
General Election.

10.--Died at Ludham, Mr. William Heath, in his 90th year.  He was
formerly a well-known breeder of cattle, and a successful exhibitor at
the Smithfield Club and other shows.  In the days of his prosperity he
dispensed unbounded hospitality at the Hall Farm; in after years he
experienced severe reverses and lived in retirement in the locality where
he had once held so prominent a position.

13.--The Rev. W. M. Hay Aitken was installed a canon of Norwich
Cathedral, in place of the Ven. Archdeacon Nevill, deceased.

24.--A woman named Kelly, aged 27, the widow of a reservist who had died
in South Africa, was found in her cottage at Stokesby suffering from
severe abdominal wounds, from which she died in the course of the day.  A
half-witted lad named Cossey, aged 20, was apprehended on the charge of
murdering the woman.

                             END OF VOL. II.




INDEX.


A


Abduction of a boy, alleged, 96.

,, remarkable charge of, 122.

Abstinence from food, remarkable instance of, 88.

Accidents: Rev. W. Beauchamp killed, 20; remarkable subsidence at
Norwich, 24; boating, on the Yare, 33; killed by the fall of a building,
33; on the railway, near Thetford, 38; ditto, near Harling, 56; at
Norwich circuses, 68, 112; fatal driving, 91; Norwich fish market, 91;
explosion on ss. Tonning, 100; gunpowder explosion at Norwich, 101;
fatal, carriage, at Norwich, 116; fatal fall from Nelson Monument,
Yarmouth, 124; Burgh water frolic, 125; on Lynn and Hunstanton railway,
126; at Arnold's brewery, Norwich, 156; boiler explosion at Stark's dye
works, Norwich, 162; ditto at Watlington, 166; firework explosion, 205;
Wells railway station, 299; shooting, 360; Mr. Mann, of Thelveton, 372;
boating, at Buckenham Ferry, 401; at a Norwich fire, 434; on Ormesby
broad, 463; Hunstanton yawl disaster, 464; drowning, at Holkham, 471;
Wells boating disaster, 485; dragoon fatally injured, 489.

Actor and Member of Parliament, 80.

Administrative reform, 41.

Advertisement duty, repeal of, 23.

Agricultural Association, Norfolk: proposal to hold show at Dereham, 103;
annual shows at Attleborough, 191; Aylsham, 380; Dereham, 116, 213, 299,
392, 470; Diss, 278, 499; Downham Market, 178, 310, 510; Fakenham, 168,
256, 339, 480; Harleston, 202; Lynn, 136, 222, 348, 430, 489; North
Walsham, 286; Norwich, 144 (first two day's show), 241, 329, 443;
Swaffham, 266, 402; Thetford, 233; Watton, 357; Wymondham, 321, 421, 462;
Yarmouth, 125, 413, 450.  Show abandoned owing to cattle plague, 153;
efforts to obtain visit of the R.A.S.E., 231; secretaries, 229, 475;
spring show of horses, 283, 318, 327, 330, 346.

,, depression, 319, 353, 436, 454, 465, 468.

Agricultural excursion to Holland, 327.

,, experiments, 357.

,, Hall, Norwich, 321, 327, 331.

,, Holding's Act, 406.

,, labour, scarcity of, 500.

,, labourers' agitation, 219; earnings, 433; Union, 231, 239, 263.

,, Relief Association, 9.

,, rents on Holkham estate, 436.

,, Society, Mitford and Launditch, 423.

,, Society, Royal, 231, 347, 358, 370.

,, Union, National, 438, 449.

Agriculture, employment of women and children in, 170.

Aitkin, Rev. W. M. Hay, 514.

Albani, Madame, 226, 258, 271, 289, 324, 361, 384, 444, 452, 473, 502,
514.

Albemarle, Earl of, on benefit clubs, 55.

Alexander, Rev. J., presentation to, 50; resignation, 157; death, 180.

Alexandra steamboat launched, 176.

Aliwal, charge of 16th Lancers at, 325.

Alleyn, Miss, 336.

Allotment Bill, St. Faith's, 420.

Amalgamation of railways, 112.

Amateur theatricals, 404, 455, 463.

American Congregationalists at Norwich, 471.

Anchor Brewery excursions, 289, 313.

Angelo, Madame, pedestrian, 243.

Angler's Society, Norfolk and Norwich (afterwards Yare Preservation
Society), 62, 73.

Angling match, 88.

Anguish's Charity, 341, 388, 467.

Apparatus for raising sunken vessels, 28.

Aquarium, Yarmouth, 258.

Arcade, Royal, Norwich, 499.

Arch, Joseph, returned for North-West Norfolk, 363, 432, 463; defeated by
Lord Henry Bentinck, 370; petition against the return of his lordship,
378; defeats Lord Henry Bentinck, 432; remarkable speech at New
Buckenham, 450.

Archaeological Institute, 403.

Archbishop of Canterbury at Norwich Cathedral, 449; memorial service for,
473.

,, York, 465.

Archery fete at Crown Point, 127.

,, National meeting, 160.

Architects, National Association of, 313.

Art Circle, Norwich, 360.

,, Loan exhibitions, 291, 354.

Artillery Company, Hon., 233.

,, Militia, 23, 28, 157, 158, 222, 258, 321, 357, 379, 401, 420, 437,
460, 499, 512.

,, Volunteers, 391, 402; new uniform of, 299.

Artists, Norfolk and Suffolk, 244.

Artizans' Dwellings Act, 276.

Ashbourne, Lord, at Didlington, 422; at Norwich, 440.

Assessment, county, 208, 438.

,, Norwich, 500.

Assize, maiden, at Norwich, 231.

Assizes, 4, 6, 11, 28, 30, 40, 43, 60, 94, 95, 98, 101, 104, 105, 107,
114, 122, 131, 142, 143, 147, 156, 161, 169, 179, 185, 190, 200, 223,
239, 242, 243, 252, 254, 257, 265, 276, 278, 288, 294, 312, 320, 324,
328, 331, 340, 341, 354, 361, 365, 368, 369, 372, 374, 375, 376, 377,
399, 408, 428, 461, 476, 480, 489, 509.

,, actions at: Abbott _v._ Bacon, 4; Baldry _v._ Ellis, 6; Waldron _v._
Bates, 40; Fisher _v._ Nisbett, 43; Tillett _v._ Lord Hastings, 60; Corry
_v._ Bond, publisher of the "Norfolk News," 94; Wright _v._ Wilkin, 95;
Gillings _v._ Manders, 98; Marrison _v._ London Union Fire Office, 101;
Cufaude _v._ Corry, 105; Lane _v._ the Yarmouth "Free Press" and Printing
Company, 107; Middle Level litigation, 114, 120; Pell _v._ Wigg, 142; le
Strange _v._ Rowe, 143; Creake _v._ Smith, 156; Athill _v._ Soman, 161;
Colman _v._ Larkman, 175; Johnson _v._ Cooke, Q.C., 223; Spurgeon _v._
Vincent, 239; Morse _v._ G.E. Railway Company, 252; Gilman _v._ ditto,
253; Phillips _v._ Stewardson, 257; Farrow _v._ Childs (alleged breach of
promise), 276; Loftus _v._ Berney, 288; Taylor _v._ Gwyn and Lubbock,
288; le Strange _v._ Anker, 294; Samuel _v._ Burgess and Burgis, 334; le
Strange _v._ Corporation of Lynn, 354; Corporation of Norwich _v._ Coxe,
376; Bullard and others _v._ Saul, 428.

Astley and Wyrley-Birch _v._ MacLean, 485.

Asylum, Heigham Hall, alleged irregularities at, 35.

,, Norfolk County Lunatic: suicide of medical officer, 107; enlargement
of premises, 282; Dr. Thomson appointed medical superintendent, 376;
epidemics attributed to sewage farm, 300.

,, Norwich City, 230, 242, 252, 308; medical officer charged with fraud,
243.

Athletic sports, 105, 159, 232.

Attack on Norwich police, 399.

Attempted murder at Norwich, 495.

Attleborough cemetery dispute, 402.

,, lighted with gas, 89.

Austin _v._ Central News, 470.

Automobile Club at Norwich, 488.

Aylsham Corn Hall, 55.



B


Bagge memorial at Swaffham, 340.

Baines, Thomas, explorer, 71; death, 256.

Balaclava charge, survivors of, 355, 379, 414.

Balfour, Mr. A. J., at Norwich, 484.

Balloon ascents, 15, 116, 117, 179, 194, 402, 480; perilous descent of a,
180.

Ballot Act, first elections under the, 225, 228, 238.

Bancroft, Mr., 474.

Bank clerk, robbery by, 210.

,, Holiday, first, 214.

Banks--East of England, 136; suspends payment, 137; arbitration case,
220; Harvey and Hudson's, Norwich, 141, 315, 316; Consolidated (now
National Provincial), 154; Crown bank failure (q.v.); closing of Diss
Bank, 215; centenary of Messrs. Gurneys and Co., 255; jubilee of Mr.
Henry Birkbeck, 396; amalgamation of Gurney's and Co., 470; presentation
to, 470.

Barnum at Norwich, 82.

,, and Bailey's great show, 492, 500.

Barracks, Norwich Cavalry, 159, 327, 336.

,, Britannia, 350, 392.

Barrett, Rev. G. S., receives hon. degree, 447.

Barrett, Wilson, 202, 420.

Barry, Sheil, 342.

Barton, Dr. S. J., 392.

Bassingham gateway, Norwich, 64.

Bateman, Dr., knighted, 430.

Bateman, Miss Isabel, 386.

Bates, Captain, the Kentucky giant, 221.

Bath House at East Dereham, 61.

Baths, Norwich Corporation, 489.

Beaconsfield, Lord, death of, 320.

Beating the bounds, 168.

Beatrice, Mdlle., 215, 266.

Beecher, Rev. Henry Ward, 372.

Beeston church tower destroyed by lightning, 221.

Bell Ringers' Association, 280, 339.

,, tolling of muffled, at East Dereham, 227.

Bells and bell ringers, 144, 188, 256, 280, 290, 316, 409, 414.

,, centenary of St. Peter Mancroft, 256; re-hung, 337.

Bellew, Rev. J. M., 153.

Bennett George (actor), 3, 5, 12.

Benefit Clubs, 55.

Bensly, Dr., appointed Chapter Clerk, 195.

Benson, Miss, mistress of Norwich High School for Girls, 473.

Bentinck, Mr. G. W. P., returned for West Norfolk, 209.

Berney Arms station litigation, 102.

Bexfield, Dr., conducts new oratorio at Norwich, 8; death, 25.

Bibliomancy, 156.

Bicycle, introduction of the, 186; journey on a, 224; Norwich Velocipede
Club established, 187; formation of Norfolk and Norwich Bicycle Club,
273; races, 187, 273, 489; inter-county race, 300; 50 miles races, 379,
501; volunteer cyclist relays, 481; meeting at Norwich of the National
Cyclists' Union, 489; 50 miles championship, 501.

Bignold, Lieut.-Col., presentation to, 404; elected Mayor of Norwich,
454; death, 459.

Bignold, Samuel, elected Mayor of Norwich, 26; knighted, 31; returned for
Norwich, 38; defeated 60, 83, 86; petition against the return of Lord
Bury and Mr. Schneider, 86; Chester Waters scandal, 145, 146; eightieth
birthday celebrated, 215; elected Mayor of Norwich, 228; eighty-second
birthday celebrated, 236; presented with portrait, 238; death, 250.

Bimetalism, 379.

Birkbeck, M.P., Mr. Edward, presentation to, 361; created baronet, 365.

Births, Royal, 21, 61, 132, 450.

Bishops of Norwich: resignation of Dr. Hinds, 59; death of, 218;
installation of the Hon. and Rev. J. T. Pelham, 61; presentation to, 329;
threatening letter to, 340; resignation 439; death, 448; Rev. J.
Sheepshanks installed, 442; memorial presented by clergy and laity on
illegal practices, 496.

,, suffragan, 453.

Bisley meeting, 482.

Black gown discarded by the clergy, 211.

Blackley, Canon, and national insurance, 332.

Blake-Bignold incident, 225.

Blackfriars' Hall, Norwich, 364.

Blind Institution, 391, 423.

Blondin, 107, 194, 446.

Bloomer costume, 8.

Blue ribbon movement, 330.

Board School, first built, at Norwich, 227.

Bodies, unclaimed, 225.

Bohemian wax wing, 164.

Boileau drinking fountain, Norwich, 270.

Boiler explosions, 100, 186, 162, 166.

Book Club, Yarmouth, 310.

Booth "General," 418.

Borrow, George, Intrepidity of, 24; death, 322.

Boswell _v._ Coaks (see "Harvey Life Interest.")

Boundary of the City of Norwich, 301, 386.

,, County of Norfolk, 386.

,, of wards, 405, 422, 428.

Bounds, beating the, 168.

Boxing-day, first observed as a general holiday, 56.

Box-keeper at Norwich Theatre, 23.

Boys' Home, Norwich, 309.

,, Hospital, 331, 341.

Brandram, Samuel, 277.

Branscombe, Miss Maude, 341.

Breach of promise action, 276.

Brewery, St. George's, Norwich, sale of, 137.

Bribery, 36, 59, 60, 74, 84, 90, 94, 156, 183, 186, 189, 190, 193, 208,
366, 368.

,, prosecutions, 90, 186, 200, 368.

Brighten ("Norwich Milk Boy,") 110, 118.

British Archaeological Association, 67, 302.

,, Association, 180.

,, Dairy Farmers' Association, 391.

,, Medical Association, 244, 249, 412.

,, Training Squadron, 420.

Broads, public rights on, 431.

Brooke, G. V., 31; drowned in the wreck of the London, 154.

Brooke, Rajah, at Norwich, 7, 76; death, 178.

"Brother Officers," 496.

Brough, Lionel, 235.

Browne, Sir Thomas, skull of, 445; proposed monument, 497.

Buck, Zachariah, receives degree, 24; death, 302.

Building Society frauds, 241, 242, 253.

Bulgarian atrocities, 269.

Bullard, Harry, appointed Sheriff of Norwich, 281; presented with
portraits, 282, 294; excursions for work-people, 289, 313; elected Mayor,
291, 304, 374; munificence during the great flood, 291; presented with
silver cradle, 300; plants trees in Chapel Field, 303; performs opening
ceremony at Chapel Field, 315; receives Duke of Norfolk, 311;
subscription portrait hung in St. Andrew's Hall, 328; adopted
Conservative candidate for Norwich, 360; returned, 362; unseated on
petition, 366; banquet to celebrate the Queen's birthday, 379; entertains
Queen Kapiolani, 380; the Jubilee, 381; receives honour of knighthood,
381; freedom of the city, 385; Conservative Club _soiree_, 405; Bullard
and others _v._ Saul, 428; silver wedding, 429; adopted Conservative
candidate for Norwich, 461; returned, 462; unveils portrait of Mr. J. J.
Colman, 503; returned unopposed, 512.

Bulwer, W. E. G. L., wounded at the Alma, 36; receives Crimean medal, 41;
marriage, 42; presentation to, 128; Mrs. Bulwer opens rifle range, 158;
Col. Bulwer gazetted brigadier, 392; presents volunteer decoration, 439;
long service medal, 457.

Bunn, Robert, pedestrian, 66.

Bunnett, Edward, takes degree as Mus. Bac., 56; Mus. Doc., 189;
complimentary concert to, 281; appointed city organist, 313; "musical
jubilee," 469.

Burdett-Coutts, Baroness, 405.

Burgh, water frolic, shocking accident at, 125.

Burglary at Norwich jeweller's, 468.

Burials Bill, protest against, 310.

Burlesque of "The Yellow Gnome," 48.

,, Gaiety Company, 221.

Burnham Thorpe, memorial to Nelson, 423, 463.

Burritt, Elihu, 128.

Burton, F. C. Dr., 419.

Bustard re-introduced, 511.

Buttifant case, 241, 242, 253.

Buxton, Sir R. J., returned for South Norfolk, 211; death, 386.

Bylaugh Hall, 15; litigation, 65.



C


Cadge, Mr., elected surgeon of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, 68;
appointed Sheriff of Norwich, 271; presented with portrait, 413; freedom
of the city, 407; munificent gift to Hospital, 496.

Cadet Corps, Norwich, 450.

,, hackney stallion, 434.

Cafe Company, Norwich, 290.

Caister yawl disaster, 358.

Cambridge crew at Lynn, 417.

,, Middle Class examinations, 79, 159.

Canadian cattle, importation of, 469.

Capital punishment, suggested abolition of, 31.

Cardinal Manning, 328.

Card playing scandal at Norwich, 115.

Carrow Bridge undertaking, 402.

,, Works, alleged nuisance arising from, 20; electric light at, 336.

Carter, Samuel, artist, 335.

Cartridges, improved by Sir Henry Stracey, 71.

"Caste" Company, 193, 233, 253, 264, 296, 314.

Castle Museum, 373, 422, 451, 453.

Cathedral, Norwich, opening of west window, 33; Lord High Steward of,
161; suicide in, 315; organ, 487, 504; organists, 281, 317, 363; pulpits,
420, 421; memorial window, 420; restoration, 444, 449, 487, 499; Pelham
memorial throne, 460; effigy, 470; octo-centenary services, 470, 471.

Cattle market, Norwich, enlargement of, 106, 241.

,, plague, 148, 153, 155, 171, 246.

Cavalry drill-ground, 336, 472.

Celeste, Madame, 123.

Cemeteries, 48, 188, 195, 323, 402.

Census returns, 5, 105, 212, 320, 421.

Centenarian, remarkable, 151.

Centenarian's challenge, 124.

Centenarians, 206, 213, 401, 406, 442, 508, 511.  (See also "Died.")

Centenary of Church Missionary Society, 498; of "Norfolk Chronicle," 106;
of Norwich Union Fire Insurance Society, 480.

Chamber of Agriculture, Norfolk, 162.

,, Commerce, 457.

Chancellors of the Diocese: Chancellor Evans, 181; Mr. Edward Howes, 210;
Mr. John Worlledge, 322; appointment of Mr. T. C. Blofeld, 323.

Chang, Chinese giant, 180.

Changes of name: Scott-Chad, 46; Evans-Lombe, 101, 118;
Stracey-Clitheroe, 151; Marsham-Townshend, 440.

Channel Fleet at Yarmouth, 97, 114, 126, 245, 361, 413, 464.

Chapel Field, Norwich, improvement scheme, 11, 22, 169, 303, 315.

,, agricultural show in, 144.

Chapels, Nonconformist: Prince's street, Norwich, 189; Cowper
Congregationalism Dereham, 235.  Baptist: Unthank's Road, Norwich, 242.
Trinity Wesleyan, Dereham, 316.

Chaplin, Mr. G. H., manager of Norwich Theatre, 226, 280.

Charge, extraordinary, at Walsingham, 164.

Charity Commissioners' schemes, 299, 331, 341, 388, 407, 467.

Chevalier, Albert, 442.

Cheese fair, Lynn, 283.

Chief Constables of Norfolk, 14, 57, 119, 135, 311, 391, 482.

,, of Norwich, 57, 83, 476, 479.

,, Bill, 58.

China Cup, won by Norfolk Volunteers, 278, 482.

Choir Benevolent Fund, 54, 316, 357.

Cholera, threatened outbreak of, 439.

Choral Society, Norwich, dissolved, 251.

Christening, Royal, 468.

Christmas Show Association, Norfolk and Norwich, 274, 292, 304, 315, 332.

Church Association, 454.

,, Choral Association, 98.

,, Congress, 150, 465.

,, consecrations, 7, 74, 88, 107, 117, 140, 159, 170, 203, 323, 349, 419,
487.

,, in Wales Suspensory Bill, 442, 452.

,, Missions, 483.

,, of England Young Men's Society, 266.

,, ornaments illegally removed, 492.

,, rates, 154.

,, reform, 368.

Church restoration, 13, 61, 107, 134, 138, 160, 171, 173, 177, 196, 201,
254, 269, 273, 280, 287, 292, 323, 324, 337, 342, 348, 349, 363, 381,
383, 395, 403, 420, 421, 423, 424, 433, 450, 463, 485, 492, 495, 509.

,, School Aid Association, 425.

,, tower at Drayton, 1; at St. Michael-at-Thorn, 374; at Hindolvestone,
432.

"Church's Call" at Norwich, 200.

Churches destroyed by fire, 172, 424.

,, illegal practices in, 496.

,, new, 7, 26, 45, 55, 66, 74, 107, 117, 159, 170, 191, 203, 206, 211,
220, 279, 349, 365, 374, 392, 419, 461.

,, outrages in, 156, 163.

,, struck by lightning, 221, 302, 337.

Churchill, Lord Randolph, 360, 444.

Churchmen's Club, Norwich, 173.

Cinematograph, 470.

Circus accidents, 68, 112.

,, singular incident at a, 275.

,, stage play at a, 81.

Circuses, 9, 20, 56, 68, 81, 103, 112, 113, 140, 173, 196, 217, 237, 250,
272, 275, 282, 299, 317, 325, 335, 353, 354, 355, 363, 389, 399, 405,
416, 424, 437, 445, 446.

,, managed by pugilists, 112, 113, 115.

City Engineers: resignation of Mr. A. W. Morant, 230; appointment of Mr.
C. Thwaites, 230; resignation, 277; appointment of Mr. P. P. Marshall,
277; resignation, 431; death, 508; appointment of Mr. Buchan, 431;
resignation, 450; appointment of Mr. A. E. Collins, 450.

Clergyman charged with begging, 33.

,, shot, 461.

Clergyman's shocking death, 408.

,, suspension, 429; deprivation, 499.

Clerks of the Peace (city): Death of Mr. Arthur Dalrymple, 176; election
of Mr. E. C. Bailey, 176; death of, 340; election of Mr. J. Wilson
Gilbert, 342.

,, (county): Death of Mr. R. W. Parmeter, 313; appointment of Mr. Charles
Foster, 313.

Clocks, irregularities of public, 26.

C.M.S. Centenary, 498.

City Accountant, 486.

,, Gaol, 3; fire at, 252; discontinuance of, 284; sale of, 307.

,, Surveyors, 93, 431.

,, Treasurers: Death of Mr. T. Hancock, 247; appointment of Mr. E. S.
Steward, 247; resignation, 369.

Civic robes presented to Norwich Corporation, 476.

Climatic variations, remarkable, 464, 497.

Close, The, Norwich, proposed railway through, 309, 327.

Coach, 309.

Coins discovered, 9, 65, 266.

Coleman, John, charged with assault, 44; appears at Norwich Theatre, 47.

Colenzo, Bishop, 38.

Colliery riots, military and police drafted from Norwich, 444.

Collision in Yarmouth Roads, 165; off Happisburgh, 175.

Colman cricketing team, 357, 453, 457.

Colman, J. J., Mr., returned for Norwich, 209, 238, 307, 362, 370, 431;
entertains Royalty, 315, 367, 474; coming of age of Mr. R. J. Colman,
330; threatening letter, 341; presentation to, 429; receives freedom of
Norwich, 439; entertains Institute of Journalists, 451; Trades Union
Congress, 451; Jenny Lind Infirmary site, 469; death, 492; portrait
unveiled, 503.

Colona, Don Edgardo, Mexican tragedian, 258.

Colours, regimental, at Norwich Cathedral, 174, 471.

,, at Sandringham church, 385.

Combat between a stallion and a bull, 115.

Comedians, Norfolk and Suffolk Company of, 77, 132.

Comet, 79.

Coming of Age celebrations, 42, 49, 137, 194, 286, 330, 343, 354, 413,
468, 470, 492.

Commercial School, Norwich, establishment of, 64, 73; Mr. T. R. Pinder
appointed master, 111; resignation, 483; memorial from parents, 171;
amended scheme of management, 191; Charity Commissioners' inquiry and
schemes, 331, 341; Mr. W. R. Gurley appointed master, 483.

Common rights at Mulbarton, 143.

Compton Comedy Company, 386, 427, 437, 438, 445.

Congregational chapel at Norwich, 79.

,, Union, 373.

Conservative Association, 146.

,, Clubs, Norwich and Norfolk, 388; Patteson, 419.

,, compromises, 59.

Consistory Court: Bouverie _v._ Barnes, 98; Archdeacon of Norwich _v._ W.
Delph and W. T. Gilbert, 260; _re_ St. John Timberhill rood loft, 452;
_re_ unlawful removal of church ornaments from St. Michael-at-Coslany,
492; deprivation of living, 499.

Contagious Diseases (Animals) Act, prosecutions under, 298, 507.

Convalescent Home, Cromer, 413, 441.

Convict's property, claim by Norwich Corporation, 89.

Cooper's restaurant, 288.

Cooping of electors, 497.

Copeman, Rev. A. G., elected minister of St. Andrew's, 57.

Corn Exchange, Norwich, 80, 82, 109.

,, Hall, Yarmouth, 216.

Coroners--City: Death of Mr. E. S. Bignold, 469; appointment of Mr. R. W.
Ladell, 469.

Coroners, County: Death of Mr. Edward Press, 286; election of Mr. R. T.
Culley, 286; death, 337; election of Mr. J. Stanley, 337.

,, elections, 62, 161, 337, 469.

Corporation stock, 432.

Corrupt practices, proposed inquiry into, 84.

Costa's "Eli" at Norwich, 51.

Costerton _v._ Lacon, 104.

Cotman, John Sell, exhibition of works by, 392.

County balls, 385, 504.

,, Club, 396.

,, Council, preliminary proceedings, 386; elections, 397; scholarships,
420; litigation with Thetford Corporation, 490.

,, finances, control of, 1.

,, Court judge, action against a, 223.

,, judges: Death of Mr. T. J. Birch, 177; appointment of Mr. W. H. Cooke,
Q.C., 178; resignation, 247; death, 453; appointment of Mr. E. P. Price,
Q.C., 247; resignation, 463; death, 500; appointment of Mr. E. W.
Addison, Q.C., 463; resignation, 478; appointment of Mr. W. Willis, Q.C.,
478.

,, School, 213, 217, 232, 442.

,, Surveyors: Mr. R. M. Phipson elected, 89; death of, 354; appointment
of Mr. T. H. B. Heslop, 356.

,, Treasurers: Resignation of Mr. Day, 173; Mr. Herbert William Day
elected, 173; resignation, 425; Mr. H. C. Bolingbroke elected, 425.

Coursing, 36.

Court of Record: Mr. Carlos Cooper appointed judge, 219; death, 483; Mr.
E. E. Wild elected judge, 485.

Courts and yards of Norwich, 490.

Cowper centenary, 509.

,, Congregational chapel, Dereham, 235.

Cozens-Hardy, Mr., Q.C., M.P., appointed judge of the High Court of
Justice, 496.

Cranes, 191.

Creak will case, 18, 243, 244, 268.

Cresswell, Lieut., and the North-West Passage, 25.

Cricket, 14, 22, 76, 117, 179.

,, Club, Norfolk County, dissolved, 188; new club formed, 270; bazaar in
aid of, 419.

,, matches: Norfolk and Norwich _v._ Oxford and Cambridge Universities,
76; ditto _v._ United All England, 117; Aboriginal Australians _v._
Carrow, 179; South of England _v._ Norfolk and Norwich, 193; Norfolk _v._
Parsees, 392.

,, theatricals, 371, 382, 392, 403, 413, 422, 433.

,, Week, 323, 392, 422.

Cricketers, Colman, team of, 357, 453, 457.

Crimean War: Raising of relief funds, 30; Norwich address to the Queen,
31; days of humiliation, 31, 39; victory of the Alma, 35; fictitious
message, 35; railway constructed by Mr. Peto, 37; Norfolk officers
receive the Crimean medal, 41; fall of Sevastopol, 45; General Windham,
46, 52; peace rejoicings, 48.

Criminal lunatic, death of a, 100.

Crinolines, 93.

Cromer gas works, 508.

,, lighthouse, fall of, 164.

,, pier, 511.

Crops sold by auction, 500.

Crosse, Archdeacon, 439.

Crosse, Mr. R. E., 417.

Crown Bank failure, 204, 236, 281.

Crown Point, Norwich, 194, 222, 230.

Crowther, Bishop, 329.

Cruelty, remarkable charge of, 249.

Cruikshank, George, 8.

Cushman, Miss, 49.

"Cuthbert Bede," 347.

Czarewitch of Russia at Sandringham, 248.



D


Dalrymple, Mr. A., elected Clerk of the Peace, 47.

Dalton, Canon, charge against, 96.

Daniell, E. T., exhibition of works by, 422.

Dawson, George, 48, 63, 100.

"Daylight" prosecutions and actions, 334, 368.

Dead, prayers for the, 484.

Deans of Norwich: Death of the Hon. and Very Rev. George Pellew, 162;
installation of the Rev. Dr. Goulburn, 164; resignation, 400; death, 479;
installation of Dean Lefroy, 403.

De Camin, Baron, 133.

Deerfoot, pedestrian, 110, 118.

Derby, The, won by Melton, 357.

Dereham church restoration, 61, 363.

,, Corn hall opened, 58; litigation, 66, 75, 155; Coke's statue at, 78.

,, Local Improvement Board, 275.

,, race meeting, 65.

Diamond Jubilee, 476, 480.

Dickens, Charles, 89, 109, 167.

Died (_c_ indicates reputed centenarian): Adams, Rev. Coker, 425;
Albemarle, Earl of, 418; Albemarle, Earl of, 451; Alderson, Baron, 57;
Aldred, C. C., 348; Alexander, Lieut.-Col., 150; Alexander, Rev. John,
180; Allcock, Trivet, 184; Amyot, Thomas Edward, 467; Anson,
Major-General, 65; Archdale, George Francis, 508; Armes, Thomas
Frederick, 355; Ashburton, Baron, 181; Astley, Lieut.-Col., 157;
Atkinson, Commander, 270; Atkinson, J. G., 408; Austin, Mrs. (Sarah
Taylor), 169; Aylmer, Hugh, 449.

,, Back, Philip, 511; Bacon, George P., 284; Bacon, Mary Ann, 251; Bacon,
Richard Noverre, 344; Bacon, Sir Edmund, 135; Bagge, Richard, 419; Bagge,
Sir William, M.P., 305; Bagge, Sir William, 324; Bailey, Elijah Crosier,
340; Baines, Thos., 256; Baring, Thomas, 236; Barlow, Professor, 112;
Barnard Sarah (_c_), 416; Barham, J. C., 412; Barton, Edward Walter, 305;
Barwell, Henry George, 490; Barwell John, 263; Barwell, Louisa Mary, 355;
Barrett, Rev. G. W., 447; Bateman, William, 382; Bates, Rev. Jonathan,
294; Bates, Samuel, 392; Bayfield, T. G., 439; Bayning, Rev. Lord, 160;
Beal, Rev. Dr., 201; Beare, Samuel Shalders, 126; Beauchamp, Sir T. W. H.
Proctor, 246; Beauchamp, Rev. William, 20; Becher, Captain, 138; Beechey,
Rev. St. Vincent, 501; Beevor, Lady, 407; Beevor, Sir Thomas, 296;
Beevor, Sir Thomas, Bart., 359; Bell, Admiral, 25; Bellairs, Sir William,
128; Bennett George, 12; Bennett, John, 132; Bensly, Professor, 440;
Bentinck, G. W. P., 366; Berners, Lord, 3; Berney, G. D., 386; Berry,
Lady, 50; Betts, John, 391; Bexfield, Dr., 25; Bickersteth, Mrs. Sarah,
88; Bidwell, Leonard Shelford, 178; Bignold, Edward Samuel, 469; Bignold,
Lady, 95; Bignold, Lieut.-Col., 459; Bignold, Sir Samuel, 250; Birch,
Judge, 177; Birkbeck, Henry, 456; Black, Lieut.-Col., 391; Black,
Rear-Admiral, 16; Blake, Francis John, 260; Blake-Humfrey, Robert, 373;
Blackelock, Archdeacon, 428; Blane, Captain Rodney, R.N., 414; Blofeld,
Rev. Thomas John, 320; Blyth, Captain William D'Urban, 356; Blyth, Rev.
William, 369; Boileau, Lt. Charles A. P., 44; Boileau, Sir Francis G. M.,
514; Bolieau, Sir John P., 189; Bolingbroke, Horatio, 294; Bond-Cabbell,
Benjamin, 249; Bond-Cabbell, Benjamin Bond, 430; Bond, Thomas William,
302; Borrow, Ann, 77; Borrow George Thomas, 322; Bourchier,
Lieut.-General, 82; Bouverie, Archdeacon, 279; Boyce John, 511; Brett,
Lieut.-Col., 157; Brewer, Rev. Dr., 478; Brewer, Rev. Professor, 295;
Briggs, John, 240; Bright Henry, 235; Brightwell, Miss Cecilia Lucy, 254;
Brightwell, Thomas, 183; Brightwell, Thomas, 305; Brock, Rev. Dr., 259;
Brock, Samuel, 237; Brooke, Sir James, 178; Brown, Frederic, 258; Brown,
Rev. James, 55; Browne, Thos., 496; Browne Henry, 199; Browne, Richard
Charles, 439; Browne, W. J. Utten, 441; Buck, Dr. Zachariah, 302; Bulmer,
Rev. Edward, 507; Bulwer, J. R., Q.C., 497; Bulwer, William Earle Lytton,
279; Bunn, Rhoda (_c_), 348; Bunting, Christopher, 208; Burroughes, H.
N., 219; Burroughes, Thomas Proctor, 374; Burroughes, William, 158;
Burroughes, William Norton, 346; Butcher, William, 266; Buxton, Lady,
219; Buxton, Sir Edward, North, 75; Buxton, Sir R. J., 386.

,, Campbell, Quarter-master, 401; Canterbury, Viscount, 278; Carr, Isaac,
176; Carthew, G. A., 331; Carson, Edward, 107; Cator, Admiral, 137;
Cator, Albemarle, 178; Cattermole, George, 180; Chamberlin, A. J. N.,
338; Chamberlin, Robert, 267; Cholmondeley, Marquis of, 201;
Cholmondeley, Marquis of, 363; Christie, G. H., 385; Chute, W. L. W.,
300; Clabburn, W. H., 403; Clark, John F., 493; Clayburn, Phoebe (_c_),
113; Clayton, General Sir W. R., 161; Cockburn, Major-Gen., 391; Cockle
(the pill maker), 28; Codman, Stephen, 16; Coke, Hon. Edward Wentworth,
402; Coke, Thomas William, 167; Coleman, George Lovick, 406; Colkett, S.
D., 120; Collison, Rev. Henry, 323; Collyer, Archdeacon, 60; Collyer,
Georgina Frances Amy, 477; Colman, Alan C., 476; Colman, Henry, 457;
Colman Jeremiah, 357; Colman, J. J., 492; Colman, Mrs. J. J., 462;
Colman, Samuel, 453; Constance, Edward, 30; Cooke, George Frederick, 488;
Cooke, W. H., Q.C., 453; Coope, Octavius Edward, 375; Copeman, Rev. A.
C., 472; Cooper, Carlos, 483; Cooper, J. N. V., 178; Cooper, William,
280; Coots, Philip, 31; Copeman, Dr. Edward, 306; Copeman, John, 499;
Cory, Charles, 191; Costello, Rev. Edmund, 222; Cotman, John Joseph, 284;
Cox, Rev. John Edmund, 415; Coyte, Arthur, 360; Cozens-Hardy, W. H., 459;
Crabbe, Rev. George, 349; Crane, Commander, R.N., 287; Cranworth, Baron,
179; Craven, Countess of, 98; Crawshay, Charles, 503; Creeny, Rev. W. F.,
479; Croker, J. M., 298; Crome, Mary Ann, 283; Crompton, Rev. Joseph,
285; Crosse, Thomas William, 435; Cruttenden, Col., 11; Cubitt, Edward,
153; Cubitt, Sir William, 108; Cubitt, T., 47; Cubitt, William Jary, 358;
Cubitt, William Partridge, 352; Culley, John, 64; Culley, R. T., 337;
Culley, Samuel, 495; Cumming, Rev. James, 109; Curtis, John, F.L.S., 117;
Custance Col., Sir H., 434; Custance, General, 365.

,, Dalling and Bulwer, Baron, 221; Dalrymple, Archibald, 125; Dalrymple,
Arthur, 176; Dalrymple, Dr., M.P., 235; Dalrymple, John, 12; Dalton, Rev.
John, 239; Daly, William Henry, 333; Daniels, Benjamin ("Last of the
Giants"), 275; Darkin, James, 400; Daveney, Major-General, 229; Davenport
(actor), 6; Davie, Rev. W. Cufaude, 409; Davy, Captain John, R.N., 288;
Dawson, John, 22; Day, Herbert William, 491; Day, William, 169; Daynes,
Samuel, 412; De Bardelin, General, 12; de Ramsey, Baron, 382; Dickson,
Colonel, 455; Dillon, Charles, 322; Direr, Oswald, 367; Dolphin, Rev.
John, 402; Doughty, Mary (_c_), 142; Dover; Henry, 45; Dowson, J. W.,
300; Drake, William, 165; Drane, Henry (coachman), 138; Druery, John
Henry, 310; Duff, M.P., Colonel James, 293; Du Port, Rev. J. M., 496.

,, Eastlake, Lady, 444; Eaton, George Clayton, 510; Eden, W. A. D., 474;
Eden, Rev. Robert, 494; Edwards, Rev. Bartholomew, 399; Edwards, Sarah
(_c_), 239; Elvin, Charles, Horton, 454; Elwes, Lieut. R. H., 318; Elwin,
Rev. Robert Fountaine, 19; Elwin, Rev. Whitwell, 505; Evans, Charles,
182.

,, Feilden, Canon J. R., 424; Fellowes, Rev. Thomas Lyon, 321; ffolkes,
Sir W. J. H. B., 94; Fiddaman, James, 344; Field, Edward, 365; Field,
Rev. Dr., 356; Fielden, Joshua, 435; Firth, G. W. W., 288; Fish, John
(_c_), 140; Fisher, David, 77; Fisher, David, 383; Fisher George, 132;
Fisher, Rear-Admiral, William, 16; Fitch, Robert, 459; FitzRoy,
Lieut.-Col., 295; Fletcher, Josiah, 268; Fletcher, Mrs. Sarah, 429;
Forster, Robert (bandmaster of 33rd Regiment), 31; Forster, William, 28;
Foster, P. Le Neve, 295; Foster, Sir William, 249; Fountaine, Edward,
402; Fox, William Johnson ("Norwich Weaver Boy"), 136; Francis, Bransby,
246; Francis, John, 45; Freeman, Rev. John, 273; Freeman, W. P. B., 482;
Freeman, William, 282; Freestone, Edward, 246; Frere, Captain, R.N., 132;
Frere, Rev. Temple, 87; Frere, Sir Bartle, 347; Fryer, William, 438.

,, Garnier, Rev. T. P., 487; Garrod, Edward, 109; Garthon, James S., 236;
Gattey, Bartholomew, 151; Gedge, George, 272; Gibbon, Charles, 413;
Gibson, C. M., 238; Gibson, Robert E. 277; Gill, Charles, 190; Gilman, C.
S., 389; Glover, Christiana, 296; Gooch, Vice-Admiral, 266; Goodwin, C.,
390; Goodwin, Charles Wyncliffe, 283; Gordon, Harriet Gurney (actress),
41; Gordon, Lord, of Drumearn, 303; Goulburn, Dean, 479; Gould, Rev.
George, 326; Goward, Mary (_c_) 35; Grafton, Duke of, 122; Grafton, Duke
of, 144; Grafton, Duke of, 328; Grahame, Miss C. S., 279; Graver-Browne,
J. B., 314; Green, Margaret (_c_), 200; Griggs, Money (_c_), 218;
Grigson, Rev. Wm., 303; Grimmer, Frederic, 487; Grimmer, Samuel, 406;
Gunn, Mrs., 283; Gunn, Rev. John, 411; Gordon, Brampton, 320; Gurney,
Daniel, 310; Gurney, Francis Hay, 415; Gurney, Hudson, 139; Gurney, John,
377; Gurney, John Henry, 409; Gurney, Richard Hanbury, 27; Gurney,
Richard Hanbury, 498; Gurney, William, 201; Guy, Dr. William, 430.

,, Haggard, W. M. R., 440; Hallett, Rev. John, 314; Hales (the Norfolk
giant), 130; Hamond, Admiral Sir Graham, 119; Hamond, Anthony, 196;
Hamond, Anthony, 458; Hancock, Thomas, 247; Hankinson, Archdeacon, 177;
Hanly, John Laffan, 330; Hansell, Henry, 284; Harbord, Harbord, Hon.,
446; Harbord, Hon. and Rev. John, 514; Harcourt, James, 338; Hare, Sir
Thomas Leigh, 315; Harris, Commander F., 339; Harris, Rev. G. H., 339;
Harrison, Eleanor (_c_), 111; Harrison, Thomas, 367; Harrod, Henry,
F.S.A., 208; Harvey, Col. J. E. 405; Harvey, Elizabeth (_c_), 228;
Harvey, General Sir Robert, 97; Hastings, Lord, 92; Hastings, Lord, 210;
Hastings, Lord, 226; Hastings, Lord, 261; Hawkes, John (_c_), 452;
Haywood, Kezia (_c_), 284; Heath, William, 514; Heaviside, Canon, 477;
Hill, Dr. Horace, 508; Hill, James Frederick, 275; Hills, Bishop, 466;
Hillyard, Rev. E. A., 484; Hinds, Bishop, 218; Hitchman, Robert, 488;
Hoare, Joseph, 364; Hobson, Rev. R., 419; Hodgson, Charles, 55; Hodgson,
David, 135; Holley, James Hunt, 437; Holmes, John (_c_), 73; Hooker, Sir
W. J., 149; Hopper, Archdeacon, 283; Hoseason, Thomas, 285; Hosken, Rev.
Charles Heath, 429; Hoste, Rear Admiral, Sir William, 181; Hoste, Rev.
George Charles, 433; Hotblack, John, 457; Houchen, Rebecca (_c_), 109;
Howard, the Hon. T. 312; Howe, Henry, 468; Howell, Rev. Hinds, 500;
Howes, Edward, M.P., 210; Howlett, Robert, 80; Howlett, William, 321;
Huddleston, Baron, 416; Hudson, Anthony, 67; Hull, Dr. Robert, 49;
Hunter, William, 484; Hurry, Thomas, 188; Husenbeth, Rev. Dr., 227.

,, Jarrold, Hannah Elizabeth, 485; Jarrold, Samuel, 250; Jarrold, Thomas,
281; Jarvis, Sir L. W., 395; Jay, G. B., 404; Jean, Ann, 56; Jenner,
Commander George, 232; Jerningham, Hon. Francis Stafford, 246;
Jerningham, the Hon. G. S. Stafford, 248; Jerrard, George Birch, 130;
Jessopp, Rev. John, 372; Jex, Johnson, 9; Jocelyn, M.P., Viscount, 32;
Johnson, J. Godwin, 237; Johnson, Rev. Ambrose, 408; Johnson, Rev. John
Munnings, 374; Johnson, Winifred (_c_), 249; Johnson, Rev. W. Cowper,
444; Jones, Mrs. Herbert, 466; Jones, Sir Willoughby, 350.

,, Kay, Mr. Justice, 478; Kett, George, 223; Kett, George Samuel, 211;
Kett, Thompson, H. K., 228; Ketton, John, 224; Keeley, Mrs., 497; Kelly,
Sir Fitzroy Edward, 313; Kerrison, General, Sir Edward, 20; Kerrison,
Roger, 136; King, Rev. G. A., 434; Kinnebrook, 104; Kitson, John, 195;
Knight, Rev. Joseph Philip, 380; Knights, Mark, 478.

,, Lacon, Sir E. H. K., 393; Lacon, Sir E. B. K., 500; Ladbrooke,
Frederick, 151; Ladbrooke, J. B., 300; Ladbrooke, Henry, 195; Land,
Benjamin, 224; Laws, William (coach proprietor), 39; Leaman, Robert, 288;
Leeds, Robert, 412; Lee Warner, Rev. H. J., 358; Lee Warner, Henry James,
369; Leicester, Countess of, 201; L'Estrange, John, 278; le Strange, H.
L. Styleman, 116; Linay, Samuel, 449; Lindley, John, F.R.S., 152; Ling,
Mrs. E. (_c_), 405; Linton, Bishop Sydney, 449; Lock Mary (_c_), 115;
Loftus, Captain Frederick, 101; Loftus, Lord George William, 273; Loftus,
Major Charles, 338; Lombe, Charles, 99; Lombe, Edward, 11; Lombe, Rev.
Henry, 289; Longe, John, 226; Lothian, Marquis of, 203; Lound, Thomas,
104.

,, Mackenzie, Edward, 313; Maidstone, Robert (_c_), 212; Maltby, Bishop,
86; Manby, Captain, 37; Mann, Dr. R. J., 371; Mann, Thomas, 372; Manning,
Rev. C. R., 496; Mansfield, Earl of, 491; Marsh, Samuel Charles, 127;
Marshall, John, 201; Marshall, Peter Paul, 508; Marsham, Rev. Henry
Philip, 428; Martineau, Dr. James, 507; Martineau, Harriet, 267;
Martineau, Miss Fanny Anne, 273; Martineau, Robert, 202; Mason, Colonel,
152; Mason, Robert Hindry, 360; Master, Alfred, 342; Master, R. P., 287;
Matchett, William, 128; Mathias, Archdeacon, 136; Mathias, Colonel
Vincent, 165; Mendham, W. L., 267; Metcalfe, William James, Q.C., 437;
Methold, Rev. John, 342; Micklethwait, Rev. J. N., 278; Middleton, G.,
211; Miller, H. B., 409; Mills, Frederick Anthony, 355; Minns, Henry
Jonathan, 315; Mitham, Thomas, 509; Money, Lieut.-General, 78; Money,
Philip John, 107; Montgomery, Walter, 214; Morgan, A. M. F., 305;
Mortimer, Mrs., 288; Morton, John, 452.

,, Naylor, John (_c_), 151; Neave, James, 39; Nelson, William (_c_), 308;
Nelthorpe, Lieut.-Col., 31; Nevill, Archdeacon, 513; Nichols, William
Peter, 292; Nightingale, Samuel, 376; Ninham, Henry, 247; Nisbet, Canon
J. M., 433; Nolbrow, Sarah (_c_), 215; Norgate, John, 212; Norton, Henry,
427; Noverre, Frank, 286; Nursey, Claude L., 230.

,, Oakes, Lieut.-Col., 119; Ollett, William, 5; O'Malley, P. F., 249;
Ommanney, Major-General, 275; Onslow, Captain, 54; Opie, Amelia, 26;
Orde, James Henry, 306; Orfeur, John, 353; Orford, Earl of, 81; Orford,
Earl of, 455; Osborne, John (coach driver), 43; Oury, Antonio James, 339;
Oury, Madame, 311; Overman, Henry, 417.

,, Paget, Sir James, 504; Palgrave, Francis Turner, 483; Palmer, Charles
John, 330; Palmer, George Danby, 142; Palmer, Nathaniel, 219; Parmeter,
Robert William, 313; Parry, Lady, 468; Parry, Sir William Edward, 42;
Patteson, H. S., 487; Patteson, Sir John, 106; Pelham, Bishop, 448;
Pelham, Mrs., 445; Pelham, Rev. Herbert, 320; Pellew, Dean, 162; Penrice,
Major John, 434; Pentney, Peter (_c_), 482; Peto, Sir Morton, 405;
Phillips, Fredk. Lawrence, 304; Phillips, Mrs., 412; Phipson, R. M., 354;
Pilch, William, 161; Pinson, G., 304; Prendergast, M., 82; Press, Edward,
286; Preston, Arthur, 390; Preston, E. H. L., 225; Preston, Isaac, 155;
Preston, Sir Jacob Henry, 423; Price, E. P., Q.C., 500; Pymar, John, 348.

,, Quinton, John, 348.

,, Ranelagh, Viscount, 361; Ranking, Dr. W. H., 168; Rattee, James, 40;
Reddie, J. F., 93; Reeder, Benjamin, 23; Reeve, Henry, 465; Reynolds, F.,
(sportsman), 248; Richardson, Samuel, 306; Rigby, Anne, 225; Rigby
Edward, 103; Rigby, Jane, 472; Rigg, Rev. Richard, 365; Robberds, John
May, 342; Robinson, Sir Henry, 304; Robison, John, 240; Rolfe, Rev. E.
N., 346; Rope, Susan (_c_), 487; Rowland, John, 5; Rudd, Henry, 218;
Rumbold, C. E., 63; Rumsby, Widow (_c_), 116; Rust, Rev. Cyprian T., 457.

,, Schneider, H. W., 385; Seager, Major-General, 337; Seaman, Robert,
240; Sedgwick, Rev. Adam, 230; Seppings, Thomas Johnson, 308; Sewell,
Mary, 347; Shalders, W., 47; Sharman, James, 171; Sharpe, Rear-Admiral
Robert, 176; Short, Obadiah, 371; Sidney, William, 463; Simpkinson, Rev.
J. N., 447; Simpson, Frederick, 220; Simpson, John Palgrave, 382;
Simpson, Lieut. William, 167; Simpson, W. T., 481; Skipper, John, 120;
Slann, Richard, 5; Smetham, J. O., 416; Smith, Dame Pleasance (_c_), 274;
Smith, George, 282; Smith, Henry Powell, 268; Smith, Lieut.-Col. James,
10; Smith, James, 3; Smith, William, 287; Smith, Willoughby, 422; Smyth,
Edward, 134; Softly, John (_c_), 17; Soman, Philip, 461; Sondes, Baron,
250; Sondes, Earl, 452; Sowerby, J. De Carle, 214; Sparke, Lieut. Henry
Astley, 36; Sparrow, J. W., 492; Spelman, C. C. Rix, 500; Spilling,
James, 482; Springfield, Osborn, 277; Springfield, Thomas Osborn, 74;
Squirrell, M.P., 475; Stafford, Baron, 7; Stafford, Baron, 352; Stafford,
Dowager Lady, 118; Stafford, Lady, 56; Stafford, William Cooke, 272;
Stanley, Joseph, 497; Stannard, Alfred, 398; Stannard, Alfred George,
358; Stannard, Emily, 354; Stannard, Emily, 454; Stark, William, F.G.S.,
129; Stead, Thomas Ballan, 474; Steavenson, Susannah (_c_), 237;
Steggall, Lucy (_c_), 377; Stevens, G. A., 379; Stevenson, Henry, 393;
Stevenson, Seth William, 27; Steward, Donald, 485; Steward, Edward, 237;
Steward, Robert, 209; Steward, Timothy, 79; Stopford, Lieut.-Col., 504;
Stoughton, Rev. Dr., 483; Stracey, John, 79; Stracey, Lady, 346; Stracey,
Rev. Sir George, 38; Stracey, Sir E. H. J., 6; Stracey, Sir H. J., Bart.,
359; Stratton, Minnie (daughter of "Tom Thumb"), 162; Sultzer, John, 212;
Swann, Joshua, 272.

,, Tallack, Thomas R., 434; Tallowin, Mary (_c_), 88; Tash, Mary (_c_) 1;
Taylor, Dr. J. E., 464; Tattersall, Edmund, 486; Taylor, Emily, 218;
Taylor, John, F.R.S., 123; Taylor, John Oddin, 241; Taylor, John Oddin
Howard, 410; Taylor, Mrs., 398; Taylor, Professor Edward, 122; Taylor,
Richard Cowling, 8; Thackeray, Mrs., 398; Thew, John Dyker, 423;
Thompson, William, 434; Thurtell, William, 281; Thurston, John (_c_), 15;
Thurtell, Captain Charles, 55; Tillett, Jacob Henry, 426; Titlow, Rev.
Samuel, 211; Todd, Mary Ann (_c_), 257; Tooley, Benjamin (_c_), 175;
Towler, Abel, 263; Townshend, Lord Charles, 25; Townshend, Rear-Admiral
127; Travers, Sir Eaton Stanley, 72; Trimmer, Rev. Kirby, 384; Truman,
James, 290; Tubby, Miss, 23; Tuck, C. E., 405; Turnbull, W. Wilson, 290;
Turner, Charles, 110; Turner, Rev. Charles, 415; Turner, Dawson, 76;
Turner, Sir George James, 169.

,, Unthank, John, 304; Upcher, Henry Ramey, 429; Upcher, Rev. Arthur
Wilson, 470.

,, Venning, John, 74; Ventnor, Arthur Dale, 353; Villebois, Henry, 366;
Viner, Frederick, 414.

,, Walker, Admiral Sir J. B. W., 263; Walpole, Colonel, the Hon., 92;
Walpole, Hon. Frederick, 264; Walsingham, Lord, 207; Waring, Walter, 513;
Waring, William, 447; Warner, Edward, 253; Warrant, Eleanor (_c_), 31;
Watts, J. (coach driver), 41; Watson, F. E., 494; Watson, John Ferra,
372; Weeds, Sarah (_c_), 414; Weller, Edmund Stephen, 325; Wellington,
Duke of, 349; Whall, Benjamin, 39; Whur, Cornelius ("Suffolk Poet"), 20;
Wigham, J. B., 9; Wild, Charles, 418; Wilde, George, 379; Wilde, Stephen,
283; Wilde, William, 160; Wilkins, Archdeacon, 149; Wilkinson, Charles
Crawshay, 318; Willett, E. H., 315; Willins, Edward Preston, 401; Willis,
John, 387; Wilshere, W., 172; Wilson, Lieut.-General Sir Archdale, 240;
Wilson, Rev. Edward, 247; Winch, B. V., 417; Windham, F. W., 154;
Windham, William Howe, 37; Winter, Ambrose (_c_), 413; Winter, Rev. G.
R., 464; Windham, General, Sir C. A., 197; Wiseman, Isaac, 123; Winter,
James, 263; Wiseman, Rev. Luke Hoult, 252; Wodderspoon, John, 118;
Wodehouse, Col. Edwin, 206; Wodehouse, Edmond, 44; Wodehouse, Sir P. E.,
385; Wollaston, Rev. W. C., 227; Womersley, Joshua, 497; Wood, Charles,
10; Woods, Henry, 409; Woolley, Rev. Dr. John, 153; Woodward, B. B., 194;
Woodward, S. P., 147; Worlledge, Chancellor, 322; Wortley, Robert, 495;
Wright, Charles, 372; Wright, Jonas Silvanus, 193; Wymer, Colonel, Sir
George, 181.

,, Yates, Elizabeth, 98; Youell, Edward, 205; Young, J. F., 377; Young,
Richard, 215.

Dillon, Charles, 63, 100, 307.

Diocesan Conference, 206, 227, 290, 304, 310, 315, 324, 331, 343, 351,
367, 374, 378, 390, 401, 409, 418, 429, 440, 447, (at Ipswich), 469, 479,
487, 498, 508.

Discharged Soldiers' Association, 392.

Disfranchisement Bill, Norwich voters, 193.

,, of Yarmouth, 156.

Dishorning of cattle, 395, 400, 420.

Diss Corn Hall, 37, 79.

District Councils, 455.

,, Visiting Society, 39.

Divorce suits: Gurney _v._ Gurney and Taylor, 101; Burroughes _v._
Burroughes and Silcock, 115.

Docking Union Association dissolved, 232.

Docks at Lynn, 176, 192, 343.

"Doctor," unlawful use of the designation, 491.

Dodder, 170.

Dogs as animals of draft, 30.

Donati's Comet, 79.

Donegal Militia at Yarmouth, 87, 98.

Douglas's Theatrical Company, 2.

Dow, General Neal, 167.

Downham Market Public Hall, 259; Town Hall, 384.

Drayton church steeple, fall of, 1.

Drill Hall, Norwich, 159, 163.

Drives, long, 248, 510.

Drought, 12.

Duchess of Kent, death of, 105.

Duels, inciting to fight, 6, 60.

Duke of Albany, 346.

,, Cambridge, 321.

,, Clarence at Yarmouth, 420; at Lynn, 424; betrothal, 424; visit to
Didlington, 424; proposed marriage, gift to, 425; death, 425.

,, Connaught at Norwich, 244, 245, 250; marriage of, 296; opens Norfolk
and Norwich Hospital, 341; at Lynn, 424.

,, Edinburgh at Norwich, 163, 165; visit to Thornham Hall, 164; Gunton
Hall, 165; Holkham Hall, 165; Marham House, 165; Yarmouth, 309;
Didlington Hall, 316; attempted assassination of, 178.

,, Norfolk visits Norwich, 311.

,, Wellington, 15; monument to, 16, 36.

,, York, betrothal of, 441; marriage, 443; at Didlington, 445; opens
Technical School at Lynn, 446; birth of first child, 450; opens Castle
Museum at Norwich, 453; visit to Norwich Fat Cattle Show, 474; to Lynn
Hospital, 499; to Yarmouth, 509.

Duke's Palace Bridge, Norwich, freeing of, 41.

Duleep Singh, Maharajah, 126.

Durrant card scandal, 115.



E


Eade, Peter: knighted, 357; resigns post of senior physician of the
Hospital, 392; elected Mayor of Norwich, 445; elected to fill casual
vacancy, 460; receives freedom of city, 464; presented with portrait,
464.

Eagles shot, 57, 406.

Early closing of public houses, 34, 138, 224, 234.

,, of shops, 266, 296.

Earthquake shock, 143.

"Eastern Daily Press" first published, 206.

Eccentric personages, 31, 151.

Ecclesiastical History Lectures at Norwich Cathedral, 437, 438, 458, 468.

Eccles-next-the-Sea, ruined church of, 24; fall of tower, 456.

Eel, immense, 171.

Edgefield church, 349.

Education Code, 324.

Elastic cloth, 101.

Eldon Club, Norwich, 324.

Election disturbances in East Norfolk, 462, 463.

,, expenses, action to recover, 59.

,, of a vicar at Norwich, 475.

,, petitions against Messrs. Peto and Warner, 16; withdrawal of, 19;
against Messrs. M'Cullagh and Watkin, 66; against Lord Bury and Mr.
Schneider, 86, 94; against Sir Edmund Lacon and Sir H. Stracey, 93;
against Sir H. Stracey 186, 196; against the Hon. R. Bourke, 189; against
the Hon. F. Walpole and Sir E. H. K. Lacon, 190; against Mr. J. H.
Tillett, 205, 208; ditto, 253, 255; against Messrs. P. Back and J. H.
Ladyman (municipal election), 273; against Mr. Harry Bullard, 366;
against Lord Henry Bentinck, 378.

Elections, Parliamentary, 13, 14, 34, 37, 38, 42, 60, 69, 72, 77, 83, 84,
86, 94, 123, 146, 147, 172, 182, 183, 184, 196, 203, 209, 211, 238, 239,
253, 265, 294, 307, 308, 345, 362, 363, 367, 369, 370, 372, 430, 431,
432, 461, 462, 463, 488, 497, 512, 513.

Electric lighting, 295, 312, 323, 336, 337, 423.

Elephant, death of an, 171.

Electricity Company, Norwich, 423.

Elementary Education Bill, 197; Norwich Town Council recommends formation
of School Board, 209.

Embezzlement, 216.

Emigrant ship ashore at Winterton, 265.

Emigrants leave Norfolk, 391.

English _v._ Black, remarkable action tor defamation, 57.

Estate sales, 14, 42, 51, 77, 78, 87, 105, 125, 143, 161, 172, 256, 322,
371.

Ex-communication, 359.

Execution of Henry Groom, 6; William Thompson, 30; Hubbard Lingley, 169;
William Sheward, 186; Henry Webster, 265; Henry March, 280; William
George Abigail, 328; Robert Goodale, 361; John Thurston, 365; George
Harmer, 372; George Watt, 489.

,, last public 169.

,, first private, 186.

,, last at Norwich Castle, 372.

,, disgraceful scenes at an, 30.

,, horrible accident at, 361.

Exhibitions, industrial, at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, 169, 213.

Explosion on Alexandra steamer, 269; at Clerkenwell, 173; at Walsingham
church, 163; gunpowder, 101; in St. Peter Mancroft church alley, 271.

Explosions of boilers, 100, 156, 162, 166, 176; of fireworks, 205, 269;
gas, 49, 269, 365.



F


Fair Trade League, 353.

Fakenham Corn Hall, 44.

"Falka," 375.

Falls of Bruar, wreck of the, 383.

Falls of church steeples, 1, 6, 22, 456.

False imprisonment, action for, 142.

Fancy dress balls, 99, 228, 354.

Farmers' Alliance, 306.

,, Defence Associations, 231, 239.

Farren, Miss E., 222, 235.

Felo de se, 106.

Female franchise, 291.

Fenian movement, precautions at Yarmouth, 173.

Fifty-first Regiment, 233.

Fine Arts' Association, 41.

Fire engine, steam, 338.

,, escape, invented by Capt. Longe, 375.

Fires: at "Norwich Mercury" office, 4; Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, 13;
Hunstanton Hall, 21; steam flour mills, Norwich, 46; St. Andrew's
Norwich, 50; at Yarmouth, 69; St. Martin-at-Palace, Norwich, 70; in
Pottergate Street, Norwich, 87; in Dove Street, Norwich, 93; at Swaffham
Prison, 111; at; St. George's shoe factory, Norwich, 118; at Dereham,
126; at Frazer's Saw mills, Norwich, 142; at Little Ellingham church,
172; at Yarmouth, 174; Yarmouth Assembly rooms, 199; at Darkin's music
warehouse, Norwich, 232; at Messrs. Holmes and Sons' works, Norwich, 234;
at Dixon's, Norwich, 241; at Norwich city gaol, 252; at Riches and Watts'
works, Norwich, 263; at Boulton and Paul's works, Norwich, 268; at
Yarmouth, 286; at Bagshaw's paper mills, Norwich, 288; at Willis and
Southall's factory, Norwich, 298; at New Buckenham, 307; at Lynn docks,
316; at Carrow works, 322; Gunton Hall, 332; Woodbastwick Hall, 332;
Bridewell Alley, Norwich, 343; at Scole, 347; at Lynn, 353; at Browick
Hall, Wymondham, 367; at Bridge Street, Norwich, 384; at West Beckham
workhouse, 390; at Hockering, 391; at Cunningham's saw mills, Norwich,
394; at Wroxham House, 404; at Messrs. Cubitt and Walker's, North
Walsham, 407; at Merton Hall, 410; at Boulton and Paul's, Norwich, 410;
at St. Giles' Gates, Norwich, 410; at Sandringham House, 423; at Queen
Street, Norwich, 433; at Smith's maltings, Dereham, 445; on Jenny Lind
steamboat, 461; Sullivan and Co., Norwich, 464; on Ringland Hills, 481;
Cullingford's paper mills, Norwich, 481; at Diss, 481; Messrs. Jermyn and
Co., Lynn, 484; Press's mills, Yarmouth, 485; Dove Street, Norwich, 491;
Pinchen and Co's brewery, South Creake, 491; Leake and Sons' oil mill at
Lynn, 500; at High Street, Dereham, 501; at Kimberley Hall, 501; North
Walsham Town Hall, 501; "Free Trade" House, Dereham, 504; Porter and
Son's timber yard, Norwich, 511.

Firework explosions, 205, 269.

Fish killed by salt tides, 335.

Fisheries, National exhibition at Norwich, 319.

,, protection of, 13, 62, 256, 262, 274, 332.

,, Sea, 129, 256, 286, 304, 333.

Fisher, David, at Norwich, 131; death, 383.

Fisher family, 2, 26, 61, 77, 131, 132, 234, 383, 384.

Fishing dispute at Yarmouth, 377.

,, fleet disaster, 274.

Fish market, Norwich, 69; fatal accident at, 91.

Fish Wharves and Tramways Bill, Yarmouth, 158, 171.

FitzRoy, Lord Frederick, and the Thetford electors, 172.

Flood at Norwich, 291, 293.

Floods, 17, 19, 38, 54, 119, 172, 223, 259, 301, 424, 435, 455, 476.

,, prevention of, 293, 456.

Foot and mouth disease, 223, 316, 318, 325, 336, 344, 507.

Football Club, Norwich, 184.

Forgery, 131, 331, 368.

Foresters' High Court at Norwich, 481.

Fortescue, Miss, 445.

Fortesque, Earl, at Norwich, 159.

Fortune for a soldier, 112.

Foundry Bridge, Norwich, 303, 386.

Foxhounds, 51, 100, 152, 167, 177, 211, 258, 335, 367.

Fox, Joel, case, 90.

Framingham Pigot church, 88.

Franchise Bill, 349, 354.

Franco-Austrian war, 84.

Frauds on insurance companies, 280.

Free Bridge, opening of the, 234.

,, education, 408, 422.

Free Library, Norwich, 17; foundation stone laid, 34; opened, 59;
proposed opening on Sunday, 350.

,, lectures, 416, 417, 423.

Freemasonry, 259, 271, 355.

Free Trade _v._ Protection, 13, 14.

French prisoner shot at Dereham, 72.

,, refugee at Norwich, 13.

Fresco at St. Gregory's church, Norwich, 107.

Frosts, 9, 56, 92, 102, 103, 131, 207, 250, 317, 385, 408, 415, 416, 417,
424, 435, 438, 446, 455, 456.

Funerals in Norwich churchyards discontinued, 30.

Fye Bridge widened, 494.



G


Gales, 7, 18, 25, 41, 46, 54, 57, 68, 90, 93, 96, 101, 118, 119, 129,
130, 138, 140, 164, 165, 172, 175, 182, 188, 194, 199, 209, 217, 226,
228, 229, 253, 259, 260, 274, 281, 317, 331, 335, 374, 383, 399, 423,
424, 445, 446, 455, 459, 484, 502, 511.

Garfield, President, death of, 323.

Gas Bills, Norwich, 252; Yarmouth, 122.

,, Company, Norwich, 71, 252, 311.

,, explosions, 49, 269, 365.

,, holder blown down, 164.

,, lighting at Dereham church, 82; Attleborough, 89; St. Giles' church,
Norwich, 93.

Gavazzi, Father, 39, 119, 133.

Geese plucked alive, 483.

Genereux, ensign of the, 208.

Geological Society, Norwich, 135.

German Emperor at Sandringham, 504.

German Emperor, death of, 392.

Giants, 130, 180, 221, 275.

Gilbert, George, Norwich equestrian, 399, 445.

Gildencroft recreation ground, 430, 450.

Gilman, C. R., elected Mayor; knighted, 480, 481; presented with silver
plate, 487.

Girls' Home, Norwich, 476.

,, Hospital, Norwich, 331, 341.

,, Public Day-school Company, 243.

Gladstone Club, Norwich, 469.

Gladstone, Mr., arrives in Yarmouth Roads, 313; at Sandringham, 336;
visit to Norwich, 411; death, 488.

Glove fight at Norwich, 298.

Glover memorial, 427.

Golf, 333, 443.

Goddard, Miss, 85.

Goschen, Mr., at Norwich, 461.

Gorst, Sir John, at Norwich, 395.

Gough, J. B., at Norwich, 26, 82, 290.

Grammar School, Norwich: resignation of Dr. Woolley, 9; drowned in the
wreck of the London, 153; litigation in the Rolls Court, 29, 64, 73;
remarkable form of school punishment, 73; resignation of Dr. Vincent, 73;
the Rev. Augustus Jessopp elected head-master, 83; athletic sports, 105;
alterations in the school, 171; amended scheme of management, 191; Duke
of Connaught presents prizes, 250; retirement of the Rev. Dr. Jessopp,
305; the Rev. O. W. Tancock appointed head-master, 305; resignation, 407;
Charity Commissioners' inquiry, 331; Charity Commissioners' schemes, 341;
Rev. E. F. Gilbard appointed head-master, 407.

,, Yarmouth, opened, 222.

Grand jurymen detained by snowfall, 28.

Gresham Grammar School, Holt, re-opened, 80.

Gressenhall parish register, 494.

"Grimes' graves," 201.

Grossmith, George, 228.

Grout and Co.'s factory closed, 414.

Guardians, Board of, clerks to: resignation of Mr. E. C. Bailey, 292;
death, 340; appointment of Mr. John Cross, 292; resignation, 488;
elections, 438; Mr. E. R. Woodward appointed clerk, 488.

Guilmant, M., 333.

Gunn, Rev. John, portrait of, at Norwich Museum, 201.

Gunton Hall, fire at, 332.

Gunpowder explosion at Norwich, 101.

Gurdon, R. T.: presented with, portrait, 269; defeats Mr. C. S. Read by
one vote, 308; returned for Mid-Norfolk, 363, 370, 459; defeated, 430,
462; elected chairman of County Council, 397; receives peerage, 495.

Gurney portrait at Norwich Museum, 110.

Gymnastic Society, Norfolk and Norwich, 159.



H


Haggard, Mr. Rider H., adopted candidate for East Norfolk, 442.

Hales, the Norfolk Giant, 130.

"Hamlet," acted by a woman, 85.

"Happy Land" burlesque, 234.

Harcourt, Sir William, at Norwich, 478.

Harriers, North Norfolk, 277.

Harris, Lord, at Norwich, 389.

Harte, Bret, 308.

Hartington, Marquis of, at Norwich, 399; illness at Merton, 406.

Harvest thanksgiving services, 33.

Harvey, Sir R. J. H., declines to contest Norwich, 199; commits suicide,
203.

Harvey Life interest, 316, 332, 335, 347, 363, 366, 432, 445, 447, 466,
471.

Haslam, Rev. W., and the Revivalist movement, 133.

Hastings litigation, 52, 60.

,, barony of, 439.

Hautbois Magna church, 117.

Haven and Port Bill, Yarmouth, 141, 158.

Hawking, 126; exhibition of, 3.

Hawkins, Mr. Justice, on the judges' lodgings, 364.

Hawthorne, Miss, Grace, 439.

Health Lectures for the People, 389.

Heat, extreme, 79, 349.

Heath, Miss, 202.

Heaviside, Rev. J. W. L., installed Canon of Norwich, 94.

Heigham Hall Lunatic Asylum, alleged irregularities at 35.

Hempton Green chapel, 45, 55.

Herds and flocks, sales of, 212, 257, 280, 337, 358, 369, 371, 402, 430,
443, 451, 463, 498, 510.

Hesse, Grand Duchess of, death of, 292.

Hethersett steeplechases, disturbance at, 265.

High School for Girls, 473.

Higher Grade School, Norwich, 404.

High Sheriff fined for non-attendance, 223.

High tides, 259, 301, 335, 336, 455, 456, 484.

Highway maintenance, 328, 474.

Hill, Dr. Horace, appointed Festival Chorus Master, 313.

Hills, Bishop, at Yarmouth, 85.

Hills, Dr., superannuation of, 376.

Hillyard, Rev. E. A., and the Ritualistic movement, 133, 134; death, 484.

Hoare, Samuel, elected member for Norwich, 367, 370, 462, (unopposed)
512; opens Norwich and Norfolk Conservative Club, 388; visit to India,
416; his return, 418; silver wedding, 419; restoration of Beckham church,
419; entertainment to Workhouse inmates, 435; to Trades' Union Congress,
451; renovation of Norwich Cathedral, 487, 499; baronetcy conferred, 499.

"Hoffman's Humbug," 76.

Holkham estate rents, 436.

,, Park, Volunteer Review, 108.

Holt, Miss May, 217, 363.

Home Rule question, 368, 369, 440.

Horse-leap, remarkable, 67; over hurdles, 73.

Horse _v._ man, 189, 221.

Horsey, sea breaches at, 484.

Horticultural Society, Norfolk and Norwich, 387.

Hoskins case, 210.

Hospital, Norfolk and Norwich: movements in aid of, 182, 205; scheme for
enlarging, 214, 271; new building, 274; foundation stone laid by the
Prince of Wales, 299; opening of central block, 322; completion of work
and opening by Duke of Connaught, 341; lady superintendent as a Roman
Catholic, 419; centenary of, 217; tragedy at, 261; nurses' quarters, 500.

,, Sunday Fund established, 182.

,, Sunday first observed, 228; first annual meeting of Hospital Sunday
Fund, 237.

,, West Norfolk and Lynn, 499.

Houghton, St. Giles', Wayside chapel, 481.

Huddleston, Mr. J. W., contests Norwich, 203; elevation to the judicial
bench, 253; death, 416.

Huguenot Society, 392.

Human remains discovered at Norwich, 6; at Tasburgh, 486.

Humiliation, services of, 315, 320, 356.

Hunstanton Convalescent Home, 279.

,, yawl disaster, 464.

Hunting, 51, 100, 167, 175, 211, 275.

,, fracas, 175.

,, litigation, 485.

Hurricanes in Norfolk, 324, 457.



I


Ignatius at Norwich, 130, 132, 133, 187, 267, 409, 446.

,, alleged assault on, 267.

Illicit stills, 56.

Incorporated Law Society, 434.

Indian Mutiny: Departure of General Windham, 66; relief fund, 67; day of
humiliation, 68; relief of Lucknow and capture of Delhi, 68; defeat of
General Windham, 70.

Influenza, 406, 426.

Institute of Journalists, 451.

Insurance Company, Norwich Equitable Fire, 339.

Irish church, 177, 183, 191.

Irving, Mr. Henry, at Sandringham, 401.

Isolation Hospital, Norwich, 439.



J


Jail closed at Lynn, 154.

James, David, 343.

Jameson, Dr. at Norwich, 470.

Javelin men at Assizes, 89, 92.

Jenny Lind Infirmary, establishment of, 11; performances for, 47, 328,
361, 471; new building, 469, 476, 486, 496, 510; playground, 437.

Jessopp, Rev. Augustus, elected Master of Norwich Grammar School, 83.

Johnson, Jex, the watchmaker, 9.

Jubilee of Queen Victoria, 381.

,, Diamond, 476, 480.

Judges' lodgings, 363.

Jury of headboroughs, 140.



K


Kangaroos at Melton Constable, 61.

Kapiolani, Queen, at Norwich, 380.

Kay, Mr. Edward, Q.C., accepts judgeship, 319; death, 478.

Kean, Mr. and Mrs. Charles, 99.

Kekewich, Sir G. W., at Norwich, 456.

Kelley-Cooper sculling match, 150.

Kemble, Fanny, 8, 15, 37, 41.

Kendal, Mr. and Mrs., 398, 469.

Kensington Gardens, Lakenham, 13.

Kent, Duchess of, death of, 105.

King, Tom, at Norwich, 112.

Kolisch, Herr (chess player), at Norwich, 106.



L


Labour, Royal Commission on, 433.

,, scarcity of agricultural, 500.

Labourer's long walk, 41.

Lakenham schools, 488.

Landslip at Attleborough, 301.

La Reine des Agnes wrecked, 330.

Launch, remarkable, from Caister beach, 192.

Law of Settlement, 63, 112.

Lawson, Sir Wilfrid, 284.

Leap, extraordinary, by a horse, 67; over hurdles, 73.

Lectures: Dr. White on the Reformation, 4; Mrs. Knights on the Bloomer
costume, 8; J. B. Gough on temperance, 26; by George Dawson, 48, 63, 100;
by Thackeray on the George's, 62; by Dr. Russell on the Crimean war, 68;
by Barnum on "Money-making and the art of Humbug," 82; by Mr. J. T. Mott
(High Sheriff), on "The Paston Letters," 105; by Mr. W. J. Utten Browne
(Mayor of Norwich), on "The Times of King Charles the First," 109; by
Professor Pepper on "Optical Illusions," 122; by Elihu Burritt on "The
Higher Law and Mission of Commerce," 128; by Ignatius on "Monks and
Monasteries for the English Church," 130; by the Rev. Dr. Littledale on
"Church Principles," 132; by Baron De Camin, 133; by Father Gavazzi 133;
by Sir S. W. Baker, 166; by Dr. Bateman on "Darwinism," 236; Bret Harte
on "The Augonauts of '49," 308; Melton Prior on the Egyptian war, 336; on
war in Burmah, 407; J. C Buckmaster on "Science Teaching in Agriculture,"
342; Oscar Wilde on "The House Beautiful," 346; E. P. Weston on
pedestrianism, 346; "Cuthbert Bede" on Modern Humourists, 347; Rev. Henry
Ward Beecher on "Wastes and Burdens of Society," 372; Archibald Forbes on
"Ten years of War Correspondence," 376; by Sir Robert Ball, 388, 397,
408, 426; the Rev. W. Tuckwell, 388; Mr. S. H. Burton, 389; Mr. Donald
Day, 339; Dr. S. J. Barton, 389; Henry Furniss on "Art and Artists," 395;
on "The Humours of Parliament," 423; Lant Carpenter, 397; Dr. Andrew
Wilson, 397, 398, 417, 426, 438; Professor Miall, 397; Professor Seeley,
397; Rev. Dr. Dallinger, 397; Captain Wiggins on "Arctic seas and
Siberia," 400; on the "Nansen Expedition," 469; Mr. Louis Fagan on
"Egyptian, Assyrian, and Babylonian Antiquities," 408; Mr. Henry Seebohm
on "Adventures in Siberia," 408; Rev. H. H. Snell, 416; Mr. G. C. Davies,
417; Rev. W. F. Creeney, 417; Mr. Bosworth Harcourt, 417; Mr. H. F.
Euren, 417; Rev. J. Miller Hamilton, 426; Mr. M. P. Squirrell, 428; Mr.
C. Stacy Watson, 428; Archdeacon Farrar, 437; Rev. J. A. Robinson, 438;
Rev. Prebendary Meyrick, 438; Rev. Stanley Leathes, 438; Rev. G. A.
Schneider, 438; Dr. Drinkwater, 438; Jerome K. Jerome on "Humour, old and
new," 452; Archdeacon Sinclair, 458; Rev. Dr. Kingsmill, 458; Rev.
Professor Gwatkin, 458; Bishop Barry. 463; Rev. Dr. Moule, 468; Dr.
Nansen on "Across the Polar Region," 486; Dr. J. E. Talmage on "Utah and
its People," 490; Mrs. Garrett Anderson, M.D., on "The History and Effect
of Vaccination," 496.

Legard, Sir Charles, contests Norwich, 209.

Leicester, Earl of: denounces political coercion, 149; munificence to the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, 182, 271, 500; restoration of Holkham
church, 196; invested K.G., 233; married to the Hon. Georgiana Cavendish,
257; summoned under the Contagious Diseases (Animals) Act, 298; lays
foundation stone of Norwich Agricultural Hall, 327; Royal College of
Music, 328; letter on the Irish question, 368; Norwich Blind Institution,
391; rents of the Holkham estate, 436.

"Les Cloches de Corneville," 318, 342.

Levadia wrecked, 326.

Libel actions, 4, 40, 94, 104, 105, 107, 161, 239, 257, 470.

,, prosecution, 368.

Liberal demonstration at Whitlingham, 244.

,, dissension at Norwich, 202.

,, Unionists, 368, 369.

Libraries amalgamation at Norwich, 366.

Library, Norfolk and Norwich, destroyed by fire, 491; re-opened, 500.

Licensed Victuallers' Association, 170.

Licensing Act, New, 224.

,, Bill, protest against, 212.

Lifeboat crews, allegations against, 96, 119, 138.

,, disasters, 154, 172, 314, 317, 395.

,, demonstration at Norwich, 472.

Lifeboats, inefficiency of, 68.

,, launched, 151, 160, 161, 169, 170, 181, 195, 243, 350, 400, 404, 430,
452, 511.

Light Horse Volunteers, 104, 163, 172.

Lighthouse, fall of Cromer, 164.

,, of Norwich manufacture, 100.

"Lily of Killarney," 329.

Lindahl, Scandinavian skater, 457.

Lind, Jenny, at Norwich, 47, 113; memorial unveiled, 452.

Linton, Rev. S., consecrated Bishop of Riverina, 347; death, 449.

"Little ease," at Norwich Grammar school, 73.

Liverpool Cup, won by Melton, 375.

Livings, long tenure of, 342.

Local Government Act (see County Council).

London-street improvement, Norwich, 46, 265, 276.

Lombe family, 11, 15, 65, 99, 101, 118, 330.

Long service, remarkable instance of, 201.

Long, Walter, Mr., at Norwich, 504.

Loraine, Mr. H., 269.

Lord High Steward of Norwich Cathedral, 161.

,, Mayor of London at Norwich, 423.

Loveday's London Folly Company, 325, 326.

Lubbock, Sir J. W., at Norwich, 356.

Lugard, Captain, at Norwich, 437.

Lunatic Asylum, Norwich City, 220.

Lynn: high tides at, 19; empty gaol, 22; Lieut. Cresswell, R.N., feted,
25; Athenaeum opened, 32; fall of workhouse, 33; J. H. Gurney elected
for, 34; Corn Exchange opened, 38; smallpox at, 52; coroner's election at
62; Mr. Spurgeon at, 65; Corporation address to Thomas Baines, 71; Lord
Stanley re-elected, 72, 159; Corporation claim sturgeon, 77; Norfolk
Agricultural show at, 136, 430, 489; Lady Mayoresses' Pin Money, 139;
jury of headboroughs, 140; Kelley-Cooper sculling match, 150; jail
closed, 154; new docks, 176, 192, 343; election petition against the Hon.
R. Bourke, 189; Royal visits, 192, 355, 415, 424, 446, 489, 499; Lord
Claud Hamilton elected, 196; new railway station, 210; opening of the
Free Bridge, 234; restoration of St. Margaret's church, 254; high tides
at, 259, 336; Cheese Fair abolished, 283; sudden death of Mayor, 308;
Oddfellows A.M.C., 309; Conservative presentation to Lady Hamilton, 316;
fire at the docks, 316; Mr. and Mrs. Gladstone at, 336; Stanley Library,
351; fires, 353, 484; Lord Randolph Churchill at, 360; Sporting and Art
Exhibition, 415; enormous captures of sprats, 417; industrial exhibition,
424; Cambridge crew at, 417; Technical School, 446; typhoid fever at,
483; West Norfolk and Lynn Hospital, 499.



M


Maccomo, the "Lion King," 98, 173; narrow escape at Norwich, 111.

Mace, Jim, 16, 112, 113, 389.

,, Pooley, 138, 150.

Magistrate fined for assault, 225.

Magistrates' clerks: death, of Mr. Wm. Day, 169; appointment of Mr. G. B.
Kennett, 170; resignation, 412; Mr. W. R. Cooper appointed, 412.

Magistrates, Norwich, complaints about, 70.

,, appointment of, 436.

,, Yarmouth, appointment of at, 72.

Male attire assumed by a female servant, 58.

Malt Tax, 134, 141, 146, 311.

Man _v._ horse, 189, 221.

Mann, Arthur H., admitted Doctor of Music, 327.

Manufactures, Norwich, 48, 50, 69, 101, 131, 414.

Marching column of 1st V.B.N.R., 460.

,, Norfolk Artillery, 512.

Market Cross at North Walsham, 57.

,, tolls inquiries, 396.

Marriage Law Defence Union, 334.

Marriages: Viscount Powerscourt and Lady Julia Coke, 135; Earl of Dunmore
and Lady Gertrude Coke, 157; Mr. Robert Clements and Lady Winifrid Coke,
235; Colonel Buller and Lady Anne Coke, 238; the Hon. H. Strutt and Lady
Margaret Coke, 240; Earl of Leicester and the Hon. Georgiana Cavendish,
257; Earl of Lichfield and Lady Mildred Coke, 290; Viscount Lewisham and
Lady Mary Coke, 305.

,, (Royal): Princess Royal, 70; Princess Alice and the Grand Duke of
Hesse, 115; Prince of Wales, 121; Princess Louise, 210; Duke of
Edinburgh, 238; Duke of Connaught, 296; Princess Louise and the Earl of
Fife, 403; Duke of York and Princess Victoria Mary of Teck, 443; Princess
Maud and Prince Charles of Denmark, 471.

Mathematician in humble life, 23.

Mayoral entertainments, 403, 449, 451, 454, 481.

Mayor, alleged wrongful election of, 17.

,, elected by his casting vote, 9.

,, of Norwich insulted, 10; death of, 460.

Mayors, election of 8, 16, 26, 36, 46, 56, 68, 80, 90, 101, 109, 118,
129, 138, 152, 164, 171, 182, 195, 206, 216, 228, 236, 248, 259, 271,
281, 291, 304, 315, 324, 331, 343, 351, 361, 374, 385, 395, 405, 415,
424, 436, 445, 454, 466, 474, 484, 494, 504, 514.

Mathews, Charles, 44, 119, 277.

Mattishall church rate case, 154.

McCalmont, Col., adopted candidate for East Norfolk, 442.

Medical officer charged with fraud, 243.

Medical Officer of Health: Mr. T. W. Crosse appointed, 229.

Melton, winner of the Derby, 357; Liverpool Cup, 375.

Member of Parliament as actor, 80.

Memorial brass stolen, 79.

,, to Bishop of Norwich, 496.

Menagerie, fight between tigers at, 362; foolhardy feat at, 385.

Menageries, 37, 56, 81, 92, 98, 103, 111, 120, 171, 173, 184, 230, 272,
293, 362, 385.

,, accidents at, 98, 111.

Mendham, W. L., appointed Town Clerk, 47; death, 267.

"Messiah," first Good Friday performance of, 327.

Meteor, 270.

Meteorological Society, Norwich, 202.

Middle Level inundations, 113; litigation, 114, 120, 132, 144, 165.

,, sluice opened, 282.

"Midsummer Night's Dream," 455.

Mild weather in winter, 82, 83, 131, 207, 396.

Military and Naval exhibition, 482.

,, balls, 230, 397, 420, 475, 499.

Military riot at Yarmouth, 105.

,, tournaments, 254, 277, 285, 375, 386, 399, 407, 420, 450, 469.

Militia: raising of regiments, 15; trainings, 21, 31, 38; barracks, 28;
colours presented to West Norfolk Regiment, 42; West Norfolk Regiment at
Aldershot and Dublin, 42; arrival at Norwich, 51; West Norfolk Regiment
at Chester, Liverpool, and Stockport, 69; 4th Battalion staff transferred
to Norwich 392.

,, Artillery, 23, 28, 31, 39.

Miraculous escape at Swaffham, 18.

Mirage at Yarmouth, 221.

Missionary Loan exhibition, 488.

Monasticism at Norwich, 130, 132, 133, 187, 267.

Monkton, Lady, 404.

Montgomery, Walter (actor), 45, 48; death, 214.

Moody, D. L., 435.

Morley, Mr. A., at Norwich, 450.

Morley, Mr. John, at Norwich, 380.

Mounted Rifles, Norwich, 104, 163, 172.

Mountjoy, pedestrian, 75.

Mousehold Heath: common rights, 124; Dean and Chapter offer to give up
their rights, 140; agreement confirmed, 310; management scheme adopted,
321; action in the High Court, 338; Royal assent given to the scheme,
346; relief works, 365; opening of new road, 369.

,, rifle range, 98.

Mower, Charles, pedestrian, 121.

Mulbarton common rights, 143.

Mundella, M.P., Mr., at Norwich, 404.

Municipal buildings, proposed, 494, 501.

,, election petition, 273.

Murder, remarkable confession of, 7.

Murders, 4, 6, 30, 128, 169, 185, 261, 265, 280, 320, 324, 328, 355, 361,
365, 372, 374, 375, 377, 406, 443, 461, 489, 512, 514.

Murder trials, 40, 190, 243, 265, 280, 320, 324, 374, 375, 377, 406, 443,
476, 489.

Murray, Dr. John, portrait of, 499.

Museum, Norfolk and Norwich: theft from, 89; Gurney portrait at, 110;
Lombe collection, 234; closing of the old buildings, 451.

Musical Festival, Norfolk and Norwich Triennial, 15, 34, 67, 99, 127,
162, 194, 226, 257, 289, 324, 351, 384, 414, 444, 472, 502.

Musical ride, 254.

Music Hall, 34.

,, Norwich School of, 450.

,, Royal College of, 328.

"Mute of malice," 509.



N


Nansen, Dr., at Norwich, 486.

National Fisheries exhibition opened by Prince of Wales, 319.

,, Insurance, 332.

National poor rate, 63, 71, 81.

,, Union of Women Workers, 494.

Nelson memorial at Burnham Thorpe, 423, 463.

,, monument, Yarmouth; fatal fall from, 124; Scotch fisherman's feat on,
259.

,, statue, Norwich, 10, 48.

Newspaper Act, 42.

Nilsson, Mdlle. Christine, 195, 245.

Ninth East Norfolk Regiment, 218; memorial window at Norwich Cathedral,
420.

Nisbet, Rev. E. M., installed Canon, 172.

"Nita's First," 353.

"Norfolk Chronicle," centenary of, 106; libel summons applied for, 390.

Norfolk Hotel sold, 135.

"Norfolk News," libel action against the, 94.

Norfolk Volunteer Service Association, 114.

Norman's charity, 331, 341.

"Norwich," G.E.R. steamship launched, 335.

Norwich, Aylsham, and Cromer Railway, 88.

,, building sites, value of, 51.

,, Castle: letter from Mr. John Gurney, _re_ acquisition of, 343;
deputation to the Home Secretary and purchase of the buildings, 345;
suggested conversion into a museum, 373; keys transferred to the Mayor
and Corporation, 381; opening of gardens, 401; of museum, 422.

,, Central Conservative Club, 267, 276, 284.

,, Corporation Bill, 397.

,, Dispensary, 286.

,, Free Library lectures, 416.

,, Improvement Act, 303.

,, Public Library, centenary of, 333.

,, Union Fire Insurance Society, centenary of, 480.



O


Obstructing a railway train, 410.

O'Connor, Mr. T. P., at Norwich, 398.

Octagon chapel, Norwich, 50.

Octo-centenary of Norwich Cathedral, 470, 471.

Oddfellows' A.M.C. at Norwich, 63; Lynn, 309; jubilee, 364; dinner to
Grand Master Flowers, 435.

"Old World exhibition" at Norwich, 378.

Omnibus Company, Norwich, 298.

Ontario, wreck of the, 138.

Opera at Norwich Theatre, 53, 76, 106, 114, 135, 143, 157, 167, 177, 180,
190, 201, 204, 235, 265, 269, 289, 313, 329, 346, 356, 429.

,, bouffe, 219, 221, 232.

,, comic, by children, 318.

Operatic Union, Norwich, 91, 102.

Organ at St. Andrew's Hall, 314, 333.

Organs, church, 158, 160, 199, 254, 267, 276, 280, 378.

Organists, Cathedral, 281, 317, 363.

Overend, Gurney and Co., 158, 184.

Overstrand church, 170.

Oratorio of "Nehemiah," 297.

Ordnance Survey, 394.

Orford, Lord, and the Bible Society, 63.

Organophonic Band, Hoffman's, 48, 76.

Ormesby Broad catastrophe, 463.

"Our Boys," 277, 343.

Outrage at Diss, 106.

Owen, George, manager of Norwich Theatre, 109.

Oxford, Bishop of, at Norwich, 76.

Oxford Hotel, purchase at Norwich, 268.



P


Paderewski in Norwich, 444, 456, 497.

Paget, Sir James, presented with an address, 214.

Pallas' sand grouse, 125.

Panoramas, 18, 51.

Pantomime companies, touring, 333.

Pantomimes, 27, 38, 47, 56, 69, 80, 92, 103, 111, 120, 131, 140, 153,
165, 173, 184, 196, 207, 217, 229, 237, 250, 262, 272, 282, 293, 305,
317.

Parachute descents, 402.

Parish clerk of Woodbastwick, 438.

Parish Councils, 455.

Parliamentary costs paid from rates, 8.

Parliamentary Divisions of Norfolk, 167, 178.

Passengers' communication, 140.

Pasteur treatment, 412.

Paston Grammar School, 242.

,, Letters, 105.

Pastoral plays, 381, 434, 450, 471, 489.

Patriotic Fund, 36.

Patteson, Mr. H. S., elected leader of Conservative party, 461;
complimentary banquet and presentation, 468; resignation of leadership,
485; death, 487.

Patteson, Mr. Justice, retires from the Bench, 10.

Patti, Madame, at Norwich, 129, 434.

Paul, Dawson, presentation to Mr. and Mrs., 373; silver wedding, 443.

Pedestrian follower of hounds, 30.

Pedestrianism, 24, 31, 40, 41, 42, 66, 75, 110, 118, 121, 124, 221, 243,
295, 311.

Pelham memorial throne, 460; effigy, 470.

Pennington, Mr. W. H., 275.

Pepper's Ghost, 122.

Peto, Mr., created a baronet, 39.

Phillips, Frederick Lawrence: accident at Norwich Theatre, 4; benefit
performances, 5; proprietor of "The Shades," 34; new plays by, 55; action
against William Harper Stewardson, 257; death, 304.

Phillips', Mrs., farewell performance, 48.

Phonograph, 401.

Photographic Society, 32.

Photography, 80.

Piccolomini, Mdlle., at Norwich, 54.

Pigott, Mr. Paynton, appointed Deputy Chief Constable of Norfolk, 247;
Chief Constable, 311; presentation to, 482.

Pigtail, 132.

Pike, large, 306.

"Pink Dominoes," 286.

Pin Money, 139.

Pitt and Hamilton's Comedy Company, 270, 284.

Playing Fields and Open Spaces Committee, 423, 450, 483.

Pleuro-pneumonia, 404.

Ploughing by steam, 62.

Ploughing matches: All England and Norfolk, 215.

Ploughs, trials of, 142.

Plucking of live geese, 483.

Plumstead church destroyed by fire, 424.

Poisoning, charges of, 11.

Police force, Norwich City, 3, 22, 39.

,, new uniform, 39.

Political ascendency in Norwich Town Council, 100.

Political coercion on the Holkham estate denounced by the Earl of
Leicester, 149.

Poor, entertainments to the, 344, 424.

Poor-law Amendment Bill (Norwich), 121.

Poor-law Conference, 259.

Poor-rate, proposed national, 63, 71, 81.

Poor Removal Act, 112.

Porpoise killed in the Yare, 337.

Postmasters of Norwich: Mr. B. V. Winch appointed, 205; death, 417; Mr.
B. N. Thoms appointed, 418; Mr. Sturgeon appointed, 418.

Presbyterian church, Norwich, 245.

Presentations, 3, 14, 21, 50, 55, 64, 66, 71, 76, 79, 82, 85, 93, 124,
134, 152, 168, 192, 194, 215, 222, 226, 227, 232, 238, 258, 262, 269,
273, 275, 284, 287, 311, 329, 335, 348, 361, 373, 385, 387, 396, 404,
411, 419, 429, 443, 464, 464, 482, 468, 469, 470, 472, 482, 487, 491,
502.

Primrose League, 357, 381, 389, 393, 422.

Prince Albert Victor, 339, 342, 354, 357.

Prince Bonaparte Jerome at Gressenhall Workhouse, 99.

"Prince Bonta Workey," 184.

Prince Consort, death of the, 111.

Prince of Wales: coming of age of, 118; marriage of, 121; visits to
Holkham Park, 141, 153, 165, 173, 196, 230, 251, 272, 325; visits to
Merton Hall, 141, 206, 236, 271, 332; visits to Gunton Park, 152, 194,
196, 207; visits to Norwich, 163, 194, 207, 271, 299, 315, 319, 331, 351,
367, 370, 371, 460, 473, 510; Oakley park, 164; Lynn, 192, 222, 355, 415;
Yarmouth, 221, 299, 321, 357, 379, 460, 499; opens West Norfolk Junction
Railway, 153; opens New Dock at Lynn, 192; illness of, 216; recovery and
thanksgiving, 217; president of the Norfolk Agricultural Association,
222; lays foundation stone of County School, 232; receives the Czarewitch
of Russia at Sandringham, 248; presentation on return from India, 273;
opens Yarmouth Town Hall, 328; visits to Melton Park, 315, 351, 415;
Didlington Park, 396; Elveden, 228, 236; lays foundation stone of Norfolk
and Norwich Hospital, 299; opens Agricultural Hall, Norwich, 331;
receives Mr. and Mrs. Gladstone, 336; silver wedding, 390; at the
Sandringham sales, 402; in record railway run, 419; presides at Norfolk
Artillery dinner, 437; at Shernbourne church, 495; receives German
Emperor at Sandringham, 504; inspects Loyal Suffolk Hussars, South
African detachment, 506; at opening of Jenny Lind Infirmary, Norwich,
510.

Prince of Wales Road, Norwich, 82, 97, 241.

Prince's Street Lecture Hall, Norwich, 317.

"Princess of Trebizonde," 219.

Princess Louise at Norwich, 473; marriage of, 210.

Princess Victoria of Wales confirmed, 367.

Prior Melton at Norwich, 336, 407.

Prison Governors, 259, 304.

,, new, at Norwich, 381.

,, escape from, 389.

Prisons, amalgamation of county, 259.

Prize fights, 16, 138, 150.

Proportional Representation Society, 356.

Public Health Act (1848), 7; (1872), 229.

Public-house Closing Act, 138.

Public-houses, early closing of, 34, 224.

Pulpits at Norwich Cathedral, 420, 421.

Pump Street Norwich, 106.

Pusey memorial, 332.



Q


Quarter Sessions, Norfolk, 1, 28, 58, 89, 453; chairmen of, 308, 329.

,, Norwich, 20, 89, 115, 280.

Queen's birthday celebrated, 85, 95, 124, 135, 143, 159, 168, 178, 191,
202, 212, 221, 233, 241, 266, 309, 379, 480.

Queen of Denmark at Norwich, 163.

Queen's visit to Sandringham, 401.



R


Rabies, 412.

Race meeting, 65.

Rachael, Madame, and Lord Ranelagh, 178.

Railways: ruinous competition, 24; proposed line from Tivetshall to
Harleston, 27; Eastern Counties (Amalgamation of Railways) Bill, 31;
accident near Thetford, 38; flooded, 38; unsatisfactory state of, 46;
litigation under the Norwich and Lowestoft Navigation Act, 53, 70;
accident near Harling, 56; transit rates, 59; Wells and Fakenham, 69;
Berney Arms station litigation, 102; amalgamation of, 112; accident on
the Lynn and Hunstanton, 126; proposed Norwich, Aylsham, and Cromer line,
88 (afterwards known as the East Norfolk Railway), 129, 135, 151, 205,
247, 276; passengers' communication, 140; narrow escape of a train, 145;
West Norfolk Junction Railway opened by Prince of Wales, 153; Victoria
Station, Norwich, 159; trains impeded by snow, 166, 317; Watton and
Swaffham, 190; Wensum Valley (proposed), 205; new station at Lynn, 210;
Norwich and Aylsham (proposed), 220; Thorpe accident, 244, 245, 252, 253;
Yarmouth and Stalham (or North Norfolk), 258, 279, 287, 321; proposed
Central Norfolk, 258; Lynn and Fakenham, 281, 309, 327, 332; killed at
Wells station, 299; East Norfolk, 313, 327; express service, 330; Acle
and Yarmouth, 335; Eastern and Midland extension to Holt, 350; Thorpe
Station, Norwich, opened, 368; train obstruction at East Winch, 410; fast
railway run, 419; second class tickets abolished, 438; projected in South
Norfolk, 465, 488; North Walsham to Mundesley, 489; restaurant cars on
G.E.R., 498; proposed light railway from Norwich to Dereham, 506.

Rains, heavy, 301, 302, 402, 403, 404, 435, 476.

Ranelagh, Lord, and Madame Rachel, 178.

Rare birds, 51, 54, 57, 125, 164, 191, 199.

Rarey at Norwich, 96.

Rate collectors, 176, 474.

Rating, 1, 8, 500.

Rats eaten alive, 131.

Ray's bream, 465.

Read, Clare Sewell, wins prizes for agricultural essays, 41; advocates
peripatetic agricultural shows, 103; McCormick's reaper at the Plumstead
farm, 117; Malt Tax Association, 141; returned to Parliament as a Malt
Tax repealer, 146; the cattle plague, 148, 246; first chairman of the
Norfolk Chamber of Agriculture, 162; returned for South Norfolk, 184,
239; on compulsory education, 198; on county rates, 208; president of
Norfolk Agricultural Society, 213; appointed Permanent Secretary of Local
Government Board, 239; at Poor-law conference, 259; resigns Local
Government Board appointment, 261; national testimonial presented, 262;
establishment of Norwich Fat Cattle Show, 274; evidence _re_ importation
of foreign cattle, 278; motion for forming a Diocesan Conference, 290; on
road management, 297; speaks in the House of Commons on agricultural
depression, 300; visit to America, 302; Farmers' Alliance, 306; defeated
by Mr. R. T. Gurdon, 308; motion on the malt tax, 311; foot and mouth
disease, 316, 318, 344; opening of the North Norfolk Railway, 321; road
maintenance, 323; unopposed return for West Norfolk, 345; agricultural
depression, 353, 436; contests Norwich, 370; with British Dairy Farmers'
Association, 391; criticism of the Agricultural Holdings' Act, 406;
relinquishes farming in Norfolk, 467; farewell to Honingham _ibid_;
presented with portrait, 482.

Reaping machines introduced, 77; trial of McCormick's reaper, 117.

Re-assessment of Norwich properties, 500.

Recorders of Norwich: death of Mr. Prendergast, Q.C., 82; appointment of
Mr. O'Malley, Q.C., 83; death, 249; appointment of Mr. J. W. Metcalfe,
Q.C., 250; death, 437; Mr. Kemp, Q.C., appointed, 437.

Redenhall bell foundry, 316.

Re-distribution of seats, 167, 178, 349, 354.

Reed, German, at Norwich, 68, 70, 90, 269, 288.

Reeves, Sims, at Norwich, 297, 410.

Reffley wood celebration, 5.

Reform Act, first election under new, 182.

Reformatories, 65, 365.

Regiment, 54th, West Norfolk, 174.

Regiments (Cavalry): 1st (King's) Dragoon Guards, 163, 443, 444, 450,
453, 455, 460, 463, 464; 2nd Dragoon Guards, 5, 12; 3rd Dragoon Guards,
192, 234, 233, 242; 5th Dragoon Guards, 108, 112; 6th Dragoon Guards
(Carabineers), 23, 29, 257, 265, 267; 7th Dragoon Guards, 215, 221, 230,
232, 325, 329, 464, 467, 469, 471, 475, 480, 489, 490; 1st Dragoons
(Royals), 268, 277; 3rd Hussars, 318, 319, 325; 4th Light Dragoons
(afterwards 4th Hussars), 12, 343, 351, 360; 5th Lancers, 117, 121, 125,
277, 283, 285, 286, 287; 6th Dragoons (Inniskillings), 309, 312, 315; 7th
Hussars, 244, 252, 254, 257, 494, 498, 506, 509; 8th Hussars, 414, 420,
443; 10th Hussars, 99; 11th Hussars, 3, 5; 13th Hussars, 150, 156, 361,
369, 509, 510; 15th Light Dragoons (afterwards 15th Hussars), 67, 68, 76,
108, 170, 177; 16th Lancers, 137, 143, 144; 18th Hussars, 127, 135, 136;
19th Hussars, 369, 370, 375, 379, 381, 386, 390; 20th Hussars, 390, 397,
399, 407, 412; 21st Hussars, 287, 289, 290; Royal Horse Artillery, 76,
96, 180, 191, 193, 202, 212, 214; Royal Artillery, 36, 40, 57, 67.

Relief subscriptions, 39, 67, 103, 166, 365, 416.

,, works on Mousehold Heath, 365.

Religious services at Norwich Theatre, 102.

Remarkable career, 5.

Reredos at Letheringsett, 509.

Reserve Squadron at Yarmouth, 225.

Restaurant cars on the G.E.R., 498.

Restitution of stolen money, 58.

Revivalism, 133.

Revolting performance at Norwich, 131.

Rifle shooting, 111, 114, 158, 391.

Riots, 3, 49, 105, 376, 453.

Ritualistic practices, 133, 484.

River pollution, 166.

Riverside Road, Norwich, 415.

Rivers, preservation of order on, 445.

Robinson, Miss, "lady preacher," 187.

Roebuck, Captain Disney, 233.

Rontgen rays, 468.

Rood beam at St. John Timberhill, 452.

Roman Catholic church, Norwich, 433, 451.

Rosebery, Earl of, visits Postwick, 202; at Norwich, 400.

Roundabouts, worked by steam, 140.

Rousby, Mr. and Mrs., at Norwich, 233.

Route march of Norfolk Artillery Militia, 512.

Rowing, 8, 56, 63, 64, 69, 150, 289.

Rowing Club, Norfolk and Norwich, 170.

Royal Commissions, 190, 193, 196, 257, 264.

Royal Hotel (new), Norwich, 484.

Running constables, 22.

Rush, James Blomfield, 104.

Russell, Henry, at Norwich, 30, 48.

Russell, Dr., war correspondent, at Norwich, 68.



S


St. Andrew, Norwich, election of a vicar, 475.

St. Andrew's Hall: Mayor's prerogative to give use of, 52; restoration
of, 127.

St. Andrew Society, Norwich, 260, 499.

St. Augustine's churchyard scandal, 260; improvement, 450.

St. Clement's churchyard opened, 483.

St. Faith's riot, 453.

St. George's Home for Working Girls, 479.

St. George's Vase won by Norwich volunteer, 432.

St. Lawrence church, Norwich, attempted destruction of, 156.

St. Michael-at-Thorn tower, 374, 378.

St. Paul's, Norwich, improvement scheme, 276.

St. Peter Mancroft: vicars of, 290, 324, 348, 412, 415; restoration
schemes, 291, 324, 326, 337, 354, 435, 469, 492; new reredos at, 363.

St. Philip's schools, Norwich, 228.

St. Thomas, Heigham, 392.

Salisbury, Lord, at Norwich, 382.

,, appointed High Steward of Yarmouth, 395.

Salvation Army, 329, 418, 428.

Sanctus bell, 220.

Sandford, Emily, 66.

Sandringham sales, 402, 428, 443, 456, 485, 498, 510.

Saturday popular concerts, 296.

Savings' Bank, fraud on, 476.

Savi's warbler, 51.

Sayers, Tom, at Norwich, 113; charged with assault at Swaffham, 115.

Scarlet uniforms for volunteers, 279.

School Board: formation of recommended by Norwich Town Council, 209,
election of first, 211; remarkable scene, 297; presentation to clerk of,
479.

Science Lectures for the People, 388, 397, 408, 417, 426, 438.

Scotch fisherman's freak, 259.

Scotch fishing fleet disasters, 259.

Scottish celebration at Norwich, 210.

Sea breaches at Horsey, 484.

Sea-shore rights, 143, 294.

Second-class tickets abolished, 438.

Sedan chair at election, 38.

Sentence of death, painful scene during, 375.

Sentences, disparity in, 216.

Servant girl's remarkable conduct, 58.

Severe weather, 377, 385, 389, 408, 415, 416, 420, 446, 456, 457, 476,
497, 503.

Sewerage works at Norwich, 54, 71, 144, 157, 166, 174, 188, 209, 227,
230, 238, 383, 457, 467, 489, 503.

Sewage Farm, 277, 300.

Shalders' fountain pump, 47.

Sheriffs, appointment of, 8, 16, 26, 36, 46, 56, 68, 80, 90, 101, 109,
118, 129, 138, 152, 164, 171, 182, 195, 206, 216, 228, 236, 248, 259,
271, 281, 291, 304, 315, 324, 331, 343, 351, 361, 374, 385, 395, 405,
415, 424, 436, 445, 454, 466, 474, 484, 494, 504, 514.

Sheriffs' entertainments, 383, 400, 402, 404.

Shernbourne church restored, 495.

Sheward case, 6, 185.

Shipbuilding in Norfolk, 22, 51, 83, 105, 125, 136, 149, 213, 257.

Shipping disasters, 25, 28, 41, 46, 57, 68, 90, 96, 101, 118, 119, 129,
130, 138, 140, 164, 165, 172, 175, 182, 188, 192, 194, 199, 209, 217,
226, 228, 229, 253, 267, 258, 259, 260, 274, 281, 283, 317, 326, 330,
331, 383, 399, 423, 459, 508, 511.

Shooting, extraordinary feats of, 161, 225, 293.

Siamese princes at Norwich, 512.

Sidestrand church, 323.

"Sidney Carton" produced at Norwich Theatre, 438.

Sidney, W., manager of Norwich Theatre; presentation to, 50; action as to
silver ticket holders, 68; information against a circus proprietor, 81;
licence of Norwich Theatre, 343; death 463.

Silver cradles, 300, 301, 430, 496.

,, tickets at Norwich Theatre, 44, 68.

,, weddings, 390, 419, 429, 443, 492.

Skating, 103, 317, 416, 417, 424, 438, 456, 457.

,, National Association meeting on Wroxham Broad, 317.

,, carnival on Diss mere, 417, 456.

,, Rink, Norwich, 269, 270, 282, 296, 299, 329.

,, roller championship, 296.

Skull of Sir Thomas Browne, 445.

Slavin at Norwich, 450.

Small-pox, 27, 53, 219, 263.

Smith, Albert, 3.

Smith, Captain (afterwards Major), of Ellingham, 357, 508.

Snowfalls, 19, 28, 56, 92, 153, 165, 166, 207, 376, 389, 408, 416, 435,
446, 455, 476, 508.

Snow in May, 212, 420.

Socialist riot at Norwich, 376.

Social Science Congress at Norwich, 236.

Soldier succeeds to a fortune, 112.

Soldiers' and Sailors' Home, Norwich, 467, 473.

Soldiers charged with attempted murder, 312.

Soldiers' monument at Norwich cemetery, 290.

Soldier's romance, 337.

Sol-fa system of Psalmody, 297, 427.

Solicitors charged with fraud, 4, 399, 480.

Somnambulism, remarkable case of, 331.

Sondes, Lord, elected High Steward of Yarmouth, 32.

Sothern, Mr., 167, 205.

Soudan campaign: departure of the 7th Dragoon Guards from Norwich, 329;
thanksgiving services, 330; Lieut. M. W. M. Edwards receives Victoria
Cross, 335; Norfolk men at the battle of Teb, 346; service of
Humiliation, 356.

Special constables, 376.

Spelling bees, 262.

Spiritualism, 23.

S.P.G. bicentenary, 510.

Sprats, enormous captures of, 417.

Spring, early, 441.

Springfield, Mr. T. O., requested to become candidate for Norwich, 10.

Ship, mysterious disappearance of a, 10.

Sprowston boundary, 301.

Spurgeon, Mr., at King's Lynn, 66; at Norwich, 87.

Stage play at a circus, 81.

Staghounds, 265, 275.

,, extraordinary run of, 275.

Stalham Corn Hall, 44.

Stamp frauds at Norwich, 278.

Stamps, perforated sheets, inventor of, 318.

Stanfield Hall: superstitious difficulties, 26; litigation, 288; death of
Lady Beevor, 407.

Stanley Library, Lynn, 351.

Starr-Bowkett Building Society, 285.

Steamboat Alexandra launched, 176.

Steeplechases, 105, 265.

Stolen money, restitution of, 58.

Stork shot at Pickenham, 54.

Stracey, Sir Henry, returned for Norwich, 183; presentations to, 222.

Strangers' Hall, Norwich, 498.

Street names altered at Norwich, 488.

Street improvements at Norwich, 46, 82, 97, 265, 276.

Strikes: building trade, 421; shoe trade, 477.

Sturgeon claimed by Lynn Corporation, 77.

Submarine cable, 80.

Subsidence of a floor at Norwich, 24.

Suicides, 107, 203, 258, 315, 495.

Sunday closing of public-houses, 29.

Sunday deliveries, 407.

,, opening of Free library, protest against, 350.

,, of St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, 407.

Sunday School centenary, 311.

Superstition, 61, 156.

Swaffham coursing meeting, 36.

Swan Laundry and Public Baths, Norwich, 301.

Swimming race at Thorpe, 225.

Swine fever, 446.



T


Tasburgh, human remains discovered at, 486.

Taverham paper mills, 502.

Teachers, National Union of elementary, 356.

Technical education, 420, 423, 446.

,, Institute, 488.

Telegraph line, 80.

Tel-el-Kebir, battle of, 330.

Telephones, 283, 325, 376.

Temperance movement, 8, 26, 28, 167, 284, 290, 328, 330.

,, Society, Church of England, 286, 404.

Terry, Edward, 350, 360.

Terry, Miss, Ellen, at Sandringham, 401.

Thackeray at Norwich, 62.

Theatre, Norwich, 3, 4, 5, 23, 27, 32, 37, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 53,
56, 61, 63, 68, 69, 72, 76, 80, 92, 99, 100, 102, 103, 106, 109, 111,
114, 120, 123, 131, 135, 140, 143, 153, 162, 165, 167, 169, 177, 180,
184, 190, 193, 194, 196, 201, 202, 204, 205, 207, 215, 219, 221, 222,
226, 229, 232, 233, 234, 235, 237, 250, 253, 258, 262, 264, 265, 269,
270, 271, 272, 277, 280, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 289, 293, 305, 313,
314, 317, 318, 325, 326, 329, 332, 333, 341, 342, 343, 344, 346, 350,
353, 356, 359, 363, 375, 386, 396, 398, 403, 404, 420, 427, 429, 433,
437, 438, 439, 445, 455, 463, 469, 496; improvements at, 360, 375;
managers of, 3, 6, 32, 44, 50, 109, 162, 226, 280, 282, 343, 359, 463,
472; play (new), at, 438; subscription nights at, 68.

Theatre Licence, Norwich, remarkable disclosure, 343.

Theatre, proposed new, 486.

Theatricals, amateur, 59, 283.

"The Guv'nor," 332.

"The Science of Love" operetta, 247.

Thetford Corporation _v._ Norfolk County Council, 490.

Thomas a Becket's chapel, Norwich, 240.

Thorpe Green obstruction, 297.

Thorpe railway accident, 244, 245, 252, 253.

Thorpe St. Andrew, proposed annexation by Norwich, 442.

Thorpe station, Norwich, 368.

Threatening letters, 340, 341, 399.

Thunderstorm and hurricane, 302.

Thunderstorms, 23, 77, 302, 339, 349, 392, 402, 403, 404, 422, 430, 443,
511.

Thurton, ventriloquist, 48.

Tichborne claimant at Norwich, 355.

Tides, remarkable, at Yarmouth, 375.

Tigers, combat between, 362.

Tillett, Jacob Henry: resigns seat in Norwich Town Council, 36; action
against Lord Hastings, 60; on the appointment of city magistrates, 70;
advocates Parliamentary inquiry into corrupt practices, 84; elected Mayor
of Norwich, 90; Joel Fox case, 90; initiates the abolition of political
ascendancy in Norwich Town Council, 100; the Chester Waters scandal, 145;
adopted Liberal candidate, 179; defeated, 183; petitions against the
return of Sir H. Stracey, 186; pays costs, 197; again adopted, 202;
elected, 203; petitioned against, 205; unseated, 208; portrait placed in
St. Andrew's Hall, 216; arbitration case, Coaks _v._ Tillett, 220;
returned for Norwich, 253; unseated on petition, 255; elected Mayor of
Norwich, 259; returned for Norwich, 307; contests Norwich for the last
time, 370; death, 426.

Time ball suggested, 26; erected on Norwich Castle, 511.

Tithe, non-payment of, 378.

Tobacco culture in Norfolk, 383.

Toll-house Museum, Yarmouth, 461.

Tom Thumb at Norwich, 83, 162.

Toole, J. L., 168, 222, 233, 326, 396, 469.

Towers, falls of, 374, 432, 456.

Town Clerks, Norwich: Mr. W. L. Mendham appointed, 47; death, 267; Mr. H.
B. Miller appointed, 267; death, 409; Mr. G. B. Kennett appointed, 410.

Town Close Estate: Christmas dole withheld, 351; litigation commenced,
352; Stanley _v._ Mayor and Corporation, 377, 387; litigation abandoned,
398; final settlement of Attorney-General's scheme, 427.

Town Councillor wrongfully elected, 12, 17.

Tractarian movement, 2.

Traction engine with "endless railway," 62; with indiarubber tyres, 209.

Trades Union Congress, 451.

Trafalgar, anniversary of, 474.

Training College, Norwich and Ely, 433.

Training Institution, Norwich Diocesan, 22.

Tramway schemes, 205, 217, 227, 292, 333, 375, 405, 474, 475, 485, 508.

,, East Suffolk, 227.

,, Yarmouth and Gorleston, 254.

Transportation, return from, 147.

Transvaal War: approval of Government policy in South Africa, 502, 503;
Mr. Stead at Norwich, 503; reservists called out, 503; Lieut.-Col.
Stopford killed at Modder River, 504; gifts to Norfolk Regiment, 505; 2nd
Battalion sails for South Africa, 505; Loyal Suffolk Hussars volunteer
for the front, 505; drafts from Volunteer battalions, 505; 3rd Battalion,
Norfolk Regiment (Militia), embodied and leave for Fermoy, 505; volunteer
and sail for South Africa, 506; Yeomanry and Volunteers leave Norwich,
506; relief of Ladysmith, 506; relief of Mafeking, 506; thanksgiving
services, 506; occupation of Pretoria, 506; Norfolk war memorial, 506;
death of Mr. Walter Waring at Pinetown Bridge, 513; return of the Earl of
Albemarle, 514.

Trinity church, Norwich, 88, 107.

Trotting, 81, 189.

Trout, 186.

,, salmon, 356.

Turnpike, Wells and Fakenham, 314.

Turnpikes, 190.

"Turpin's Ride to York," 275.

Tussaud's, Louis, exhibition at Norwich, 470.

Tweedmouth, Lord, at Norwich, 469.

"Twenty-four Club," Norwich, 210.

"Two-headed Nightingale," 221.

Typhoid fever at Lynn, 483.

Tyssen-Amherst, coming of age, 49; returned for West Norfolk, 307, 308;
entertains Royalty, 316, 396, 405, 424, 445; opens Downham Town Hall,
384; retires from Parliament, 419; sale of red-polls, 430; dignity of
peerage, 433; presentations to, 454.



U


Uniforms of Volunteers, 85, 104, 279.



V


Vaccination, 27, 330, 430; inquiry at Norwich, 330; lecture on by Mrs.
Garrett Anderson, M.D., 496.

Valpeian Club, 76.

Vance at Norwich, 147.

Vandenhoff, Miss, 72.

Vaudeville, Theatre of Varieties, Norwich, 270, 282, 299, 329.

Velocipede (see Bicycle).

Victoria Cross, 335, 346, 432.

Victoria station, Norwich, 159; explosion at, 365.

Villebois, Mr., presentation to, 100.

Vining, Miss Fanny, 23.

Visiting Society, 390.

Vokes family, 285.

Volunteer movement, 85, 98, 104, 124; Artillery Volunteers, 299; camps,
125, 168, 179, 192, 203, 213, 222, 233, 242, 267, 279, 287, 301, 311,
323, 329, 358, 371, 391, 392, 402, 403, 413, 422, 432, 443, 450, 471,
490, 500, 511; China Cup won by Norfolk, 278, 482; Col. Black accepts
command of Norwich volunteers, 135; retires, 192; succeeded by Col.
Boileau, 193; retires, 343; succeeded by Col. Mansel, 343; Col. Dawson,
424; colours presented to volunteers, 124; cyclists, 481; Dean of Norwich
appointed chaplain to 1st V.B.N.R., 424; decoration, 439; Drill Hall,
Norwich, 159, 163; fetes at Crown Point, 117; at Quebec House, Dereham,
180; guards of honour, 152, 153, 163, 221, 232, 319; Light Horse, 104,
163, 172; long service medal, 457; marches, 213, 222, 460; Medical Staff
Corps, 409, 465; presentations to Captain Bulwer, 128, Captain H. S.
Patteson, 124, Col. Black, 192, Col. Boileau, 348, Lieut.-Col. Foster,
396, Major Cubitt, 411; ranges opened at Mousehold, 98; at Billingford,
158; reviews at Norwich, 99, 117, 127; at Holkham, 108; at Yarmouth, 115;
at Windsor, 179, 322; rifle shooting, 111, 114, 158, 213, 278; Rifle
corps, known as Volunteer Battalion of Norfolk Regiment, 338; St.
George's Vase won by Norwich Volunteer, 432; uniforms, 85, 104, 279, 299;
Volunteer Brigade, 392; Volunteer Service Association, 114; Volunteers in
South Africa, 505, 506.

Voting apparatus, 481.



W


Wainwright, Jacob (Livingstone's attendant), 242.

Walsingham floods, 223.

Walsingham, Lord, and his tenantry, 226; shooting feats by, 225, 393;
elected High Steward of Cambridge University, 421; re-introduction of the
great bustard, 511.

Walsingham Quarter Sessions discontinued, 103.

Ward boundaries and re-distribution, 405, 422, 428.

Watch-making extraordinary, 9.

Watchmen, last of the, 509.

Waters, Edmond Chester, accusations against, 145; presentation to, 146.

Waterspout off Cromer, 482.

Waterworks, Norwich: opening of, 7; new Bill, 22; new reservoirs, 208,
218, 414; proposed purchase by Corporation, 417, 485, 512.

Waterworks, Yarmouth, opening of, 41.

Wayland Agricultural Society, 67.

Wayland Hall, Watton, 22.

Wayside chapel, Houghton St. Giles', 481.

Weather, remarkable changes of, 439.

Weavers' disputes, 131.

Weavers' strike at Norwich, 25.

Wedding, remarkable incident at a, 142.

Weights and Measures Act, 140.

Well accidents, 5, 18, 509.

Wellesley, Marchioness of, buried at Costessey Hall, 27.

Wellington statue, Norwich, 16, 36.

Wells boating disaster, 485; church destroyed by lightning, 302;
restoration fund bazaar at Holkham, 312; re-opening, 337; Wells and
Fakenham Railway opened, 69; harbour works, 87; inundation at, 119;
lifeboat disaster, 314; boating accident, 485; singular railway accident
at, 299.

Wesleyan schism, 1, 2.

Weston, Edward Payson (pedestrian), at Norwich, 295, 346.

Whale captured, 32.

Wheat, remarkable seizure of, 174.

Wherrymen's chapel, Yarmouth, 91.

Whipping at Norwich Castle, 254.

Whirlwind at Worstead, 497.

Wigan, Horace Mr., at Norwich, 215.

Wiggins, Captain, 400, 408, 469.

Wild-Collins voting apparatus, 481.

Wild fowl, 209.

Wild, Mr. E., address to, 385; elected leader of Norwich Conservatives,
485.

Wild, Mr. E. E., elected judge of Court of Record, 484.

Wilde Oscar, at Norwich, 346.

Will cases, 6, 18, 43, 95.

Wilson, F. W., adopted Gladstonian candidate for Mid Norfolk, 443;
defeated by Mr. R. T. Gurdon, 459; elected, 462.

Wilson, General Sir Archdale, at Norwich, 76; death, 240.

Winchilsea, Earl of, at Norwich, 449.

Windham case, 109, 154; death of Mr. F. W. Windham, 154.

Windham, General, address to, 46; received at Norwich, 46, 52; returned
for East Norfolk, 61; departure for India, 66; defeated by Gwalier
mutineers, 70; death, 197.

Window-tax, 3.

Winter of 1881, 317.

Witchcraft, 156.

Witch doctor, 62.

Wodehouse, Lord, fined for assault, 463; removed from the Commission of
the Peace, 463.

Wodehouse, Lieut.-Col., welcomed at Hingham, 53; death, 206.

Wolseley, Lord, at Norwich, 467, 498.

Woodbastwick Hall, destroyed by fire, 332.

Wood carver, 5.

Wood paving at Norwich, 303, 313, 333, 446.

Workhouse at Norwich, 65.

Workhouse, fall of a, at Lynn, 33.

Workhouses, proposed amalgamation of, 468.

Wymondham Bridewell discontinued, 284.



Y


Yacht ashore at Happisburgh, 63.

Yachting and Fishing exhibition, 446.

Yare and Bure Preservation Society, 412.

Yarmouth: seamen's riot, 3; mayor elected by his casting vote, 9; Priory
Schools, 16; Corporation records, 19; vessel attacked by mutineers, 21;
Wellington Pier, 23; George Borrow saves a boat's crew, 24; as a Militia
centre, 28; Lord Sondes elected High Steward, 32; new bridge opened, 35;
waterworks opened, 41; cemetery, 51; charities, 51; storms at, 54, 57,
68, 90, 96, 101, 118, 119, 129, 130, 138, 140, 164, 165, 172, 182, 188,
194, 199, 209, 253, 259, 274, 281, 283, 317, 335, 455, 459, 484, 502;
Britannia Pier, 54, 90; Nelson Column, 55; bribery, 59; election
petitions, 66, 93, 156; school of Navigation and Art, 62; Marine Parade,
64; discovery of coins, 65; St. John's church, 66, 74, 348; fire at St.
James's Place, 69; magisterial appointments condemned, 72; presentations
to Bishop Hills, 85; Donegal Militia, 87, 98; Wherrymen's chapel, 91;
Channel Fleet, 97, 114, 126, 245; explosion on the s.s. Tonning, 100;
action against Sir Edmund Lacon, M.P., 104; Cufaude _v._ Corry, 105;
shipbuilding, 105, 125, 136, 149, 213, 257; military riot, 105; "Yarmouth
Independent" libel action, 107; lifeboat scandals, 119, 138; Gas Bill,
122; Nelson monument, fatal fall from, 124; Scotch fisherman's feat on,
259; accident at Burgh Water Frolic, 125; presentation to a Mayor, 134;
Public-house Closing Act, 138; St. Nicholas church restoration, 138, 201,
420, 421; Haven and Port Bill, 141, 158; Fish Wharves and Tramways Bill,
153, 171; lifeboats launched, 151, 400, 430; lifeboat disasters, 154;
Drill Hall, 171; Fenian scare, 173; fires, 174, 286; St. James's church,
191, 279; extraordinary catches of herring, 54, 195; Assembly Rooms
destroyed by fire, 199; church organ, 199; Corporation address to Sir
James Paget, 214; Corn Hall opened, 216; depot of the 9th Regiment, 218;
Recordership, 219; mirage, 221; visits of Prince of Wales, 221, 299, 321,
328, 357, 379, 460, 499; Grammar School opened, 222; Reserve Squadron,
225, 413; Ballot Act, 225; East Suffolk Tramway, 227, 254; Aquarium, 258;
fishing fleet disaster, 274; presentation to Mr. C. J. Palmer, 274; Town
Hall, 285, 328; silver cradle, 301; British Archaeological Association,
302; Duke of Edinburgh, 309; Book Club centenary, 310; visit of the Duke
of Cambridge, 321; Golf Club, 333; high tides, 335, 455; remarkable
tides, 375; fishing dispute, 377; Hospital, 379, 394; Lord Salisbury as
High Steward, 395; Duke of Clarence, 420; British Training Squadron, 420;
Lord Randolph Churchill, 444; Agricultural shows, 125, 413, 450; floods,
455, 484; Tollhouse Museum opened, 461; Yeomanry Cavalry training, 470;
fire at Press's mills, 485; St. Paul's church consecrated, 437; murder,
489; Missions to Seamen Church and Institute, 509; Duke of York, 509;
beach murder, 512.

Yarn Company, Norwich, 50.

Yeomanry Cavalry, 470, 498; volunteer for South Africa, 505, 506.

Young, J. F., 37; manager of Norwich Theatre, 162; member of "Caste"
Company, 233; death, 377.

"Youth," 344.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORFOLK ANNALS***


******* This file should be named 36206.txt or 36206.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/6/2/0/36206



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

