The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mystery of the Locks, by Edgar Watson Howe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mystery of the Locks

Author: Edgar Watson Howe

Release Date: May 27, 2011 [EBook #36237]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERY OF THE LOCKS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                     THE MYSTERY OF THE LOCKS

                          BY E. W. HOWE

              AUTHOR OF "THE STORY OF A COUNTRY TOWN"


    BOSTON
    JAMES R. OSGOOD AND COMPANY
    1885

    _Copyright, 1885_,
    BY JAMES R. OSGOOD AND COMPANY.

    _All Rights Reserved._

    C. J. PETERS AND SON,
    ELECTROTYPERS.




CONTENTS.


I. THE TOWN OF DARK NIGHTS

II. THE LOCKS

III. THE FACE AT THE WINDOW

IV. DAVY'S BEND

V. A TROUBLED FANCY

VI. PICTURES IN THE FIRE

VII. THE LOCKS' GHOST

VIII. A REMARKABLE GIRL

IX. THE "APRON AND PASSWORD"

X. TUG WHITTLE'S BOOTY

XI. THE WHISPERS IN THE AIR

XII. RUINED BY KINDNESS

XIII. THE REBELLION OF THE BARITONE

XIV. THE ANCIENT MAIDEN

XV. A SHOT AT THE SHADOW

XVI. THE STEP ON THE STAIR

XVII. THE PURSUING SHADOW

XVIII. THE RISE IN THE RIVER

XIX. MR. WHITTLE MAKES A CONFESSION

XX. THE SEARCH IN THE WOODS

XXI. LITTLE BEN

XXII. TUG'S RETURN

XXIII. THE GOING DOWN OF THE SUN




THE MYSTERY OF THE LOCKS.




CHAPTER I.

THE TOWN OF DARK NIGHTS.


Davy's Bend--a river town, a failing town, and an old town, on a dark
night, with a misty rain falling, and the stars hiding from the
dangerous streets and walks of the failing town down by the sluggish
river which seems to be hurrying away from it, too, like its
institutions and its people, and as the light of the wretched day that
has just closed hurried away from it a few hours since.

The darkness is so intense that the people who look out of their windows
are oppressed from staring at nothing, for the shadows are obliterated,
and for all they know there may be great caverns in the streets, filled
with water from the rising river, and vagabond debris on their front
steps. It occurs to one of them who opens the blind to his window a
moment, and looks out (and who notices incidentally that the rays from
his lamp seem afraid to venture far from the casement) that a hard crust
will form somewhere above the town, up where there is light for the
living, and turn the people of Davy's Bend into rocks as solid as those
thousands of feet below, which thought affects him so much that he
closes his blinds and shutters tighter than before, determined that his
rooms shall become caves.

The rain comes down steadily, plashing into little pools in the road
with untiring energy, where it joins other vagrant water, and creeps off
at last into the gutter, into the rivulet, and into the river, where it
joins the restless tide which is always hurrying away from Davy's Bend,
and bubbles and foams with joy.

The citizen who observed the intense blackness of the night comes to his
window again, and notes the steady falling of the rain, and in his
reverie pretends to regret that it is not possible for the water to come
up until his house will float away like an ark, that he may get rid of
living in a place where the nights are so dark and wet that he cannot
sleep for thinking of them. When he returns to his chair, and attempts
to read, the pattering rain is so persistent on the roof and at the
windows that the possibility of a flood occurs to his mind, and he
thinks with satisfaction that, should it come to pass, Davy's Bend would
at last be as well off as Ben's City; and this possibility is so
pleasant that he puts out his light, the only one showing in the town,
and goes to bed.

At the foot of a long street, so close to the river that its single
light casts a ghastly glare into the water, stands the railroad station,
where the agent awaits the arrival of the single train that visits the
place daily,--for only a few people want to go to Davy's Bend, and not
many are left to move away,--so the agent mutters at the rain and the
darkness, and growls at the hard fate that keeps him up so late; for, of
all the inhabitants of the place, he is the only one who has business to
call him out at night. There are no people in Davy's Bend who are
overworked, or whose business cares are so great as to make them nervous
or fretful; so they sleep and yawn a great deal, and have plenty of time
in which to tell how dull their own place is, and how distressingly
active is Ben's City, located in the country below them, and which is
admired even by the river, for it is always going in that direction.

Fortunately, on this misty night the agent has not long to wait; for
just as he curls himself up in his chair to rest comfortably, certain
that the train will be late, there is a hoarse blast from a steam
whistle up the road, which echoes through the woods and over the hills
with a dismal roar, and by the time he has seized his lantern, and
reached the outside, the engine bell is ringing softly in the yard; the
headlight appears like a great eye spying out the dark places around the
building, and before he has had time to look about him, or express his
surprise that the wheels are on time, a few packages have been unloaded,
and the train creeps out into the darkness, hurrying away from Davy's
Bend, like the river and the people.

There is but one passenger to-night: a man above the medium height and
weight, dressed like a city tradesman, who seems to own the packages put
off, for he is standing among them, and apparently wondering what
disposition he is to make of them; for the agent is about to retire into
the station with his books under his arm. Evidently the stranger is not
good natured, for he hails the official impatiently, and inquires, in a
voice that is a mixture of indignation and impudence, if the hotels have
no representatives about, and if he is expected to remain out in the
rain all night to guard his property.

The agent does not know as to that, but he does know that the stranger
is welcome to leave his packages in the building until morning, which
arrangement seems to be the best offering, for it is accepted, after
both men have denounced the town until they are satisfied; for no one
pretends to defend Davy's Bend, so the agent readily assents to whatever
the stranger desires to say that is discreditable to his native place,
while he is helping him to carry the trunks and bundles into the light.

When the rays of the single lamp in the station fall upon the stranger,
the agent at first concludes that he is middle-aged, for a new growth of
whiskers covers his face completely; but he thinks better of this during
the course of his inspection, and remarks to himself that the owner of
the packages is not as old as he seemed at first glance, but he is a man
not satisfied with himself, or with anything around him,--the agent is
sure of that; and as he helps with the baggage, of which there is a
great deal, he keeps thinking to himself that it will stand him in hand
to be more polite than usual, for the stranger looks sullen enough to
fight with very little provocation. His quick, restless eyes were always
busy,--the agent feels certain that he has been measured and disposed of
in a glance,--but the longer he looks at the stranger the more certain
he becomes that the packages he is helping to handle contains goods of
importance, for their owner is evidently a man of importance.

"There must be gold in that," the agent says, as he puts his end of one
of the trunks down, and pauses to rest. "I have been agent here a good
many years; but if that is not an excess, I never had hold of one. Now
for the rest of them."

The work is soon finished, and after extinguishing the light the agent
steps upon the outside, locks the door, and puts the key into his
pocket.

"I am sorry," he says, as he stands with the stranger outside the door,
on a covered platform, where they are protected from the rain, "but I go
in this direction, while the hotel lies in that," pointing the way.
"It's a rough road, and you may have trouble in getting them up, but I
guess you will get there if you go far enough, for the hotel stands
directly at the head of the street. It's a pity that the town does not
afford an omnibus, or a public carriage, but it doesn't, and that ends
it. I intend to go away myself as soon as I can, for the company does
not treat me any too well, though it is generally said that another man
could not be found to do the work as I do it for the money."

By this time the agent has his umbrella up, which appears to be as
dilapidated as the town, for it comes up with difficulty, so he says
good night cheerily, and disappears; and the traveller, after shivering
awhile on the platform, starts out to follow the direction given him,
floundering in the mud at every step.

There is a row of houses on either side, with great gaps between them,
and he is barely able to make out the strip of lighter shade which he
judges is the street he is to follow, the night is so dark; but as the
hotel is said to lie directly across his path, he argues that he is sure
to run into it sooner or later, so he blunders on, shivering when he
realizes that he is becoming wet to the skin. After travelling in this
manner much longer than was desirable, finding the sidewalks so bad that
he takes to the middle of the street, and finally goes back to the walk
again in desperation; stumbling over barrels and carts, and so much
rubbish that is oozy and soft as to cause him to imagine that everything
is turning into a liquid state in order that it may leave the place by
way of the gutters, the rivulets, and the river, he becomes aware that a
lantern, carried by one of two men, whose legs are to be seen in long
shadows, is approaching, and that they are very merry, for they are
making a good deal of noise, and stop frequently to accuse each other of
being jolly old boys, or thorough scoundrels, or dreadful villains, or
to lean up against the buildings to discuss ribald questions which seem
to amuse them. Apparently they have no destination, for after one of
their bursts of merriment they are as apt to walk up the street as down
it; and believing them to be the town riff-raff out for a lark, the
stranger tries to pass them without attracting attention when he comes
up to their vicinity; but the one who carries the lantern sees him, and,
locking arms with his companion, adroitly heads the traveller off, and
puts the lantern so close to his face that he dodges back to avoid it.

"Tug," the man says, in an amused way, "a stranger. There will be a
sensation in Davy's Bend to-morrow; it hasn't happened before in a
year."

Believing the men to be good-natured prowlers who can give him the
information he is seeking, the stranger patiently waits while they enjoy
their joke; which they do in a very odd fashion, for the man who carries
the lantern, and who, the stranger noticed when the lantern was raised,
was rather small, and old, and thin-faced, leans against his companion,
and laughs in an immoderate but meek fashion. The fellow who had been
addressed as Tug had said nothing at all, though he snorted once, in a
queer way, which threw his companion into greater convulsions of
merriment than ever, and changing their position so that they support
themselves against a building, one of them continues to laugh gayly, and
the other to chuckle and snort, until they are quite exhausted, as
though a stranger in Davy's Bend is very funny indeed.

"There will be a train going the other way in three hours,--for both the
trains creep through the town at night, as if they were ashamed to be
seen here in daylight," the little man says to the traveller, recovering
himself, and with a show of seriousness. "You had better take it, and go
back; really you had. Davy's Bend will never suit you. It don't suit
anybody. The last man that came here stood it a week, when off he went,
and we never expected to see another one. Look at these deserted houses
in every direction," he continues, stepping out farther into the middle
of the street, as if to point around him, but remembering that the night
is so dark that nothing can be seen, he goes back to his companion, and
pokes him in the ribs, which causes that worthy to snort once more in
the odd way that the stranger noticed on coming up. This reminds them of
their joke again; so they return to the building, leaning against it
with their arms, their heads, and their backs, laughing as they did
before. Meanwhile the stranger stands out in the rain, watching the two
odd men with an air of interest; but at last, recollecting his
condition, he says,--

"It happens that I am looking for a place that suits nobody, and one
that is generally avoided. If you will point out the way to the hotel, I
will decide that question for myself to-morrow."

The little man picks up the lantern immediately when the hotel is
mentioned.

"I never thought of the hotel," he exclaims, on the alert at once, and
starting up the street, followed by his snorting companion, who ambled
along like the front part of a wagon pushed from behind. "It is my
business to be at the station when the train arrives, to look for
passengers," the man continues as he hurries on with the light; "but it
seemed like a waste of time to go down there, for nobody ever comes; so
I thought I'd spend the time with Tug."

The man says this in a tone of apology, as though accustomed to making
explanations for lack of attention to business; and as he leads the way
he is not at all like the jolly fellow who laughed so immoderately,
while leaning against the building, at his own weak joke; but perhaps he
is one thing when on duty, and another when he is out airing himself.
However this may be, the stranger follows, taking long strides to keep
up, and occasionally stumbling over the person who has been referred to
as Tug, and who appears to be unjointed in his legs; for when room is
made for him on the left-hand side of the walk, he is sure suddenly to
turn up on the right.

Thus they hurry along without speaking, until at length a dim light
appears directly ahead of them, and coming up to this presently, the
stranger finds that it comes from a building lying across the course in
which they are travelling; for the street leading up from the river and
the station ends abruptly in that direction with the hotel, as it ended
in the other with the station. Another street crosses here at right
angles, and the hotel turns travellers either to the right or to the
left.

When the three men enter the place, and the light is turned up, the
traveller sees that it had formerly been a business place; that it has
been patched and pieced, and does not seem to answer the purpose for
which it is being used without a protest, for the guests fall down two
steps when they attempt to enter the dining-room, and everyone is
compelled to go outside the office to get to the stairway leading to the
rooms above. In its better days the room used as an office had probably
been a provision store; for the whitewash on the walls does not entirely
cover price-lists referring to chickens and hams and oats and flour.

"I am the clerk here," the man who had carried the lantern says, as he
brings out a chair for the stranger, but condemns it after examination
because both the back legs are gone, and it can only be used when
leaning against the wall. "I am sorry I was not at the station to meet
you; but it is so seldom that anyone comes that I hope you will not
mention it to him," pointing his thumb upward, evidently referring to
the proprietor sleeping above.

The arrival was thinking that queer little men like the one before him
were to be found at every country hotel he had ever visited, acting as
clerk during the hours when there was no business, and as hostler and
waiter during the day, but he rather liked the appearance of this
fellow, for he seemed more intelligent than the most of them, so he
turned to listen to what he was saying, at the same time recollecting
that he himself had suddenly become very grave.

"This is not much of a hotel," the clerk continues, at last fishing out
a chair that seems to be strong, and placing it in front of the guest;
"but it is the best Davy affords. The hotel, though, is better than the
town; you will find that out soon enough."

A small man, of uncertain age, the clerk turns out to be, now that the
light is upon him. He may be thirty, or forty, or fifty; for, judged in
some ways, he looks old, while judged in other ways he looks young; but
it is certain that he is not jolly around the hotel as he was on the
street, for he is very meek, and occasionally strokes his pale face,
which is beardless, with the exception of a meek little tuft on either
side, as though he thinks that since he has been caught laughing it will
go hard with him.

After looking at his companion, with an amused smile, for a moment, the
stranger says that he will not mention anything, good or bad, "to him,"
whoever he may be, and, while thinking to himself that "Davy" is a
familiar way of referring to Davy's Bend, he notices that the man who
has already been called Tug, and who has found a chair and is sitting
bolt upright in it, is eyeing him closely. He also remarks that Tug is
hideously ugly, and that he is dressed in a suit of seedy black, which
has once been respectable, but is now so sleek, from long use, that it
glistens in the lamplight. He has a shock of hair, and a shock of beard,
both of which seem to have been trimmed recently by a very awkward
person; and the stranger also notices, in the course of his idle
examination, that one of Tug's eyes, the left one, is very wide open,
while the other is so nearly shut that generally the man seems to be
aiming at something. When Tug winks with the eye that is wide open, the
one that is nearly shut remains perfectly motionless, but follows the
example presently, and winks independently and of its own accord, so
that the stranger thinks of him as walking with his eyes, taking a
tremendous leap with his left, and then a limp with his right.

Tug continues his observations, in spite of the cold stare of the
stranger, and makes several discoveries, one of which is, that the
stranger has a rather good-looking face and a large and restless eye.
Tug imagines that he can read the man's character in his eye as easily
as in an open book, for it has varying moods, and seems to be resolute
at one moment, and gloomy and discontented at another. Although he is
looking straight at him, Tug is certain that the stranger's thoughts are
not always in Davy's Bend; and, while thinking that the stranger has
important matters to think of somewhere, the clerk returns from the
kitchen, carrying in his arms a great piece of cold beef, a loaf of
bread, a half a pie in a tin plate, and a coffee-pot and a tumbler.
Covering with a newspaper a round table that stands in the room, he
places the articles upon it, and asks the guest to sit up and help
himself.

The stranger declined, but he noticed that Tug, from his position
against the wall, was walking toward the table with his eyes, with first
a long step and then a short one, and that at a sign from his friend he
walked over hurriedly with his legs, and went to work with a ravenous
appetite, putting pieces of meat and bread into his mouth large enough
to strangle him. This convinced the stranger that the lunch was really
prepared for Tug, and that there would have been disappointment had he
accepted the clerk's invitation.

"I don't suppose you care to know it," the clerk said, seating himself,
and apparently enjoying the manner in which Tug was disposing of the
cold meat, "but my name is Silas Davy. I am what is known as a good
fellow, and my father was a good fellow before me. He discovered this
town, or located it, or settled here first, or something of that kind,
and once had a great deal of property; but, being a good fellow, he
couldn't keep it. If you will give me your name, I will introduce you to
my friend, Mr. Tug Whittle."

"I don't care to know him," the guest replied, somewhat ill-humoredly,
his restless eyes indicating that his thoughts had just returned from a
journey out in the world somewhere, as they finally settled on Tug. "I
don't like his looks."

Tug looked up at this remark, sighted awhile at the guest with his right
eye, and, after swallowing his last mouthful, with an effort, pointed a
finger at him, to intimate that he was about to speak.

"Did you see any ragged or sore-eyed people get off the train to-night?"
he inquired, in a deep bass voice, still pointing with his bony finger,
and aiming along it with his little eye.

The guest acted as though he had a mind not to reply, but at last said
he was the only passenger for Davy's Bend.

"I was expecting more of my wife's kin," Tug said, with an angry snort,
taking down his finger to turn over the meat-bone, and using his eye to
look for a place not yet attacked. "Come to think about it, though, they
are not likely to arrive by rail; they will probably reach town on foot,
in the morning. They are too poor to ride. I wish they were too sick to
walk, damn them. Do you happen to know what the word ornery means?"

The guest acted as though he had a mind not to reply again, but finally
shook his head, after some hesitation.

"Well," the ugly fellow said, "if you stay here,--which I don't believe
you will, for you look too much like a good one to remain here
long,--I'll introduce you not only to the word but to the kin. After you
have seen my wife's relations, you'll fight when anybody calls you
ornery."

Finding a likely spot on the meat-bone at the conclusion of this speech,
Mr. Whittle went on with his eating, and was silent.

"There are a great many people who do not like Tug's looks," the clerk
went on to say, without noticing the interruption, and looking
admiringly at that individual, as though he could not understand why he
was not more generally admired; "so it is not surprising that you are
suspicious of him. I do not say it with reference to you, for you do not
know him; but my opinion is that the people dislike him because of his
mind. He knows too much to suit them, and they hate him."

By this time Tug had wiped up everything before him, and after
transferring the grease and pie crumbs from his lips and beard to his
sleeve, the three men were silent, listening to the rain on the outside,
and taking turns in looking out of the windows into the darkness.

"I suppose the shutters are rattling dismally up at The Locks to-night,"
Silas Davy said. "And the windows! Lord, how the windows must rattle!
I've been told that when there isn't a breath of air the shutters and
windows at The Locks go on at a great rate, and they must be at it
to-night, for I have never known it to be so oppressive and still
before."

"And the light," Tug suggested, removing his aim from the stranger a
moment, and directing it toward Davy.

"Yes, the light, of course," Davy assented. "They say--I don't know who
says it in particular, but everybody says it in general--that on a night
like this a light appears in the lower rooms, where it disappears and is
seen in the front hall; then in the upper hall, and then in an upper
room, where it goes out finally, as if someone had been sitting
down-stairs, in the dark, and had struck a light to show him up to bed.
There is no key to the room where the light disappears, and those who
visit the house are not permitted to enter it. I have never seen the
light myself, but I have been to the house on windy, noisy days, and it
was as silent on the inside as a tomb. The windows and shutters being
noisy on quiet nights, I suppose they feel the need of a rest when the
wind is blowing."

The guest was paying a good deal of attention, and Davy went on talking.

"The place has not been occupied in a great many years. The man who
built it, and occupied it, and who owns it now, made money in Davy's
Bend, and went away to the city to live, where he has grown so rich that
he has never sent for the plunder locked up in the rooms; I suppose it
is not good enough for him now, for I am told that he is very proud. He
has been trying to sell the place ever since, but Davy began going down
hill about that time, and the people have been kicking it so sturdily
ever since that nobody will take it. And I don't blame them, for it is
nothing more than a nest for ghosts, even if it is big, and
respectable-looking, and well furnished."

The guest's mind is evidently in Davy's Bend now, for he has been paying
close attention to the clerk as he talks in a modest easy fashion, even
neglecting his first ambition to stare Mr. Whittle out of countenance.
It may be that he is in need of an establishment, and is looking out for
one; but certainly he takes considerable interest in the place Silas
Davy referred to as The Locks.

"Who has the renting of the house?" he interrupted the clerk to inquire.

The clerk got up from his chair, and, walking over to that portion of
the room where the counter was located, took from a nail a brass ring
containing a number of keys of about the same size.

"Here are the keys," Davy said, returning to his chair, and holding them
up for inspection. "Number one admits you to the grounds through the
iron gate; number two opens the front door; number three, any of the
rooms leading off from the hall down stairs; number four, any of the
rooms opening off from the hall up stairs; and number five and number
six, any of the other rooms. _We_ are the agents, I believe, though am
not certain; but anyway we keep the keys. The place came to be known as
The Locks because of the number of keys that were given to those who
applied to see it, and The Locks it has been ever since."

The stranger rose to his feet, and paced up and down the room awhile,
thinking all the time so intently that it occurred to Tug that he was
puzzled to decide whether his family would consent to live in a place
which had the reputation of being visited by a ghost carrying a light.

"I would like to see this house," he said, stopping in his walk finally,
and addressing Davy. "I may become a purchaser. Will you show me the way
to it, now?"

Up to this time, since polishing the meat-bone, Tug had occupied himself
by aiming at the stranger, but as if the suggestion of a walk up to The
Locks was pleasing to him, he jumped to his feet, and walked towards the
door. Silas Davy made no other reply than to put the ring containing the
keys on his arm, and, putting out the light, the three men stepped out
into the rain together.

The Locks appear to be located towards the river; not down where the
railway train stops to take people on who desire to get away from Davy's
Bend, but higher up the street running at right angles in front of the
hotel, for the men walk in that direction, Davy and Tug ahead carrying
the lantern, with their arms locked together, and the stranger behind,
who thinks the two men are a queer pair, for they seem to enjoy being
out in the rain, and one of them, the smaller one, laughs frequently but
timidly, while the other snorts in a manner which the stranger
recognizes as signifying pleasure.

Occasionally they stop to light the stranger's steps on reaching a
particularly bad place, and when he has passed it they go on again; up
hill and down, toward the river, and when they stop at last, it is so
dark that the stranger does not know that they have reached a stone wall
with an iron gate opening into an enclosure, until he comes entirely up
to them.

The lock turns heavily, and Tug condescends to hold the lantern while
Silas applies both hands to the key. Upon the inside a long stone walk,
leading toward the house, then a flight of stone steps, and a porch is
reached, where they are out of the rain.

Silas selects a key from the collection he carries on his arm, and, once
more calling upon Tug to hold the light, opens the door, and they all
enter the wide hall.

Considering that the house has not been occupied for eight years, it is
in good condition. As they walk through the different rooms, Davy
opening the doors from the bunch of keys on his arm, the stranger
notices that they are decently furnished, everything being plain and
substantial; and he hears for the first time, while standing in front of
the door that is not to be opened, that an old lady and her
grand-daughter live on the grounds in a detached building, who, when she
sees fit, airs and dusts the rooms, and that she has lived there for
eight years, in the pay of the owner. This explains the good condition
of everything, and they continue their investigation by the dim light of
the lantern.

There are ten rooms in all, counting the two in the attic, all of them
furnished, from the kitchen to the parlor; and the stranger is so well
pleased that he inquires the rent asked, and the purchase price. Silas
Davy is not certain as to either, but promises that his proprietor will
give full particulars in the morning.

"I will take the house," the stranger finally says, after a lamp has
been found and lighted, and seating himself in a chair as an intimation
that he is ready for the two men to depart. "If I do not buy it I will
rent it, and I will stay here to-night."

Tug is willing to depart at once, but Silas lags behind, and seems to be
ill at ease.

"Have you any objection to giving me your name, that I may record it at
the house?" he respectfully asks.

"Oh, my name," the stranger returns. "Sure enough; I had forgotten
that."

It seems to have escaped him, for while Silas stands waiting, he studies
for a long time, contracting his brow until he looks so fierce and
savage that Tug, who has been aiming at him from the door, steps out
into the hall to get out of the way.

"You may register me as Allan Dorris," he said at last, getting up from
his chair, and looking confused, "from Nowhere-in-Particular. It is not
important where I am from, so long as I am responsible; and I will
convince your proprietor of that in the morning. You will oblige me if
you will step over to the quarters of the old lady you spoke of, and
inform her that there is a new master at The Locks, and that he has
taken possession. When you return I will show you out."

"I neglected to mention," Silas says, after making a note of what the
stranger has said on an envelope, "that you can open and close the gate
from this room, and lock and unlock it. There is also a speaking-tube
leading from this room, whereby you can converse with persons on the
outside. I will call you up when I go out. It is located here, behind
the door."

The two men step over to examine it, and Tug creeps in to look too, and
after sighting at it awhile returns to the hall.

The apparatus consists of an iron lever, with a show of chains running
over pulleys and disappearing through the floor, and a speaking-tube.
Silas explains that when the lever is up the gate is open, and when it
is down the gate is shut and locked. Both men try it, and conclude that,
with a little oil; it will work very well, leaving it open so that the
men may pass out.

There being no further excuse for remaining, Silas and his ugly friend
start down the stairs, the stranger holding the light at the top; and
after they have passed out of the door and slammed it to work the spring
lock, and tried it to see that it is locked, Allan Dorris returns to the
room they have just left.

The grate in the room is filled with wood, and there is kindling at the
bottom, probably put there years before, judging by the dust; and the
stranger lights this, intending to dry his wet clothing. While about it
there is a whistle from the speaking-tube, and going over to it and
replying, a sepulchral voice comes to him from somewhere to the effect
that Mrs. Wedge, the housekeeper, is delighted to hear that the house is
to be occupied at last; that she will call upon the new master in the
morning to pay her respects, as well as to make her arrangements for the
future; and, good night.

The stranger says good night in return, pulls the lever down, which
closes and locks the gate, and returns to the fire, which is burning
brightly by this time.

"Allan Dorris, from Nowhere-in-Particular," he mutters after he is
seated, and while watching his steaming garments. There is an amused
look on his face at first, as he repeats the name, but a frown soon
takes its place, that grows blacker as he crouches down into his chair,
and looks at the fire.

At length he seems to tire of his thoughts, for he gets up and walks the
floor, pausing occasionally to look curiously at the pictures on the
walls, or at the carpet, or at the furniture. If he returns to his
chair, the frown appears on his face again, and once more he walks to
get rid of his thoughts.

This is continued so long that the darkness finally gets tired of
looking in at the windows, and hurries away at the approach of day. From
time to time, as the light increases, he steps to the window and looks
out; and when walking away, after a long look at Davy's Bend through the
morning mist, he mutters:--

"Allan Dorris, if you are from Nowhere-in-Particular, you are at home
again."




CHAPTER II.

THE LOCKS.


From the southern windows of The Locks, Allan Dorris looked with curious
interest the day after his arrival, and the week and the month
following, for he remained there for that length of time without going
out, except to walk along the country roads for exercise, where he
occasionally met wagons containing men who cursed the town they were
leaving for its dullness.

The dwellings of Davy's Bend were built upon hills sloping toward the
little valley where the business houses were, and which poured a flood
of water and mud into the long streets in rainy weather through gaping
gullies of yellow clay. The rains seemed to be so fierce and frequent
there that in the course of time they had cut down the streets, leaving
the houses perching on hills above them, which were reached by flights
of steps; and this impression was strengthened by the circumstance that
it was a wet time, for it rained almost incessantly.

The houses were a good way apart, so far as he could see from his
southern windows; and this circumstance caused him to imagine that the
people were suspicious of each other, and he noticed that while many of
them had once been of a pretending character, they were now generally
neglected; and that there was a quiet air everywhere that reminded him
of the country visited in his walks.

The houses themselves appeared to look at him with a cynical air, as the
people did, as if to intimate that he need not hope to surprise them
with his importance, or with anything he might do, for their quiet
streets had once resounded to the tread of busy feet, and they had seen
strangers before, and knew the ways of men. Some of the dwellings
perching on the hills, deserted now except as to bats and owls,
resembled unfortunate city men in a village; for there was a conspicuous
air of decayed propriety about them, and an attempt at respectability
that would have been successful but for lack of means. These in
particular, he thought, made faces at him, and sneered as he passed
through their part of the town in his walks to and from the country
roads.

Several times he heard parties of men passing his house at night,
talking loudly to make themselves heard above the jolting of their
wagons; and these usually had something to say about the new owner of
The Locks, from which he imagined that there was much speculation in the
town concerning him. The house in which he lived was such a gloomy
place, and he was shut up in it alone for such a length of time, that he
came to listen to the sound of human voices with pleasure, and often
went to the windows to watch for the approach of wagons, that he might
hear the voices of their occupants; for there were no solitary
travellers that way, and while the men may have been dissatisfied with
themselves and their surroundings, they at least had company. He longed
to join these parties, and go with them to their homes, for he thought
the companionship of rough men and their families would be preferable to
the stillness of his house; but the wagons drove on, and Allan Dorris
returned to his walk across the room, and back again.

From the window most patronized by him in his lonely hours he could see
a long stretch of the river, and at a point opposite the town a steam
ferry was moored. Usually smoke was to be seen flying from its pipes
during the middle hours of the day, as it made a few lazy trips from one
shore to the other; but occasionally it was not disturbed at all, and
sat quietly upon the water like a great bird from morning until night.

From making excursions about his own premises, as a relief from doing
nothing, he found that the house in which he lived was situated in a
wooded tract of several acres in extent, entirely surrounded by a high
stone wall, with two entrances; one in front, by means of a heavy iron
gate, which looked like a prison door, and a smaller one down by the
stable. The stable, which was built of brick, had been occupied by
pigeons without objection for so many years that they were now very
numerous, and protested in reels and whirls and dives and dips in the
air against the new owner coming among them at all; perhaps they
imagined that in time they would be permitted to occupy the house
itself, and rear their young in more respectable quarters. There were a
few fruit and ornamental trees scattered among the others, but they had
been so long neglected as to become almost as wild as the native oaks
and hickories. Occasionally a tall poplar shot its head above the
others, and in his idleness Allan Dorris imagined that they were trying
to get away from the dampness below, for in the corners, and along the
stone wall, there was such a rank growth of vines and weeds that he was
almost afraid to enter the dank labyrinth himself. There was a quaking
asp, too, which was always shivering at thought of the danger that might
be concealed in the undergrowth at its feet, and even the stout
hickories climbed a good way into the air to insure their safety.

Close to the south wall, so close that he could almost touch it, stood a
stone church, with so many gables that there seemed to be one for every
pigeon from the stable, and on certain days of the week someone came
there to practise on the organ. At times the music was exquisite, and in
his rambles about the place he always went down by the south wall to
listen for the organ, and if he heard it he remained there until the
music ceased. The music pleased him so much, and was such a comfort in
his loneliness, that he did not care to see the player, having in his
mind a spectacled and disagreeable person whose appearance would rob the
spell of its charm; therefore he kept out of his way, though, on the
days when the music could be expected, Dorris was always in his place,
impatiently waiting for it to commence. There was something in the
playing with which he seemed to have been acquainted all his life; it
may have been only the expression of weariness and sad melancholy that
belongs to all these instruments, but, however it was, he regarded the
organ as an old acquaintance, and took much pleasure in its company even
when it was silent, for it occupied a great stone house like himself,
and had nothing to do.

Between the stable and the house was the residence of Mrs. Wedge, the
housekeeper--a building that had originally been a detached kitchen, but
the cunning of woman had transformed the two rooms into a pleasant and
cozy place. This looked home-like and attractive, as there were vines
over it and flowers about the door; and here Allan Dorris found himself
lingering from day to day, for he seemed to crave companionship, though
he was ashamed to own it and go out and seek it. Instead of dining in
the stone house, he usually sat down at Mrs. Wedge's table, which he
supplied with a lavish hand, and lingered about until he thought it
necessary to go away, when he tried to amuse himself in the yard by
various exercises, which were probably recollections of his younger
days; but he failed at it, and soon came back to ask the motherly old
housekeeper odd questions, and laugh good-naturedly at her odd answers.

A highly respectable old lady was Mrs. Wedge, in her black cloth dress
and snowy white cap, and no one was more generally respected in Davy's
Bend. During his life Mr. Wedge had been a strolling agent, never
stopping in a town more than a week; and thus she lived and travelled
about, always hoping for a quiet home, until her good-natured but
shiftless husband took to his bed one day, and never got up again,
leaving as her inheritance his blessing and a wild son of thirteen, who
knew all about the ways of the world, but nothing of industry. Hearing
of Davy's Bend soon after as a growing place,--which was a long time
ago, for Davy's Bend was not a growing place now,--she apprenticed her
son to a farmer, and entered the service of the owner of The Locks,
under whose roof she had since lived.

The wild son did not take kindly to farming, and ran away; and his
mother did not hear of him again until four years after she was living
alone in The Locks, when a little girl five years old arrived,
accompanied by a letter, stating that the son had lived a wanderer like
his father, and that the child's mother being dead, he hoped Mrs. Wedge
would take care of his daughter Betty until the father made his fortune.
But the father never made his fortune; anyway, he never called for the
child, and Mrs. Wedge had found in her grand-daughter a companion and a
comfort, passing her days in peace and quiet. Therefore when the new
owner offered her a home there, and wages besides, in return for her
agreement to undertake his small services, she accepted--having become
attached to the place--and lived on as before.

The house itself, which was built of stone, and almost square, contained
ten rooms; four of about the same size below, and four exactly like them
above, and two in the attic or half story in the roof. There were wide
halls up stairs and down, and out of the room that Allan Dorris had
selected for his own use, and which was on the corner looking one way
toward the gate in front, and the other toward the town, began a covered
stairway leading to the attic.

In this room he sat day after day, and slept night after night, until he
almost became afraid of the quiet that he believed he coveted when he
came to Davy's Bend; and at times he looked longingly toward the
speaking-tube behind the door, hoping it would whistle an announcement
that a visitor had arrived; for his habit of sitting quietly looking at
nothing, until his thoughts became so disagreeable that he took long
walks about the place to rid himself of them, was growing upon him.

But no visitors came to vary the monotony, except the agent on the
morning after his arrival, who received a quarter's rent in advance, and
afterwards named a price so low that Allan Dorris bought the place
outright, receiving credit for the rent already paid.

Had the dark nights that looked in at Allan Dorris's windows, and for
which Davy's Bend seemed to be famous, been able to remark it, there
would have been much mysterious gossip through the town concerning his
strange actions. Whenever he sat down, his eyes were at once fixed on
nothing, and he lost himself in thought; he was oblivious to everything,
and the longer he thought, the fiercer his looks became, until finally
he sprang from his chair and walked violently about, as if his body was
trying to escape from his head, which contained the objectionable
thoughts. At times he would laugh hoarsely, and declare that he was
better off at The Locks than he had ever been before, and that Davy's
Bend was the best place in which he had ever lived; but these
declarations did not afford him peace, for he was soon as gloomy and
thoughtful as ever. That he was ill at ease, the dark nights could have
easily seen had they been blessed with eyes; for the dread of loneliness
grew upon him, and frequently he sent for Mrs. Wedge, confessing to her
that he was lonely, and that she would oblige him by talking, no matter
what it was about.

Mrs. Wedge would politely comply, and in a dignified way relate how, on
her visits to the stores to purchase supplies, great curiosity was
everywhere expressed with reference to the new master of The
Locks,--what business he would engage in; where he came from; and, most
of all, there was a universal opinion that he had bought The Locks for
almost nothing.

"A great many say they would have taken the place at the price
themselves," Mrs. Wedge would continue, smoothing down the folds of her
apron, a habit of which she never tired, "but this is not necessarily
true. The people here never want to buy anything until it is out of the
market; which gives them excuse for grumbling, of which they have great
need, for they have little else to do. I believe the price at which you
took the house was lower than it was ever offered before,--but that is
neither here nor there."

Then Mrs. Wedge would tell of the queer old town, in a quaint way, and
of the people, which amused her employer; and noticing that, in his easy
chair, he seemed to enjoy her company, she would smooth out her apron
once more, and continue:--

"They all agree,"--there would be an amused smile on Mrs. Wedge's face
as she said it,--"they all agree that you do not amount to much, else
you would have gone to Ben's City, instead of coming here. This is
always said of every stranger, for Davy's Bend is so dull that its
people have forgotten their patriotism. I have not heard a good word for
the town in ten years, but it is always being denounced, and cursed, and
ridiculed. I think we despise each other because we do not move to Ben's
City, and we live very much as I imagine the prisoners in a jail do,--in
cursing our home, in lounging, in idle talk, and in expecting that each
one of us will finally be fortunate, while the condition of the others
will grow worse. We are a strange community."

Dorris expressed surprise at the size of the church near The Locks, and
wondered at the deserted houses which he had seen in his walks,
whereupon Mrs. Wedge explained that Davy's Bend was once a prosperous
city, containing five thousand busy people, but it had had bad luck
since; very bad luck, for less than a fifth of that number now remained,
and even they are trying to get away. What is the cause of this decrease
in population? The growth of Ben's City, thirty miles down the river.
The belief which existed at one time that a great town would be built at
Davy's Bend turned out to be a mistake. Ben's City seemed to be the
place; so the people had been going there for a number of years, leaving
Davy's Bend to get along as best it could.

This, and much more, from Mrs. Wedge, until at a late hour she notices
that Dorris is asleep in his chair, probably having got rid of his
thoughts; so she takes up the lamp to retire with it. Holding it up so
that the shade throws the light full upon his face, she remarks to
herself that she is certain he is a good, an honorable, and a safe man,
whoever he is, for she prides herself on knowing something about men,
and arranging the room for the night, although it does not need it, she
goes quietly down the stairs, out at a door in a lower room, and into
her own apartment.




CHAPTER III.

THE FACE AT THE WINDOW.


Allan Dorris sleeps on, unconscious of the darkness peering in at him
from the outside, which is also running riot in the town, and
particularly down by the river, where the crazy houses with their
boarded windows seem to collect shadows during the day for use at night,
robbing the sunlight for the purpose; for there is little brightness and
warmth at Davy's Bend, but much of dampness and hazy atmosphere.

There is light and life down this way; a light in the window of the
wretched house occupied by Mr. Tug Whittle, and all the neighboring
buildings are alive with rats and vermin. Tug occupies his house for the
same reason that the rats occupy theirs, for in this quarter of the town
the tenants pay no rent. Some of the buildings were once busy warehouses
and stores, but they have been turned over to the rats these ten years,
and Tug occupies a little frame one from choice, as he argues that if it
falls down from old age, there will not be so many ruins in which to
bury the tenants. Besides, the big buildings shelter him from the cold
north winds in winter, and do not interfere with the southern breezes
from the river in summer; therefore the faded sign of "T. Whittle, Law
Office," swings in front of the little frame building back from the
street, instead of from the more imposing ones by its side.

Everybody knows Tug Whittle, and admits that he is perfectly harmless
and hopelessly lazy--always excepting Silas Davy, who believes that his
friend is very energetic and dangerous; therefore when Silas is unable
to hold a position because he is a good fellow, or because he spends so
much time at night with Tug that he is unfit for work during the day, he
is also an inhabitant of the little law office, along with the lawyer
and the rats, although it is not much of a law office, for it contains
nothing but a stove, half cooking and half heating, a bed that looks as
though it came from the fourth story of a cheap hotel, a few broken
chairs, a box that is the lawyer's table, and a few other articles
common to a kitchen, all of them second-hand, and very poor.

There is nothing about the place to suggest a law office save the sign
in front, and a single leather-covered book on the inside; a ponderous
volume to which Mr. Whittle applies for everything, including kindling.
Silas has seen him look through it to decide questions in science,
theology, law, and history, and tear leaves out of it with which to
start his fire; and while a cunning man would have guessed that Mr.
Whittle made up his authority, instead of finding it in the book, Silas
Davy, who is not cunning, believes that it is a repository of secrets of
every kind, although it is really a treatise on a law which has been
repealed many years. When Silas so far forgets himself as to mildly
question something his companion has said, Mr. Whittle refers to the
book, and triumphantly proves his position, no difference what it may
be; whereupon the little man feels much humiliated. Mr. Whittle has even
been known to refer to the book to convict his enemies in Davy's Bend of
various offences; and Silas has so much respect for the volume that he
has no trouble in imagining that the den in which Tug lives is not only
a law office, but a repository of profane, political, and sacred
history, to say nothing of the sciences and the town scandal.

Like the rats again, Tug lies by during the day, and goes abroad at
night, for he is seldom seen on the streets until the sun goes down, and
he is not entirely himself until after midnight. Occasionally, on dark,
bad days he is to be seen walking about, but not often, and it is known
that he sleeps most of the day on the rough bed in his rough office. If
he is disturbed by idle boys, which is sometimes the case, he gets up
long enough to drive them away, and returns to his bed until it is dark,
when he yawns and stretches himself, and waits patiently for Silas Davy,
who is due about that hour with his supper.

But for Silas Davy, like the rats again, Tug would be compelled to steal
for a living; for he never works, but Silas believes in him, and admires
him, and whenever he is employed, he saves half of what he gets for his
friend, who eats it, and is not grateful. Indeed, he often looks at
Silas as much as to say that he is not providing for him as well as he
should, whereupon Silas looks downcast and miserable; but, all in all,
they get along very well together.

Up to the present rainy and wet year of our Lord eighteen hundred and no
difference what, Tug has never admired anyone, so far as is known; but
he admires Allan Dorris, the new owner of The Locks, and frequently says
to Silas that "_There_ is a man," at the same time aiming his big eye in
the direction Dorris is supposed to be. There is every reason why Tug
should admire Silas Davy, who is very good to him, but he does not,
except in a way, and which is a very poor way; and there is no reason
why he should admire Allan Dorris, who is suspicious of him, but he
does, and on this night, Silas having arrived early with his supper, he
is killing two birds with one stone, by discussing both at the same
time.

"By the horns of a tough bull," Tug says, which is his way of swearing,
"but there _is_ a man. Muscle, brain, clothes, independence, money;
everything. What, no butter to-night?"

He says this impatiently after running through the package his companion
has brought, and not finding what he was looking for; and Silas humbly
apologizes, saying he could not possibly get it at the hotel.

"Well, no matter," Tug continued in an injured way, using a pickle and
two slices of bread as a sandwich. "It will come around all right some
day. When I come into my rights, I'll have butter to spare. But this
impudent Dorris; I like him. He has the form of an Apollo and the muscle
of a giant. If he should hit you, you would fall so fast that your rings
would fly off your fingers. He's the kind of a man I'd be if I had my
rights."

While Tug is munching away at his supper, Davy remembers how unjust the
people are with reference to these same rights; how they say he has
none, and never will have, except the right to die as soon as possible.
The people say that Tug's wife, the milliner, drove him from her house
because he would not work, and because he was ugly in disposition, as
well as in face and person; that it was soon found out that he was not
so dangerous, after all, when men were talking to him, so they have
regarded him as a harmless but eccentric loafer ever since. Some of the
people believe that Tug does not appear on the streets during the day
for fear of meeting his wife, while others contend that he goes out only
at night because he is up to mischief; but neither class care to
question him about the matter, for he has a mean tongue in his head, and
knows how to defend himself, even though he is compelled to invent facts
for the purpose.

But Davy knows that Tug can tell a very different story, and tell it
well, and he is sure that there will be a genuine sensation when he
finally tells it, and comes into his own.

"What a voice he has, and what a eye," Mr. Whittle goes on to say,
throwing a leg over a chair to be comfortable. "I usually despise a
decent man because I am not one myself, but this fellow--damn him, I
like him."

Silas Davy was the sort of a man who is never surprised at anything. Had
he been told on a dark night that it was raining blood on the outside,
he would not have disputed it, or investigated it, believing that such
storms were common, though they had escaped his observation; therefore
he was not surprised that Tug admired Allan Dorris, although he knew he
had no reason to.

"I have known people to come here and denounce us for a lack of culture
who knew nothing about propriety except to eat pie with a fork," Mr.
Whittle said again; "but this Dorris,--I'll bet he practises the
proprieties instead of preaching them. He don't remind me of the people
who come here and call us ignorant cattle because we do not buy their
daub paintings at extravagant prices, or take lessons from them; _he_
don't look like the cheap fellows who declare that we lack cultivation
because we refuse to patronize their fiddle and pianow concerts,
therefore look out for Dorris. He's a man, sure enough; I'll stake every
dollar I'm worth and my reputation on it."

Although he had neglected to bring butter, the supper Silas had brought
was good enough to put Mr. Whittle in a cheerful humor, and he
continued,--

"The people around here put me in mind of the freaks in a dime museum;
but Dorris's clothes fit him, and he looks well. There are plenty of men
so common that they look shabby in broadcloth, and who are so miserably
shaped that no tailor can fit their bones; but this fellow--he would
look well with a blanket thrown over his shoulders, and running wild.
Hereafter, when I refer to my rights, understand that I would be a
Dorris sort of a fellow were justice done me. Did you bring me a drink?"

Silas produced a flask from his pocket, and while Tug was mixing the
contents with sugar, by means of stirring them together with a spoon in
a tumbler, making a cheerful, tinkling sound the while, he delivered a
stirring temperance lecture to his companion. He did this so often that
Silas regarded himself as a great drunkard, although that was not one of
his failings; but he felt grateful to Tug, who drank a great deal, for
his good advice. He was so mortified to think of his bad habits and
Tug's worthiness, that he turned his face away, unable to reply.

"Dorris reminds me of a young widow two years after the funeral," Mr.
Whittle said, after drinking the dram he had prepared. "Handsome, clean,
well-dressed, and attractive. I have an ambition to be a young widow
myself, but owing to the circumstance that I have been defrauded of my
rights, at present I look like a married woman with six children who
does not get along with her husband. In short, I am slouchy, and
ill-tempered, and generally unattractive, with an old wrapper on, and my
hair down. Ben, come here."

The light in the room was so dim that it had not yet revealed to the
eyes of Silas the form of a boy seated on a low box at the side of the
room farthest from him, who now came over into the rays of the lamp, and
looked timidly at Tug.

Silas knew the boy very well; little Ben Whittle, the son of his friend,
who worked on a farm three miles in the country, and who came to town
occasionally after dark to see Silas, who treated him well, but always
returning in time to be called in the morning; for his employer was a
rough man, and very savage to his horses and cattle and boys. Ben was
dressed in a coat no longer than a jacket, buttoned tightly around his
body, and his pants were so short that they did not nearly touch the
tops of his rough shoes. He wore on his head a crazy old hat, through
the torn top of which his uncombed hair protruded, and altogether he was
such a distressing sight that Davy was always pitying him, although he
was never able to do him much good, except to treat him kindly when he
came to the hotel at long intervals, and give him something to eat.

"Are you hungry?" Tug inquired, looking sharply at the boy, as he stood
cringing before him.

"Yes, sir, if you please."

"Then help yourself," his father roughly returned, crabbed because Ben
had told the truth, and pointing to the table; whereupon the boy went to
nibbling away at the crumbs and bones remaining of the lunch brought by
Silas.

Little Ben was so surprisingly small for a boy of eleven that he was
compelled to stand to reach the crumbs and bones, but his father
regarded him as a brawny youth as tough as dogwood.

"When I was a boy of his age," Tug said to Davy, "they dressed me up in
good clothes, and admired me, and thought I was about the cutest thing
on earth, but I wasn't."

Davy looked up as if to inquire what he really was at Ben's age, and
received an answer.

"I was an impudent imp, and detested by all the neighbors; that's the
truth. My father used to go around town, and tell the people the cute
things I said, instead of making me go to work, and teaching me
industry; but the people didn't share his enthusiasm, and referred to me
as that 'worthless Whittle boy.' Ben, what can you do?"

"I can cut corn, sir, and drive the team, and plough a little," the boy
replied, startled by his father's loud voice.

"Anything else?"

"I can't remember everything, sir. I do as much as I can."

Little Ben did not look as though he could be of much use on a farm, for
he was very thin, and very weak-looking; but apparently this did not
occur to his father, who continued to stare at him as though he wondered
at his strength.

"Think of that, will you," Tug continued, addressing Silas again. "He
can cut corn, and plough, and all that, and only eleven years old. Why,
when he gets to be thirteen or fourteen he will whip old Quade, and take
possession of the farm! What could I do when I was eleven years old?
Nothing but whine, and I was always at it, although I was brought up in
a house with three-ply carpets on the floor, and always treated well. I
was treated _too_ well, and I intend to make a man out of Ben by seeing
that he is treated as mean as possible. Look here, you," he added
turning toward the boy, "when old Quade fails to lick you twice a day,
get your hat and run for me; and I'll try and make you so miserable that
you'll amount to something as a man."

It was the opinion of Davy that Ben was meanly enough treated already,
not only by his father, but by the farmer with whom he worked; for no
one seemed to be kind to the boy except himself, and he made his long
journeys to town for no other reason than to hear Davy's gentle voice.
But Davy was afraid to say this to Tug, and in his weakness could do
nothing to help him. In the present instance he looked out of the
window.

"You are a fortunate boy in one respect, at least," the admiring father
said to his son again. "Your mother hates you, and you have a prospect
of becoming a man. Many a boy at your age has a good bed to sleep on,
and plenty to eat, and will grow up into a loafer; but here you are on
the high road to greatness. Had my father been a wise man, as your
father is, I might have been a storekeeper now instead of what I am;
therefore don't let me hear you complain--I'll give you something to
complain about if I do. The ways of Providence may be a little
mysterious to you now, you robust rascal; but when the Hon. Benjamin
Whittle goes to Congress he will tell the reporter who writes him up
that his father was a kind, thoughtful man who did a great deal for
him."

There was something more than the darkness peering in at the window when
Silas Davy looked that way; a good deal more--a strange man's face,
which was flattened against the lower pane. At the moment that Silas saw
him, the man seemed to be using his eyes in investigating the other
corner of the room, for he did not know for a moment that he was
detected. When his gaze met Silas Davy's, he quickly drew away from the
window, and disappeared; but not until Silas remarked that it was a
swarthy, malicious face, and that cunning and determination were
expressed in its features. Silas was not at all astonished at the
appearance, as was his custom; but when he looked at Tug again, to pay
respectful attention to his next observation, he saw that he, too, had
seen the face, for he was preparing to go out.

"Another stranger," Tug said, as he looked for his hat. "We are becoming
a great town."

Silas asked no questions, but when his companion stepped into the dirty
street, leaving little Ben alone, he followed, and walked a few paces
behind him, as he hurried along in the direction of the inhabited
portion of the town. As they neared the dismal lamps, and while they
were yet in the darkness, they saw the figure of a tall man, enveloped
in what seemed to be a waterproof cloak, turn into the main street,
which ran parallel with the river, and walk toward the hotel where Davy
was employed. But the man wearing the cloak did not stop there, except
to examine a scrap of paper under the light; after which he turned
again, and walked in the direction of The Locks. Silas and his companion
followed, as rapidly as they could, for there were no lights now, and
they stumbled over the hills, and into the gullies, until The Locks gate
was reached, which they found ajar.

This strange circumstance did not deter them from entering at once,
though quietly and with caution, and together they crept up the
pavement, and up the front steps, through the front door, which was wide
open, and up the stairway, until they stopped in front of the door
leading into the room occupied by Allan Dorris.

Everything was still; and as they stood there in the dark, listening,
Tug was surprised to find that Davy was in front of him, whereas he had
believed that he was in his rear. Likewise Silas Davy was surprised, for
while he was sure that Tug had passed him, and gone lightly down the
stairs, a moment afterward he put his hand on him, and knew that he was
bending over, and listening at the keyhole.

But nothing could be heard except the regular breathing of Allan Dorris
as he slept in his chair, although they now realized that the mysterious
stranger had passed them on the stairs, and was on the outside; so they
crept down the stairs, and into the street, closing the door and gate
after them.

Over the hills and into the hollows again; so they travelled back to
their retreat down by the river, where they greatly surprised little Ben
and the rats by opening the door suddenly and walking in upon them.

Silas dropped down on the bed, and Tug into a chair, where they remained
a long time without speaking.

"What do you make of it?" Tug inquired at last.

"Nothing," Silas returned.

There was another long silence, which was finally broken by Tug
remarking,--

"I make nothing of it, myself. We are agreed for once."




CHAPTER IV.

DAVY'S BEND.


It was generally agreed among the people of Davy's Bend--a thousand in
number, the census said; six hundred they said themselves, for they
changed the rule, and exaggerated their own situation unfavorably--that
the town possessed more natural advantages than any other in the world.

They demonstrated this with great cleverness, by means of maps drawn on
brown wrapping-paper inside of the stores, and, after looking at their
maps, they triumphantly exclaimed, with a whack of their fists on the
counter, "There are the figures; and figures won't lie." But in spite of
their maps showing valleys occupied with railroads (which Capital
neglected to build), Ben's City, below them, continued to prosper,
whereas Davy's Bend continued to go steadily down the hill.

The people did little else than wonder at this, and curse Capital
because it did not locate in a town where nature was lavish in the
matter of location, instead of going to a place where it would always
find the necessity of contending against odds confronting it. Such a
town was Ben's City, in the estimation of those living at Davy's Bend;
but they must have been mistaken, for great houses and institutions grew
up where little had been planted, and men with money trampled upon each
other in their mad haste to take advantage of the prosperity that seemed
to be in the air. Those who drew the maps declared that a crash was soon
to come, when the capitalists who did not know their own interests would
trample upon each other in their haste to get away; but those who bought
Ben's City property, no difference at what price, soon sold out again at
an advance; and the prosperity of the place was quite phenomenal.

Never was Capital so thoroughly hated as in Davy's Bend. It was cursed a
thousand times a day, and shown to be fickle and foolish and ungrateful;
for evidences of these weaknesses on the part of Capital abounded on
every hand. There were railroads to be built out of Davy's Bend that
would pay immensely, as had been demonstrated times without number by
the local paper; but Capital stubbornly refused to build them,
preferring to earn a beggarly per cent elsewhere. There were
manufactories to be built in Davy's Bend that would make their owners
rich, as every child knew; but Capital, after a full investigation, was
so dull that it could not see the opportunity. The town was alive with
opportunities for profitable investments, but Capital, with a mean and
dogged indifference, refused to come to Davy's Bend; therefore Capital
was hated, and bullied, and cursed, and denounced; and it was generally
agreed that it deserved no better fate than to go to ruin in the general
crash that would finally overtake Ben's City.

The people of Davy's Bend were a good deal like a grumbling and idle
man, who spends the time which should be devoted to improving his
condition to grumbling about his own ill luck and the good luck of his
industrious rival, who is steadily prospering; and as men frequently
believe that the fates are against them when they are themselves their
only opposition, so it was generally believed in this wretched little
town that some sort of a powerful and alert goddess was in league with
Ben's City. While they readily admitted their own points of advantage,
even to the extent of giving themselves more credit than they deserved,
they refused to be equally fair with their competitor, as men do, and
contended, with an ignorant persistency, that Ben's City was prosperous
because of "luck," whereas they should have known that there is no such
thing, either good or bad.

But, in course of time, when they found that they would always be in the
rear, no difference whether they liked it or not, the people of the
Bend, in order to more thoroughly denounce their own town for its lack
of ability to attract Capital, began to exaggerate the importance of
Ben's City. A four-story building there became seven stories high, and
those who visited the place vied with each other in giving vivid and
untruthful accounts of its growth and prosperity on their return; all of
which their acquaintances repeated over and over, though they knew it to
be untrue, even adding to the exaggerated statements, in order to bully
their own meek town.

Probably they were not proud of the greatness of their rival; for they
talked of it as a cowardly man might exaggerate the strength of the
fellow who had whipped him, using it as an excuse for defeat. Indeed,
they were proud of nothing, except their own accounts of the greatness
of Davy's Bend a long while before, when the huge warehouses were
occupied, and before Capital had combined against it; of this they
talked in a boastful way, magnifying everything so much that many of the
listeners who had not heard the beginning of the conversation imagined
that they were talking of Ben's City; but of bettering their present
condition they had no thought,--by common consent it was so very bad
that attempts to become prosperous again were useless, so the Bend was a
little worse off every year, like an old and unsuccessful man.

Most of the business men of Davy's Bend had been clerks in the days of
the town's prosperity, making their own terms when their energetic
employers wanted to get away, and in spite of the general dullness and
lack of success, they entertained very good opinions of themselves; for
no difference what a citizen's misfortunes were, he loaded them all on
the town, and thus apologized for his own lack of ability. But for the
circumstance that he was tied to Davy's Bend, he would have been great
and distinguished; they all said the same thing, and in order to get his
own story believed, every man found it necessary to accept the
explanations of the others, or pretend to; so it happened that the
people did not hold themselves responsible for anything,--the town in
which they lived was to blame for everything that was disagreeable, and
was denounced accordingly.

The esteem with which the people regarded themselves was largely due to
the manner in which they were referred to in the local paper, a ribald
folio appearing once a week. None of the business men were advertisers,
but they all gave the publisher free pardon if he referred to them in
complimentary terms in his reading columns, and sent in his bill. Thus,
the merchant who did not own the few goods he displayed was often
referred to as a merchant prince, with an exceedingly shrewd business
head on his shoulders. Sometimes notices of this character were left
standing from week to week by the shiftless editor; a great number of
them would occasionally get together on the same page, referring to
different men as the shrewdest, the wisest, the most energetic, etc.;
and it was very ridiculous, except to the persons concerned, who
believed that the people read the notices with great pleasure.

So great was the passion for puffery among them that designing men who
heard of it came along quite frequently, and wrote the people up in
special publications devoted to that kind of literature. There would be
a pretence that the special edition was to be devoted to the town, but
it really consisted of a few lines at the beginning, stating that Davy's
Bend had more natural advantages than any other town in the world, and
four pages of puffs of the people, at so much per line; whereupon the
men made fun of all the notices except their own, believing that its
statements were true, and generally accepted as a part of the town's
history. A few of those who were able had engravings inserted, and the
puff writers, in order to make the notices and bills as large as
possible, told how long and how often the subjects had been married; how
many children they had, together with their names, where they came from,
and much other mild information of this character.

It was known that many of the complimentary sketches were written by the
persons to whom they referred; but while Harrisonfield, the grocer, gave
wide circulation to the fact that Porterfield, of the dry-goods store,
had referred to himself as an intellectual giant, and a business man of
such sterling ability that he had received flattering offers to remove
to Ben's City, he did not know that Porterfield was proving the same
indiscretion with reference to himself.

Every new man who wrote up the town in this manner was more profuse with
compliments of the people than his predecessor had been; and finally the
common language was inadequate to describe their greatness, and they
longed for somebody to come along who could "write," and who could fully
explain how much each one was doing for the town; but although they all
professed to be doing a great deal constantly for Davy's Bend, there was
no reason to believe that any of them were accomplishing anything in
this direction, for it could not have been duller than it was in the
year of our Lord just referred to.

But there was an exception to this rule, as there is said to be to all
others,--Thompson Benton, the merchant; the dealer in everything, as the
advertisements on his wrapping-paper stated, for he advertised nowhere
else. But he was reliable and sensible, as well as stout and surly; so
it was generally conceded that he was the foremost citizen of the Bend.

Not that he made a pretence to this distinction; old Thompson was modest
as well as capable, and whatever good was said of him came from the
people themselves. Had there been new people coming to Davy's Bend
occasionally, it is possible that old Thompson would not have been the
leading citizen, for it was said that he "improved on acquaintance," and
that people hated the ground he walked on until they had known him a
dozen years or more, and found out his sterling virtues; but they had
all known him a great many years, and therefore admired him in spite of
themselves.

Thompson Benton had been a resident of the town in the days of its
prosperity, and ranked with the best of those who had moved away; but he
preferred to remain, since he had become attached to his home, and
feared that he could not find one which would suit him equally well
elsewhere. Besides, he owned precious property in the Davy's Bend
cemetery, and lavished upon it the greatest care. Hard though he was in
his transactions with men, the memory of his wife was sacred to him; and
many believed that, had she lived, he would have been less plain-spoken
and matter-of-fact. This devotion was well known; and when the people
found it necessary to forgive him for a new eccentricity,--for it was
necessary to either forgive him or fight him,--they said he had never
recovered his spirits since the day a coffin was driven up to his house.

His store was always open at seven in the morning, and the proprietor
always opened it himself, with a great iron key that looked as venerable
and substantial as the hale old gentleman whose companion it had been so
many years; for it was not a key of the new sort, that might lock up a
trifling man's affairs, but a key that seemed to say as plainly as could
be that it had money and notes and valuable goods of many kinds in its
charge. At six in the evening his store was closed, and the proprietor
turned the key, and put it into his pocket. At noon he ate his frugal
dinner while seated on a high stool at his desk, and he had been heard
to say that he had not eaten at home at midday in fifteen years; for on
Sundays he dined in state at five o'clock.

There were no busy days in Davy's Bend, therefore he got along without a
clerk, and managed his affairs so well that, in spite of the dulness of
which there was such general complaint, he knew that he was a little
richer at the close of every day, and that he was probably doing better
than many of his old associates who were carrying on business with a
great deal of noise and display in Ben's City. Certainly he was reputed
to be rich, and those who were less industrious said that he should have
retired years before, and given others a chance.

Thompson Benton was known as a plain-spoken man, and if he thought one
of his customers had acted dishonestly with him, he said so at the first
opportunity, and gruffly hoped it wouldn't happen again; by which he was
understood to mean that if it _did_ happen again, there would be a
difficulty in which the right would triumph. Indeed, he had been known
to throw men out of the front door in a very rough manner, two and three
at a time; but the people always said he was right, and so it usually
turned out, for he was never offended without cause. If an impostor came
to the town, the people were fully revenged if he called at Benton's
store, for the proprietor told him what he thought of him, and in
language so plain that it was always understood.

Thompson Benton's principal peculiarity was his refusal to be a fool.
The men who threatened to leave the town because they were not
appreciated received no petting from him; indeed, he told them to go,
and try and find a place where they would not grumble so much. The
successors of the business men who had moved away were always trying to
invent new methods as an evidence of their ability, and some of them did
not pay their debts because that was an old, though respectable, custom;
they rejected everything old, no matter how acceptable it had proved
itself, and got along in an indifferent manner with methods invented by
themselves, though the methods of their inventing were usually lame and
unsatisfactory. For such foolishness as this old Thompson had no
charity, as he believed in using the experience of others to his own
profit; so he raised his voice against the customs of the town, and
though he was usually abused for it, it was finally acknowledged that he
was right.

But notwithstanding his austere manner, the people had confidence in old
Thompson, and many of the town disputes were left to him. If the people
had spare money, they asked the privilege of leaving it in his iron safe
(which had belonged to the last bank that moved away), and took his
receipt for it. When they wanted it again, it was always ready; and if
the Ben's City cracksmen ever came that way to look at the safe, they
concluded that the proprietor would prove an ugly customer, for it was
never disturbed.

His family consisted of a maiden sister almost as old and odd as
himself, and his daughter Annie, who had been motherless since she was
five years old. The people said that old Thompson never smiled during
the day except when his pretty daughter came in, and that his only
recreation was in her society during two hours in the evening, when she
read to him, or played, or sang. They were all certain that he was
"wrapped up" in her, and it was also agreed that this devotion was not
without cause; for a better girl or a prettier girl than Annie Benton
was not to be found in all the country round.

The house in which he lived was as stout as brick and mortar could make
it; for the people said that he inspected every brick and stick as it
was used; and when it was completed, his prudish sister, whom he
referred to as the "Ancient Maiden," was equally careful in the
furnishing, so that it was a very good house, and kept with scrupulous
neatness. The Ancient Maiden's drafts were always honored, for nothing
was too good for Thompson Benton's home; and those who went there never
forgot the air of elegant comfort which pervaded everything. Though
Thompson Benton went down town in the morning with the men who worked by
the day, and carried a lunch basket, he dined in the evening in state,
surrounded by silver and china both rich and rare; though he worked ten
hours a day, and ate a lunch at noon, he slept at night in a bed and in
a room which would have rested a king; and his house was as good as any
man's need be.

Very early in life Annie Benton learned, somehow, that it had been one
of her father's pleasures, when he came home at night, to listen to her
mother's piano-playing, when that excellent lady was alive; and,
resolving to supply the vacant place, she studied so industriously with
the poor teachers the town afforded that at fifteen she was complimented
by frequent invitations to play for the glum and plain-spoken merchant.
If she selected something frivolous, and played it in bad taste or time,
and was not invited to play again for a long while, she understood that
her music did not please him, and studied to remedy her fault. In course
of time she found out what he wanted, though he never gave her advice or
suggestion in reference to it; and he had amply repaid her for all the
pains she had been to by saying once, after she had played for him half
an hour in a dark room, while he rested on a sofa near her, that she was
growing more like her mother every day.

"There were few ladies like your mother, Annie," old Thompson would say,
when the girl thanked him for his appreciation. "It pleases me that you
remind me of her, and if you become as good a woman as she was, it will
be very remarkable, for you have had no mother, poor child, to direct
you in her way."

Annie would try harder than ever, after this, to imitate the virtues of
the dead woman, and bothered the Ancient Maiden a great deal to find out
what she was like. She was not a drone, that much was certain; therefore
the daughter was not, and tried to be as useful in the hive as she
imagined her mother had been, in every way in which a worthy woman
distinguishes herself.

In like manner the girl learned to read to please her father, and every
day he brought home with him something he had come into possession of
during the day, and which he wanted read; a book, a pamphlet, or a
marked paragraph in a newspaper,--he seemed to read nothing himself
except business letters; but none of these, or any mention of his
affairs, ever came into his home.

Annie Benton's mother had been organist in the big stone church near The
Locks, which the first residents had built in the days of their
prosperity, and the girl learned from family friends that her father
regularly attended both services on Sunday, to hear the music; perhaps
there were certain effects possible on the great organ which were not
possible on a more frivolous instrument; but it was certain that he
never attended after her death until two or three years after his
daughter became the organist, and after she was complimented on every
hand for her voluntaries before and after the services, and for her good
taste in rendering the hymns; for old Thompson was not a religious man,
though he practised the principles of religion much better than many of
those who made professions.

But one summer morning the girl saw her father come in, and occupy the
seat he had occupied before her mother's death, and regularly after that
he came early and went away late. Except to say to her once, as they
walked home together, that she was growing more like her mother every
day, he made no reference to the subject, though he pretended to wonder
what the matter was when she threw her arms about his neck after they
reached the house, and burst into tears.

One Sunday afternoon he had said to her that if she was going down to
the church to practise, he would accompany her, and after that, every
Sunday afternoon he was invited to go with her, although she never had
practised on Sunday afternoons before. Arriving there, an old negro
janitor pumped the organ, and the girl played until she thought her
father was tired, when they returned home again, where he spent the
remainder of the day alone; thinking, no doubt, of his property in the
cemetery, and of the sad day when it became necessary to make the
purchase.




CHAPTER V.

A TROUBLED FANCY.


It was Annie Benton's playing which Allan Dorris occasionally heard as
he wandered about the yard of The Locks, for she came to the church
twice a week in order that she might pretend to practise on Sunday
afternoons, and please her father's critical ear with finished playing;
and Dorris was so much impressed with the excellence of the music that
he concluded one afternoon to look at the performer.

In a stained-glass window looking toward The Locks there was a broken
square, little larger than his eye, and he climbed up on the wall and
looked through this opening.

A pretty girl of twenty, a picture of splendid health, with dark hair,
and features as regularly cut as those of a marble statue, instead of
the spectacled professor he expected to see. Allan Dorris jumped down on
the outer side of the wall, and, going around to the front of the
church, entered the door.

The player was so intent with her work that she did not notice his
approach up the carpeted aisle, until she had finished, and he stood
almost beside her. She gave a little start on seeing him, but collected
herself, and looked at him soberly, as if to inquire why he was there.

"T hope you will pardon me," he said in an easy, self-possessed way,
"but I live in the place next door called The Locks, and having often
heard you play of late, I made bold to come in."

"All are welcome here," the girl replied, turning the leaves of the book
before her, and apparently paying little attention to Dorris. "You have
as much right here as I, and if I can please anyone with my dull
exercises, I am glad of the opportunity."

Allan Dorris seated himself in a chair that stood on the platform
devoted to the choir, and observed that the girl had splendid eyes and
splendid teeth, as well as handsome features.

"Do you mind my saying that I think you are very pretty?" he inquired,
after looking at her intently as she turned over the music.

Allan Dorris thought from the manner in which she looked at him that she
had never been told this before, for she blushed deeply, though she did
not appear confused.

"I don't say it as a compliment," he continued, without giving her an
opportunity to reply; "but I enjoyed the playing so much that I was
afraid to look at the performer, fearing he would be so hideously ugly
as to spoil the effect; but you are so much handsomer than I expected
that I cannot help mentioning it."

"You are a surprise to me, too," the girl replied, avoiding the
compliment he had paid her, and with good nature. "I imagined that the
new occupant of The Locks was older than you are."

There was a polite carelessness in his manner which indicated that he
was accustomed to mingling with all sorts of people; for he was as much
at his ease in the presence of Annie Benton as he had been with Mrs.
Wedge, or with Silas and Tug.

"I am so old in experience that I often feel that I look old in years,"
he replied, looking at the girl again, as though about to repeat his
remark concerning her beauty. "I am glad I do not appear old to you. You
have returned my compliment."

The girl made no other reply than to smile lightly, and then look
intently at her music, as an apology for smiling at all.

"How old are you?" he asked abruptly.

Annie Benton looked a little startled at the question, but replied,----

"Twenty."

"Have you a lover?"

This seemed to require an indignant answer, and she looked at him
sharply for that purpose, when she discovered that there was not a
particle of impudence in his manner, but rather a friendly interest. He
made the inquiry as an uncle might, who had long heard of a pretty niece
whom he had never met; so she compromised the matter by shaking her
head.

"That's strange," he returned. "It must be because the young men are
afraid of you, for you are about the prettiest thing of any kind I have
ever seen. It is fortunate that you live in Davy's Bend; a more
intelligent people would spoil you with flattery. Will you be kind
enough to play for me?"

The girl was rather pleased than offended at what he said, for there was
nothing of rudeness in his manner; and when she had signified her
willingness to grant his request, he went back to the pews, and sat down
to listen to the music. When the tones of the organ broke the silence,
Dorris was satisfied that the girl was not playing exercises, for the
music was very beautiful, and rendered with excellent judgment.

Her taste seemed to run in the direction of extravagant chords and odd
combinations; the listener happened to like the same sort of thing, too,
and the performance had such an effect upon him that he could not remain
in his seat, but walked softly up and down the aisle. The frown upon his
face was very much like that which occupied it when he walked alone in
his own room, after permitting himself to think; for there were wild
cries in the music, and mournful melodies. When it ceased, he walked up
to the player, and asked what she had been playing.

"I don't know myself," she answered, looking at him curiously, but
timidly, as if anxious to know more of him. "It was a combination of
many of the chords I have learned from time to time that pleased me. My
father, who is a very intelligent man, likes them, and I thought you
might. It was made up from hymns, vespers, anthems, ballads, and
everything else I have ever heard."

"The performance was very creditable, and I thank you for the pleasure
you have afforded me," he said. "Would you care if I should seat myself
here in this chair while you play, and look at you?"

The girl laughed quietly at the odd request, and there was a look of
mingled confusion and pleasure in her face as she replied,--

"I wouldn't care, but I could not play so well."

"Then I will go back to the pews; I don't wish to interfere with the
music. If you don't mind it, I will say that I think you are very frank
and honest, as well as pretty and accomplished. Many a worse player than
you are would have claimed that the rare combination of chords I have
just heard was improvising."

"It is my greatest fault," the girl answered, "to let my fancy and
fingers run riot over the keys, without regard to the instructions in
the book, and of which I am so much in need. The exercises are so dull
that it is a great task for me to practise them; but I never tire of
recalling what I have learned heretofore, and using the chords that
correspond with my humor. I have played a great deal, lately, with The
Locks in my mind, for I have heard much of you, and have known of the
strange house all my life. Perhaps I was thinking of you when you were
listening."

"If you will close up the book, and think about me while you are
playing, I will go back to the door, and listen. The subject is not very
romantic, but it is lonely enough, Heaven knows. I should think the old
organ might have sympathy with me, and do the subject justice, for it is
shut up from day to day in a great stone house, as I am."

Allan Dorris went back by the door, and the organ was still for such a
length of time that he thought it very correctly represented the silence
that hung over his house like a pall; but finally there was the thunder
of the double-bass, and the music began. The instrument was an unusually
good one, with a wide range of effects in the hands of such a player as
Annie Benton proved to be; and Allan Dorris thought she must have
learned his history somehow, and was now telling it to whoever cared to
listen. Dirges! The air was full of them, with processions of mourning
men and women. The girl seemed to have a fondness for odd airs, played
in imitation of the lower and middle registers of the voice, with treble
accompaniment, and the listener almost imagined that a strong baritone,
the voice of an actor in a play, was telling in plain English why Allan
Dorris, the occupant of The Locks, came to Davy's Bend, and why he was
discontented and ill at ease.

The actor with the baritone voice, after telling everything he knew,
gave way for a march-movement, and a company of actors, representing all
the people he had ever known, appeared before him under the magic of the
music. Some of them looked in wonder, others in dread and fear, as they
passed him in procession; but the march kept them going, and their
places were soon taken by others, from the store in his memory, who
looked in wonder, and in dread and fear, at the strange man in the back
pew, though he was no stranger to them. Not by any means; they knew him
very well. What an army! They are still coming, flinging their arms to
the time of the march; but the moment they arrive they look toward the
back pew, and continue looking that way, until they disappear; as though
they have been looking for him, and are surprised at his presence in
that quiet place. After a pause, to arrange the stops, the music sounded
as if all those who had appeared were trying to make their stories heard
at once. Their hatred, their dread, their fear,--all were represented in
the chords which he was now hearing, but in the din there was nothing
cheerful or joyous. If any of the actors in the play he had been
witnessing knew anything to the credit of Allan Dorris, their voices
were so mild as to be drowned by the fiercer ones with stories of hate
and fear and dread.

The music at last died away with the double-bass, as it began, and the
player sat perfectly still after she had finished; nor did Dorris move
from his position for several minutes.

The music seemed to have set them both to thinking, for nothing could be
heard for a long time except the working of the bellows; for the old
janitor was so deaf that he did not know that the music had ceased.

"What have you heard about The Locks?" he asked, after he stood beside
the girl, feeling as though there was nothing concerning him which she
did not know; for she had expressed it all in the music.

"Everything about The Locks, and a great deal about you," she answered.

"I didn't suppose that you had ever heard of me. Who talks about me?"

"The people."

"What do they say?"

"I wouldn't care to tell you all they say," she answered; "for in a dull
town, like this, a great deal is said when a mysterious man arrives, and
takes up his residence in a house that has been regarded with
superstitious fear for twenty years."

She was preparing to go out now, and he respectfully followed her down
the aisle.

"Whatever they say," he said, when they were standing upon the outside,
"there was a great deal more than art in the piece you dedicated to me.
You know, somehow, that I am lonely, and thoroughly discontented. Do the
people say that?"

"No."

"Then how did you know it?"

"I saw it in your manner. Anyone could see that."

"A perfectly contented man would become gloomy were he to live long in
that house," he replied, pointing to The Locks. "When the stillness of
night settles upon it there never was a scene in hell which cannot be
imagined by those so unfortunate as to be alone in it. I believe the
wind blows through the walls, for my light often goes out when the
windows and doors are closed; and there is one room where all the people
I have ever known seem collected, to moan through the night. Did you
ever hear about the room in The Locks into which no one is permitted to
look?"

"No."

"Even the new owner was asked to give a promise not to disturb that
room,--it adjoins the one I occupy,--or look into it, or inquire with
reference to it; and if I look ill at ease, it must be because of the
house I occupy. I am sincerely obliged to you for the music. May I
listen to you when you practise again?"

"Certainly," she answered. "I could not possibly have an objection."

She bowed to him, and walked away, followed by the limping negro
janitor, who turned occasionally to look at Dorris with distrust.




CHAPTER VI.

PICTURES IN THE FIRE.


Allan Dorris was seeing pleasant pictures in the cheerful fire which
burned in his room, for he watched it intently from early evening until
dusk, and until after the night came on.

The look of discontent that had distinguished his face was absent for
the first time since he had occupied the strange old house. Perhaps a
cheerful man may see pleasant pictures in a fire which produces only
tragedies for one who is sad; for it is certain that Allan Dorris had
watched the same fire before, and cursed its pictures, and walked up and
down the room in excitement afterward with clenched fists and a wicked
countenance. But there was peace in his heart now, and it could not be
disturbed by the malicious darkness that looked in at his windows; for
the nights were so dark in Davy's Bend that they seemed not an
invitation to rest, but an invitation to prowl, and lurk, and do wicked
things.

When Mrs. Wedge brought in the lamp, and put it down on the mantel, he
did not look up to say a cheerful word, as was his custom, but continued
gazing into the fire; and she noticed that he was in better humor than
he had ever been before during their acquaintance. Usually his thinking
made him frown, but to-night he seemed to be enjoying it.

The worthy woman took pleasure in finding excuses to go to his room as
often as possible, for he seemed to bless her for the intrusion upon his
loneliness; but for once he did not seem to realize her presence, and he
was thinking more intensely than usual.

Mrs. Wedge had come to greatly admire the new occupant of The Locks.
That he was a man of intelligence and refinement there was no doubt; she
believed this for so many reasons that she never pretended to enumerate
them. Besides being scrupulously neat in his habits, which was a great
deal in the orderly woman's eyes, he was uniformly polite and pleasant,
except when he was alone, when he seemed to storm at himself.

There was a certain manly way about him--a disposition to be just to
everyone, even to his housekeeper--that won her heart; and she had lain
awake a great many nights since he had come to The Locks, wondering
about him; for he had never dropped the slightest hint as to where he
came from, or why he had selected Davy's Bend as a place of residence.

She often said to herself that a bad man could not laugh as cheerfully
as Allan Dorris did when he dropped in at her little house to spend a
half-hour, on which occasions he talked good-humoredly of matters which
must have seemed trifling to one of his fine intelligence; and she was
certain that no one in hiding for the commission of a grave offence
could have captured the affections of Betty as completely as he had
done, for the child always cried when he returned to his own room, or
went out at the iron gate to ramble over the hills, and thought of
little else except the time when she could see him again.

Mrs. Wedge had heard that children shrink from the touch of hands that
have engaged in violence or dishonor, and watched the growing friendship
between the two with a great deal of interest.

Mrs. Wedge believed that he had had trouble of some kind in the place he
came from, and that he was trying to hide from a few enemies, and a
great many friends, in Davy's Bend; for Mrs. Wedge could not believe
that anyone would select Davy's Bend as a place of residence except
under peculiar circumstances; but she always came to the same
conclusion,--that Allan Dorris was in the right, whatever his difficulty
had been. She watched him narrowly from day to day, but he never gave
her reason to change her mind--he was in the right, and in the goodness
of her heart she defended him, as she went about her work.

"Were it Betty's father come back to me, instead of a stranger of whom I
know nothing," the good woman would say aloud, as she swept, or dusted,
or scoured in her little house, "I could not find less fault with him
than I do, or be more fond of him. I know something about men, and Allan
Dorris is a gentleman; more than that, he is honest, and I don't believe
a word you say."

"Grandmother," the child would inquire in wonder, "who are you talking
to?"

"Oh, these people's tongues," Mrs. Wedge would reply, with great
earnestness, looking at Betty as though she were a guilty tongue which
had just been caught in the act of slandering worthy people. "I have no
patience with them. Even Mr. Dorris is not free from their slander, and
I am tired of it."

"But who says anything against Mr. Dorris, grandmother?"

Sure enough! Who had accused him? No one, save his friend Mrs. Wedge,
unless his coming to Davy's Bend was an accusation; but she continued to
defend him, and declared before she went to sleep every night; "I'll
think no more about it; he is a worthy man, of course."

But whatever occupied his thoughts on the evening in question, Allan
Dorris was not displeased to hear an announcement, from the
speaking-tube behind the door, of visitors, for they were uncommon
enough; and going to it, a voice came to him from the depths announcing
that Silas and Tug were at the gate, and would come up if he had no
objection. Pulling the lever down, which opened the gate, he went down
to admit them at the door, and they came back with him.

During his residence in the place he had met the two men frequently, for
they took credit to themselves that he was there at all, since his
coming seemed to please the people (for it gave them something to talk
about, even if they did not admire him); and when he returned to his
house in the evening, he often met the strange pair loitering about the
gate. He had come to think well of them, and frequently invited them to
walk in; but though they apparently wanted to accept his invitation,
they acted as though they were afraid to: perhaps they feared he would
lose the little respect he already entertained for them on acquaintance.
But they had evidently concluded to make him a formal call now, induced
by friendliness and curiosity, for they were smartened up a little; and
it had evidently been arranged that Silas should do the honors, for Tug
kept crowding him to the front as they walked up the stairs.

Apparently Tug did not expect a very warm reception at The Locks, for he
lagged behind, and sighted at Allan Dorris with his peculiar eyes, as
though he had half a mind to try a shot at him; and when he reached the
landing from the level of which the doors opened into the rooms of the
second story, he looked eagerly and curiously around, as if recalling
the night when he traced the shadow there, but which had escaped him.

Allan Dorris invited both men into the apartment he usually occupied,
and there was a freedom in his manner that surprised them both. The pair
had decided to visit him from a curiosity that had grown out of their
experience with the shadow; and although they expected to find him stern
and silent, and angered at their presence, he was really in good humor,
and seemed glad to see them; perhaps he was so lonely that he would have
welcomed a visit from a ghost. They both noticed that the ragged beard
which he had worn on his face when he first arrived was now absent; for
he was clean shaven, and this made him appear ten years younger. He
looked a good deal more like a man in every way than he did on the night
of his arrival, when he sat moping in the hotel office; and Silas and
Tug both wondered at the change, but they were of one mind as to his
clean face; it was a disguise.

Tug's suit of black glistened more than ever, from having been recently
brushed; and as soon as he had seated himself, he set about watching
Allan Dorris with great persistency, staring him in the face precisely
as he would look at a picture or an ornament. Silas seated himself some
distance from the fire, and seemed greatly distressed at his friend's
rudeness.

"I like you," Mr. Whittle said finally, without moving his aim from
Dorris's face.

Dorris seemed amused, and, laughing quietly, was about to reply, when
Tug interrupted him.

"I know you don't like me, and I admire you for it, for every decent man
despises me. I am not only the meanest man in the world, but the most
worthless, and the ugliest. My teeth are snags, and my eyes are bad, and
my breath is sour, and I am lazy; but I like you, and I tell you of it
to your teeth."

Tug said this with so much seriousness that his companions both laughed;
but if he understood the cause of their merriment, he pretended not to,
for he said,--

"What are you laughing at?" glaring fiercely from one to the other. "I
am not trying to be funny. I hate a funny man, or a joky man. I have
nothing for a funny man but poison, and I have it with me."

Dorris paid no more attention to his fierce companion than he would to a
growling dog, and continued laughing; but Silas shut up like a knife, as
Tug took from his vest pocket a package carefully wrapped in newspaper,
and after looking at it a moment with close scrutiny, continued,--

"Whenever you find me telling jokes, expect me to giggle at my own wit,
and then pour the contents of this package on my tongue, and swallow it;
and it will be no more than I deserve. I have but one virtue; I am not
funny. You have no idea how I hate the low persons who advertise
themselves as comedians, or comediennes, or serio-comic singers, or you
would not accuse me of it."

Silas had often seen this package before, for Tug had carried it ever
since they had been acquainted, frequently finding it necessary to renew
the paper in which it was wrapped. From certain mysterious references to
it Tug had dropped, Silas believed the powder was intended for a
relative more objectionable than any of the others, though he
occasionally threatened to use it in a different manner, as in the
present instance. Indeed, he seemed to carry it instead of a knife or a
pistol; and Silas had noticed on the night when they were following the
shadow that his companion carried the package in his hand, ready for
instant use.

"You are the kind of a man I intended to be," Tug continued, putting
away his dangerous package with the air of a desperado who had been
flourishing a pistol and took credit to himself for not using it. "I
might have been worthy of your friendship but for my wife's relations,
but I admire you whether you like it or not. Do your worst; I am your
friend."

Tug had not taken his huge eye from Dorris's face since entering, except
to look at the poison; but he removed it as Mrs. Wedge came in to
prepare the table for the evening meal.

Dorris was a good deal like Tug in the particular that he did not sleep
much at night, but he slept soundly when the morning light came up over
the woods to chase away the shadows which were always looking into his
window; therefore he frequently ate his breakfast at noon, and his
supper at midnight.

There was a roast of beef, a tea urn, a pat of butter, and a loaf of
bread, on the platter carried by the housekeeper, while Betty followed
with the cups and saucers, and the potatoes, the napkins, and the sugar.

"I am obliged to you for your good opinion," Dorris said, while the
cloth was being laid, "and if you will remain to supper with me, we will
become better acquainted."

It occurred to Silas that Dorris looked at Tug, in spite of his
politeness, as he might look at an amusing dog that had been taught to
catch a bacon rind from off his nose at the word of command, and
wondered that Tug felt so much at home as he seemed to; for he was
watching the arrangements for supper with great eagerness. Silas was
sure the invitation to supper would be accepted, too, for Tug had never
refused an invitation of any kind in his life, except invitations to be
a man and go to work, which the people were always giving him.

At a look from Dorris, Mrs. Wedge went out, and soon returned with
additional plates, besides other eatables that seemed to be held in
reserve; and during her absence the master had been placing the chairs,
so that by the time the table was arranged, the three men were ready to
sit down, which they did without further ceremony. Among other things
Mrs. Wedge brought in a number of bottles and glasses, which were put
down by the side of Dorris, and these now attracted the aim of Tug.

"If you offer us drink," he said, "I give you fair warning that we will
accept, and get drunk, and disgrace you. We haven't a particle of
decency, have we, you scoundrel?"

This, accompanied by a prodigious poke in the ribs, was addressed to
Silas Davy, who had been sitting meekly by, watching the proceedings.
Tug had a habit of addressing Silas as "his dear old scoundrel," and
"his precious cut-throat," although a milder man never lived; and he
intently watched Dorris as he opened one of the bottles and filled three
of the glasses. Two of them were placed before Tug and Silas, and though
Silas only sipped at his, Tug drank off the liquor apportioned to him
greedily. This followed in rapid succession, until two of the bottles
had been emptied, Dorris watching the proceedings with a queer
satisfaction.

He also helped them liberally to the roast beef and the gravy, and the
potatoes, and the bread and butter, to say nothing of the pickles and
olives; but Tug seemed to prefer the liquor to the tea, for he partook
of that very sparingly, though he was anxious to accept everything else
offered; for he occasionally got up from the table to tramp heavily
around the room, as if to settle that already eaten to make room for
more.

Allan Dorris enjoyed the presence of the two men, and encouraged the
oddities of each by plying them with spirits. Although the drink had
little effect on Silas, who was very temperate, Tug paid tribute to its
strength by opening his wide eye to its greatest extent, as if in wonder
at his hospitable reception, and closing the other tighter, like a man
who had concluded to give one side of his body a rest.

As the evening wore away, and the liquor circulated more freely through
his blood, Tug recited, between frequent snorts, what a man he had been
until he had been broken up and disgraced by his wife's relations, Silas
earnestly vouching for it all, besides declaring that it was a shame, to
which their host replied with enthusiasm that it was an outrage that
such a bright man and such a good-looking man as Tug had been treated so
unjustly, at the same time filling up the glasses, and proposing that
they drink to the confusion and disgrace of the relations. Neither of
them seemed to realize that Dorris was making game of them; for Tug
listened to all he said--and he said a great deal--with an injured air
that was extremely ludicrous; and when Davy related that when Mr.
Whittle was in practice, the judges begged the favor of his opinion
before rendering their decisions on difficult legal questions, Dorris
regretted that he had not known the judges, for he felt sure that they
were wise and agreeable gentlemen. But at the same time Dorris felt
certain that if he should be invited to attend the man's funeral, he
would laugh to himself upon thinking how absurdly dignified he must look
in his coffin.

Silas had never known Tug when he was great, of course, for he had
flourished in the time of Silas's father; but he nevertheless believed
it, and seemed to have personal knowledge of the former magnificence of
the rusty old lawyer. Indeed, but few of the present inhabitants of
Davy's Bend had known Tug when he was clean and respectable, for he
always claimed that his triumphs were triumphs of the old days, when
Davy's Bend was important and prosperous, and among the energetic
citizens who had moved away and made decay possible.

"I don't amount to anything except when I am drunk--now," Tug said,
getting on his feet, and taking aim at his host, "but fill me with
aristocratic liquor, and I am as cute as the best of them. Have you ever
heard the story of the beggar on horseback? Well, here he is, at your
service. Will the rich and aristocratic owner of this house oblige the
beggar by pouring out his dram? Ha! the beggar is at full gallop."

Dorris good-naturedly obeyed the request, and while Tug was on his feet,
his aim happened to strike Silas.

"Silas, you greatest of scoundrels," he said, "you thoroughly debased
villain, loafer, and liar, I love you."

Reaching across the table, Tug cordially shook hands with his friend,
who had been doing nothing up to that time save enjoying Tug's humor,
and indorsing whatever he said. Whether Silas enjoyed being called a
scoundrel, a villain, a loafer, and a liar, is not known, but he
certainly heard these expressions very frequently; for Tug seemed to
tolerate him only because of his total and thorough depravity, though
the other acquaintances of Silas regarded him as a mild-mannered little
man without either vices or virtues.

"I have but two friends," Tug said again, seating himself, and gazing
stiffly at his host, "Rum and Davy; rum cheers me when I'm sad, and Davy
feeds me when I'm hungry, though the splendid thief does not feed me as
well as he might were he more industrious. Rum has a bad reputation, but
I announce here that it is one of my friends. I am either ravenously
hungry, or uncomfortable from having eaten too much, all the time, so
that I do not get much comfort from victuals; but rum hits me just
right, and I love it. You say it will make me drunk. Very well; I _want_
to get drunk. If you argue that it will make me reckless, I will hotly
reply that I _want_ to be reckless, and that a few bottles will make me
as famous as a lifetime of work and success will make a sober man.
Therefore I hail rum as my best friend, next to the unscrupulous rascal
known for hailing purposes, when there are boots to be polished, or
errands to run, as Hup-avy."

The eminent legal mind hurriedly put his hand to his mouth, as though
thoroughly humiliated that he had hiccoughed, and, looking at Dorris
with the air of a man who commits an unpardonable indiscretion and hopes
that it has not been noticed, continued with more care, with a great
many periods to enable him to guard against future weakness.

"Although I have but two friends, I have a host of enemies. Among them
Tigley. My wife's cousin. When I was a reputable lawyer, Tigley appeared
in Davy's Bend. Tigley was a fiddler. And spent his time in playing in
the beer halls for the drinks. The late Mrs. Whittle believed him to be
a great man. She called him a mastero, though he played entirely by ear;
and excused his dissipation on the ground that it was an eccentricity
common to genius. If Tigley ever comes in my way again there will be
something to pay more disagreeable than gold. He taught me to like rum."

Silas, who acted as a kind of chorus, intimated to Dorris that his
friend referred to a word of four letters beginning with an "h," and
ending with an "l."

"That's _one_ reason why I am a drunkard," the victim of too many
relatives added, after a moment's thought. "The other is that I could
never talk up to the old women except when I was drunk, and it was
necessary to talk up to her so often that I finally craved spirits."

Tug crooked his elbow and produced the package from his vest pocket,
which he waved aloft as an intimation that Tigley's nose should be held,
when next they met, until he swallowed its contents.

"By-the-way," Tug said, as if something new had occurred to him, "I warn
you not to believe anything I say; I lie because I enjoy it. Drinking
whiskey, and lying, and loving Davy, are my only recreations. Then there
was Veazy Vaughn, the Vagrant--my wife's uncle--he is responsible for my
idleness. When he came here, twenty odd years ago, I tried to reclaim
him, and went around with him; but he enjoyed vagrancy so much, and
defended his position so well, that I took a taste of it myself. I liked
it. I have followed it ever since."

There was not the slightest animation about Tug, and he sat bolt upright
like a post while he talked with slow and measured accent, to avoid
another hiccough, and his great eye was usually as motionless as his
body.

"The late Mrs. Whittle treated her relatives so well that other
worthless people who were no kin to her began to appear finally, and
claim to be her cousins and nieces and nephews," Tug said. "And she used
my substance to get up good dinners for them. They came by railroad. By
wagon. On foot. And on horseback. I was worse than a Mormon, for I
married a thousand, at least, on my wedding-day. Some of them called me
'Uncle W,' while others spoke of me as their 'Dear Cousin T;' but when
the last dollar of my money was invested in dried beef, and the
relatives had eaten it, I protested, and then they turned me out. The
relations have my money, and I have their bad habits. I have nothing
left but the poison, and they are welcome to that."

He once more produced the package, and as he laid it on the table,
Dorris half expected to see a troop of ill-favored people come dashing
in, grab up the paper, and run away with it. But none of them came, and
Tug went on:

"I was a polite man until my wife's relations made me selfish. We always
had gravy when they were around, and good gravy at that; but by the time
I had helped them all, there was none left for me. I now help myself
first. Will the Prince pass the Pauper the fresh bottle of rum?"

The bottle was handed over, and the rare old scoundrel helped himself to
a full glass of its contents, drinking as deliberately as he had talked,
apparently taking nine big swallows without breathing, at the same time
thinking of the one he loved the best, as a means of curing the
hiccoughs.

"I like Mrs. Wedge," Tug said, looking at that excellent woman with a
tipsy grin, as she came into the room with some new delicacy for her
employer's guests. "She looks so common, somehow, and I don't believe
she knows any more about manners than I do. Whenever you see her eating
her dinner, you'll find that she puts her arms on the table, as I do,
though it's not polite. Polite things are not natural, in my opinion;
mind I don't assert it as positive. I hate cold water, but it's polite
to bathe; and your respectable shirt-collars rub all the hide off my
neck. And anything that's good for me, I don't like. There's oatmeal,
and graham grits, and such like--they are healthy, therefore I don't
like their taste; but give me milk gravy, or salt risin' bread, or fried
beef, or anything else that's not good for me, and you'll find me at
home, as the man who had the party said on his cards."

During this discourse Mr. Whittle's great eye was following Mrs. Wedge
about the room, but when she disappeared it lit on Dorris.

"I'm with the crowd, though, when it comes to my wife's kin," he said,
eyeing his host in an impudent way. "A good many don't say so; but it
makes them all hot to fill their houses with their relations. Whenever
you go to see your relations, depend upon it that they are glad when you
are gone. They may pretend to like you, but they don't, except when you
are away from them. But in all other respects I'm common. Common! I'm so
common that I like boiled cabbage; and the olives you blow about--I'd as
soon eat green pignuts soaked in brine. _Common!_" He yelled out the
words as though he were calling some one of that name in the cellar. "If
men were judged by their commonness, I would be a chief with plumes in
my hat."

Allan Dorris and Silas Davy were seated with their backs to the windows
overlooking the town, while Tug sat opposite them, and in transferring
his gaze from one to the other, in dignified preparation for resuming
his conversation, which both his companions were enjoying, he saw the
mysterious face he had seen once before peering into the room, and which
was hastily withdrawn.

Tug jumped up from his chair at sight of it, and hurried to the window
with such haste that the table was almost upset; but the face, as well
as the figure to which it belonged, had disappeared. Throwing up the
sash, Tug found that he could step out on to a porch, and from this he
dropped into the yard with a great crash through the vines and
lattice-work. Silas Davy quickly followed, by way of the stairs,
suspecting the cause of Tug's disappearance; and Dorris was left alone.

All this had occupied but a few moments, and he probably thought of the
circumstance as one of the many eccentricities of the two odd men; for
after pulling down the lever to close the gate (it is a wonder that he
was not surprised to find it open) he sat down before the fire and
engaged in the pleasant thoughts that were interrupted early in the
evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

Silas did not come up with Tug until he reached the vicinity of the
hotel, where a single street lamp burned all night, and while they were
hurrying along without speaking, the figure they were pursuing passed
quickly on the opposite side of the street from the hotel. The rays of
the lamp were so feeble that the figure was only a shadow; but they
easily recognized it as the one seen before--that of a man above the
medium height, enveloped in a long cloak, not unlike those worn by women
in wet weather, with a slouch hat pulled down over his face.

The two men hurried after it, but in the darkness they were frequently
compelled to stop and listen for the footsteps of the pursued, in order
to detect his course. Each time the echoes were more indistinct, for the
fellow was making good use of his legs; and in this manner they traced
his course to the river bank, near the ferry landing, where the
ferry-boat itself was tied up for the night. They concluded that the
fugitive had a skiff tied there somewhere, which he intended to use in
leaving the place, and, hurrying on board the ferry-boat, they rapped
loudly at the door of the little room on the upper deck where the crew
usually slept, with a view of procuring means of following.

The fellow who had charge of the ferry, a native of the low lands lying
along the river, was known as "Young Bill Young," although he greatly
desired that the people call him "Old Captain Young;" therefore both men
pounded vigorously on the door, and loudly called "Captain Young," as a
tribute to his vanity. "Captain Young" soon appeared, for he always
slept in a bunk with his clothes on, which he said reminded him of his
sea days, although he had never really seen any other water than that on
which he operated his ferry. As the two hurriedly explained to him that
they wanted a boat, Young Bill Young went to the lower deck, and
unlocked one that floated at the stern, and soon Tug and his friend were
pulling down the river with long strokes, for there were two pairs of
oars. Occasionally they stopped rowing to listen, but nothing could be
heard save the gentle ripple of the current; whereupon they worked with
greater vigor than before.

They had rowed in this manner for an hour or more, when, stopping to
listen again, the plash of oars was indistinctly heard on the water
ahead of them. Lying down in the prow of the boat, Tug could see the
boat and its occupants low down on the water, between him and the first
rays of light of the coming morning. There was a heavy fog on the river,
which was lying close to the water, but this had lifted sufficiently to
permit an inspection through the rising mist. There were two figures in
the boat; one rowing, who was evidently the man they had twice seen
looking in at them, and the other a much smaller person, who was seated
in the stern, and steering. This fact Tug regarded as so remarkable that
he told Davy to lie down, and take a look, and when Davy returned to his
oars, after a long inspection, he said:--

"I make out two."

"A big one and a little one," Tug replied, bending to the oars, and
causing the boat to hurry through the water. "Earn your supper up at The
Locks, and I'll introduce you to them."

On the left hand a smaller stream put into the main river, and at its
mouth there was an immense growth of willows, besides a chute, an
island, and a bend. Into this labyrinth the boat they were pursuing
effectually disappeared; for though Tug and Silas rowed about until
broad daylight they could find no trace of it or its occupants.

A short distance up the smaller stream was a lonely station on a
railroad that did not run into Davy's Bend, and while rowing around in
the river, the roar of an approaching train was heard, and the fact that
this stopped at the station, with a blast from the engine-whistle
indicating that it had been signalled, may have been important; but it
did not occur to either Silas or Tug, who pulled their boat back to town
in silence.




CHAPTER VII.

THE LOCKS' GHOST.


There was general curiosity in Davy's Bend with reference to the new
occupant of The Locks, and when the people had exhausted themselves in
denouncing their own town more than _it_ deserved, and in praising Ben's
City more than it deserved, they began on Allan Dorris, and made him the
subject of their gossip.

Whoever was bold enough to invent new theories with reference to him,
and express them, was sure of a welcome at any of the houses where the
speculation concerning his previous history went on from day to day;
and, this becoming generally known, there was no lack of fresh material
for idle tongues. Whenever he walked into the town, he knew that the
stores turned out their crowds to look at him, and that in passing the
residences which were occupied, the windows were filled with curious
eyes. But although there were a hundred theories with reference to him,
it was only positively known that he one day appeared at his gate, two
months after his arrival, and tacked up a little sign on which was
inscribed in gold letters:

     DR. DORRIS.

This curiosity of the people brought Dr. Dorris a great deal of
business, for many of them were willing to pay for the privilege of
seeing him, and he applied himself to practice with such energy that he
was soon in general demand. As the people knew more of him, their
curiosity became admiration; and many of them defended him from
imaginary charges as warmly as did Mrs. Wedge, for there was every
reason that the people should admire him, except that he had located at
Davy's Bend.

That he was skilful and experienced as a physician became apparent at
once, and it was therefore generally believed that he was only there
temporarily; for certainly no one who was really capable would consent
to remain long in Davy's Bend.

His heart was not in his work; this was a part of the gossip concerning
him, though it is difficult to imagine how the idea originated; for he
appeared to be pleased when he was called out at night, as though the
companionship of even those in distress suited him better than the
solitude of his own house; but though he was always trying to be
cheerful, he could not disguise the fact that his mind was busy with
matters outside of his work. Perhaps this was the excuse of the people
for saying that his heart was not in his work, and the charge may have
been true. While busy, he gave whatever was in hand careful and
intelligent attention, but as soon as he was idle again, he forgot his
surroundings, and permitted his mind to wander--nobody knew where. When
addressed, he good-naturedly remembered that he was in Davy's Bend, and
at the service of its people, and did whatever was expected of him with
so much gentleness and ability that he won all hearts. This was his
brief history during the summer following his arrival, except as shall
be related hereafter.

The sun, which had been struggling for mastery over the mist and the
fog, had triumphed after a fashion, and the pleasanter weather, and his
business, served to make him more cheerful than he had been; and had he
cared to think about such matters, the conviction would no doubt have
forced itself upon his mind that he was doing well, and that he had
every reason to feel contented, though he was not.

Still there were times when he was lonely in spite of his rather busy
life, and nights when he sent for Mrs. Wedge and Betty to keep him
company; for there were strange sounds through his house, when the
summer air was still and oppressive, and the doors and windows rattled
in the most unaccountable manner.

Thus it came about that they were with him one night long after their
usual time to retire, Dorris being particularly nervous and restless,
and having asked them to come up to his room rather late in the evening.

Mrs. Wedge had told him of Annie Benton a dozen times already, but she
made it a baker's dozen, and told him again of her simple history; of
her popularity in the town, though the people all seemed to be shy of
her, and of her gruff father, who, in Mrs. Wedge's opinion, would resent
the appearance of a lover in the most alarming manner. Mrs. Wedge
thought she observed that Dorris was fond of this subject, and kept on
talking about it; for he was paying close attention as he lounged in his
easy chair. Dorris laughed in such a way at the accounts of Thompson
Benton's jealousy of his daughter that Mrs. Wedge believed that he
regarded him as he might regard a growling mastiff, which growled and
snapped at whoever approached, knowing it was in bad taste and not
expected of him.

Mrs. Wedge was sure her employer was not afraid of old Thompson,--or of
any one else, for that matter,--so she added this declaration to the
great number she was constantly making in his defence, and repeated it
to herself whenever he was in her mind.

She was pleased with the circumstance that he admired Annie Benton, and
though she said a great deal in her praise, it was no more than the
truth, for she was a girl worthy of admiration and respect. But the
subject was exhausted at last, and when she got up to go out, Dorris
roused himself from one of his reveries, and asked her to tell him the
history of The Locks, as a last resort to induce her to keep him
company.

The worthy woman seated herself again, smoothed down the folds of her
apron, and began by saying,--

"Betty, open the door leading into the hall."

The child did as she was directed, and, coming back, brought up a low
chair, and rested her head on her grandmother's knee.

"Listen," Mrs. Wedge said again.

They were all perfectly quiet, and a timid step could be distinctly
heard on the stair; it came up to the landing, and, after hesitating a
moment, seemed to pass into the room into which no one was to look. The
little girl shivered, and was lifted into her grandmother's lap, where
she hid away in the folds of her dress.

Dorris was familiar with this step on the stair, for he had heard it
frequently, and at night the thought had often occurred to him that some
one was in the house, going quietly from one room to another. A great
many times he had taken the light, and looked into every place from the
cellar to the attic, but he found nothing, and discovered nothing,
except that when in the attic he heard the strange, muffled, and ghostly
noises in the rooms he had just left.

"It is not a ghost to frighten you," Mrs. Wedge said, looking at her
employer, "but the spirit of an unhappy woman come back from the grave.
Whenever the house is quiet, the step can always be heard on the stair,
but I have never regarded it with horror, though I have been familiar
with it for a great many years. I rather regard it as a visit from an
old friend; and before you came I often sat alone in this room after
dark, listening to the footsteps.

"Jerome Dudley, who built The Locks, was a young man of great
intelligence, energy, and capacity; but his wife was lacking in these
qualities. Perhaps I had better say that he thought so, for I never
express an opinion of my own on the subject, since they were both my
friends. I may say with propriety, however, that they were unsuited to
each other, and that both knew and admitted it, and accepted their
marriage as the blight of their lives. Differently situated, she would
have been a useful woman; but she was worse than of no use to Jerome
Dudley, as he was contemptible in many ways towards her in spite of his
capacity for being a splendid man under different circumstances.

"The world is full of such marriages, I have been told; so I had
sympathy for them both, and was as useful to them as I could be. When I
came here as housekeeper, I knew at once that they were living a life of
misery, for they occupied different rooms, and were never together
except at six o'clock dinner.

"Mr. Dudley always went to his business in the morning before his wife
was stirring, and did not return again until evening; and, after
despatching his dinner, he either went back to his work, or into his own
room, from which he did not emerge until morning. He was not a gloomy
man, but he was dissatisfied with his wife, and felt that she was a
drawback rather than a help to him.

"The management of the house was turned over to me completely, and when I
presided at the table in the morning, he was always good-natured and
respectful, (though he was always out of humor when his wife was in the
same room with him) and frequently told me of his successes, and he had
a great many, for he was a money-making man; but I am sure he never
spoke of them to his wife. His household affairs he discussed only with
me, and the fact that I remained in his service until I entered yours
should be taken as evidence that I gave satisfaction."

Dorris bowed respectfully to Mrs. Wedge in assent, and she proceeded,--

"Mrs. Dudley spent her time in her own room in an indolent way that was
common to her, doing nothing except to look after her little girl, who
was never strong. The child was four years old when I came, and the
father lavished all his affection upon it. He had the reputation of
being a hard, exacting man in his business, and gave but few his
confidence, which I think was largely due to his unsatisfactory home;
and I have heard him say that but two creatures in all the world seemed
to understand him--the child, and myself. It was a part of my duty to
carry the child to its father's room every night before putting it to
bed; and though I usually found him at a desk surrounded with business
papers, he always had time to kiss its pretty lips if asleep, or romp
with it if awake.

"While the mother cheerfully turned over the household affairs to me
entirely, she was jealous of the child, and constantly worried and
fretted with reference to it. The father believed that his daughter was
not well cared for, in spite of the mother's great affection, for she
humored it to its disadvantage; and I have sometimes thought that the
child was sick a great deal more than was necessary. From being shut up
in a close room too much, it was tender and delicate, and when the door
was open, it always went romping into the hall until brought back again,
which resulted in a cold and a spell of sickness. This annoyed Mr.
Dudley, and from remarks he occasionally made to me I knew he believed
that if the little girl should die, the mother would be to blame.

"'It would be better if she had no mother,' he was in the habit of
saying. When children are properly managed, they become a comfort; but
if a foolish sentiment is indulged in, the affections of the parents are
needlessly lacerated, and they become a burden. I say this with charity,
and I have become convinced of it during my long life. Little Dudley was
managed by the mother with so much mistaken affection that she was
always a care and a burden. Instead of going to bed at night, and
sleeping peacefully until morning, as children should, she was always
wakeful, fretful, and ill, and Mr. Dudley's rest was disturbed so much
that I thought he had some excuse for his bad humor; for nothing is so
certain as that all this was unnecessary. The child was under no
restraint, and was constantly doing that which was not good for her, and
though her mother protested, she did nothing else.

"Because the father complained of being disturbed at all hours of the
night, the mother accused him of heartlessness and of a lack of
affection, but he explained this to me by saying that he only protested
because his child was not cared for as it should be; because that which
was intended as a blessing became an irksome responsibility, and because
he was in constant dread for its life.

"Whether the mother was to blame or not will perhaps never be known; but
it is certain that the child died after a lingering illness, and the
father was in a pitiful state from rage and grief. He did not speak to
his wife during the illness, or after the death, which she must have
accepted as an accusation that she was somehow responsible; for she soon
took to her bed, and never left it alive except to wearily climb the
stairs at twelve o'clock every night, to visit the child's deserted
room,--the room next to this, and into which no one is permitted to
look. Her bed was on the lower floor, in the room back of the parlor,
and every night at twelve o'clock, which was the hour the child died,
she wrapped the coverings about her, and went slowly up the stairs,
clinging to the railing with pitiful weakness with one hand, and
carrying the lamp with the other.

"I frequently tried to prevent her doing this; but she always begged so
piteously that I could not resist the appeal. She imagined, poor soul,
that she heard the child calling her, and she always asked me not to
accompany her.

"One night she was gone such a long time that at last I followed, and
found her dead, kneeling beside her child's empty crib, and the light
out. Mr. Dudley was very much frightened and distressed; and I think the
circumstance hastened his departure from Davy's Bend, which occurred a
few weeks later. He has never been in the house since.

"It is said that once a year--on the third of May--at exactly twelve
o'clock at night, a light appears in the lower room, which soon goes
out, and appears in the hall. A great many people have told me that they
have seen the light, and that it grows dimmer in the lower hall, and
brighter in the upper, until it disappears in the room where the empty
crib still stands, precisely as if it were carried by some one climbing
the stair. It soon disappears from the upper room, and is seen no more
until another year rolls round. I have never seen the light, but I have
often heard the step. Sometimes it is silent for months together, but
usually I hear it whenever I am in the main house at night. Just before
there is a death in the town, or the occurrence of any serious accident,
it goes up and down with unvarying persistency; but there is a long rest
after the death or the accident foretold has occurred."

When Mrs. Wedge had ceased talking, there was perfect silence in the
room again, and the footsteps were heard descending the stair.
Occasionally there was a painful pause, but they soon went on again, and
were heard no more.

"Poor Helen," Mrs. Wedge said, wiping her eyes, "how reluctantly she
leaves the little crib."

Mrs. Wedge soon followed the ghost of poor Helen down the stair,
carrying Betty in her arms; and as Dorris stood on the landing lighting
them down, he thought, as they passed into the shadow in the lower hall,
that poor Helen had found her child, and was leaving the house forever,
content to remain in her grave at last.




CHAPTER VIII.

A REMARKABLE GIRL.


Annie Benton had said that she usually practised once a week in the
church; and during the lonely days after his first meeting with her,
Allan Dorris began to wonder when he should see her again. The sight of
her, and the sound of her voice, and her magic music, had afforded him a
strange pleasure, and he thought about her so much that his mind
experienced relief from the thoughts that had made him restless and ill
at ease. But he heard nothing of her, except from Mrs. Wedge, who was as
loud in her praise as ever; though he looked for her as he rode about on
his business affairs, and a few times he had walked by her father's
house, after dark, and looked at its substantial exterior.

There was something about the girl which fascinated him. It may have
been only the music, but certainly he longed for her appearance, and
listened attentively for notice of her presence whenever he walked in
his yard, which was his custom so much of late that he had worn paths
under the trees; for had he secured all the business in Davy's Bend he
would still have had a great deal of time on his hands.

During these weeks he sometimes accused himself of being in love with a
girl he had seen but once, and laughed at the idea as absurd and
preposterous; but this did not drive thoughts of Annie Benton out of his
mind, for he stopped to listen at every turn for sounds of her presence.
After listening during the hours of the day when he was not occupied, he
usually walked in the path for a while at night, hoping it might be
possible that she had changed her hours, and would come to practise
after the cares and duties of the day were over. He could see from his
own window that the church was dark; but he had little to do, so he took
a turn in the path down by the wall to convince himself that she was not
playing softly, without a light, to give her fancy free rein. But he was
always disappointed; and, after finding that his watching was hopeless,
he went out at the iron gate in front, and walked along the roads until
he recovered from his disappointment sufficiently to enter his own home.

This was his daily experience for several weeks after his first meeting
with the girl, for even the Sunday services were neglected for that
length of time on account of the pastor, who was away recruiting his
health; when one afternoon he heard the tones of his old friend the
organ again. Climbing up on the wall, and looking at the girl through
the broken window, he imagined that she was not playing with the old
earnestness, and certainly she frequently looked toward the door, as if
expecting someone. Jumping down from the wall, he went around to the
front door, which he found open, and entered the church. The girl heard
his step on the threshold, and was looking toward him when he came in at
the door leading from the vestibule.

"I seem to have known you a long time," he said, as he sat down near
her, after exchanging the small civilities that were necessary under the
circumstances, "and I have been waiting for you as anxiously as though
you were my best friend. I have been very busy all my life, and I don't
enjoy idleness, though I imagined when I was working hard that I would
relish a season of rest. I have little to do here except to wait for you
and listen to the music. Had you delayed your coming many days longer I
should have called on you at your home. You are the only acquaintance I
have in the town whose society I covet."

There was no mistaking that the girl had been expecting him, and that
she was pleased that he came in so promptly. Her manner indicated it,
and she was perfectly willing to neglect her practice for his company,
which had not been the case before. She was better dressed, too; and
surely she would have been disappointed had not Dorris made his
appearance.

Annie Benton, like her father, improved on acquaintance. She was neither
too tall nor too short, and, although he was not an expert in such
matters, Dorris imagined that her figure would have been a study for a
sculptor. A woman so well formed as to attract no particular comment on
first acquaintance, he thought; but he remarked now, as he looked
steadily at her, that there was a remarkable regularity in her features.
There are women who do not bear close inspection, but Annie Benton could
not be appreciated without it. Her smile surprised every one, because of
its beauty; but the observer soon forgot that in admiring her pretty
teeth, and both these were forgotten when she spoke, as she did now to
Dorris, tiring of being looked at; for her voice was musical, and
thoroughly under control:

"I have dreaded to even pass The Locks at night ever since I can
remember," she said with some hesitation, not knowing exactly how to
treat the frankness with which he acknowledged the pleasure her presence
afforded him, "and I don't wonder that anyone living in it alone is
lonely. They say there is a ghost there, and a mysterious light, and a
footstep on the stair; and I am almost afraid to talk about it."

Allan Dorris had a habit of losing himself in thought when in the midst
of a conversation, and though he said he had been waiting patiently to
hear the music, it did not arouse him, for the girl had tired of waiting
for his reply, and gone to playing.

Now that he was in her presence he did not seem to realize the pleasure
he expected when he walked under the trees and waited for her. Perhaps
he was thinking of the footstep on the stair, which he had become so
accustomed to that he thought no more of it than the chirping of a
cricket; but more likely he was thinking that what he had in his mind to
say to the girl, when alone, was not at all appropriate now that he was
with her.

"An overture to 'Poor Helen,'" Dorris thought, when he looked up, and
heard the music, after coming out of his reverie; for it was full of
whispered sadness, and the girl certainly had that unfortunate lady in
her mind when she began playing, for she had spoken of her tireless step
on the stair; and when he walked back to the other end of the church, he
thought of the pretty girl in white, at the instrument, as a spirit come
back to warn him with music to be very careful of his future.

Where had the girl learned so much art? He had never heard better music,
and though there was little order in it, a mournful harmony ran through
it all that occasionally caused his flesh to creep. She was not playing
from notes, either, but seemed to be amusing herself by making odd
combinations with the stops; and so well did she understand the secret
of the minors that her playing reminded him of a great orchestra he had
once heard, and which had greatly impressed him.

Where had this simple country-girl learned so much of doubt, of despair,
and of anguish? Allan Dorris thought that had _his_ fingers possessed
the necessary skill, _his_ heart might have suggested such strains as he
was hearing; but that a woman of twenty, who had never been out of her
poor native town, could set such tales of horror and unrest and
discontent to music, puzzled him. The world was full of hearts
containing sorrowful symphonies such as he was now listening to, but
they were usually in older breasts, and he thought there could be but
one explanation--the organist was an unusual woman; the only flower in a
community of rough weeds, scrub-oaks, and thistles, wind-sown by God in
His mercy; a flower which did not realize its rarity, and was therefore
modest in its innocence and purity. But her weird music; she must have
thought a great deal because of her motherless and lonely childhood, for
such strains as her deft fingers produced could not have been found in a
light heart.

"There are few players equal to you," he said, standing by her side when
she finally concluded, and looked around. "A great many players I have
known had the habit of drowning the expert performance of the right hand
with the clumsy drumming of the left; but you seem to understand that
the left hand should modestly follow and assist, not lead, as is the
habit of busy people. There are many people who have devoted a lifetime
to study, surrounded with every advantage, who cannot equal you. I am an
admirer of the grand organ, and have taken every occasion to hear it;
but there is a natural genius about your playing that is very striking."

"No one has ever told me that before," she replied, turning her face
from him. "I have never been complimented except by the respectful
attention of the people; and father once said I could play almost as
well as my mother. Your good opinion encourages me, for you have lived
outside of Davy's Bend."

Well, yes, he _had_ lived outside of Davy's Bend, and this may have been
the reason he now looked away from the girl and became lost to her
presence. He did not do this rudely, but there was a pathetic
thoughtfulness in his face which caused the girl to remain silent while
he visited other scenes. Perhaps Allan Dorris is not the only man--let
us imagine so, in charity--who has lived in other towns, and become
thoughtful when the circumstance was mentioned.

"If there is genius in my playing, I did not know it, for it is not the
result of training; it comes to me like my thoughts," the girl finally
continued, when Dorris looked around. "When you were here before, you
were kind enough to commend me, and say that a certain passage gave
evidence of great study and practice. I am obliged to you for your good
opinion, but the strains really came to me in a moment, and while they
pleased me, I never studied them."

The girl said this with so much simple earnestness that Allan Dorris
felt sure that his good opinion of her playing would not cause her to
practise less in the future, but rather with an increased determination
for improvement.

"I think that your playing would attract the attention of the best
musicians," he said. "The critics could point out defects, certainly,
for a great many persons listen to music not to enjoy it, but to detect
what they regard as faults or inaccuracies; but the masters would
cheerfully forgive the faults, remembering their own hard experience,
and enjoy the genius which seems to inspire you. I only wonder where you
learned it."

"Not from competent teachers," she replied, as though she regretted to
make the confession. "The best music I ever heard was that of the bands
which visit the place at long intervals. I have seldom attended their
entertainments, but my father has listened with me when they played on
the outside, and we both enjoyed it. All that I know of style and
expression I learned from them. I once heard a minstrel band play in
front of the hall, on a wet evening, when there was no prospect of an
audience, and there was such an air of mournfulness in it that I
remember it yet. It is dreadful to imitate minstrel music in a church,
but you have spoken so kindly of my playing that I will try it, if you
care to listen."

They were both amused at the idea, and laughed over it; and after Dorris
had signified his eagerness to hear it, and reached his favorite place
to listen, the back pew, he reclined easily in it, and waited until the
stops were arranged.

The music began with a crash, or burst, or something of that kind, and
then ran off into an air for the baritone. This was the girl's favorite
style of playing, and there was really a very marked resemblance to a
band. There was an occasional exercise for the supposed cornets, but the
music soon ran back into the old strain, as though the players could not
get rid of the prospect of an empty house, and were permitting the
baritone to express their joint regrets. The accompaniment in the treble
was in such odd time, and expressed in such an odd way, that Dorris
could not help laughing to himself, although he enjoyed it; but finally
all the instruments joined in a race to get to the end, and the music
ceased. He started up the aisle to congratulate the player, and when
half way she said to him:

"At another time I heard a band coming up from the river. The players
seemed to be in better spirits that day"--

A distant march, and a lively one, came from the organ, and surely there
were banners in front of the players. The music gradually became louder,
and finally the girl said,--

"Now it turns the corner of the street."

Then came a crash of melody, and Dorris was almost tempted to look out
of the window for the procession that he felt sure was passing. It was
just such an air as a band-master might select to impress the people
favorably on his first appearance in a town; and every member did his
best until the grand finale, which exhausted the powers of the organ.

When the girl turned round, Dorris was laughing, and she joined him in
it.

"It is a dreadful thing for a girl to do," she said, though her face
indicated that she did not think it was so dreadful, after all, and that
she enjoyed it; "but when father comes to hear me practise, he insists
on hearing the band pieces; and he sometimes calls for jigs, and
quadrilles, and waltzes, and imitations of the hand-organ. The
hand-organs, with their crippled players, have been of great use to me,
for their music is all well arranged, and father says that if I can
equal them he will be very proud of me. Please don't laugh at the idea,
for father never says anything that is silly, and he knows good music
when he hears it. I know it is the fashion to make light of the
barrel-organ; and the people talk a great deal about bribing the players
to leave town; but father says a great many customs are not founded in
good sense, and perhaps this is one of them. We so rarely find innocent
pleasure that we should be free to enjoy it, no matter what it is, or
where found, whether custom happens to look on approvingly or not."

"I am glad you said that," Dorris returned, "for I enjoy coming here to
listen to your practising, and whether the world approves or not, I
intend to come whenever there is opportunity, and you do not object. It
is my opinion that you have never been appreciated here, and I will
repay you for the music by fully and thoroughly appreciating it. Do you
know that you are a remarkable girl?"

Dorris was a bold fellow, the girl thought, but there was nothing
offensive in his frankness. He seemed to say whatever occurred to him,
without stopping to think of its effects.

"It never occurred to me," she said.

"Really and truly?"

"Really and truly," she replied. "If there is merit in my playing, I
might have lived all my life without finding it out, but for you."

"Then let me be the first to tell you of it. You are very pretty, and
you have talent above those around you. I hear that your father is a
very sensible man; he no doubt appreciates what I have said, but dreads
to tell you of it, fearing you will become discontented, and lose much
of the charm that is so precious to him. The friends of Cynthia Miller
force themselves into the belief that you are no handsomer than she, and
that your playing is no better than her drumming. All the other Davy's
Bend maids have equally dull and enthusiastic friends; but I, who have
lived in intelligent communities, and am without prejudice, tell you
that I have never seen a prettier girl in my life. You have intelligence
and capacity, too. Mrs. Wedge has told me the pretty story of how you
became an organist, and I admire you for it. Some people I have known
were content to be _willing_ to do creditable things, and came to
believe in time that they had accomplished all they intended, without
really accomplishing anything; but I admire you because you do not know
yourself how much of a woman you are; at least you make no sign of it. I
am glad to be the first to do justice to a really remarkable woman."

The remarkable woman was evidently surprised to hear this; for she was
very much flustered, and hung her head.

"If a girl as pretty and intelligent as you are," he continued, "should
fall in love with me, I believe I should die with joy; for a girl like
you could find in her heart a love worth having. I don't know what I
should do under such circumstances, for I have had no experience; but I
imagine I should be very enthusiastic, and express my enthusiasm in some
absurd way. No one ever loved me, that I can remember; for as a child I
do not believe I was welcome to the food I ate, though I was not more
troublesome than other children who receive so much attention that they
care nothing for it. I have been indignant at men for beating their
dogs, and then envied the love the brutes displayed while the smart was
yet on their bodies. It has so chanced that the dogs I have owned were
well treated and ungrateful, and finally followed off some of the
vagrants who were hard masters. I have thought that they despised me
because they were fat and idle, believing these conditions to be
uncomfortable, having never experienced poverty and hard treatment; but
certainly they regarded me with indifference and suspicion. But I didn't
try to force them to admire me; I rather kept out of their way; for an
animal cannot be driven to love his master, and you cannot force or
persuade a man to admire any one he dislikes."

"It is possible that you only imagine it," the girl said. "Such doubts
as you express have often come to me, but I have comforted myself with
the poor reflection that there is so little love in the world that when
it is divided among the people, it does not amount to as much as they
wish. I know nothing of your situation, past or present, but is it not
possible that everyone has the same complaint that you have?"

"There is force in your suggestion," he replied thoughtfully, "but I do
not believe that I overdraw my condition; I know too much of real
wretchedness to permit myself to worry over fancied wrongs. I hope I am
too sensible to weave an impossible something out of my mind, and then
grieve because of a lack of it. I might long for something which does
not exist, but so long as I am as well off as others, I will be as
content as others; but when I have seen that which I covet, and know
that I am as deserving as others who possess my prize, its lack causes
me regret which I can shake off, but which, nevertheless, is always in
my mind. This regret has no other effect than to make me gloomy, which
no man should be; I can get it out of my actions when I try, but I
cannot get it out of my mind. Happiness is not common, I believe; for I
have never known a man or woman who did not in some way excite my pity
on closer acquaintance, but owing to a strange peculiarity in my
disposition, I have always felt the lack of honest friendship. This is
my malady, and perhaps my acquaintances pity me because of it, as I pity
them because of their misfortunes. It must be that I have a disagreeable
way about me, and repel friendship, though I am always trying to be
agreeable, and always trying to make friends. I have little ambition
above this; therefore I suppose it may be said that I am no more
unfortunate than others who have greater ambitions, and fail in them. I
have been told that men who have great success find friends a bother and
a hindrance; so it comes about that we are all disappointed, and I am no
worse off than others. How old are you?"

"I shall be twenty on my next birthday; you asked me that before."

"A little too old to become my pupil," he continued, "but let me say
that if you are as contented as you look, make no experiments in the
future; pursue the course you have already pursued as long as you live,
and never depart from it. If you are given to dreaming, pray for sound
slumber; if you occasionally build castles, and occupy them, extol your
plain home, and put aside everything save simplicity, honesty, and duty.
There is nothing out in the great world, from which I came, which will
afford the happiness you know here. I know everything about the world
except the simplicity and peace of your life, and these are the jewels
which I seek in Davy's Bend. The road leading from this town is the road
to wretchedness, and I have heard that those who have achieved greatness
would scatter their reputation to the quarters from whence it came for
the quiet contentment you know. Many lives have been wrecked by day
dreaming, by hope, by fancy. Pay attention only to the common realities.
If you feel that there is a lack in your life, attack it as an evil, and
convince yourself that it is a serious fault; an unworthy notion, and a
dangerous delusion."

"Must all my pretty castles come tumbling down, then?" she said, in a
tone of regret. "Can this be the sum of life, this round of dull days?
This dreaming which you say is so dangerous--I have always believed it
to be ambition--has been the only solace of my life. I have longed so
intensely to mingle with more intelligent people than we have here, that
I cannot believe it was wrong; I almost believe you are dangerous, and I
will leave you."

She walked half way down the aisle, as if intending to go out, but as
Dorris did not move, and continued looking at the floor, she came back
again.

"That is what you ought to do--go away and never come into my presence
again," he said, raising his eyes and looking into her face. "That was a
good resolve; you should carry it out."

Annie Benton looked puzzled as she asked why.

"Because every honest sentiment I ever expressed seemed wrong, and
against the established order. The friendship of the people does not
suit me--neither does their love; and, miserable beggar though I am to
feel dissatisfied with that which The King offers, I am not content with
it. I wander aimlessly about, seeking--I know not what. A more
insignificant man than I it would be difficult to find; but in a world
of opulence, this mendicant, this Prince Myself, finds nothing that
satisfies him. A beggar asking to be chooser, I reject those things that
men prize, and set my heart upon that which is cheap but impossible.
Sent into the world to long for an impossibility, I have fulfilled my
mission so faithfully that I sometimes wonder that I am not rewarded for
it. _You_ must not follow a path that ends in such a place."

He pointed out of the window, and the girl thought he referred to The
Locks; certainly it was not a cheerful prospect.

"For you, who are satisfied with everything around you, and who greet
every new day for its fresh pleasures, I am a dangerous companion, for
my discontent is infectious. And though I warn you to go away, you are a
suspicion of that which I have sought so long. Your music has lulled me
into the only peace I have ever known; but principle--which has always
guided me into that which was distasteful--demands that I advise you to
keep out of my company, though I cannot help hoping that you will not
heed the advice."

"I regret that what you say--that I am contented with everything around
me--is not true," the girl replied, "but though I am not, and wish I
were, I do not repine as you do. You are the gloomiest man I ever knew."

"Not at all gloomy," he answered. "Listen to my laugh. I will laugh at
myself."

Surely such a good-natured laugh was never heard before; and it was
contagious, too, for the girl joined him in it, finally, though neither
of them knew what they were laughing about.

"I seldom afflict my friends with melancholy," he said, "for I am
usually gay. Gay! I am the gayest man in the world; but the organ caused
me to forget. It's all over now; let's laugh some more."

And he did laugh again, as gayly as before; a genteel, hearty laugh it
was, and the girl joined him, as before, though she could not have told
what she was laughing about had her life depended upon it, except that
it was very funny that her companion was laughing at nothing. The
different objects in the church, including the organ, seemed to look at
the pair in good humor because of their gayety; perhaps the organ was
feeling gay itself, from recollections of the minstrel band.

"It makes me feel dreadfully gay to think you are going home presently,
and that I am to return to my cheerful room in The Locks, the gayest
house in the world. Bless you, there is no ghost's walk about that
place, and the sunshine seems to be brighter there than anywhere else in
the town. I leave it with regret, and return to it with joy; and the
wind--I can't tell you what pleasing music the wind makes with the
windows and shutters. But if you will let me, I will walk home with you,
although I am dying with impatience to return to my usual gayety. I wish
it would rain, and keep you here a while longer. I am becoming so funny
of late I must break my spirit some way."

It was now dusk, and the girl having signified her willingness to
accompany him, they walked out of the church, leaving the old janitor to
lock the door, which he probably did with unusual cheerfulness, for
Dorris had given him an amount of money that was greater than a month's
wages.

"They say here that if Thompson Benton should see a gentleman with his
daughter," Dorris said, as they walked along, "that he would give it to
him straight. I suppose they mean, by that, that he would tell him to
clear out; but I will risk it."

"They say a great many things about father that are unjust," the girl
answered, "because he does not trifle. Father is the best man in the
world."

"The lion is a dear old creature to the cub," he replied, "but I am
anxious to meet this gentleman of whom I have heard so much, so you had
better not invite me in, for I will accept. A lion's den would be a
happy relief to the gayety of The Locks, where we go on--the spectres
and I--in the merriest fashion imaginable."

Dorris seemed determined to be gay, and as they walked along he several
times suggested another laugh, saying, "now, all together," or, "all
ready; here we go," as a signal for them to commence, in such a queer
way that the girl could not help joining.

"I am like the organ," he said, "gay or sad, at your pleasure. Just at
present I am a circus tune, but if you prefer a symphony, you have only
to say the word. I am sorry, though, that you cannot shut a lid down
over me, and cause me to be oblivious to everything until you appear
again. Something tells me that the stout gentleman approaching is the
lion."

They were now in the vicinity of the home of the Bentons', and the girl
laughingly replied that the stout gentleman was her father. By the time
they reached the gate, he was waiting for them, and glaring at Dorris
from under his shaggy eyebrows. Annie presented the stranger to her
father, who explained who he was, and said that, having been attracted
by the music in the church, he had taken the liberty of walking home
with the player.

"I have the habit myself," old Thompson grunted, evidently relieved to
know that Dorris was not a lover, and looking at him keenly.

He held the gate open for the girl, who walked in, and then closed it,
leaving Dorris on the outside. He raised his hat, wished them good
night, and walked away, and he imagined when he looked back that the
girl was standing at the door looking after him.




CHAPTER IX.

THE "APRON AND PASSWORD."


The guests at the hotel, with their dull wit and small gossip, had
disappeared, and the proprietor was seated at the long table in the
dining-room, eating his supper, with no companion save Silas Davy, the
patient man-of-all-work.

A queer case, the proprietor. Instead of being useful to the hotel, as
would naturally be expected, he was a detriment to it, for he did not
even come to his meals when they were ready, making a special table
necessary three times a day, greatly to the disgust of Mrs. Armsby, who
did about everything around the place, from tending the office to
superintending the kitchen; and she succeeded so well in all these
particulars that occasional strangers had been known to familiarly pat
her husband on the back, and congratulate him on keeping a house which
was known far and near for its fine attention to guests.

Armsby did not drink, or gamble, or anything of that kind, but he owned
a gun and a hunting dog, and knew exactly when the ducks appeared in the
lakes, and when the shrill piping of quail might be expected in the
thickets; and he was usually there, in his grotesque hunting costume, to
welcome them. In addition to this he was fond of fishing, and belonged
to all the lodges; so that he had little time to attend to business,
even had he been inclined that way.

Mrs. Armsby regarded the men who sold powder and fishing-tackle, and
encouraged the lodges, about as many another sad-hearted woman regards
the liquor-sellers; and, as she went wearily about her work, had been
heard to wonder whether hunting and fishing and lodge-going were not
greater evils than drinking; for she had no use for her husband
whatever, although he was a great deal of trouble. He never got out of
bed without being called a dozen times, but when he did get up, and was
finally dressed (which occupied him at least an hour) he was such a
cheerful fellow, and told of his triumph at the lodge election the night
before, or of his fancy shots the day before, with such good nature that
he was usually forgiven. Indeed, the people found no other fault with
his idleness than to good-naturedly refer to his hotel as the "Apron and
Password," probably a tribute to the English way of naming houses of
public entertainment; for they argued that if Mrs. Armsby could forgive
her husband's faults, it was no affair of theirs; and by this name the
place was known.

But he had one good habit; he was fond of his wife--not because she made
the living, and allowed him to exist in idleness, but really and truly
fond of her; though everyone was fond of capable Mrs. Armsby: for though
she was nearly always at work, she found time to learn enough of passing
events to be a fair conversationalist, and sometimes entertained the
guests in the parlor by singing, accompanying herself on the piano.

It was said that as a girl Mrs. Armsby had been the favorite of a circle
of rich relatives and friends, and that she spent the earlier portion of
her life in a pleasant and aristocratic home; but when she found it
necessary to make her own living, and support a husband besides, she
went about it with apparent good nature, and was generally regarded as a
very remarkable woman. She had been Annie Benton's first teacher, in
addition to her regular duties, and a pupil still came to the house
occasionally, only to find her making bread in the kitchen, or beds in
the upper rooms.

Armsby had been out hunting, as usual, and his wife had prepared his
supper with her own hands, which he was now discussing.

"There are a great many unhappy women in the world, Davy," Armsby said,
looking admiringly at the contents of the plates around him, "for the
reason that most husbands are mean to their wives. I wouldn't be a woman
for all the money in Thompson Benton's safe; I am thankful that I am a
man, if for nothing else. It is very pretty to say that any woman is so
good that she can have her pick of a husband, but it is not true, for
most of them marry men who are cross to them, and unfair, and
thoughtless; but Mrs. Armsby has her own way here. She has a maid and a
man, and I fancy she is rather a fortunate woman. Instead of being
bossed around by her husband, he keeps out of the way and gives her full
charge. Pull up to the table and eat something, won't you? Help yourself
to the sardines."

Davy accepted the invitation, and was helping himself when Mr. Armsby
said:

"You will find them mighty good; and they ought to be good, for they
cost sixty cents a box--the three you have on your plate cost a dime.
But they are as free as the air you breathe. Help yourself; have some
more, and make it fifteen cents."

Davy concluded not to take any sardines after this, and after browsing
around among the mixed pickles and goat-cheese awhile, and being told
that they ought to be good, for they cost enough, he concluded that
Armsby's hospitality was intended as a means of calling attention to his
rich fare; for he was very particular, and in order to please him his
wife always provided something for his table which was produced at no
other time. There was a bottle of olives on the table, and when Davy
took one of them, Armsby explained that he had imported them himself at
enormous expense, although they had been really bought at one of the
stores as a job lot, the proprietor having had them on hand a number of
years.

"Any guests to-night?" Armsby inquired, trying to look very much vexed
that the clerk had not accepted the invitation to refresh himself.

"No," Davy answered, a little sulky because of his rebuff.

"I am sorry for that," Armsby continued. "Mrs. Armsby enjoys a lively
parlor, and she has a great deal of time in which to make herself
agreeable. What a wonderful woman she is to fix up! Always neat, and
always pleasant; but she has little else to do. You don't take very
kindly to the ladies yourself, Davy?"

The boarders frequently accused Davy of being fond of various old widows
and maids in the town, whom he had really never spoken to, and gravely
hinted that the streets were full of rumors of his approaching nuptials;
but he paid no attention to these banters, nor did he now, except to
give a little grunt of contempt for any one so foolish as to marry.

"Why, bless me, Davy," Armsby said, laying down his knife and fork in
astonishment; "how bald you are becoming! Let me see the back of your
head."

Silas turned his back to his employer's husband, and looked up at the
ceiling.

"It's coming; you will be as bald as a plate in a year. But we must all
expect it; fortune has no favorites in this respect. I know a man who
does not mistreat his wife, but I never knew one who wasn't bald. You
might as well quit washing your head in salt water, Davy; for it will do
no good."

The facts were that Davy gave no sign of approaching baldness; but
Armsby, being very bald himself, was always trying to discover that
other people's hair was falling out.

"Better remain single, though," he continued, referring to matrimony
again, "than to marry a woman and mistreat her. All the men are unjust
to their wives, barring the honorable exception just named; therefore it
has always been my policy to make Mrs. Armsby a notable exception. Is
there another woman in the Bend who handles all the money, and does
exactly as she pleases? You are around a good bit; do you know of
another?"

Davy thought to himself that she was entitled to the privilege of
handling the money, since she earned it all, besides supporting a
vagrant husband; but he said nothing, for Silas was not a talkative man.

"Whatever she does is entirely satisfactory to me," continued the model
husband. "I never complain; indeed, I find much to admire. There is not
another woman like her in the world, and it contains an awful lot of
people."

Mrs. Armsby appeared from the kitchen at this moment, and, greeting her
husband pleasantly, really seemed charmed with his presence. While she
was looking after his wants, he told her of his hunting that day; how he
had made more double shots than any of his companions; how his dog had
proved, for the hundredth time, that he was the very best in the
country, as he had always contended; how tired and hungry he was, and
how fortunate it was that there was no lodge that night, as in that
event he would have to be present.

His wife finally disappeared into the kitchen again, to arrange for the
first meal of the next day, and Armsby said to Davy,--

"Poor woman, she has so little to occupy her mind that she has gone into
the kitchen to watch Jennie peel the potatoes. If business was not so
dull--you say it is dull; I know nothing about it myself--I would hire a
companion for her; someone to read to her, and walk about with her
during the day. It's too bad."

Unfortunately for the patrons of the Apron-and-Password, Armsby had been
to New York; and though he had remained but two days, since his return
he had pretended to a knowledge of the metropolis which was marvellous.
When a New York man was mentioned, Armsby pretended to know him
intimately, telling cheerful anecdotes of how their acquaintance began
and ended. Whenever a New York institution was referred to, he was
familiar with it, almost to intimacy; and a few of the Davy's Bend
people amused themselves by inventing fictitious names and places in New
York, and inducing Armsby to profess a knowledge of them, which he did
with cheerful promptness.

He never neglected an opportunity to talk about his trip, therefore when
he put his chair back from the table, and engaged in quiet meditation,
Silas felt sure he was about to introduce the subject in a new way; for
Armsby was a very ingenious as well as a very lazy man.

"You ought to wear the apron, Silas," Mr. Armsby said, looking at Silas
with the greatest condescension and pity; "but it would be dreadful if
your application should be greeted with the blacks. I don't recommend
that you try it, mind, for that is not allowed, and the records will
show that we lodge men have so much regard for principle that it has
never been done; but it is something that everyone should think about,
sooner or later. Only the very best men wear this emblem of greatness.
But if you have faults, I should advise you not to run the risk of being
humiliated, for the members are very particular. A lazy man, or a
shiftless man, or a bad man of any kind, cannot get in; and when a man
belongs to a lodge, it can be depended upon that he is as near right as
they make them. This is the reason we must be particular in admitting
new members. Reputation is at stake; for, once you are in, the others
stand by you with their lives and their sacred honor. There's nothing
like it."

The landlord occupied himself a moment in pleasant thought of the
lodges, in connection with their cheapness and general utility, and then
continued, after smiling in a gratified way over his own importance in
the lodge connection,--

"When I first went to New York I became acquainted with the very best
people immediately; for every man who wears the apron has confidence in
every other man who wears it; each knows that the other has been
selected from the masses with care, and they trust each other to the
fullest extent. One day I went over into--"

Armsby could not remember names, and he snapped his fingers now in
vexation.

"It is strange I am unable to name the town," he said; "I am as familiar
with it as I am with my own stable. Well, no matter; anyway it is a big
suburb, and you reach it by crossing the--"

Again he stopped, and tried to recall the name of the bridge he had
crossed, and the city he had visited, but to no avail; though he rapped
his head soundly with his knuckles, for its bad behavior, and got up to
walk up and down the room.

"If I should forget your name, or Mrs. Armsby's, it would not be more
remarkable," he continued, at last, giving up in despair. "I was brought
up in sight of them; but what I started out to say was, that I walked
into a bank one day, and the fine-looking man who was at the counter
looked at me, at first, with the greatest suspicion, thinking I was a
robber, no doubt, until I gave him a certain sign. You should have seen
the change in his manner! He came through a little door at the side, and
shaking hands with me in a certain way, known only to those on the
inside, took me into a private office in the rear, where a number of
other fine-looking gentlemen were seated around a table.

"'President Judd,' he said to them, 'this gentleman wears the apron.'

"All the elegant gentlemen were delighted to see me. It was not feigned,
either, for it was genuine delight; and a controversy sprang up as to
which of them should give his time to my entertainment while in the
city, though I protested that I was so well acquainted that I could get
along very well alone. But they insisted upon it, and when they began to
quarrel rather fiercely about it, I gave them a sign (which reminded
them of their pledge to be brothers), whereupon they were all
good-natured at once, and one of them said,--

"'Thank you for reminding us of our duty, brother; the best of us will
occasionally forget. Will you do us the favor to pick out one of our
number to show you about, and make your stay in the city pleasant?'"

Davy noticed that Mrs. Armsby was listening at the kitchen door, though
Armsby did not know it, for his back was turned toward her; but he did
not mention the circumstance.

"I liked the looks of Mr. Judd," Armsby continued, "so I said that if
the other brothers would not take offence, I would like his company. The
others said, 'Oh, not at all,' all of them making the sign to be
brothers at the same time, and President Judd at once began arranging
his business so he could go out with me, not neglecting to put a big
roll of money in his pocket; and, though it was very big, the others
said it wasn't half enough."

Davy believed everything the people saw fit to tell him, and vouched for
the truth of it when he repeated it himself, and was very much
interested in what Armsby was saying.

"Well, sir, when we went out, the sign was everything. You cannot
imagine how potent it was. We made it when we wanted a carriage, and the
driver regarded it as a favor to carry us for nothing; we made it when
we were hungry, and it assured us the greatest attention at the hotels,
which were nothing like this, but larger--very much larger."

Davy gave evidence of genuine astonishment on learning that there were
hotels larger than the "Apron and Password;" but as the proprietor
himself had made the statement, he presumed it must be true, though it
was certainly very astonishing.

"I can't think of the name of it now, but they have a railroad in the
second story of the street there, and instead of collecting fare, when
the proprietors came around they put money in our outside pockets,
thinking we might meet someone who was not a brother. Judd remained with
me five days, taking me to his own residence at night, which was twice
as big as The Locks, and when we finally parted, he loaded me down with
presents, and shed tears. Next to the sign, the apron is the greatest
thing in the world; I am sorry you do not wear it."

Armsby wandered leisurely out into the office soon after, probably to
smoke the cigars his wife kept there in a case for sale, when Mrs.
Armsby came into the dining-room, and sat down, looking mortified and
distressed.

"Silas," she said, "don't believe a word Armsby has said to you, or ever
will say, on this subject. Before he became a slave to this dreadful
lodge habit, he was a truthful man, but you can't believe a word he says
now. Do you know what they do at the lodges?"

Davy shook his head, for of course no one except a member _could_ know.

"Let me tell you, then. They tie cooks' aprons around their waists, put
fools' caps on their heads, and quarrel as to whether the hailing sign,
or the aid sign, or whatever it is, is made by holding up one finger
when the right thumb is touching the right ear, or whether it is two or
three or four fingers. It is all about as ridiculous as this, and my
advice to you is, never join. Armsby has been talking to you a good deal
about the matter lately, and I suspect he wants the fun of initiating
you, which is accompanied with all sorts of tricks, which gives them
opportunity to make fun of you from behind their paper masks."

Since it was impossible to believe both stories, Silas made up his mind
to ask Tug's opinion,--Tug would know,--but he said nothing.

"Some of them wear swords," Mrs. Armsby went on to say; "but, bless you,
they can't draw them, and even if they should succeed in getting them
out, they couldn't put them back in their scabbards again. Armsby came
home one night wearing his sword, and in this very room he took it out
to make a show of himself, and was so awkward with it that he broke half
the dishes on the dresser, besides upsetting the lamp and wounding me on
the hand. To complete his disgrace, he was compelled to ask me to put it
in its case again; but I fear the lesson did the misguided man little
good, for he has been as bad as ever since. But while these men might be
pardoned for their foolishness if they remained in their halls, they are
utterly unpardonable for disgracing their wives and friends by appearing
on the street, which they occasionally do, dressed in more fantastic
fashion than ever. If you should join, you would be expected to do this,
and after one appearance you could never look a sensible person in the
face again, unless you are lost to all sense of self-respect. Besides,
it is expensive; my husband keeps me poor in attending grand lodges, and
most of the failures are caused by neglecting business to talk lodge. My
only fear is that my misguided husband will finally consider it his duty
to kill somebody for telling about the signs and grips, and then we will
all be disgraced. It is your misfortune as well as mine, Silas, that
Armsby is not a drunkard. Drunkards are occasionally reformed, and are
of some use in their sober intervals; but a lodge man never reforms. If
a lodge man engages in business, he fails, for he does not attend to it;
but a drinking man admits that he is doing wrong, and sometimes succeeds
in his efforts to do better; whereas a lodge man argues all the time
that his foolishness is good sense, and therefore don't try to get out
of the way. Compared to me, Mrs. Whittle is a very fortunate woman."

Mrs. Armsby got up at this and went out; and as Silas was preparing to
follow, he heard a whistle which he recognized at once as Tug's.
Whenever Tug had use for Silas early in the evening, he had a habit of
whistling him out, since he never came into the hotel until his friend
had possession.

Silas at once put on his hat and went down to the wagon yard, where he
found Tug impatiently waiting, who started off at a rapid swinging gait
toward the lower end of the town and the river as soon as Silas caught
sight of him. When the pair travelled, Davy always lagged behind, as he
did in this instance; for in the presence of genius like Tug's, he felt
that his place was in the rear. Others might doubt the ability or even
the honesty of his friend, but Silas had no doubt that Tug would some
day be a wonderful man, and prove that everything said to his discredit
was untrue. It was a favorite saying of his that when he "came into his
own," he would move about, with the magnificence of a circus procession,
on the back of an elephant, with a brass band in front and a company of
trumpeters behind; and Silas was content to wait. Tug occasionally
illustrated this idea now as he walked along, by swinging and flinging
his body about as those who ride on elephants do, and it occurred to
Silas that "his own" must have arrived by boat, and that he was going
after it; for he walked rapidly toward the river without looking around.

Tug had not spoken a word since setting out, and after reaching the
street which led down to the crazy collection of houses where he lived,
he travelled down that way a while, and at last turned off toward the
right, following the course of the river through alleys and back yards,
and over fences and gaping sloughs, until at last he stopped near an old
warehouse, which had been used a great many years before in storing
freight arriving by the boats when the Bend was an important town. It
was entirely deserted now, and as the two men stopped in its shadow, Tug
gave his companion to understand that he must be very quiet and secret.

After they had blown awhile, Tug began crawling around the building on
his hands and knees, followed by his companion, occasionally raising his
hand as a warning when they both stopped to listen. When Tug had reached
the other end of the warehouse, he motioned Davy to come up to him; and
when he did so this is what he saw:--

A light skiff tied to the bank, with the oars laid across it, and a
woman seated in the stern--the woman they had seen when they followed
the shadow down the river, after its appearance at Allan Dorris's
window. They were certain it was the same woman, because she wore a
waterproof cloak, as she did on the night when they followed the shadow
down the river, and she was very small. Her back was turned toward them,
and she was motionless as a statue; and realizing that as her ears were
covered with the waterproof she could not hear well, the two men arose
to their feet after a careful inspection, and walked back to the other
end of the building.

"I intend to steal her," Tug whispered into his companion's ear, at the
same time reaching down into Davy's pocket and taking out a
handkerchief, which he arranged in his hand like a sling ready for use.




CHAPTER X.

TUG WHITTLE'S BOOTY.


After resting a while, and looking carefully around to make sure that
they were not watched, Tug and Silas crawled cautiously back to the bank
which overlooked the boat and its singular occupant, and after warning
his companion to remain where he was by shaking his hand at him like a
club, Tug began to climb down the bank, feeling every step as he went
with the cunning stealth of a tiger. Gradually he worked his way to the
water's edge; so careful was he, that even Silas, watching him with
breathless interest above, could not hear his step, and at last he stood
on the brink of the water. The boat was in an eddy, floating easily
about, and when it came within Tug's reach, he clapped the handkerchief
over the woman's mouth, tied it in a knot at the back of her head, and
came clambering up the bank with her on his shoulders. Without saying a
word, he started to retrace his steps, only stopping once or twice to
see that his booty was not smothering, when, finding the little woman
all right, he went on over the fences and sloughs, and through the
alleys and yards, until he entered his own door.

"Now then, sister," he said, putting the woman on her feet, and
breathing heavily from his exercise, "Tell us who you are. Davy, make a
light."

Silas came lagging in about this time, and did as he was told, though he
was a long time about it, for the matches were damp, and the flame slow
in coming up. Everything seemed to be damp in Davy's Bend, and it was no
wonder that the matches were slow and sleepy, like the other inhabitants
of the town; therefore they came to life with a sputtering protest
against being disturbed. While Silas was rubbing them into good humor,
Tug was closely watching the little woman with his great eye, and
getting his breath; and when the light was fairly burning, he went over
to her side, and removed the handkerchief from her mouth.

"Gentlemen!" she cried out, in a weak voice, as soon as she could.
"Gentlemen! In the name of God! I appeal to you as gentlemen!"

"Don't gentleman me," Tug said, bringing the light over to look at the
woman's face. "I'm not a gentleman; I'm a thief, and I've stolen a
woman. Nor is _he_ a gentleman," pointing to Davy, and holding his head
to one side to get a bead on him. "He's the greatest scoundrel that ever
lived. Look at the audacious villain now! Look at him! Did you ever see
a person who looked so much like the devil? And he _is_ the devil, when
he gets started. He's keen to get at you now, and I'll have trouble with
him if you are at all unreasonable."

Davy looked like anything but a villain as he meekly watched the pair
from the other side of the room; indeed, he was thinking that Tug was
carrying the matter entirely too far, and was becoming alarmed. But Tug
did not share this feeling of apprehension, for he seemed desperately in
earnest as he held the lamp close to the woman's face, who tried to
shield it from his sight with her thin, trembling hands, and cried out
in the same weak voice: "Gentlemen! In the name of God! I appeal to you
as gentlemen!"

A very small woman, with shrivelled face and sharp features, was Tug's
booty, and she trembled violently as she piteously held out her hands to
the two men. Tug thought of her as the key to the problem he had been
attempting to solve, so he stood between her and the door to prevent
escape. But Silas felt sure that the woman had but lately risen from a
sick bed; for she was weak and trembling, and from sitting long in the
damp river air, there was a distressed and painful flush in her face.

"Come now, sister," Tug said, seating himself in front of her, and
frowning like a pirate. "Tell us what you know, and be carried back to
your boat. If you refuse to do it, we will take you on a journey to the
Hedgepath graveyard, in the woods over the river, where we will erect a
stone Sacred to the Memory of an Obstinate Woman. Which will you have?
Use your tongue; which will you have?"

But the woman made no other reply than to appeal to them as gentlemen,
in the name of God, and cry, and wring her hands.

"In case you ever see that foxy companion of yourn again, which is
extremely doubtful, for I have a companion who murders for the love of
it--(Here, now, take your hand off that knife, will you," Tug said, by
way of parenthesis to Silas, looking at him sharply. Then going over to
him, he pretended to take a knife out of Davy's inside coat pocket, and
hide it in the cupboard). "If you ever see your friend Sneak again, say
to him that I intend to get his head. He is bothering a friend of mine,
and I intend to create a commotion inside of him for it."

Tug walked over to the table where the lamp stood, and, taking the
package of poison from his pocket, carefully divided it into two doses;
a large one for a man, and the other for a smaller person, probably a
woman. He also took occasion, being near to Davy, to whisper to him that
the woman reminded him of his wife's sister Sis.

"You are evidently a married woman, sister," the bold rascal said,
seating himself in front of his captive, and looking at her in the
dignified manner which distinguished him. "I suppose you were very
handsome as a girl, and the men fell desperately in love with you, and
were very miserable in consequence. But I will let you into a secret;
you are bravely over your beauty now. I suppose your mother braided your
hair, and did all the work, that your hands might be as pretty as your
face; and certainly she believed that while the boys might possibly fail
in life, _you_ would be all right, and marry a prince, and repay her for
her kindness. Your poor mother rented a pianow for you, too, I reckon,
and hired you a teacher; and when you could drum a little, she thought
you could play a great deal, and felt repaid for all her trouble,
believing that you would turn out well, and make your brothers feel
ashamed of themselves for being so worthless. And while I don't know it,
I believe that she paid five dollars to somebody to make you a artist,
and that you painted roses and holly-hocks on saucers and plates, which
your poor mother, in the kindness of her heart, recognized, and greatly
admired. I shall believe this as long as I live, for you _look_ like a
painter and a pianowist out of practice."

This train of thought amused Mr. Whittle so much that he paused as if to
laugh; but he apparently thought better of it, though his scalp crawled
over on his forehead,--an oddity which distinguished him when he was
amused.

"Did your poor mother get to sleep peacefully at night, after working
all day for you?" inquired Mr. Whittle fiercely. "You don't answer; but
you know she didn't. You know she spent the night in wrangling with your
father to induce him to give her money that she might buy you more
ribbons and millinery and dry goods; and kid gloves, probably, although
your brother Bill was out at his toes, and hadn't so much as a cotton
handkercher; and how your mother went on when your husband came courting
you! He wasn't good enough for you _then_, whoever he was; though I'll
bet he thinks he's too good for you _now_, whoever he is; and what a
time you must have had borrowing silverware and chairs for the wedding!
I've been married, and I know. Your tired mother hoped that when her
children grew up they would relieve her, and love her, and be good to
her; but I'll bet you find fault because she didn't 'do' more for you;
and that your brother Bill, who ran away because you had all the pie in
the house, is taking care of her, providin' she aint dead from bother
and too much work, which is likely. And after all this trouble in your
behalf, look at you now!"

The little woman seemed to be paying some attention to what he was
saying, for she looked at him timidly out of the corners of her black
eyes a few times, and occasionally forgot to wring her hands and cry.

"Look at you now, I say! Your health has gone off after your beauty, for
you seem to have neither with you, and I find you wandering around at
night with a Thief. A great fall you've had, sister, providin' you ever
were young and pretty, for I was never acquainted with a worse-looking
woman than you are; and if you knew my wife you would be very indignant,
for she has the reputation of being a Terror for looks. When I was
younger I fell in love with every girl I met, and had no relief until
they married; _then_ I soon got over it, for you ought to know how they
fade under such circumstances; but you are worse than the rest of them;
you are so ugly that I feel sorry for you. Honestly, I wonder that you
do not blush in my presence; and I am not handsome, God knows. I really
feel sorry for you, but in connection with your friend Prowler you are
annoying an amiable and a worthy gentleman, who happens to be a friend
of Mr. Blood's, the party sitting opposite you; and I fear he does _not_
feel sorry for you. A little less of that word 'gentlemen,' sister, if
you please."

The woman was appealing to them again as before: "Gentlemen! In the name
of God! I appeal to you."

"Promise to take your friend Prowler, and leave this country," Mr.
Whittle continued, "and never return, and you shall go free; but if you
refuse--Blood!"

Tug sprang up and glared savagely at his meek little partner, at the
same time advancing toward him.

"You sha'n't satisfy that devilish disposition of yourn by shooting a
woman in the back when _I'm_ around, you cut-throat," he said. "Haven't
I always been ready to join you in putting men out of the way, and
haven't I enjoyed the pleasure of it with you? Then why do you want to
take the credit of this job to yourself, and enjoy it alone? You must
wait, Blood, until she speaks. We _may_ forgive her, providin' she
speaks up cheerful and don't attempt to deceive us."

Again Tug pretended to take a dangerous weapon from his companion,
standing between Davy and the prisoner while about it; after which he
regarded him for a few moments in contemptuous silence.

"It's your tongue, sister, and not your tears, as will do you good in
this difficulty," Tug said, in answer to a fresh burst of grief from the
woman. "I'll give you five minutes to decide between tongue and tears.
At the end of that time, if it's tears, the cravings of that bad man in
the corner shall be satisfied. Blood, where is the watch you took from
the store? Hain't got it? My guess is that you've lost it gambling, as
usual. Well, I'll count three hundred seconds, sister, since we have no
watch. One, two, three; here we go."

Tug looked reverently up at the ceiling; and appeared to be engaged in
counting for two or three minutes, occasionally looking at the woman and
then at Silas, who thought Tug had been counting at least half an hour
already.

"Two hundred and twenty-one, two hundred and twenty-two, two hundred and
twenty-three," he counted aloud. "Fifth call, sister, the time is going;
two hundred and twenty-four, two hundred and--"

At this moment there was a strange interruption to the proceedings. A
tall man wearing a rubber coat, which reached below his knees, opened
the door, and, leaving it open, stood just upon the inside, carrying a
pistol in his right hand, which hung by his side.

"The shadow!" both men thought at once; and very determined and ugly
looked the shadow, with his long, sallow face, and dark moustache.

"Alice," he said to the woman, "come out."

The woman quickly jumped up, and hurried outside. The shadow followed,
backing out like a lion-tamer leaving a cage, and closing the door after
him. But while he stood inside the door, although he was there only a
moment, both men noticed a strange peculiarity. The upper part of his
left ear was gone,--cut off clean, as if with a knife; and this
peculiarity was so unusual that they remarked it more than his face. The
circumstance gave them both an impression that the shadow was a
desperate man, and that he was accustomed to fierce brawls.

Tug and Silas looked at each other in blank dismay a long time after the
mysterious pair had disappeared, not venturing to look out, fearing it
might be dangerous; but finally Tug said,--

"Silas, I must have a gun. Do you happen to have one?"

Silas shook his head.

"Then I must steal one, for I need a gun. The shadow looks so much like
an uncle of my wife's that I am more determined than ever to kill him."

Whereupon he went over to the table, emptied the two packages of poison
on to the floor, and went to bed.




CHAPTER XI.

THE WHISPERS IN THE AIR.


There is a wide and populous world outside of Davy's Bend, from which
Allan Dorris recently came; let the whispers in the air, which frighten
every man with their secrets, answer why he had resolved never again to
see Annie Benton.

During his residence in Davy's Bend he had met the girl frequently,
usually at the stone church near his house, where she came to practise;
and after every meeting he became more than ever convinced, after
thinking about it,--and he thought about it a great deal,--that if their
acquaintance continued, there would come a time when he would find it
difficult to quit her society. The pleasure he enjoyed in the company of
the pretty organist was partly due to the circumstance that she was
always pleased at his approach, although she tried to disguise it; but
beyond this,--a long way beyond this,--there was reason why he should
avoid her; for the girl's sake, not his own.

He repeated this often to himself, as though he were a desperate man
ready to engage in any desperate measure; but his manner visibly
softened when he thought of the pretty girl whose ways were so engaging,
innocent, and frank. He knew himself so well,--the number of times he
had gone over the story of his life, in his own mind, since coming to
The Locks even, would have run up into the hundreds; therefore he knew
himself very well indeed,--that he felt in honor bound to give up his
acquaintance with her, although it cost him a keen pang of regret, this
determination to hear the music no more, and never again see the player.

Avoiding even a look at the church, which was a reminder of how much
pleasure he had found in Davy's Bend, and how much misery he would
probably find there in the future, he passed out of the iron gate of The
Locks, and set his face toward the quiet country, where he hoped to walk
until his body would call for rest at night, and permit him to sleep; a
blessing that had been denied him of late more than before he knew Annie
Benton, and when he thought that Davy's Bend contained people only fit
to be avoided.

But he was glad that he had resolved never to see the girl again,--for
her sake, not his own.

He had made this resolve after a struggle with himself, thinking of the
strange fatality that had made duty painful throughout his entire life;
and he walked toward the country because he believed the girl was in the
direction of the town; probably seated in the church at that moment,
watching the door for his approach. She was a comfort to him, therefore
he must avoid her; but this had always been the case--he was accustomed
to being warned that he was an intruder whenever he entered a pleasant
place.

There was something in store for her besides a life of hiding and fear,
and an unknown grave at last, with a fictitious name on the headboard;
and he would not cross a path which led toward happiness for one he so
much admired.

Thus he argued to himself as he walked along; but when he remembered how
dull his life would be should her smile never come into it again, he
could not help shuddering.

"But I have been so considerate of others," he said aloud, as he pursued
his way, "that even the worms in my path impudently expected me to go
round them, and seemed to honestly believe me unworthy of living at all
if I did not. Let me not show a lack of consideration now that my heart
is concerned."

Above his house, and so near the river that the water rippled at its
base, was a rugged bluff, separated from the town by a deep and almost
impassable ravine, and for this reason it was seldom visited; Allan
Dorris had found it during his first month in the town, and he resolved
to visit it now, and get the full benefit of the sunshine and delightful
air of the perfect summer day.

It occurred to him as he sat down to rest, after making the difficult
ascent, that he would like to build a house there, and live in it, where
he would never be disturbed. But did he want solitude? There seemed to
be some question of this, judging from the look of doubt on his downcast
face. When he first came to Davy's Bend, he believed that the rewards of
life were so unsatisfactory that all within his reach that he desired
was his own company; but an experience of a month had satisfied him that
solitude would not do, and he confessed that he did not know what he
wanted. If he knew what it was his heart craved, he believed that it was
beyond him, and unobtainable; and so his old habit of thinking was
resumed, though he could never tell what it was all about. Everything he
desired was impossible; that within his reach was distasteful--he could
make no more of the jumble in his brain, and finally sat with a vacant
stare on his face, thoroughly ashamed of the vagrant thoughts which gave
him a headache but no conclusions.

Even the pure air and the bright sunshine, that he thought he wanted
while coming along the road, were not satisfactory now; and as he
started to walk furiously up the hill, to tire himself, he met Annie
Benton in the path he was following.

She had been gathering wild flowers, and, as he came upon her, she was
so intent on arranging them after some sort of a plan, that she was
startled when he stood beside her.

"I was thinking of you," she said hurriedly, instead of returning his
greeting. "I intended sending you these."

Dorris could not help being amused that he had encountered the girl in a
place where he had gone to avoid her, but there was evidence in his
light laugh that he was glad of it; so he seated himself on a boulder
beside the path, and asked what she had been thinking of him.

"That you were a very odd man," she answered frankly.

"That has always been a complaint against me," he said, with a tone of
impatience. "I think I have never known any one who has not said, during
the course of our acquaintance, that I was 'odd;' whatever is natural in
me has been called 'odd' before. If I wanted bread, and was not
satisfied with a stone, they called me 'odd.' The wishes of the horse
that has a prejudice for being bridled on the left side are respected,
but there is no consideration for a man who cannot be contented simply
because it is his duty. I remember that we had a horse of this
description in our family when I was a boy, and if he injured any one
who failed to respect his wishes, the man was blamed, not the horse. But
the people do not have equal charity for a man who is not content when
circumstances seem to demand it of him, no difference what the
circumstances are, or how repugnant they may be to his taste. So you
were finding fault with me? I am not surprised at it, though; most
people do."

The girl had seated herself near him, and was busily engaged in
arranging the flowers until he inquired again,--

"So you were finding fault with me?"

"No," she answered, "unless it was finding fault to think of you as
being different from any other person I have ever known. It was not a
very serious charge to think of you as being different from the people
in Davy's Bend."

There was something in that, for they were not the finest people in the
world, by any means; nor could the town be justly held responsible for
all their faults, as they pretended.

"No, it is not serious," he replied; "but I am sorry you are looking so
well, for I am running away from you. It would be easier, were you less
becoming. I am sorry you are not ugly."

There was a look of wonder in the girl's face that made her prettier
than ever.

"Running away from _me_?"

"Yes, from you," he answered.

She began arranging the flowers again, and kept her eyes on them while
he watched her face. Dorris thought of himself as a snake watching a
bird, and finally looked down the river at the ferry, which happened to
be moving.

"Why?" she asked at last.

"Because I am dangerous," he replied, with a flushed face. "You should
run away when you see me approach, for I am not a fit companion for you.
I have nothing to offer that you ought to accept; even my attentions are
dangerous."

The bouquet was arranged by this time, and there was no further excuse
for toying with it, so she laid it down, and looked at him.

"I suppose I should be very much frightened," she said, "but I am not. I
am not at all afraid of you."

He laughed lightly to himself, and seemed amused at the answer she had
made.

"I know nothing whatever about women," he said, "and I am sorry for it,
for you are a puzzle to me. I know men as well as I know myself, and
know what to expect of them under given circumstances; but all those of
your sex I have ever known were as a sealed book. The men are always the
same, but I never know what a woman will do. No two of them are alike;
there is no rule by which you can judge them, except that they are
always better than the men. I have never known this to fail, but beyond
that I know nothing of your sex. I say to you that I am dangerous; you
reply that you are not afraid of me. But you ought to be; I am sure of
that."

"If you desire it," she said, "I am sorry, but I feel perfectly safe in
your company."

"It's a pity," he returned, looking down the river again. "If you were
afraid of me, I would not be dangerous. I am not liable to pelt you with
stones, or rob you; but the danger lies in the likelihood of our
becoming friends."

"Is friendship so dangerous, then?"

"It _would_ be between you and me, because I am odd. Look at me."

She did as requested, with quiet confidence and dignity.

"You say you are not afraid of me; neither am I of you, and I intend to
tell you what you can hardly suspect. I am in love with you to such an
extent that I can think of nothing else; but I cannot offer you an
honorable man's love, because I am not an honorable man, as that
expression is used and accepted. I have been looking all my life for
such a woman as you are, but now that I have found you, I respect you so
much that I dare not attempt to win your favor; indeed, instead of that,
I warn you against myself. Until I was thirty I looked into every face I
met, expecting to find the one I sought; but I never found it, and
finally gave up the search, forced to believe that such a one as I
looked for did not exist. I have found out my mistake, but it is too
late."

He jumped up from the stone on which he was seated, as if he intended to
run away, and did walk a distance, but came back again, as if he had
something else to say.

"I speak of this matter as I might tell a capable artist that I was
infatuated with his picture, and could not resist the temptation to
frequently admire it. I have no more reason to believe that there is a
responsive feeling in your heart than I would have reason to believe
that the picture I admired appreciated the compliment, but there is
nothing wrong in what I have said to you, and it is a pleasure for me to
say it; there can be no harm in telling a pretty, modest woman that you
admire her--she deserves the compliment."

Annie Benton did not appear to be at all surprised at this avowal, and
listened to it with the air of one who was being told of something
commonplace.

"You do not make love like the lovers I have read about," she said, with
an attempt at a smile, though she could not disguise the oddity of her
position. "I do not know how to answer you."

"Then don't answer me at all," he replied. "I am not making love to you,
for I have denied myself that privilege. I am not at liberty to make
love to you, though I want to; therefore I ask the privilege of
explaining why I shall avoid you in the future, and why I regret to do
it. The first feeling I was ever conscious of was one of unrest; I was
never satisfied with my home, or with those around me. If I thought I
had a friend, I soon found him out, and was more dissatisfied than ever.
Of course this was very unreasonable and foolish; anyone would say that,
and say it with truth, but while it is an easy explanation, I could not
help it; I was born that way, nor can I help saying that I am satisfied
with you. You suit me exactly, and I was never contented in my life
until I sat in the old church and looked at you."

Though the girl continued to look at him without apparent surprise, her
face was very pale, and she was breathing rapidly.

"You may regard what I have said as impudent," Dorris continued, "and
think that while you are satisfactory to me, I would not be to you. I am
not now, but I would give a great deal to convince you that I am the man
you dreamed of when you last put wedding-cake under your pillow,
providing you ever did such a ridiculous thing. It is not conceit for me
to say that I believe I could compel you to respect me, therefore I
regret that we have ever met at all, for I am not at liberty to woo you
honorably; if you want to know why, I will tell you, for I would place
my life in your hands without the slightest hesitation, and feel secure;
but it is enough for the present to say that nothing could happen which
would surprise me. I am in trouble; though I would rather tell you of it
than have you surmise what it is, for I am not ashamed of it. I can
convince you--or any one with equally good sense--that I am not nearly
so bad as many who live in peace. Would you like to hear my history?"

"No," she replied; "for you would soon regret telling it to me, and I
fear that you will discover some time that I am not worthy of the many
kind things you have said about me. I am only a woman, and when you know
me better you will find that I am not the one you have been looking for
so long and so patiently."

"Excuse me if I contradict you in that," he said with as much grave
earnestness as though he had been talking politics, and found it
necessary to take issue with her. "You _are_ the one. Once there came to
me in a dream a face which I have loved ever since. This was early in
life, and during all the years which have brought me nothing but
discontent and wretchedness, it has been my constant companion; the one
little pleasure of my life. From the darkness that surrounded me, the
face has always been looking at me; and whatever I have accomplished--I
have accomplished nothing in Davy's Bend, but my life has been busy
elsewhere--has been prompted by a desire to please this strange friend.
I have never been able to dismiss my trouble--I have had no more than my
share, perhaps, as you have said, but there is enough trouble in the
world to render us all unhappy--except to welcome the recollection of
the dream; and although I have often admitted to myself that this
communion with the unreal was absurd, and unworthy of a sensible man, it
has afforded me a contentment that I failed to find in anything else;
therefore the fancy made a strong impression on my mind, and it grew
stronger as I grew older, causing me many a heartache because there was
nothing in life like it. Most men have dreams of greatness, but my only
wish was to find the face that always came out of the shadows at my
bidding."

He paused for a moment, looking into the empty air, where his dream
seemed to realize before him, for he looked intently at it, and went on
to describe it.

"It was not an angel's face, but a woman's, and there was no expression
in it that was not human; expressions of love, and pity, and
forgiveness--you have them in your face now, and I believe they are not
uncommon. I have never expected unreal or impossible things, and as I
grew older, and better understood the unsatisfactory nature of life, I
became more than ever convinced that I would feel entirely satisfied
could my dream come true. At last I came to believe that it was
impossible; that I was as unreasonable as the man who pined because his
tears were not diamonds; but I could not give up the recollection of the
face, to which I was always so true and devoted, and comforted myself
with brooding over it, and regretting my misfortune. Instead of
greatness or grandeur, I longed for the face, and it was the only one I
ever loved."

Again he was gazing intently at nothing; at his fancy, but this time he
seemed to be dismissing it forever, after a careful inspection to
convince himself that the counterpart he had found on earth was exactly
like it.

"Until I met you," he said, looking at Annie Benton again, "this
sweetheart of my fancy lived in Heaven, Maid of Air. When you turned
upon me that afternoon in the church, I almost exclaimed aloud: 'The
face! My vision has come true!' Not a feature was missing, and your
actions and your smile were precisely what I had seen so often in my
fancy. Therefore you are not a stranger to me; I have loved you all my
life, and instead of worshipping a vision in the future I shall worship
you. Why don't you speak to me?"

"I don't dare to," she answered, looking him full in the face, and
without the slightest hesitation. "I am afraid I would say something I
ought not to."

He looked at her curiously for a moment, trying to divine her meaning,
and concluded that if she should speak more freely, he would hear
something surprising; either she would denounce him for his boldness, or
profess a love for him which would compel him to give up his resolution
of never seeing her again.

"That was an unfortunate expression," he said. "I am sorry you said
that, for it has pleased my odd fancy; indeed, it is precisely what I
was hoping you would say, but there is all the more reason now for my
repeating to you that I am dangerous. I know how desperate my affairs
are; how desperate I am, and how unfortunate it would be if you should
become involved. Therefore I say to you, as a condemned prisoner might
shut out the single ray of light which brightened his existence, so that
he might meet his inevitable fate bravely, that you must avoid me, and
walk another way when you see me approaching."

A hoarse whistle came to them from the ferry in the river, and Dorris
thought of it as an angry warning from a monster, in whose keeping he
was, to come away from a presence which afforded him pleasure.

"May I speak a word?" the girl inquired, turning abruptly toward him.

"Yes; a dozen, or a thousand, though I would advise you not to."

"Is what you have said to me exactly true?"

"Upon my honor; exactly true," he answered.

"Is there no morbid selfishness in it; no foolish fancy?"

"Upon my honor, none!"

"Do you believe I am your dream come true with the same matter-of-fact
belief which convinces you that there is a ferry in the river?"

She pointed out the boat as it moved lazily through the water, and as he
looked at it he seemed to resolve the matter carefully in his mind.

"Yes," he answered, "I am as certain that you are the woman I have loved
devotedly all my life, as I am certain that there is a river at the foot
of the hill. What I have said to you is generally regarded as
sentimental nonsense except when it is protected by the charity of a
sweetheart or a wife; but it is in every man's heart, though it is
sometimes never expressed, and my idle life here has made me bold enough
to state that it is true. I have been seeking contentment with so much
eagerness, and know so well that it is hard to find, that I have come to
believe that there is but one more chance, and that I would find what I
lack in the love of a woman like you. Even if I should discover by
experience that I am mistaken in this belief, I would feel better off
than I ever did before; for I would then conclude that my fancies were
wrong, and that I was as well off as any man; but this feeling will
always be denied me, for I am denied the privilege of happiness now that
it is within my reach. My lonely life here has wrung a confession from
me which I should have kept to myself, but it is every word true; you
can depend on that."

Annie Benton seemed satisfied with the answers he had made, and there
was another long silence between them.

"And your music--you play like one possessed," he said finally, talking
to the wind, probably, for he was not looking at the girl. "Every
sentiment my heart has ever known you have expressed in chords. Had I
not known differently, I should have thought you were familiar with my
history and permitted the organ to tell it whenever we met. What a voice
the old box has, and what versatility; for its power in representing
angels is only equalled by its power to represent devils. There is a
song with which I have become familiar from hearing you play the air; it
is a sermon which appealed to me as nothing ever did before. Before I
knew the words, I felt sure that they were promises of mercy and
forgiveness; and when I found them, I thought I must have been familiar
with them all my life; they were exactly what I had imagined. To look at
your cold, passionless face now, no one would suspect your wonderful
genius. You look innocent enough, but I do not wonder that you are
regarded as a greater attraction than the minister. I have been told
that you can kill the sermon, when you want to, by freezing the audience
before it commences, and I believe it. I have no doubt that you take
pride in controlling with your deft fingers the poor folks who worship
under the steeple which mounts up below us. I only wonder that you do
not cause them to cheer, and swing their hats, for they say that you can
move them to tears at will."

"I never feel like cheering myself," she answered, "and I suppose that
is why the organ never does. But I very often feel sad, because I am so
commonplace, and because there is so little in the future for me. If I
play so coldly at times that even the minister is affected, it is
because I am indifferent, and forget, and not because I intend it."

"If you are commonplace," Allan Dorris replied, "you have abundant
company; for the world is full of common people. We are all creatures of
such common mould that I wonder we do not tire of our ugly forms. Out of
every hundred thousand there is a genius, who neglects all the virtues
of the common folks, and is hateful save as a genius. For his one good
quality he has a hundred bad ones; but he is not held to strict account,
like the rest of us, for genius is so rare that we encourage it, no
matter what the cost. But I have heard that these great people are
monstrosities, and thoroughly wretched. I would rather be a king in one
honest heart, than a sight for thousands. But this is not running away
from you, as I promised, and if I remain here longer I shall lose the
power. My path is down the hill; yours is up."

He lifted his hat to her, and walked away; but she called to him,--

"I am going down the hill, too, and I will accompany you."

He waited until she came up, and they walked away together.

The girl had said that she was going down the hill, too, and would
accompany him; but Dorris knew that she meant the hill on which they
were standing, not the one he referred to. He referred to a hill as
famous as wickedness, and known in every house because of its open doors
to welcome back some straggler from the noisy crowd travelling down the
famous hill; but he thought that should a woman like Annie Benton
consent to undertake the journey with him, he would change his course,
and travel the other way, in spite of everything.

"Did I do wrong in asking you to wait for me?" she inquired, after they
had walked awhile in silence.

"Yes," he answered, "because it pleased me. Be very careful to do
nothing which pleases me, for I am not accustomed to it, and the novelty
may cause me to forget the vow I have made. A man long accustomed to
darkness is very fond of the light. What do you think of me, anyway?"

"What a strange question!" the girl said, turning to look at him.

"Be as frank with me as I was with you. What do you think of me?"

The girl thought the matter over for a while, and replied,--

"If I should answer you frankly, I should please you; and you have
warned me against that."

Dorris was amused at the reply, and laughed awhile to himself.

"I didn't think of that," he said, though he probably had thought of it,
and hoped that her reply would be what it was. "I am glad to hear that I
am not repugnant to you, though. It will be a comfort to me to know, now
that my dream has come true, that the subject of it does not regard me
with distrust or aversion. I am glad, too, that after dreaming of the
sunshine so long, it is not a disappointment. In my loneliness hereafter
that circumstance will be a satisfaction, and it will be a pleasure to
believe that the sunshine was brighter because of my brief stay in it. I
can forget some of the darkness around me in future, in thinking of
these two circumstances."

They had reached Thompson Benton's gate by this time, and, the
invitation having been extended, Dorris walked into the house. The
master was not due for an hour, so Dorris remained until he came,
excusing himself by the reflection that he would never see the girl
again, and that he was entitled to this pleasure because of the
sacrifice he had resolved to make.

It was the same old story over again; Allan Dorris was desperately in
love with Annie Benton, but she must not be in love with him, for he was
dangerous, and whether this was true or not, his companion did not
believe it. He told in a hundred ways, though in language which might
have meant any one of a hundred things, that she was his dream come
true, and of the necessity which existed for him to avoid her.
Occasionally he would forget to be grave, and make sport of himself, and
laugh at what he had been saying; and at these times Annie Benton was
convinced more than ever that he was not a dangerous man, as he said,
for there was an honest gentility in his manner, and a gentle respect
for her womanhood in everything he did; therefore she listened
attentively to what he said, saying but little herself, as he requested.
Although he made love to her in many ingenious ways, and moved Annie
Benton as she had never been moved before, he did not so intend it.
Could his motives have been impartially judged, that must have been the
verdict; but while he knew that his love was out of place in the keeping
of the girl, he could not resist the temptation of giving it to her, and
then asking her to refuse it.

Several times Annie Benton attempted to speak, but he held up his hand
as a warning.

"Don't say anything that you will regret," he said. "Let me do that; I
am famous for it. I never talked ten minutes in my life that I didn't
say something that caused me regret for a year. But I will never regret
anything I have said to you, for I have only made a confession which has
been at my tongue's end for years. I have known you all my life; you
know nothing of me, and care less, therefore let it be as I suggest."

"But just a word," the girl insisted. "You do not understand what I
would say--"

"I don't know what you would say, but I can imagine what a lady like you
_should_ say under such circumstances, and I beg the favor of your
silence. Let me imagine what I please, since that can be of little
consequence to you."

There was a noise at the front door, and old Thompson came in. Dorris
bowed himself out, followed by a scowl, and as he walked along toward
his own house he thought that his resolution to see Annie Benton no more
would at least save him from a quarrel with her father.




CHAPTER XII.

RUINED BY KINDNESS.


John Bill, editor of the Davy's Bend _Triumph_, was ruined by a railroad
pass. When he taught school over in the bottoms, on the other side of
the river, and was compelled to pay his fare when he travelled, he
seldom travelled, and therefore put his money carefully away, but when
he invested his savings in the _Triumph_, and the railroad company sent
him an annual pass, he made up for lost time, and travelled up and down
the road almost constantly, all his earnings being required to pay his
expenses.

A day seldom passed that John Bill did not get off or on a train at the
Davy's Bend station, carrying an important looking satchel in his right
hand, and an umbrella in his left, and though he imagined that this
coming and going gave the people an idea of his importance, he was
mistaken, for they knew he had no business out of the town, and very
little in it: therefore they made fun of him, as they did of everything
else, for the Davy's Bend people could appreciate the ridiculous in
spite of their many misfortunes. They knew enough, else they could not
have been such shrewd fault-finders, and they had rather extensive
knowledge of everything worldly except a knowledge of the ways of
Capital, which was always avoiding them; but this was not astonishing,
since Capital had never lived among them and been subject to their keen
scrutiny.

When an event was advertised to take place on the line of road over
which his pass was accepted, John Bill was sure to be present, for he
argued that, in order to report the news correctly, he must be on the
ground in person; but usually he remained away so long, and gave the
subject in hand such thorough attention, that he concluded on his return
that the people had heard of the proceedings, and did not write them up,
though he frequently asserted with much earnestness that no editor in
that country gave the news as much personal attention as he did.

Still, John Bill claimed to be worth a good deal of money. There was no
question at all, he frequently argued, that his business and goodwill
were worth fifteen thousand dollars--any man would be willing to pay
that for the _Triumph_ and its goodwill, providing he had the money;
therefore, deducting his debts, which amounted to a trifle of eleven
hundred dollars on his material, in the shape of an encumbrance, and a
floating indebtedness of half as much more, he was still worth a little
more than thirteen thousand dollars. The people said that everything in
his office was not worth half the amount of the encumbrance, and that
his goodwill could not be very valuable, since his business did not pay
its expenses; but John Bill could prove that the people had never
treated him justly, therefore they were likely to misrepresent the facts
in his case.

There was a mortgage, as any one who cared to examine the records might
convince himself, but it was a very respectable mortgage, and had been
extended from time to time, as the office changed hands, for fifteen
years past. It had been owned by all the best men in the neighborhood;
but while a great many transfers were noted thereon, no credits
appeared, so John Bill was no worse than the rest of them. The former
parties of the first part had intended paying off the trifling amount in
a few weeks, and thereby become free to act as they pleased; John Bill
had the same intention concerning the document, therefore it was no
great matter after all.

Besides, there were the accounts. He had a book full of them, and was
always showing it to those who bothered him for money. The accounts were
all against good men; a little slow, perhaps, but good, nevertheless,
and the accounts should be figured in an estimate of John Bill's
affairs, which would add a few thousands more to the total.

It was a little curious, though, that most of the men whose names
appeared on John Bill's ledger had accounts against John Bill, and while
he frequently turned to their page and showed their balances, they also
turned to John Bill's page in _their_ ledgers, and remarked that there
was no getting anything out of him. Thompson Benton had been heard to
say that each of these men were afraid to present their bills first,
fearing that the others would create a larger one; so the accounts ran
on from year to year. But whoever was in the right, it is certain that
the accounts were a great comfort to John Bill, for he frequently looked
them over as a miser might count his money.

John Bill was certain the people of Davy's Bend were ungrateful. He had
helped them and their town in a thousand ways, and spent his time (or
that part of it not devoted to using his pass) in befriending them; but
did they appreciate him? They did not; this may be set down as certain,
for if the editor had put them in the way of making money, they were
thoroughly ungrateful. Indeed, the people went so far as to declare that
John Bill was the ungrateful one, nor were they backward in saying so.
They had taken his paper, and helped him in every way possible, but he
did not appreciate it; so they accused each other, and a very
uncomfortable time they had of it. But though John Bill claimed to be
always helping the people, and though the people claimed that they had
done a great deal for John Bill, the facts were that neither John Bill
nor the people gave substantial evidence of any very great exertions in
each other's behalf, so there must have been a dreadful mistake out
somewhere. Likewise, they quarrelled as to which had tried to bring the
greater number of institutions to the town; but as to the institutions
actually secured, there were none to quarrel over, so there was peace in
this direction.

John Bill frequently came to the conclusion that his wrongs must be
righted; that he must call names, and dot his i's and cross his t's,
even to pointing out to the world wherein he had been wronged. He could
stand systematic persecution no longer, he said, so he would fill his
ink-bottle, and secure a fresh supply of paper, with a view of holding
up to public scorn those who had trampled him in the dust of the street.
But it was a bold undertaking; a stouter heart than John Bill's would
have shrunk from attacking a people with a defence as sound as the
Davy's Bend folks could have made, so he usually compromised by writing
paid locals about the men he had intended to accuse of ingratitude,
referring to them as generous, warm-hearted men, who were creditable to
humanity, all of which he added to the accounts at the rate of eight
cents per line of seven words.

John Bill was so situated that he did little else than write paid
locals, though he usually found time once a week to write imaginary
descriptions of the rapid increase in circulation his paper was
experiencing. He had discovered somehow that men who would pay for
nothing else would pay for being referred to as citizens of rare
accomplishments, and as gentlemen whose business ability was such that
their competitors were constantly howling in rage; and it became
necessary to use this knowledge to obtain the bare necessities of life.
The very men who declared that John Bill could have no more goods at
their stores until old scores were squared would soften under the
influence of the puff, and honor his "orders" when in the hands of
either of the two young men who did his work.

Perhaps this was one reason the _Triumph_ was on all sides of every
question. Whoever saw fit to write for it had his communication printed
as original editorial; for the editor was seldom at home, and when he
was, he found his time taken up in earning his bread by writing
palatable falsehoods; therefore all the contributions went in, and as
correspondents seldom agree, the _Triumph_ was a remarkable publication.
Whenever a citizen had a grievance, he aired it in the _Triumph_, his
contribution appearing as the opinion of the editor. The person attacked
replied in like manner; hence John Bill was usually in the attitude of
fiercely declaring _No_ one week, and _Yes_ with equal determination the
next. It was so on all subjects; politics, religion, local
matters--everything. The Republican who aired his views one week in John
Bill's remarkable editorial columns was sure to find himself confronted
by a Democrat who was handy with a pen in the next issue; the man who
wrote that This, or That, or the Other, was a disgrace, would soon find
out that This, or That, or the Other, were very creditable; for John
Bill's printers must have copy, and John Bill was too busy travelling
and lying to furnish it himself.

Having returned home on the night train, John Bill climbed the stairway
at the head of which his office was situated, and was engaged in
preparing for his next issue. Although he felt sure that a large amount
of important mail matter had arrived during his absence, it could not be
found; and therefore the editor was in rather bad humor, as he produced
a list of paid notices to be written, and made lazy preparation for
writing them. The editor was always expecting important mail matter, and
because it never came he almost concluded that the postmaster was in the
intrigue against him. While thinking that he would include that official
in the expose he felt it his duty to write at some time in the future, a
knock came at the door. He had heard no step ascending the stair,
therefore he concluded it must be one of his young men; probably the
pale one, who was wasting his life in chewing plug tobacco, and
squirting it around in puddles, in order that he might realize on a joke
which he had perpetrated by printing a sign in huge letters, requesting
visitors not to spit on the floor.

In response to his invitation a tall gentleman came in,--a stranger,
dressed in a suit of black material that gave him the appearance of
being much on the road, for it was untidy and unkempt. He looked a good
deal like a genteel man who had been lately engaged in rough work, and
John Bill noticed that he kept his left side turned from him. The
stranger's hair, as well as his moustache and goatee, were bushy, and
sprinkled with gray; and he had a rather peculiar pair of eyes, which he
used to such an advantage that he seemed to remark everything in the
room at a single glance. An odd man, John Bill thought; a man who might
turn out to be anything surprising; so he looked at him curiously quite
a long time.

"You are Mr. Bill?" the stranger asked, after the two men had looked
each other over to their joint satisfaction.

The editor acknowledged his name by an inclination of the head, at the
same time offering a chair.

"I came in on the night train," the tall man said, seating himself with
the left side of his face toward the door at which he had entered;
"therefore I call upon you at this unseasonable hour to make a few
inquiries with reference to your place. It is not probable that I shall
become an advertiser, or a patron of any kind; but I think you may
depend on it that I will shortly furnish you with an item of news. I
have read your editorial paragraphs with a good deal of interest, and
concluded that you could give me the information desired."

John Bill expressed a wish to himself that the stranger would never find
out that he did not write the editorials he professed to admire; but
there was a possibility that his visitor was not sincere. He had said
that he came to the town on the night train. John Bill knew this to be
untrue, for he had been a passenger on that train himself, and no one
else got off when he did. He was glad, however, that the
determined-looking visitor did not bring a folded copy of the _Triumph_
with him for convenience in referring to an objectionable paragraph; for
John Bill felt sure that such a man as the stranger looked to be would
not go away without satisfaction of some kind. He was bothered a good
deal in this way, by reason of his rather peculiar way of conducting the
_Triumph_; but questions with reference to Davy's Bend,--he could answer
them easy enough.

But he did not contradict the statement of his visitor concerning the
time he arrived in town, for he did not look like a man who would take
kindly to a thing of that sort; so the editor meekly said he would be
pleased to give him any information in his power.

"I will inquire first about the man calling himself--Allan Dorris," the
stranger continued, consulting a book which he took from his pocket, and
pausing a little before pronouncing the name, "and I ask that this
conversation be in confidence. How long has this fellow been here?"

The tall stranger put up his book, and looked at the responsible head of
the _Triumph_, as though he would intimate that his displeasure would be
serious should his instructions be neglected.

"This is October," Mr. Bill replied, counting on his fingers. "He came
in the spring, some time; probably six months ago. I do not know him
personally. He is a doctor, and lives in a place called 'The Locks,' on
the edge of the town, in this direction," pointing his finger toward the
stone church, and the house in which Allan Dorris lived. "That's about
all I know of him."

The peculiar pair of eyes owned by the odd man followed the direction
pointed out for a moment, and then settled on John Bill again.

"I have heard that he has a love affair with a young woman named--Annie
Benton," the visitor said with business precision, once more consulting
his book, and pausing before pronouncing the name, as he had done
before. "What do you know about that?"

"I have heard something of it," the editor replied, "but nothing in
particular; only that he is with her a great deal, and that he meets her
usually in a church near his house. The people talk about it, but I am
too busy to pay much attention to such matters."

John Bill was trying to create the impression that he was kept busy in
writing the sparkling editorials which the stranger had pretended to
admire, but thinking at the last moment that his travelling was his
credit, he added, with a modest cough: "Besides, I travel a good deal."
But this was not the first time John Bill had tried to create a wrong
impression. He foolishly imagined that, being an editor, he was expected
to know more than other people; but as he did not, he frequently filled
his mind with old dates, and names, and events, by reading of them, and
then talked of the subject to others, pretending that it had just
occurred to him, and usually adding a word or two concerning the popular
ignorance. If he encountered a word which he did not know the meaning
of, he looked it up, and used it a great deal after that, usually in
connection with arguments to prove that the average man did not
understand the commonest words in his language. Nor was this all; John
Bill was a deceiver in another particular. He frequently intimated in
the _Triumph_ that if he were a rich man he would spend his money
liberally in "helping the town;" that is, in mending the streets and
sidewalks, and in building manufactories which would give employment to
"labor." John Bill was certainly a deceiver in this, for there never was
a poor man who did not find fault with the well-to-do for taking care of
their means. The men who have no money of their own claim to know
exactly how money should be invested, but somehow the men who have money
entertain entirely different ideas on the subject.

Upon invitation the editor told of old Thompson Benton and his
disposition; of the beauty of his daughter, and of her talent as a
musician; of Allan Dorris's disposition, which seemed to be sour one
day, and sweet the next, and so on; all of which the stranger noted in
his book, occasionally making an inquiry as the narrative of the town's
gossip progressed. When this was concluded, the book in which the notes
were made was carefully put away, and the stranger backed toward the
door, still keeping his left side in the shadow, first leaving a
ten-dollar note on the editorial table.

"I shall need your services soon," he said, "and I make a small payment
in advance to bind the bargain. When the time comes you will know it.
Your business then will be to forget this interview. You are also to say
nothing about it until you receive the warning to forget. I bid you
good-night."

So saying the stranger was gone, retreating down the stairway so lightly
that his footsteps could not be heard.

A rather remarkable circumstance, the editor thought; a visit at such an
hour from a mysterious man who inquired minutely about a citizen who was
almost as much of a mystery as the visitor himself; and when he heard a
step on the stair again, he concluded that the stranger had forgotten
something, and was coming back, so he opened the door, only to meet Mrs.
Whittle, the milliner, who carried a sealed envelope in her hand.

John Bill did not like Mrs. Whittle, the milliner, very well; for she
had a habit of saying that "her work" was all the advertising she
needed, referring to the circumstance that she had become the town
busybody in her attempts to reform the people; but he received her
politely, and thought to himself that when his sensation finally
appeared it would refer to this party as fluffy, fat, and beardy.

Mrs. Whittle had a good deal to say concerning the careless,
good-natured wickedness of the people, and the people had a good deal to
say about Mrs. Whittle. One thing they said was, that while she was
always coaxing those who were doing very well to become better, she was
shamefully neglecting her own blood in the person of little Ben Whittle,
her only child, who was being worked to death by the farmer named Quade,
in whose employ he was. This unfortunate child had not seen his mother
for years, and was really sick, distressed, ragged, and dirty; but while
Mrs. Whittle imagined that he was doing very well, and felt quite easy
concerning him, she could not sleep at night from worrying over the fear
that other children, blessed with indulgent parents and good homes, were
growing up in wickedness. Her husband was a drunkard and a loafer, but
Mrs. Whittle had no time to bother about him; there were men in the town
so thoroughly debased as to remain at home, and rest on Sunday, instead
of going to church, and to this unfortunate class she devoted her life.
She frequently took credit to herself that the best citizens of Davy's
Bend were not in jail, and believed that they would finally acknowledge
their debt to her; but of her unfortunate son and her vagrant husband
she never thought at all; so John Bill could not very well be blamed for
disliking her.

"I heard you would return to-night," the good woman said, panting from
her exertion in climbing the stairs, "and I wanted to deliver this with
my own hands, which is my excuse for coming at this late hour, though I
don't suppose that any one would doubt that I came on a good errand,
even if they had seen me coming up. Bless me, what a hard stair you
have!"

John Bill took the envelope, and, after tearing it open, hung the note
it contained on an empty hook within reach of his hand, without looking
at it. Meanwhile Mrs. Whittle continued to pant, and look good.

"It refers to Allan Dorris's affair with Annie Benton," she said,
recovering her breath at last. "Something should be done, and I don't
know who else is to do it. The people all mean well enough, and they are
good enough people as a rule; but when there is good to be accomplished,
I usually find it is _not_ accomplished unless I take an interest in it.
No one knows better than John Bill that I do not suspect people, and am
always inclined to believe good of them, but there is something wrong
about this Allan Dorris. Mr. Ponsonboy and Mr. Wilton say so, and you
know they are very careful of what they say."

John Bill had heard that statement questioned, and he mentally added
their names to his black list. Two greater talking old women never wore
pants, John Bill had heard said, than Messrs. Ponsonboy and Wilton, and
when he got at it he would skin them with the others.

"Better men than Mr. Ponsonboy and Mr. Wilton never lived," Mrs. Whittle
said, "and I have concluded to write a hint which Annie Benton as well
as Allan Dorris will understand. If nothing comes of it, I will try
something else. I am not easily discouraged, Mr. Bill; I would have
given up long ago if I were."

Mrs. Whittle found it necessary to pause for another rest, and the
editor took opportunity to make mental note of the fact (for use in the
coming exposure) that she was dressed in the most execrable taste; that
her clothes seemed to have been thrown at her from a miscellaneous
assortment, without regard to color, material, or shape, and that she
had not taken the trouble to arrange them. John Bill felt certain that
when the people were buying copies of his paper to burn, they would read
that Mrs. Whittle was in need of the refining influences of a
dress-maker.

"You are a good man at heart, Mr. Bill," Mrs. Whittle said again, which
was an expression the editor had heard before, for he was always being
told that he was a better man than he appeared to be, though he knew a
great many people who were not better than they appeared to be. "I know
you are, and that you do not mean all the bad things you say sometimes.
I know you will help me in doing good, for it is so important that good
_should_ be done. When I think of the wickedness around me, and the work
that is to be done, I almost faint at the prospect, but I only hope that
my strength may enable me to hold out to the end. I pray that I may be
spared until this is a better world."

Mr. Bill promised to find a place in his crowded columns for the good
woman's contribution, and she went away, with a sigh for the general
wickedness.

"The world will be better off for that sigh," John Bill said, as he
settled down in his chair, and heard Mrs. Whittle step off the stair
into the street. "What we need is more sighing and less work. There is
no lack of workers; in fact, the country is too full of them for
comfort, but there is a painful lack of good people to sigh. The first
one who called to-night on Allan Dorris business looked like a worker; a
worker-off, I may say. This Dorris is becoming important of late. I must
make his acquaintance. Hello! Another!"

The owner of the legs that were climbing the stairway this time turned
out to be Silas Davy, who came in and handed John Bill a piece of paper.
It proved to be a brief note, which read,--

     "TO JOHN BILL,--If the party who has just left your office left
     a communication concerning Allan Dorris, I speak for the
     privilege of answering it.

     "TUG WHITTLE."

John Bill read the note several times over after Silas had disappeared,
and finally getting up from his chair, said,--

"I'll write no more to-night; there may be interesting developments in
the morning."




CHAPTER XIII.

THE REBELLION OF THE BARITONE.


During the summer and winter following the arrival of Allan Dorris in
Davy's Bend, he met Annie Benton at intervals after their strange
meeting out on the hills, in spite of his resolution to keep out of her
way, and though he was convinced more than ever after each meeting that
their acquaintance was dangerous, he candidly admitted to himself that
he was powerless to resist the temptation to see her when opportunity
offered, for the girl waited as anxiously for his appearance as he did
for hers; she was as deeply concerned as he was, and while this
circumstance afforded him a kind of pleasure, it was also painful, for
he felt certain that no good could come of it.

Usually he attended the services in the church once a week, and watched
the organist so closely that she always divined his presence, and looked
timidly toward where he sat when opportunity offered. Dorris believed
that he could cause the girl to think of him by looking at her, and
though he changed his position at every service, he had the satisfaction
of finally seeing her pick him out, and she never made a mistake, always
looking directly at him when she turned her head.

After the people were dismissed, he occasionally met her at the door,
and walked home with her behind her glowering father, who received the
attentions of Dorris with little favor. A few times he remained in the
church with her a few minutes after the congregation had passed out, but
after each meeting he felt more dissatisfied than ever, and chafed under
the restraint which held him back. A few times, also, he went into the
house, after accompanying her home, which pleased Annie Benton as much
as it displeased old Thompson, but somehow he did not enjoy her company
there as he did when she was alone in the church, for the Ancient
Maiden, as well as the Ancient Gentleman, seemed to regard him with
suspicion and distrust; therefore in spite of his vows to let her alone,
which he had made with honesty and sincerity, he called on her at the
church nearly every week.

He believed that he was entitled to some credit because he only saw the
girl occasionally, for he longed to be with her continually; and there
were times, when he heard the organ, that he overcame the temptation and
did not enter the church. On these occasions he turned his face doggedly
toward The Locks, and paced up and down in his own room until he knew
the temptation was removed; when he would go out into the yard again,
hoping that some good fortune had detained the player longer than usual,
and that he would meet her unexpectedly.

This same spirit caused him to haunt the road which she frequented on
her visits to and from the town, and quite often he had occasion to
appear surprised at her approach when he was not, when he would walk
with her one way or the other until it seemed necessary for them to
separate. It was not a deep _ruse_--nor did it deceive himself, for he
often laughed at its absurdity--but it afforded occupation to a man who
was idle more than half his time, and Allan Dorris was like other men in
the particular that he wanted to do right, but found it very difficult
when inclination led in the other direction. When they met in this
manner, each usually had time to say only enough to excite the curiosity
of the other, and to cause them to long for another meeting, and thus
the winter was passed, and the early spring came on; the season of
quarreling between frost and sunshine.

On a certain wild March evening, after a day of idleness and longing to
see the girl, Dorris put on his heavy coat and walked in the yard, up
and down the old path under the trees, which gave evidences of his
restless footsteps even in the snows of winter. As soon as he came out
he heard the music, and between his strong desire to see the player, and
his conviction that he should never enter her presence, he resolved to
leave Davy's Bend and never return. He could better restrain his love
for her in some distant town than in Davy's Bend, therefore he would go
away, and try to forget. This gave him an excuse to enter the church,
though he only intended to bid her good-by; and so impatient was he that
he scaled the wall, and jumped down on the outside, instead of passing
out at the gate.

Annie Benton was watching for him when he stepped into her presence from
the vestibule, and as he walked up the aisle he saw so much pleasure in
her face that he regretted to make the announcement of his departure;
but he knew it was the best thing to do, and did not hesitate. He even
thought of the prospect that she might regret his determination, and say
so, which would greatly please him.

"I have concluded to leave Davy's Bend," he said, as he took the hand
she offered him, "and have called to say good-by. As soon as I can
dispose of my effects I will leave this forbidden ground, and travel so
far that I will forget the way back. The more I see of you, the more I
love you; and if I continue to live in sight of your house, I will
finally forget everything except that I love you, and do you a great
harm. It will not take me long to settle up my affairs, and within a few
days, at the farthest, I shall be gone."

The smile on Annie Benton's pretty face vanished at once, as she turned
her head and looked from him, at the same time trying to run her fingers
over the keys; but they had lost their cunning, and her hands soon lay
idly on the keyboards. When Dorris finally caught her head gently, and
turned it toward him, he saw that tears were in her eyes. She did not
attempt to hide this, and quietly submitted when he brushed them away.

"It pains me to know that you regret this announcement," Dorris said,
after looking at her a moment, "though it would pain me more to believe
that you did not. It seems to be always so; there is sorrow in
everything for me. I have cursed myself a thousand times for this
quality, and thought ill of a nature which had no peace or content in
it. I have hated myself for years because of the belief that nothing
would satisfy me; that I would tire of everything I coveted, and that I
was born a misanthrope and an embodied unrest. When I have envied others
their content, I have always concluded afterwards that there was
something in my nature opposed to peace, and that I was doomed to a
restless life, always seeking that which could not be found. I have
always believed that my acquaintances have had this opinion of me, and
that for this reason they did not grant me the charity I felt the need
of. But now that I am going away, and will never see you again, I hope
you will pardon my saying that your absence has been the cause of the
unrest which has always beset me. Long before I knew you existed I was
looking for you; and I know now that all my discontent would have
vanished had I been free to make honorable love to you when we first
met. In our weakness we are permitted to know a few things; I know this
to be true."

"Since you have always wished me to take no interest in this
acquaintance of ours," Annie Benton replied, in a tone which might have
been only sullen, but it sounded very much like the voice of an earnest
woman expressing vexation and regret, "let me at least express in words
what I have often expressed in my actions--that I would have long ago
shown you that your affection was returned; that you are not more
concerned than I am. I have always been in doubt as to what my course
should be; but let me say this, in justice to my intelligence, though it
be a discredit to my womanhood, you can never love me more than I do
you. Nor do you more sincerely regret the necessity which you say exists
for your going away."

"I hope I do not take undue credit to myself," he replied, "when I say
that I have known this ever since our acquaintance began, and I only
asked you to remain silent because I could not have controlled myself
with declarations of love from your lips ringing in my ears. You trusted
my judgment fully, and refused to hear the reasons why I said our
acquaintance was dangerous; and I will deserve that confidence by going
away, for I know that is the best thing to do. Sometimes there is a
little pleasure in a great sorrow. I have known mothers to find pleasure
in talking of their dead children, and I find a fascination in talking
to you about a love which can never be realized. Heretofore I have been
a man shut up in a dungeon, craving sunlight, hating myself because I
came to believe that there was no sunlight; now I realize that sunlight
was a natural necessity for my well-being, for I have found it, and it
is all I hoped. But I must go back into the dungeon, and the necessity
is more disagreeable than I can tell you. I am an average man in every
respect save that I feel that I have never had an average man's chance
in this matter of love, and fret because of it. That which I crave may
be a mistake of the fancy, but I am not convinced of it; therefore I am
not as philanthropic as those who have outgrown in experience an
infatuation such as I feel for you. I have tried everything else, and
have learned to be indifferent, with all my idols broken and dishonored
at my feet; but there is a possibility in love which I can never know
anything about."

While the girl was listening, there were times when Dorris thought she
would interrupt him, and make the declaration which he had forbidden;
but she controlled herself, and looked steadily away from him.

"It may occur to you as strange--it _is_ strange--that while I declare
my love for you, I run away from it. In explanation I could only repeat
what I have said before; that it is for your good that I have adopted
this course. Had you listened to my brief story, you would now
understand why my going away seems to be necessary; since you preferred
not to, I can only say in general terms that nothing could happen,
except good fortune, which would surprise me. I am surrounded by danger,
and while my life has been one long regret, the greatest regret of all
is that which I experience in leaving you. Were I to consult my own
bent, I would deny all that I have intimated to my discredit, and make
such love to you that you could not resist it; but I love you, and this
course would not prove it. We are doing now what millions of people have
done before us; making a sacrifice for the right against strong
inclinations, and we should meet it bravely. There is no hesitation in
my manner, I hope."

Annie Benton turned and looked at him, and saw that he was trembling and
very much agitated.

"Then why are you trembling?" she asked.

"Because of the chill in the air, I presume," he answered, "for I am
very determined to carry out my resolution. I might tremble with
excitement in resolving to rescue a friend from danger, though it would
not indicate a lack of courage. You are willing for me to go?"

"Since you say it is for the best," she replied, "yes."

Believing that he had said all that was necessary, Allan Dorris
hesitated between going away and remaining. Walking over to the window,
and looking out, he saw that the light he had been talking about was
fading away from the earth, as it was fading away from him, and that the
old night was coming back. A hill-top he saw in the distance he likened
to himself; resisting until the last moment, but without avail, for the
darkness was gradually climbing up its sides, and would soon cover it.

"You will no doubt think that I should have kept away from you when I
saw that my presence was not objectionable, and that our acquaintance
would finally result in this," he said, coming back to the girl, and
standing by her side, "but I could not; let me acknowledge my fault, and
say that I am sorry for it. I could not resist the temptation to enter
the only presence which has ever afforded me pleasure, try hard as I
could, so I kept it up until I am now forced to run away from it. Do I
make my meaning clear?"

"Perfectly," she replied, without looking around.

"Life is so unsatisfactory that it affords nothing of permanent value
except the love and respect of a worthy, intelligent, and agreeable
woman. It is the favor I have sought, and found too late. It is
fortunate that you are not as reckless as I am; otherwise no restraint
would keep us apart. But for the respect I have for your good name, I
would steal you, and teach you to love me in some far-away place."

"You have taught me already," the girl timidly replied, still looking
away.

"Don't say that," Dorris said in alarm. "That pleases me, for it is
depravity, and everything depraved seems to suit me. You must say
nothing which pleases me, else I will fail in my resolve. Say everything
you can to hurt my feelings, but nothing to please me."

"I cannot help saying it," she replied, rising from her seat at the
organ, and facing him. "If it is depravity to love you, I like
depravity, too."

"Annie," Dorris said, touching her arm, "be careful of what you say."

"I must say it," she returned, with a flushed face; "I am only a woman,
and you don't know how much weakness that implies. I am flesh and blood,
like yourself; but you have made love to me as though I were an
unconscious picture. I fear that you do not understand womankind, and
that you have made an idol of me; an idol which will fall, and break at
your feet. My love for you has come to me as naturally as my years, and
I want you to know when you go away that my heart will be in your
keeping. Why may not I avow my love as well as you? Why may not I, too,
express regret that you are going away?"

The girl asked the question with a candor which surprised him; there was
the innocence of a child in her manner, and the enthusiasm of a woman
thoroughly in earnest.

"For the reason that when I am gone it will be in the nature of things
for you to forget me," he replied. "You are young, and do not know your
heart as well as I know mine. In course of time you will probably form
an honorable alliance; _then_ you will regret having said this to me."

"It will always be a pleasure for me to remember how ardently I have
loved you," she replied, trembling and faltering, as though not quite
certain that the course she was pursuing was right. "I will never feel
ashamed of it, no matter if I should live forever. It may not be womanly
for me to say so; but I can never forget you. Your attentions to me have
been so delicate, and so well calculated to win a woman's affection,
that I want you to know that, but for this hindrance you speak of, your
dream might be realized. If I am the Maid of Air, the Maid of Air
returns your affection. Surely my regard for you may excuse my saying
this, now that you are going away, for you may think of it with pleasure
in your future loneliness. I appreciate your love so much that I must
tell you that it is returned."

They were standing close together on the little platform in front of the
organ, and the girl leaned against him in such a manner that he put his
left arm around her shoulders to support her. Her head rested on his
arm, and she was looking full into his face. The excitement under which
she seemed to labor lent such a charm to her face that Allan Dorris
thought that surely it must be the handsomest in the world.

"Kiss me," she said suddenly.

The suggestion frightened the great brawny fellow, who might have picked
up his companion and ran away with her without the slightest
inconvenience; for he looked around the room in alarm.

"I don't know whether I will or not," he replied, looking steadily at
her. "Were you ever kissed before?"

"By my father; by no one else."

"Then I think I will refuse," he said, "though I would give twenty years
of my life to grant your request. What a request it is! It appeals to me
with such force that I feel a weakness in my eyes because of the warmth
in my heart, and the hot blood never ran races through my veins before
as it is doing now. You have complete possession of my heart, and I am a
better man than I was before, for you are pure and good; if I have a
soul, it has forgotten its immortality in loving this earthy being in my
arms. But it is the proudest boast of a loyal wife that no lips save
those of her husband ever touched hers, and my regard for you is such
that I do not wish to detract from the peace of your future. If I have
made an idol of you, let me go away without discovering my mistake;
grant me the privilege of remembering you as the realization of all my
dreaming. In a year from now you will only remember me to thank me for
this refusal of your request."

"In a year from now I will feel just as I do now. I will never change. I
will have only this to remember you by, and my acquaintance with you has
been the only event in my life worth remembering. _Please_ kiss me."

He hurriedly pressed her lips to his own, and looked around as though he
half expected to be struck dead for the sacrilege, but nothing serious
resulted, and the girl continued to talk without changing her position.

"I have never regretted the restraint which is expected of women until I
knew you, for why should I not express my preferences as well as you? In
my lonely, dreamy childhood, I had few acquaintances and fewer friends,
and you have supplied a want which I hardly knew existed before. Ever
since I can remember, I have longed so much to know the people in the
great world from which you came that I accepted you as a messenger from
them, and you interested and pleased me even more than I expected. My
life has always been lonely, though not unhappy, and the people I read
of in books I accepted as the people who lived outside of Davy's Bend,
in the cities by the lakes and seas, where there is culture as well as
plenty. I have been familiar with their songs, and played them on the
organ when I should have been practising; everything I have read of them
I have put to music, and played it over and over. Once I read of a great
man who died, and who was buried from a church filled with distinguished
mourners. The paper said that when the people were all in their seats,
the voice of a great singer broke the stillness, in a song of hope, and
I have imitated the voice on the organ, and imagined that I was playing
a requiem over distinguished dust; but in future I shall think only of
you when I play the funeral march. Since I have known you, I have
thought of little else, and I shall mourn your departure as though you
had always been a part of me. If I dared, I would ask you on my knees to
remain."

"I have heard you play the songs to which you refer," Dorris replied
musingly, "and I have thought that you played them with so much
expression that, could their authors have listened to the performance,
they would have discovered new beauties in them. I never knew a player
before who could render the words of a song as well as the music. You do
it, and with so much genius that I wonder that you have nothing but the
cold, passionless notes to guide you. One dark afternoon you played 'I
Dreamt I Dwelt in Marble Halls,' and a savage could have told what the
words were. The entire strength of the organ seemed to be united in the
mournful air, and the timid accompaniment was peopled with the other
characters in the play from which the song is taken. That represented
you; but you have had me before the organ, telling all I knew, a hundred
times. Although you have refused to hear my story, you seem to know it;
for you have told it on the organ as many times as I have thought of
it."

"If I have told your story on the organ," the girl said, "there must
have been declarations in it that you were a brave, an honorable, and an
unfortunate man, for I have always thought that of you. In spite of all
you have said to me against yourself, I have never doubted this for a
moment, and I would trust you to any extent."

"If I expect to carry out my resolution," Allan Dorris replied, as
though in anger, though it was really an unspoken protest against doing
a disagreeable thing, "I must hear no more of this; a very little more
of what you have said, and retreat will be impossible. But before I
leave you, let me say this: You once said I was an odd man; I will tell
you why. I seem to be an odd man because you have heard every sentiment
there is in my heart; I have kept nothing back. The men you have known
were close-mouthed and suspicious, knowing that whatever they said was
likely to be repeated, and this made them cautious. Place other men in
my situation as to loneliness and misfortune, and I would not seem so
unusual. There are plenty of staid business men who are as 'odd' as I
am, but they have never been moved to tell their secrets, as I have done
to you. Even were your honorable father to express the love he feels for
your dead mother, it would sound sentimental and foolish, and surprise
his acquaintances; but rest assured that every man will turn out a
strange creature when you get his confidence. I say this in justice to
myself, but it is the truth. When you know any man thoroughly, you
either think more or less of him."

"I don't dare to tell you what is in my mind," Annie Benton said, as she
stood beside him, his arm still around her. "It would startle you, and
perhaps cause you to change the good opinion you have expressed of me;
but there can be no harm in my saying this--every day of our
acquaintance has brought me more respect and love for you. Let me pay
you the poor compliment of saying that the more I know of you, the more
I respect and honor you."

"I believe I deserve that," he replied. "I have more than my share of
faults, but it has always been a comfort for me to know that my best
friends are those who know most of me. But though I have faults, I am
not the less sensitive. I believe that should I kill a man, I would as
keenly feel the slights of my fellows as would one whose hands were
clean. Should I become so offensive to mankind as to merit banishment,
my wickedness would not cause me to forget my loneliness. My mistakes
have been as trifling in their nature, and as innocent, as neglect to
lock a door in a community of thieves; but I have been punished as
severely as though I had murdered a town. The thieves have pursued and
beaten me because I carelessly permitted them to steal my substance; and
the privilege of touching a pure woman's lips with my own, and folding
her in my arms, becomes a serious wrong, though it has only brought me a
joy which other men have known, and no harm came of it."

"I do not wish to do anything that is wrong," the girl said, with some
alarm, stepping away from him, as if frightened at her situation; "but
on the score of friendship, I may say that I shall be very lonely when
you are gone. Davy's Bend was never an agreeable place, but I was
content with it until you came and filled me with ambition. I wanted to
become worthy of the many kind things you said of me; I hoped that I
might distinguish myself in some way, and cause you to rejoice that you
had predicted well of me, but now that you are going away, you will
never know of it even if I succeed. I may regret your departure on this
account, if nothing else. I _do_ regret it for another reason, but you
reprimand me for saying it."

The dogged look which distinguished him when thinking came into his face
again, and though he seemed to be paying no attention, he was listening
with keen interest.

"Regret seems to be the common inheritance," he said, after a protracted
silence between them. "Your regret makes me stronger; it convinces me
that I am not its only victim. Duty is a master we must all obey, though
I wonder that so many heed its demands, since it seldom leads us in the
direction we would travel. The busy world is full of people who are
making sacrifices for duty as great as yours and mine; let us not fail
in doing ours. In the name of the only woman I ever loved, I ask you to
bid me good-by with indifference. For the good of the best woman in the
world, play a joyful march while I leave your presence, never to
return."

Without another word, the girl sprang to her seat at the organ, and
Allan Dorris having awakened the sleeping janitor, the music commenced;
a march of joy, to the time of which he left the church without once
looking back.

But on reaching the outside he could not resist the temptation to look
once more at Annie Benton; so he climbed up to his old position on the
wall, and looked at her through the broken pane.

He saw her look around, as if to convince herself that he was gone, when
the music changed from joy to regret while her face was yet turned
toward the door at which he had departed. She was thinking, and
expressing her thoughts with the pipes, and Allan Dorris knew what she
was thinking as well as if she were speaking the words. There were
occasional passages in the music so fierce and wild that he knew the
girl was struggling with desperate thoughts; nor could she easily get
rid of them, for the reckless tones seemed to be fighting for mastery
over the gentler ones. The old baritone air again; but strong and
courageous now, instead of mournful, and it seemed to be muttering that
it had ceased to be forbearing, and had no respect for customs, or
usages, or matters of conscience; indeed, there was a certain reckless
abandon in it which caused the listener to compare it to the roaring
song of a man reeling home to squalor and poverty--a sort of declaration
that he liked squalor and poverty better than anything else. The mild
notes of the accompaniment with the right hand--how like entreating
human voices they sounded--a chord of self-respect, of love of home, of
duty, in all their persuasive changes, urging the enraged baritone air
to be reasonable, and return to the pacific state which it had honored
so long; but the baritone air continued to threaten to break over all
restraint, and become as wild and fierce as it sounded. Occasionally the
chord of self respect, of love of home, and of duty, seemed to gain the
mastery, but the wicked baritone broke away again, though it was growing
more mild and tractable, and Allan Dorris thought that it must finally
succumb to the eloquent appeal in the treble. "I have been mild and
gentle all my life"--it seemed to be grumbling the words, as an apology
for giving in, instead of declaring them as an excuse for breaking over
all restraint--"and what good has it done me? Am I happier than those
who have mingled joys with their regrets? My mild sacrifices have
resulted in nothing, and I am tempted to try what a little spirit will
do."

But the unruly spirit was pacified at last, and the music resolved
itself into a lullaby of the kind which mothers sing to their children;
it may have been a recollection of the player's own childhood, for it
soon caused her to bow her head on the keyboard, and burst into tears.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE ANCIENT MAIDEN.


Jane Benton, old Thompson's maiden sister, was as good as anybody,
though no one urged the point as steadily as she did herself. Had the
President walked into Jane Benton's presence, she would have believed
that he had heard of her (although there was no reason that she should
entertain that opinion) and had called to pay his respects; and instead
of being timid in so great a presence, she would have expected him to be
timid in hers.

There were people who cared to distinguish themselves: very well, let
them do it; but Jane Benton did not have that ambition, though she had
the ability, and could have easily made a name for herself which would
have gone thundering down the ages. Let other people distinguish
themselves and pay the price; Jane Benton was distinguished
naturally--effort was not necessary in her case. If the people did not
acknowledge it, it was their loss, not hers.

The Ancient Maiden was a book-worm, and devoured everything she heard
of; but only with a determination to tear it to pieces, for of course no
one could hope to amuse or instruct a lady of forty-five, who not only
knew everything worth knowing already, but who had taught school in her
younger days on the strength of a certificate ranging from ninety-eight
to ninety-nine. This certificate had been issued by three learned men,
each one of whom knew absolutely everything; and it was agreed by them
that Jane Benton should have had an even hundred but for the
circumstance that her "hand write" was a little crooked. This fault had
since been remedied, and the Ancient Maiden still retained the
certificate, and the recollection of the conclusion by the three learned
men, as an evidence that, so far as education was concerned, she lacked
nothing whatever.

When she consented to favor a book by looking through it, there was
unutterable disgust on her features as she possessed herself of the
contents, since she felt nothing but contempt for the upstarts who
attempted to amuse or instruct so great a woman as Jane Benton. And her
patience was usually rewarded.

Thompson! Annie! Ring the bells, and run here! The ignorant pretender
has been found out! A turned letter in the book! A that for a which! A
will for a shall! A would for a should! Hurrah! Announce it to the
people! Another pretender found out! Lock the book up! It is worthless!
Jane Benton's greatness, so long in doubt, is vindicated!

But while there is not a perfect book in existence now, there is likely
to be one, providing Jane Benton lives three or four hundred years
longer, for the thought has often occurred to her that she ought to do
something for the race, although it does not deserve such a kindness, as
a pattern for all future writers. She has done nothing in forty-five
years; but she has been busy during that time, no doubt, in preparing
for a book which will not only astonish the living, but cause the dead
to crawl out of their graves, and feel ashamed of themselves. Let the
people go on in their mad ignorance; Jane Benton is preparing to point
out their errors, and in the course of the present century--certainly
not later than toward the close of the next one--a new prophet will
appear in such robes of splendid perfection that even the earth will
acknowledge its imperfections, and creep off into oblivion.

But notwithstanding her rather remarkable conceit, Jane Benton was a
useful woman. For fifteen years she had "pottered around," as old
Thompson said, and made her brother's home a pleasant one. Since she
could not set the world on fire, she said she did not want to, and at
least knew her own home perfectly, and had it under thorough control.
When old Thompson needed anything, and ransacked the house until he
concluded that it had been burned up, his sister Jane could put her hand
on the article immediately; and perhaps Jane Benton's genius, in which
she had so much confidence, was a genius for attempting only what she
could do well; for whatever her intentions were, she had certainly
accomplished nothing, except to distinguish her brother's house as the
neatest and cleanest in Davy's Bend.

Notwithstanding her lofty ambitions, and her marvellous capacity in
higher walks, she was jealous of what she had really accomplished; and
the servant girl who promised to be industrious and generally
satisfactory around old Thompson's house was soon presented with her
walking papers, for Jane Benton believed that she was the only woman
alive who knew the secret of handling dishes without breaking them, or
of sweeping a carpet without ruining it; therefore a servant who
threatened to become a rival was soon sent away, and a less thrifty one
procured, who afforded the mistress opportunity of regretting that the
girls of recent years knew nothing, and stubbornly refused to learn. Old
Thompson had been heard to say once, after his sister had ordered the
cook to leave in an hour, that he would finally be called upon to send
his daughter Annie away, for no other reason than that she was useful,
and careful, and industrious, and sensible; but the Ancient Maiden had
good sense, in spite of her eccentricities, and dearly loved her pretty
niece; and it is probable that old Thompson only made the remark in fun.

Thompson Benton was too sensible a man to go hungry in anticipation of
improbable feasts in the future; therefore his sister Jane and his
daughter Annie were well provided for; and were seated in a rather
elegant room in a rather elegant house, on a certain wet afternoon in
the spring of the year, busy with their work. The girl had been quiet
and thoughtful all day, but finally she startled her aunt by
inquiring,--

"Aunt Jane, were you ever in love?"

The Ancient Maiden dropped her work, and looked at the girl in
indignation and astonishment.

"Annie," she sharply said, "what do you mean by asking me such a
question as that?"

The Ancient Maiden was particularly severe on the men who attempted to
write books, but the sex in general was her abomination. Every man who
paid court to a young woman, in Jane Benton's opinion, was a married
man, with a large family of children; and though it sometimes turned out
that those she accused of this offence were only twenty years old, or
such a matter, she said that made no difference; they had married young,
probably, and investigation would reveal that they had ten or twelve
ragged children and a pale wife somewhere in poverty. Therefore the
presumption of the girl in asking such a question caused her to repeat
again, and with more indignation than before:--

"What do you mean by asking me such a question as that?"

Annie Benton was like her father in another particular; she was not
afraid of Jane, for they both loved her; therefore she was not
frightened at her indignation, but laughingly insisted on the question.

"But _were_ you ever in love?"

"Annie," her aunt replied, this time with an air of insulted dignity, "I
shall speak to your father about this when he comes home to-night. The
idea of a chit of a girl like you asking me if I have ever been in love!
You have known me all your life; have I ever _acted_ as though I were in
love?"

"The question is easy to answer," the girl persisted. "Yes or no."

Seeing that the girl was not to be put off, Jane Benton pulled a needle
out of her knitting--for Thompson Benton wore knit socks to keep peace
in the family, since his sister believed that should he go down town
wearing a pair of the flimsy kind he kept for sale, he would return in
the evening only to fall dead in her arms--and picked her teeth with it
while she reflected. And while about it, her manner softened so much
that, when she went out of the room soon after, Annie believed there was
a suspicion of tears in her eyes. She remained away such a length of
time that the girl feared she had really offended the worthy woman, and
was preparing to go out and look for her, when she came back wiping her
eyes with her apron, and carrying a great packet of letters, which she
threw down on the table in front of Annie.

"There!" she said pettishly. "Since you are so curious, read them."

The girl was very much amused at the turn affairs had taken, and, after
breaking the string which held the letters together, looked over several
of them. They were dated in the year Annie was born, and one seemed to
have been written on her birthday. They all referred to her aunt in the
most loving and extravagant terms possible; and while thinking how funny
it was that her wrinkled aunt should be referred to as dear little
angel, the Ancient Maiden said,--

"In love! I was crazy! And I can't laugh about it yet, though it seems
to be so amusing to you."

"It only amuses me because I know now that you are like other women,"
the girl replied quietly. "I think more of you than ever, now that I
know you have been in love."

"Well, you ought to think a good deal of me, then," the Ancient Maiden
said, "for I was so crazy after the writer of those letters that I
couldn't sleep. Love him! I thought he was different from any other man
who ever lived, and I worshipped him; I made a god of him, and would
have followed him to the end of the earth."

There was more animation in Aunt Jane's voice than Annie had ever
noticed before, and she waved the knitting needle at her niece as though
she were to blame for getting her into a love mess.

"He knew every string leading to my heart," the excited maid continued,
"and he had more control over me than I ever had over myself. It was a
fortunate thing that he was an honorable man. Now you know it all, and I
feel ashamed of myself."

Miss Jane applied herself to knitting again, though she missed a great
many stitches because of her excitement.

"But why didn't he marry you, since he loved you?" Annie inquired.

"Well, since you _must_ know, he found a girl who suited him better,"
the Ancient Maiden replied. "But before that girl came in the way, he
_thought_ he loved me, and I was so well satisfied with his mistaken
notion that I worshipped him. And if his old fat wife should die now,
I'd marry him were he to ask me to. After you have lived as long as I
have, you'll find out that fickleness is not such a great fault, after
all. Why, sometimes it bothers me to have your father around, and a man
can as easily tire of his wife or sweetheart as that!"

She snapped her fingers in such a manner that it sounded like the report
of a toy pistol, and the girl looked at her in surprise.

"We're all fickle; you and I as well as the rest of them," she
continued. "Had the wives of this country pleasant homes to go back to;
were their fathers all rich men, for example, who would be glad to
receive them, half of them--more than that, two thirds of them--would
leave their husbands, as they ought to do; but a wife usually has no
other home than that her husband has made for her, and she gets along
the best she can. The men are no worse than the women; we are all
fickle, fickle, fickle. As sure as we are all selfish, we are all
fickle. If I were married to a rich man who treated me well, I would be
more apt to love him than one who was poor, and who treated me badly;
sometimes we forget our own fickleness in our selfishness. Look at the
widowers; how gay they are! Look at the widows; how gay _they_ are! I
have known men and women so long that I feel like saying fiddlesticks
when I think of it."

"But father is a widower, Aunt Jane," the girl said, "and he is not
gay."

"Well, he had to run away with his wife, to get her," the Ancient Maiden
replied, after some hesitation. "There seems to be a good deal in love,
after all, in cases where people make a sacrifice for it. These runaway
matches, if the parties to it are sensible, somehow turn out well."

"Did father ever think any less of my mother because she ran away with
him?" the girl asked.

"No," her aunt replied. "He thought more of her for it, I suppose.
Anyway, I never knew another man to be as fond of his wife as he was."

Annie Benton and the Ancient Maiden pursued their work in silence for a
while, when the girl said,--

"I want to make a confession to you, too, Aunt Jane. I am in love with
Allan Dorris."

"Don't hope to surprise me by telling me that," her aunt returned
quickly, and looking at the girl as if in vexation. "I have known it for
six months. But it won't do you any good, for he is going away on the
early train to-morrow morning. Your father told me so this morning, and
he seemed glad of it. You haven't kept your secret from him, either."

To avoid showing her chagrin at this reply, the girl walked over to the
window, and looked out. Allan Dorris was passing in the road, and she
felt sure that he was walking that way hoping to catch a glimpse of her;
perhaps he was only taking a farewell look at the house in which she
lived. But she did not show herself, although he watched the house
closely until he passed out of sight.

"I supposed everyone knew it," the girl said, returning to her chair
again. "I have always thought that any girl who is desperately in love
cannot hide it; but I wanted to talk to you about it, and I am glad you
told me what you did, for I can talk more freely after having heard it.
I have no one else to make a confidant of, and I am very much concerned
about it. The matter is so serious with me that I am scared."

"Don't be scared, for pity's sake," the Ancient Maiden replied, with a
show of her old spirit. "They all feel that way, but they soon get over
it. When I was in love I wondered that the sun came up in the morning,
but everything went on just as usual. I thought the people were watching
me in alarm, fearing I would do something desperate, but those who knew
about it paid little attention, and I _had_ to get over it, whether I
wanted to or not. You will feel differently after he has been gone a
week."

"The certainty that I will not is the reason I have spoken to you,"
Annie continued gravely. "Allan Dorris loves me as the writer of the
letters you have shown me loved you before the other girl came in his
way; and I love him as you have loved the writer of the letters all
these years. You have never forgotten your lover; then why should you
say that I will forget mine within a week? What would you advise me to
do?"

"Ask me anything but that," the aunt replied, folding up her work with
an unsteady hand. "No matter how I should advise you, I should finally
come to believe that I had advised you wrong, love is so uncertain. It
is usually a matter of impulse, and some of the most unpromising lovers
turn out the best. I cannot advise you, Annie; I do not know."

Jane Benton imagined that Dorris was going away because Annie would not
marry him; but the reverse was really the case,--he was going away for
fear she would become his wife.

"My greatest fear is," the girl continued again, "that I do not feel as
a woman should with reference to it. I would not dare to tell you how
much concerned I am; I am almost afraid to admit it to myself. I am
thoroughly convinced that his going away will blight my life, and that I
shall always feel toward him as I do now; yet there are grave reasons
why I should not become his wife. Do you think the women are better than
the men?"

The Ancient Maiden leaned back in her chair to think about it, and
picked her teeth with the knitting-needle again.

"What is your honest opinion?" the girl insisted.

"Sometimes I think they are, and sometimes I think they are not," the
aunt replied, bending over her work again. "When I hear a man's opinion
of a woman, I laugh to myself, for they know nothing of them. The women
all seem to be better than they really are, and the men all seem to be
worse than they really are; I have often thought that. Women have so
many _little_ mean ways, in their conduct toward one another, and are so
innocent about it; but when a man is mean, he is mean all over, and
perfectly indifferent to what is thought about him. A lot of women get
together, and gabble away for hours about nothing, but the men are
either up to pronounced mischief or they are at work."

"If you were in love with a man, would you have as much confidence in
his honesty as you had in your own?" the girl asked.

"Certainly," her aunt replied promptly.

"Then won't you advise me? Please do; for I have as much confidence in
Allan Dorris as I have in myself."

"If you will see that all the doors are fastened," Jane Benton replied
excitedly, "I will. Quick! Before I change my mind."

The girl did as she was directed, and hurried back to her aunt's side.

"Since there is no possibility of anyone hearing," Jane Benton
continued, "I will tell you the best thing to do in my judgment; but
whatever comes of it, do not hold me responsible. Think over the matter
carefully, and then do whatever you yourself think best. No one can
advise you like yourself. You are a sensible girl, and a good girl, and
I would trust your judgment fully, and so would your father, though he
would hardly say so. There; that's enough on _that_ subject. But you can
depend on one thing: there is a grand difference between a lover and a
husband; and very few men are as fond of their wives as they were of
their sweethearts. All the men do not improve on acquaintance like your
father, and I have known girls who were pretty and engaging one year who
were old women the next; matrimony has that effect on most of them, and
you should know it. The women do the best they can, I suppose, but you
can't very well blame a man sometimes. In 1883 he falls in love with a
fresh and pretty girl, and marries her; in 1884 she has lost her beauty
and her freshness, and although he feels very meanly over it, somehow
his feelings have changed toward her. Of course he loves her a little,
but he is not the man he was before they were married--not a bit of it.
A good many husbands and wives spend the first years of their marriage
in thinking of the divorce courts, but after they find out that they
should have known better than to expect complete happiness from
matrimony, and that they are not different from other people, they get
on better. Since you have locked the door to hear the truth, I hope you
are satisfied with it."

"But is it _necessary_ for girls to become old so soon?" Annie inquired.

"Well, I don't suppose that it is," her aunt replied, "but the men had
better expect it; and the women had better expect that since there never
was yet an angel in pants, there never will be one. The trouble is, not
the men and women, but the false notions each entertain toward the
other. Now run and open the doors, or I'll faint."

Annie Benton, after opening the doors and watching her aunt revive, did
not seem at all impressed by what she had heard; indeed, she acted as
though she did not believe it, so the Ancient Maiden gave her another
dose.

"I imagine I have been rather satisfactory to your father," she said,
"but had I been his wife I doubt if we would have got along so well. A
man who is rather a good fellow is often very mean to his wife; and it
seems to be natural, too, for he does not admit it to himself, and
thinks he has justification for his course. I don't know what the
trouble is, but I know that the most bitter hatreds in the world are
those between married people who do not get along. Since you are so
curious about matrimony, I'll try and give you enough of it. Even a man
who loves his wife will do unjust things toward her which he would not
do to a sister he was fond of; and there is something about marriage
which affects men and women as nothing else will. There are thousands of
good husbands, but if you could see way down to the bottom of men's
wicked hearts not one in ten would say he was glad he had married.
That's a mean enough thing to say about the women, I hope, and if you do
not understand what my real preferences in your case are, you must be
blind."

Thompson Benton came in soon after, and they spent a very quiet evening
together. Annie retired to her own room early, and when she came to bid
her father good-night, tears started in her eyes.

"What is the matter with the girl?" he asked his sister after Annie had
disappeared.

Jane Benton did not reply for a long time, keeping her eyes on the pages
of a book she held in her hand, but at last she said,--

"I don't know."

Thompson Benton must have noticed that his sister was nervous, and had
he followed her up the stairs when she retired for the night, he must
have marvelled that she went into Annie's room, and kissed her over and
over, and then went hurriedly away.




CHAPTER XV.

A SHOT AT THE SHADOW.


The regular patronage of the "Apron and Password," like the attendance
at a theatre when reported by a friendly critic, was small, but
exceedingly respectable.

A gentleman of uncertain age who answered to the name of Ponsonboy, and
who professed to be a lawyer, usually occupied the head of the one long
table which staggered on its feet in the dingy dining-room, and when his
place was taken by a stranger, which happened innocently enough
occasionally, Ponsonboy frowned so desperately that his companions were
oppressed with the fear that they would be called upon to testify
against him in court for violence.

The minister, who occupied the seat next to Ponsonboy, and who was of
uncertain age himself, could demonstrate to a certainty that the legal
boarder was at least forty-five, but the legal boarder nevertheless had
a great deal to say about the necessity which seemed to exist for the
young men to take hold, and rescue Davy's Bend from the reign of "the
fossils," a term which was applied to most of the citizens of the town
after the other epithets had been exhausted, and as but few of them knew
what a fossil was, they hoped it was very bad, and used it a great deal.

Ponsonboy was such a particular man that he could only be pleased in two
ways--by accusing him of an intention to marry any stylish girl of
twenty, or of an intention to remove to Ben's City, which he was always
threatening to do.

"It would be useless for me to deny that I have had flattering offers,"
it was his custom to reply, when asked if there was anything new with
reference to his contemplated change of residence. "But I am deuced
timid. I came here a poor boy, with a law-book in one hand and an extra
shirt in the other, and I don't want to make a change until I fully
consider it."

It was a matter of such grave importance that Ponsonboy had already
considered it fifteen years, and regularly once a year during that time
he had arranged to go, making a formal announcement to that effect to
the small but select circle around the table, the members of which
either expressed their regrets, or agreed to be with him in a few
months. But always at the last moment Ponsonboy discovered that the
gentleman who had been making the flattering offers wanted to put too
much responsibility on him, or something of that kind, whereupon the
good lady on his left, and the good gentleman on his right, were happy
again.

It was true that the legal boarder came to Davy's Bend a poor boy, if a
stout man of thirty without money or friends may be so referred to; it
was also true that he was poor still, though he was no longer a boy; but
Ponsonboy rid himself of this disagreeable truth, so far as his friends
were concerned, by laying his misfortunes at the door of the town, as
they all did. He was property poor, he said, and values had decreased so
much of late years, that he was barely able to pay his taxes, although
he really possessed nothing in the way of property except a tumble-down
rookery on which there was a mortgage. But Ponsonboy, whose first name
was Albert, appeared to be quite content with his genteel poverty, so
long as he succeeded in creating an impression that he would be rich and
distinguished but for the wrong done him by that miserable impostor,
Davy's Bend.

The good man on his right, the Rev. Walter Wilton, and pastor of the old
stone church where Annie Benton was organist, was a bachelor, like
Ponsonboy; but, like Ponsonboy again, he did not regard himself as a
bachelor, but as a young man who had not yet had time to pick out a lady
worthy of his affections.

Close observers remarked that age was breaking out on good Mr. Wilton in
spots, like the measles in its earlier stages; short gray hairs peeped
out at the observer from his face, and seemed to be waving their arms to
attract attention, but he kept them subdued by various arts so long that
it was certain that some time he would become old in a night. He walked
well enough, _now_, and looked well enough; but when he forgets his
pretence of youth, then he will walk slowly down to breakfast some fine
morning with a crook in his back and a palsy in his hand.

When it was said of Rev. Walter Wilton that he was pious, the subject
was exhausted; there was nothing more to say, unless you chose to
elaborate on piety in general. He knew something of books, and read in
them a great deal, but old Thompson Benton was in the habit of saying
that if he ever had an original idea in his head, it was before he came
to the Bend as a mild menace to those whose affairs did not permit of so
much indolent deference to the proprieties.

The Reverend Wilton did not gossip himself, but he induced others to, by
being quietly shocked at what they said, and regularly three times a day
Ponsonboy and his assistant on the left laid a morsel before him, which
he inquired into minutely--but with the air of a man who intended to
speak to the erring parties; not as a gossip. Reverend Wilton never
spoke a bad word against anyone, nor was he ever known to speak a good
one, but he always gave those around him to understand by his critical
indifference to whatever was in hand that, were he at liberty to desert
his post, and allow the people to fall headlong into the abyss out of
which he kept them with the greatest difficulty, he would certainly show
them how the affairs of men should be properly conducted.

Too good for this world, but not good enough for the next, Reverend
Wilton only existed, giving every sort of evidence that, were it not
unclerical, he would swear at his salary (which was less than that of a
good bricklayer), denounce his congregation for good and sufficient
reasons, cheat his boarding-place, and hate his companions; but his
trade being of an amiable nature, he was a polite nothing, with a great
deal of time on his hands in which to criticise busy people, which he
did without saying a word against them.

Mrs. Whittle, the milliner, sat on Ponsonboy's left; a tall and solidly
built lady of forty-five, who was so very good as to be disagreeable.
The people dreaded to see her come near them, for her mission was
certain to be one of charity, and Mrs. Whittle's heart was always
bleeding for somebody. Summer and winter alike, she annoyed the people
by telling them of "duties" which were not duties at all; and finally
she was generally accepted as the town nuisance, although Mrs. Whittle
herself believed that she was quite popular because of the good she
intended to accomplish, but which seemed to be impossible because of the
selfishness of the people. Thompson Benton had given it out flat that if
she ever came bothering around him, he would give her the real facts in
the case, instead of putting his name on her subscription paper, but for
some reason she kept away from him, and never heard the real facts,
whatever they were. She regarded old Thompson, however, as a mean man,
and moaned about him a great deal, which he either never heard of or
cared nothing about.

Old Thompson was seldom seen at church on Sunday evening, therefore Mrs.
Whittle felt quite sure that he was prowling around with a view of
safe-blowing, or something of that kind, and she never referred to him
except to intimate that he was up to mischief of the most pronounced
sort. A man who was not at church on Sunday evening, in the opinion of
Mrs. Whittle, must be drunk in a saloon, or robbing somebody, for where
else could he be? Mrs. Whittle only recognized two classes of men; those
who were in the churches, and those who were in the saloons; and in her
head, which was entirely too small for the size of her body, there was
no suspicion of a middle ground. Those who craved the attention of Mrs.
Whittle found it necessary to be conspicuous either as a saint or a
sinner.

Theoretically Mrs. Whittle was a splendid woman, and certainly a bad
woman in no particular except that she carried her virtues to such an
extent that the people disliked her, and felt ashamed of themselves for
it, not feeling quite certain that they had a right to find fault with
one who neglected not only her affairs, but her person, to teach others
neatness, and thrift, and the virtues generally.

If she accomplished no good, as old Thompson Benton stoutly asserted, it
was certain she did some harm, for the people finally came to neglect
affairs in which they would otherwise have taken a moderate interest
because of their dislike of Mrs. Whittle. A great many others who were
inclined to attend to their own affairs (which are always sufficient to
occupy one's time, heaven knows) were badgered to such an extent by Mrs.
Whittle that they joined her in various enterprises that resulted in
nothing but to make their good intentions ridiculous, and finally there
was a general and a sincere hope that blunt Thompson Benton would find
opportunity to come to the rescue of the people.

Three times a day this trio met, and three times each day it was
satisfied with itself, and dissatisfied with Davy's Bend, as well as
everything in it, including Allan Dorris. The new occupant of The Locks
was generally popular with the people, but the hotel trio made the
absurd mistake of supposing that they were the people, therefore they
talked of Dorris as though he were generally hated and despised. They
were indignant, to begin with, because he did not covet the acquaintance
of the only circle in the town worth cultivating, and as time wore on,
and he still made no effort to know them, they could come to only one
conclusion; that he was deserving of their severest denunciation.

Could Thompson Benton have known of the pious conclusions to which they
came concerning his child, and which she no more deserved than hundreds
of other worthy women deserve the gossip to which they are always
subjected, he would have walked in upon them, and given the two men
broken heads, and the woman the real facts in her case which he had been
promising; but there is a destiny which protects us from an evil which
is as common as sunshine, and Thompson Benton was not an exception to
the rule.

It was the custom of the hotel trio to come late to supper and remain
late, greatly to the disgust of the cook and the man-of-all-work, and,
surrounding the table in easy positions, they gossipped to their heart's
content, at last wandering away to their respective homes, very well
satisfied with one another, if with nothing else.

It was after nine o'clock when they got away on the evening with which
we have to do, and by the time Davy had eaten his own supper and put the
room in order for the morning, it was ten. Hurriedly putting up a
package of whatever was at hand for Tug, he was about starting out at
the kitchen door when he met Mr. Whittle on the steps. He had somehow
come into possession of a long and wicked-looking musket, which he
brought in with him, and put down near the door connecting the kitchen
with the dining-room. Seeing Davy's look of surprise, he seated himself
in Ponsonboy's place, and explained.

"Poison has its advantages, for it does not bark when it bites, but it
lacks range, and henceforth I carry a gun. How was Uncle Albert
to-night?"

Silas placed a plate of cold meat before his friend, and replied that
Mr. Ponsonboy would be in a fine rage if he should hear himself referred
to as Uncle Albert.

"Oh, would he?" Tug inquired, sighting at his companion precisely as he
might have sighted along the barrel of his musket. "That man is fifty
years old if he is a day, and don't let him attempt any of his giddy
tricks with me. I wouldn't stand it; I know too much about him. I have
known Uncle Albert ever since he was old enough to marry, and I know
enough to hang him, the old kicker. I've known him to abuse the
postmaster for not giving him a letter with money in it, although he
didn't expect one, and accuse him of stealing it, and whenever he spells
a word wrong, and gets caught at it, he goes around telling that he has
found a typographical error in the dictionary. What did he say about me
to-night?"

"He said--I hope you won't believe that I think so,"--Davy apologized in
advance--"that you robbed the only client you ever had of a thousand
dollars."

"_Did_ he, though?" Tug impudently inquired. "Well, I'll give him half
if he'll prove it, for I need the money. Uncle Albert hears what is said
about me, and I hear what is said about him. If he'll make a date with
me, I'll exchange stories with him; and he won't have any of the best of
it, either. The people sometimes talk about as good a man as I am, and
even were I without faults, there are plenty of liars to invent stories,
so you can imagine that they give it to Uncle Albert tolerable lively."

Tug did not mingle with the people a great deal, but he knew about what
they were saying, and when talking to Silas he did not hesitate to quote
them to substantiate any position he saw fit to take. He had a habit of
putting on his hat on these occasions, and inviting Silas to accompany
him out in the town to see the principal people, in order that they
might own to what Tug had credited them with saying. But Silas always
refused to go, not doubting that his friend's inventions were true, so
it happened that Tug made out rather strong cases against his enemies.

"I can stand up with the most of them," he said, with an ill humor to
which hunger lent a zest; "and them that beat me, I can disgrace with
their poor relations. Show me the man that can't be beat if you go at
him right, and you may hang me with a thread. Them that are well-behaved
have shiftless relations, and I'll get them drunk, and cause them to
hurrah for 'Uncle Bill,' or 'Aunt Samantha,' or whoever it may be, in
front of their fine houses. I pride myself on my meanness, and I'll not
be tromped on. Let him that is without sin cast the first stone, and
I'll not be stoned. You can bet on that, if you want to."

Tug proceeded with his meal in silence until Silas said to him that
Reverend Wilton was a good man. Silas had a habit of inducing Tug to
abuse his enemies by praising them, and the ruse never failed.

"Well, don't he get paid for being good?" Tug replied, waving a kitchen
fork in the air like a dagger. "Ain't that his business? It's no more to
his credit to say that he is good, than to say that Silas Davy is a
hotel Handy Andy. If you say that he knows a good deal about books, I
will say, so does Hearty Hampton know a good deal about mending shoes,
for it's his trade. Shut Hearty up in a room, and pay him to post
himself regarding certain old characters he cares nothing about, and pay
him well, and in the course of years he will be able to speak of people,
events, and words which you, having been busy all the time, will know
nothing about. He ought to be good; it's his business. I always know
what a preacher is going to say when he opens his mouth, for don't I
know what he's hired to say? I don't like good men, any way, but a man
who is paid to be good, and expects me to admire him for it, will
find--well, I'll not do it, that's all. How's the old lady?"

There was a faint evidence that Tug was about to laugh at the thought of
his divorced wife, and his cheeks puffed out as a preliminary, but he
changed his mind at the last moment, and carefully sighted at Silas, as
if intending to wing his reply, like a bird from a trap.

"She is uncommonly well, for her," Silas said, looking meekly at his
companion. "She is almost gay."

"Oh, the young thing; _is_ she," Tug retorted. "Do you know what she
reminds me of? An old man in a dress trying to imitate a girl."

There was unutterable meanness in Mr. Whittle's last remark, and when he
looked around the room with fierce dignity, he seemed to be wondering
why any one should continue to live in the face of his displeasure.

"I heard her say to-night, when I brought in a third lot of cakes, that
you were the bane of her life," Silas said, timidly, and dodging his
head to one side, as if expecting Tug Whittle to jump at him for
repeating the scandalous story. "Although she says she is heart-broken,
I notice she eats mighty well; for her."

"And I suppose Reverend Good and Uncle Alfred encouraged her," Tug
replied. "What good husbands bachelors imagine they would be, and what
miserable old growlers they turn out. Before a man is married he takes a
great deal of comfort to himself in thinking what a kind, indulgent
husband and father he would be, and how different from other men, but
they soon fall with a dull sickening thud to the level of the rest of
us. It's easy enough to be a good husband in theory, and it's easy
enough to be brave in theory, but when the theorists come down to actual
business, they are like the rest of us. It's like an actor in a show. He
wants to find a villain, and punish him, and the villain appears about
that time, and makes no resistance, and is beaten to great applause,
finally shrinking away while the other fellow looks ferociously at him,
but it is not that way in real life. The villain fights in real life,
and usually whips. If I knew that the men I dislike would stand it
peaceable, like the villains in a show, I'd beat 'm all to death; but as
it is, I am a coward, like Ponsonboy, and you, and Armsby, and all the
rest of them; except Allan Dorris--there's a man who'd fight. When I
read in books about brave men, it makes me feel ashamed, until I
remember that the men in actual life are not like those in the books.
What did Her Ladyship say about Hector?"

Mrs. Whittle's first husband had been a certain Hector Harlam, with
whose history Silas was very familiar from his association with Tug, so
he answered,--

"She wiped away a tear, and regretted his death. She seemed greatly
affected,--for her."

"She can't possibly regret his death more than I do," Tug said. "He
appreciated her; I never did, and I am sorry she does not join Hector in
glory, or wherever he is, for she is no earthly good in Davy's Bend. She
told me once that he always called her his baby."

There was no keeping it in now; the thought of his wife being called a
"baby" was so absurd to Tug that he was about to laugh. His cheeks
swelled out as though the laugh came up from below somewhere, and he
found it necessary to swallow it, after which there was a faint smile on
his face, and a gurgle in his throat. When Mr. Whittle smiled, it was
such an unusual proceeding that his scalp had a habit of crawling over
towards his face, to take a look, which it did in this instance, and
then went back to its old position at the top of his head. It was a
dreadful laugh, but Silas was used to it, and was not alarmed.

"That woman wants to be a man the worst way," the old scoundrel went on
to say. "I hope it accounts for the circumstance that she never looks
like a woman should. A white dress on a woman--a _real_ woman,
understand; not an imitation one--looks handsome; and I never see a girl
dressed in white that I do not fall in love with her, but when the old
lady puts it on, with a frill at her neck, or any such trifling thing, I
want to find a woodpile and an axe to cut off my feet. I don't know why
anyone should want to be a man; I know what a man is, and I wonder at
this strange ambition of the old lady. I never see a man that I don't
want to spit on him. Ugh!"

He shrugged his shoulders in unutterable disgust, but soon modified his
manner, as Davy began talking of another matter.

"Barney Russell, of Ben's City, was here to-day," the little man said.
"He used to live in Davy's Bend; I suppose you remember him."

"There's another feller I don't like," Mr. Whittle replied, with a
snort. "He comes up here regularly once a month to crow over us, and
tell around that he has two overcoats; one for winter, and another for
spring. Some say he has seven canes, a different one for every day in
the week; but he ain't half the man Dorris is, although he carries silk
handkerchiefs with a red 'R' in the corner. If I should leave Davy's
Bend, I'd never come back, as he does; for I have done so many
contemptible things here that I wouldn't want to be reminded of them by
seeing the place again. I don't blame Barney, though, for having two
overcoats," Tug continued thoughtfully. "Next to two pairs of shoes,
it's the greatest luxury a rich man can afford--I'd own two overcoats
myself if I had the money. A man who has two overcoats and two pairs of
shoes, and uses a knife to cut his tobacco, instead of biting it off
like a pig, is ready to die; there will be little left in the world for
him to regret after he's gone,--but to return to the serious business of
life: it is usually on a Wednesday when the shadow appears. This is his
night, and I'm looking for him."

He turned his big eye toward the corner where he had left the musket,
and, seeing it was safe, resumed,--

"I have never been of any use to a single human being in all my life,
but I intend to make myself useful to Allan Dorris by shooting the
shadow. Give me that gun."

Silas went over to where the gun was standing, and returned with it in
his hand. Placing his finger about half way up the barrel, and following
it with his great eye, Tug said,--

"It is loaded to there. Thompson Benton trusted me for the ammunition,
though he said he knew he would never get the money. I have a notion to
pay him now, for contrariness. Have you fifty cents about you?"

Silas carefully went through his pockets, as if he were not quite sure
about it, but after a long examination replied that he hadn't a cent.

"Well, it's no great matter, though you ought to keep money about you; I
am liable to need it. But, if let alone by the shadow, Allan Dorris will
marry Annie Benton, and become a happy man, which he has never been
before. I don't know what he has been up to before he came here, and I
don't care, for I like him, and I am going out now to get a shot at his
enemy."

Without further words he walked out, followed by Silas, who carefully
locked the kitchen door and put the key in his pocket. Viewed at a
distance, the pair looked like a man and a boy out hunting; the boy
lagging behind to carry the game.

It was a bad night, for which the Bend was famous, and though it was not
raining, there was so much moisture in the air from a recent rain, that
it occurred to Silas, as he went limping along towards The Locks, for
they walked in that direction, that if Tug should find the shadow, and
fire his gun at it, the discharge would precipitate another shower; for
the prop under the water in the sky seemed to be very unsubstantial and
shaky that night.

It had been raining at intervals all day, and the two men floundered
along in the mud until they reached the church which stood near Allan
Dorris's house, where Tug stopped awhile to consider. Coming to a
conclusion after some deliberation, he pulled two long boards up from
the church steps, and, giving the gun to Silas to hold, he carried them
to the middle gable of the building, on the side looking towards The
Locks. Climbing up on the window-sill, he placed one end of each board
on the wall which surrounded The Locks, and which was only a few feet
from the church, and the other on the window-sash, pulling the upper one
down to aid the lower one in holding his weight, and allowing one end of
each board to protrude into the church. Then climbing up, and straddling
one of the boards, he took his gun, and motioned his companion to
follow.

When Davy seated himself by the side of his friend, he found that the
low gable would protect them from the rain, should it come on, and that
from where they sat they commanded a view of Dorris's window; the one
above the porch where they had once seen the shadow appear, and in which
a light now appeared. Silas felt certain that it was Tug's intention to
wait there all night for a shot, and he made himself as comfortable as
possible.

Occasionally he fell into a light doze, but on coming out of it, by
losing his balance, he saw that Tug was still intently watching the
window, with the musket in his hands ready for use.

Two hours passed in this manner, when the patience of Silas was rewarded
by seeing Tug crane his neck, and look intently through the trees. Silas
looked himself, and saw a man's head slowly rising to the porch roof
from below. It came up in full view, and then a part of the body was
seen as the shadow climbed over the low railing. As near as Silas could
make out, the man wormed himself around, and finally stood upon the
porch railing to look in at the top of the window; so that only a part
of his head and none of his body could be seen from where the men were.

Although he heard Tug cock the gun when the head first appeared, he
seemed to be waiting for a larger mark to shoot at; for there was
nothing to be seen except a part of a hat. Occasionally this would be
withdrawn, but it would soon appear again, and remain motionless a long
time, as though the wearer was intently gazing at something transpiring
in the room which greatly interested him. Tug did not seem at all
excited, as Silas was, but sat watching the shadow, as motionless as a
stone.

After a longer disappearance than usual, during which time Tug became
very nervous, the hat came in view again, and Silas said softly,--

"Suppose it should disappear, and never come back?"

Apparently Tug had not thought of this possibility, for he hurriedly
threw the gun to his shoulder, aimed a moment, and fired. The report was
tremendous, and seemed to frighten Tug himself; for he hurriedly jumped
down, and softly raised the sash into position, replaced the boards on
the steps, and set out toward the town. Reaching the vicinity of the
hotel, he waited until Silas came up, and said,--

"Sleep in your own bed to-night; we must not be found together."

So saying he disappeared, and Silas crept to his lonely room to wonder
what Allan Dorris would find when he went out to investigate the
shooting.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE STEP ON THE STAIR.


There had been two days of rain already, and Allan Dorris sat in his
lonely room at ten o'clock at night, listening to its ceaseless patter
at the windows, and on the roof, and its dripping from the eaves,
thinking that when the sun came out again he would go away and leave it,
and remove to a place which would always be in the shadow. Davy's Bend
was noted for its murky weather, and the nights were surely darker there
than elsewhere; but he felt that after his departure he would think of
the sun as always shining brightly around The Locks, and through the
dirty town, even lighting up the dark woods across the river, which
seemed to collect a little more darkness every night than the succeeding
day could drive out; for Annie Benton would remain, and surely the sun
could not resist the temptation to smile upon her pretty face.

Davy's Bend, with all its faults, would always remain a pleasant memory
with Allan Dorris, and he envied those who were to remain, for they
might hope to see Annie Benton occasionally pass on her way to church,
and be better for it.

He loved Annie Benton to such an extent that he would rather be
thousands of miles away from her than within sight of the house in which
she lived, since he had sworn not to ask her to share his life; and the
next morning before daylight he intended to go to some far-away
place,--he did not know where,--and get rid of the dark nights, and the
rain, and the step on the stair, and the organ, and the player who had
exerted such an influence over him.

He had not been able to sell The Locks at the price he paid, although
the people had been grumbling because they were not offered the bargain
originally; so he intended to turn it over to Mrs. Wedge, and poor
Helen, and the noises and spectres which were always protesting against
his living there at all, and become a wanderer over the face of the
earth. Perhaps his lonely life of a year in The Locks would cause
another ghost to take up its residence in the place, and join poor Helen
in moaning and walking through the rooms.

Mrs. Wedge had disappeared an hour before, her eyes red from weeping,
but she was coming back at three o'clock in the morning, at which time
Dorris intended to leave for the railroad station; so Dorris settled
himself in his chair to wait until the hour for his departure arrived.

How distinct the step on the stair to-night! A hundred times it had
passed up and down since Allan Dorris sat down a few hours before; and
the dripping rain at the windows made him think of sitting up with a
body packed in ice. Drip; drip; drip; and the ghostly step so distinct
that he thought the body he was watching must have tired of lying in one
position so long, and was walking about for exercise.

The light burned low under its shade, and the other side of the room was
in deep shadow. He thought of it as a map of his life; for it was
entirely dark and blank, except the one ray in the corner, which
represented Davy's Bend and Annie Benton. Yet he had determined to go
back into the shadow again, and leave the light forever; to exist once
more in toil and discontent, hoping to tire himself by excitement and
exertion into forgetfulness, and sleep, and death.

Death! Is it so dreadful, after all? Dorris argued the question with
himself, and came to the conclusion that if it meant rest and
forgetfulness he would welcome it. There had been a great deal of hope
in his life, but he was convinced now that he was foolish for
entertaining it at all, since nothing ever came of it. Perhaps his
experience had been that of other men; he gave up one hope only to
entertain another, but experience had taught him that hope was nothing
more than a solace for a wretched race. The old hope that they will be
better to-morrow, when they will get on with less difficulty and weary
labor; but to-morrow they die, and their children hope after them, and
are disappointed, and hope again.

Should Death open the door, and walk in to claim him, Dorris believed he
would be ready, since there was nothing in the future for him more
pleasant than the past had offered. He did not believe he was a morbid
man, or one given to exaggerating the distress of his own condition, but
he would give up life as he might give up anything else which was not
satisfactory, and which gave no promise of improvement.

How distinctly the step is climbing the stair! He had never heard it so
plainly before, but the faltering and hesitation were painfully natural;
he had heard it almost every night since coming to the house, but there
was a distinctness now which he had never remarked before. A long pause
on the landing; poor Helen dreading to go into the baby's room, he
thought, whither she was drawn so often from her grave. But it advanced
to the door of the room in which Dorris sat, and stopped again; he drew
his breath in gasps--perhaps it was coming in!

A timid knock at the door!

The face of the listener turned as pale as death, and he trembled
violently when he stood upon his feet. Should he open the door or lock
it! Going up to the fire, he stirred the smouldering coals until there
was a flood of light in the room, and turned up the lamp to increase the
illumination. Still he hesitated. Suppose he should open the door, and
find poor Helen standing there in her grave-clothes! Suppose she should
drop on her knees, and ask for her child, holding out her fleshless
fingers to him in supplication, and stare at him with her sightless
sockets?

After hesitating a long time, he went to the door and threw it wide
open, at the same time springing back from it in quick alarm.

Annie Benton!

He had firmly expected to see the ghost of poor Helen; instead he saw a
fresh and beautiful girl, but so excited that she could scarcely speak.
There was a look of reckless determination in her face which made Allan
Dorris fear for the moment that she had gone mad, and, strolling about
the town, had concluded, in her wild fancy, to murder him for some
imagined wrong.

"How you frightened me!" he said, coming close to her. "Just before you
rapped, the ghost of poor Helen had been running up and down the stair,
as if celebrating my resolution to leave The Locks, and give it over to
her for night walking. You have been out in the storm, and are wet and
cold. Come in to the fire."

The girl crossed the threshold, and entered the room, but did not go
near the fire. She seemed to be trying to induce her hot brain to
explain her presence there, for she turned her back to him, as if in
embarrassment.

"I can no longer control myself," Annie Benton said, facing Dorris with
quivering lips, "and I have come to give myself to you, body and soul. I
am lost to restraint and reason, and I place myself in the hands of him
who has brought this about, for I am no longer capable of taking care of
myself. Do what you please with me; I love you so much that I will be
satisfied, though disgrace comes of it. I will never leave you again,
and if you go away, I will go with you. I have loved you against my
reason ever since I knew you, for you always told me I must not, and I
restrained myself as best I could. But I cannot permit you to go away
unless you take me with you. O, Allan, promise me that you will not go
away," she said, falling on her knees before him. "Do this, and I will
return home, to regret this rashness forever. If you do not, I will
remain, let the consequences be what they may."

Dorris looked at the girl in wonder and pity, for there was touching
evidence in her last words that she was greatly distressed; but he could
only say, "Annie! what are you doing!"

"You have taught me such lessons in love that I have gone mad in
studying them," she continued, standing beside him again, "and there is
nothing in this world, or the world to come, that I would not give to
possess you. I relinquish my father, and my home, and my hope of heaven,
that I may be with you, if these sacrifices are necessary to pacify my
rebellion. If you have been playing upon my feelings during our
acquaintance, and were not sincere, you have captured me so completely
that I am your slave. But if you were in earnest, I shall always be glad
that I took this step, and never feel regret, no matter what comes of
it. Did you think I was made of stone, not to be moved by your appeals
to me? I am a woman, and every sentiment you have given utterance to
during our acquaintance has found response in my heart. It may be that
you did not know differently, for there is too much sentiment in the
world about women, and not enough knowledge. But I did not deserve all
the good you said about me; it made me blush to realize that much that
you have said in my praise was not true, though I loved you for what you
said. But I show my weakness now. I could not resist the temptation to
come here, and, as you have often told me, when anyone starts to travel
the wrong road, the doors and gates are all open. _Yours_ were all open
to-night, and I came here without resistance."

Dorris was too much frustrated to attempt to explain how his front gate
and door came open, which was, perhaps, the result of carelessness; but
he seemed as much alarmed as though a ghost, instead of his sweetheart,
had come in at them. Without knowing exactly what he did, he attempted
to take her wet wrap, but she stepped back from him excitedly.

"Don't touch me!" she said excitedly. "Speak to me!"

"Sit down, and take off your wet wrap," he answered, "and I will."

She unfastened a hook at her throat, and the garment fell to the floor.
Her dress had been soiled by the walk through the rain, and her hair was
dishevelled; but she never looked so handsome before as she did when she
stood in front of Dorris, radiant with excitement. But instead of
speaking to her, as he had promised, Dorris sat motionless for a long
time, looking at the floor. The girl watched him narrowly, and thought
he trembled; indeed he was agitated so much that he walked over to the
window, and stood looking out for a long time.

"You say you could not resist the temptation to love me, though you
_said_ it was wrong," the excited girl continued. "Nor could I help
loving you when you asked me to, though you said I should not. You never
spoke to me in your life that you did not ask me to love you. Everything
you said seemed so sincere and honest, that I forgot my own existence in
my desire to be with you in your loneliness, whatever the penalty of the
step I am taking may be. I have so much confidence in you, and so much
love for you, that I cannot help thinking that I am doing right, and
that I never will regret it. Speak to me, and say that, no difference
what the world may say, you are pleased; I care only for that."

A picture, unrolled from the heavens, has appeared on the outside, and
Allan Dorris is looking at it through the window. A long road, through a
rough country, and disappearing in misty distance; travellers coming
into it from by-ways, some of whom disappear, while others trudge
wearily along. There are difficulties in the way which seem
insurmountable, and these difficulties are more numerous as the
travellers fade into the distance; and likewise the number of travellers
decreases as the journey is lengthened. At length only one traveller is
to be seen, a mere speck along the high place where the difficult road
winds. He tries to climb a hill, beyond which he will be lost to view;
but he fails until another traveller comes up, when they help each
other, and go over the hill together, waving encouragement to those who
are below; into the mist, beyond which no human eye can look.

"During our entire acquaintance," Dorris said finally, coming over to
her, "you have said or done nothing which did not meet my approbation,
and cause me to love you more and more. You did not force yourself to do
these things; they were natural, and that was the reason I told you to
keep away from me, for I saw that our acquaintance was becoming
dangerous; why, I have offered to tell you before. But what you have
done this night pleases me most of all. I have been praying that you
would do it for months, though I did not believe you would, and, much as
I loved you, I intended going away in the morning for your good. I was
afraid to ask you to share my life, fearing you would accept, for I am a
coward when you are in danger; but now that you have offered to do it,
and relieved me of the fear I had of enticing you into it, I am happier
than I can express."

Annie Benton's face brightened, and she put her hands in his.

"Please say that my face is not cold and passionless," she said. "Once
you told me that when we were out on the hills, and it has pained me
ever since. Say that there is hot blood and passion in my veins now."

"When I said that," he answered, "I was provoked because you had so much
control. I had none at all, and declared my passion within a few weeks
after I knew you, but when I did it, you only looked at me in meek
surprise. But I understand it all now, and I want to say that although
you may regard what you have done to-night as an impropriety, it is the
surest road to my heart. If it is depravity, I will make you proud of
depravity, for I will be so good to you in the future that you will
bless the day you lost your womanly control. The fact that you have
trusted me completely caused me to resolve to make you a happy woman,
and I believe I can do it. I love you because you have blood in your
veins instead of water, and I will make you a queen. I am more of a man
than you give me credit for; I am not the gloomy misanthrope you take me
to be, for you have rescued me from that, and I will make the people of
Davy's Bend say that Annie Benton was wiser than the best of them!"

He struck the table a resounding blow with his fist, and had the enemies
of the man been able to look at his face then, they would have been
afraid of him.

"May I sit on your knee, and put my arms around your neck while you
talk?" she asked.

"Yes," he answered, picking her up with the ease of a giant, and kissing
her on the cheek. "You may ride on my back all your life if you will
only remain with me. I have never felt like a man until this moment, and
those who have fault to find with my course had better keep out of the
way. There is a reason why you and I should not be married--as we will
be before the sun shows itself again, for I intend to send for the
minister to come to the church when I am through telling you how much I
love you, and you shall play our wedding march while I pump the
organ--but I am in the right. I have endured misery long enough to
accommodate others; let them expect it no longer! And now that you know
what I intend to do, listen while I tell you who I am, where I came
from, and why I forced you to your present novel position."

"I prefer not to hear it," the girl said, without looking up. "I did not
know you before you came to Davy's Bend: I am not concerned in your
history beyond that time, and as a mark of confidence in you I shall
reserve the telling of it until our married life has been tested: until
I am so useful to you (as I am certain you will be to me) that, no
difference what your secret is, we will consider it a blessing for
bringing us together. But for the disagreeable part of your life we
would never have met; we should think of that."

"Another time, then, or never, as you prefer," he replied. "I would have
told you long ago, had you encouraged me to. Anyway, it is a story of
devotion to others, and of principle practised with the hatred and
contempt and cowardly timidity which should only characterize villains,
and villainous actions; of principle carried to such an extent as to
become a wrong; but from this hour I shall act from a right motive, in
which my heart sympathizes; which affords me a return for effort, and
which will aid in making me a better man. I shall live to accommodate
myself henceforth, instead of as a favor to others. But what will the
people say of our strange marriage?"

"I fear it is a sad depravity," the girl answered, "but I don't care."

"Nor do I; how lucky! If it satisfies you and me, let every tongue in
the world wag, if it will afford them enjoyment. I have neither time nor
inclination to hunt down the idle rumors that may find their way into
circulation concerning my affairs, for what does it matter whether old
Miss Maid or old Mr. Bach thinks good or ill of me? I never cared about
such trifles; I care less now that I have you."

Had Dorris looked at the upper sash of the window over the porch,
instead of at the girl, he would have seen a malicious face looking in
at him, but he was too much occupied for that, and the face was soon
withdrawn.

"I have never expected anything that was unreasonable," Dorris said,
probably recollecting that his actions had been such as to give rise to
a suspicion that he was a fickle man, and could not be satisfied with
anything. "I know all that it is possible for a woman to be, and I have
hoped for nothing beyond that. I ask no more than a companion of whom I
will never tire, and who will never tire of me--some one who will keep
me agreeable company during my life, and regret me when I am dead. There
are people, and many of them, who fret because they long for that which
is impossible. I have passed that time of life, and will be content with
what life affords,--with you. I am not a boy, but a man of experience,
and I know I will never tire of you. I have thought of the ways in which
you can be disagreeable, but your good qualities outweigh them all. I
know you are not an angel; you have faults, but it gives me pleasure to
forgive them in advance. If you will be equally charitable with me, we
will be very happy."

"I have no occasion to be charitable with you," she answered.

"Then you never will have," was his reply. "Marriage is the greatest
inheritance of man, but it is either a feast or a famine. The contrast
between a man who is happily married, and one who is not, is as great as
the contrast between light and darkness, but there are many more of the
first class than of the latter. It may be a false social system, but
very often those who ought not to marry hurry into it in the greatest
haste. I have thought that the qualities which attract young people to
each other are the very ones which result in misery: and that love
should commence in sincere and frank friendship; not charity or
sentimentality. I do not believe in affinities, but I do believe that
there is only one person in the world exactly suited to be my wife, and
I intend to kiss her now."

He did kiss her, but with the tenderness a rough man might display in
kissing a tiny baby.

"Although you say you love me, and I _know_ you do," the girl said
thoughtfully, "you have always acted as though you were afraid of me.
You never kissed me but once before in your life, and then I asked you
to."

"Afraid of you!" There was a merry good humor in Allan Dorris's voice
which would have made anyone his friend. "Afraid of you! Am I afraid of
the sunshine, or of a fresh breath of air! I am afraid of nothing. I had
the same fear of you that I have of heaven--a fear that you were beyond
my reach, therefore I did not care to contaminate you with my touch. But
if ever I get to heaven, I will not be afraid of it. I intend to make
love to you all my life, though I shall be careful not to make myself
tiresome. We will reverse the rule, and become lovers after we are
married. You once said that I was queer; I cannot forget that charge,
somehow. I _am_ queer; in this respect: I was born a bull with a hatred
for red flags, which have been waved in my face ever since I can
remember. I may have been mistaken, but I have always believed that I
never had a friend in my life, although I craved one more than anything
else. But you have changed all this; I am contented now, and ready to
give peace for peace. Of the millions of people in the world, am I not
entitled to you?"

He held her up in his arms, as if he would exhibit her, and ask if that
small bundle was an unreasonable request, since he asked no more, and
promised to be entirely satisfied.

The loud report of a gun on the outside, followed by a crash in the
glass in the upper pane of the window as a bullet came in to imbed
itself in the wall above their heads, startled them. The girl sprang up
in alarm, while Dorris hurriedly ran down stairs and into the yard.

"A careless hunter has allowed his gun to explode in the road," he said,
when he returned after a long absence. But this explanation did not seem
to satisfy even himself, for he soon went down to the lower end of the
hall, and aroused Mrs. Wedge, by throwing the window-prop on the roof of
her house. On the appearance of that worthy woman, who came in with her
eyes almost closed from the sleepiness which still clung to her, but who
opened them very wide at sight of Annie Benton, he said,--

"Will you two please talk about the weather, and nothing else, until I
return? I will return in a few minutes, and make the necessary
explanations. If there is anything wrong here, I will make it right."

He left the house hurriedly, and they heard the big iron gate in front
bang after him, but when his footsteps could no longer be heard, and
they no longer had excuse for listening to them, the two women sat in
perfect silence. Occasionally Mrs. Wedge looked cautiously around at
Annie Benton, but, meeting her eyes, they both looked away again, and
tried to appear at their ease, which they found impossible. Fortunately
Dorris was not gone long, and when he came back he put the girl's cloak
on, as if they were going out.

"We will return in a little while," he explained to Mrs. Wedge, who
looked up curiously as he walked out with Annie Benton on his arm. "If
you care to wait, we will tell you a secret when we come back, as a
reward for not speaking while I was out of the room."

Down the stairs they went, out at the front gate, and toward the town,
until they reached the church door, which they entered. On the inside
they found Reverend Wilton waiting for them at the chancel rail, and
although he tried to appear very much put out because he was disturbed
at that unseasonable hour, and yawned indifferently, he was really
interested. Perhaps he was thinking of the rare story he would have to
tell at breakfast.

Dorris had evidently given instructions as to what was expected of him,
for as soon as they stood before him he read the marriage service, and
pronounced them man and wife; after which he congratulated them and left
the church, which was probably in accordance with his instructions, too.

A single light burned in the building, which barely extended to the
vaulted ceiling, and which did not prevent the pews and the pulpit from
looking like live objects surprised at being disturbed at such an hour;
and leading his wife up to the organ, Dorris said: "We will have the
wedding march, if you please," whereupon he disappeared behind the
instrument to work the bellows.

And such a wedding march was never heard before. The girl put all the
joy of her heart into melody, and made chords which caused Allan Dorris
to regret that he could not leave the bellows and go round in front to
wave his hat and cheer. He was seated on a box in the dusty little
corner, working away industriously; and when he heard how eloquently the
girl was telling the story of her love for him, tears of thankfulness
came into his eyes and surprised them, for they had never been there
before. Your cheek and mine have been wet with tears wrung from the
heart by sorrow, but all of us have not been as happy as Allan Dorris
was on his wedding night.

But there was more than joy in the music; it changed so suddenly into
the plaintive strain of the minstrel baritone as to cause Allan Dorris
to start. It may have been because the player was executing with the
left hand, and without a light; but certainly it was difficult, like a
life. But when the chords were formed, they were very sweet and tender,
as we might say with a sigh that flowers on a weary man's grave were
appropriate.

At last the music ceased, dying away like the memory of sobs and cheers
and whispers, and taking his wife's arm through his own, Allan Dorris
walked back to The Locks.

Mrs. Wedge was informed of the marriage, and could do nothing but cry
from happiness; and after she left them Allan Dorris and his wife had so
much to say to each other that daylight came to congratulate them while
they were still seated in their chairs.

       *       *       *       *       *

But what is this which comes into the mind of Annie Dorris and causes
her to start up in alarm? It is the recollection of Thompson Benton, her
plain-spoken father.

"O Allan!" she said. "What will father say?"

"I will go over and hear what he says," Dorris replied promptly, putting
on his hat. "You can go along if you like."

What a bold fellow he was! And how tenderly he adjusted the wraps around
his wife, after she had signified her desire to accompany him, when they
stepped out into the frosty morning air!

It was about Thompson Benton's time to start down town, and as they
paused before his front door, not without misgivings, he opened it wide
and stood before them. Evidently the girl had not been missed from the
house, for there was genuine astonishment in the father's face as he
looked from one to the other.

"What does this mean?" he said, looking at Dorris sharply from under his
shaggy eyebrows.

"That we were married this morning," Dorris replied, not in the least
frustrated, though his wife trembled like a leaf.

He gave no evidence of the surprise which this announcement must have
caused him, but looked sullenly at Dorris for several moments, as though
he had a mind to try his strength with him; but when his eyes fell on
his child, his manner changed for the better. Motioning them to follow
him, they closed the door, and all sat down in the pleasant family room
where the girl's recollection began, and where her father spent his
little leisure in the evening. Here old Thompson looked hard at the
floor until he had thought the matter over, when he said,--

"I have never found fault with the girl in my life; I have never had
occasion to, and if she can justify what she has done I am content. Are
you sure you are right, Annie?"

He looked up at her with such a softened manner, and there was so much
tenderness in his words, that the girl forgot the fear which his hard
look had inspired when they met him at the door, and going over to him
she put her arm around his neck, and softly stroked his gray hair as she
replied,--

"That which I have done has made me very happy. If that is
justification, I am entirely justified."

"I require no other explanation," old Thompson answered. "From a little
child you have been dutiful, sensible, and capable, and though my
selfishness rebels because I am to lose you, a father's love is stronger
than selfishness, and I am glad you have found a husband you regard as
worthy of your affection. You have drawn a prize, sir."

He looked at Dorris as a defeated man might look at his rival when he
thought it necessary to hide his mortification, and offer
congratulations which he did not feel.

"There is no doubt of it," Dorris promptly answered.

"She is very much like her mother," old Thompson continued, "and her
mother was the best woman in ten thousand. If I gave her a task to
perform, she did it in a manner which pleased me, and she was always a
pleasant surprise. _This_ is a surprise, but I find no fault; I cannot
regret that Annie knows the happiness of a young wife. I am a rough man,
but I made her mother a very happy woman, and in remembrance of that I
am glad the daughter has found a husband she can honor. I have so much
confidence in the girl's good sense that I do not question her judgment,
and I wish you joy with all my heart."

He took both their hands in his for a moment, and hurried away, Dorris
and his wife watching him until he disappeared in a bend of the street,
when they went into the house to make their peace with the Ancient
Maiden.

As Thompson Benton hurried along toward his store, swinging the
respectable-looking iron key in his hand, who can know the regret he
felt to lose his child? His practical mind would not help him now, and
he must have felt that the only creature in all the world he cared for
had deserted him, for the old forget the enthusiasm of the young.

It was a fortunate circumstance that the day was bad and customers few,
for they would not have been treated well had they appeared.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE PURSUING SHADOW.


Allan Dorris and his wife had been up in the hills watching the sunset,
and at dusk were returning leisurely home. They were very fond of the
unfrequented locality where he had first declared his passion, and when
the weather was fine they frequently visited it to imagine themselves
lovers again, which was easy enough, for as man and wife they got along
amazingly well. And now, when they were returning at nightfall, a shadow
crept after them; from bush to rock, and from tree to shrub, crawling
and stealing along like a beast watching its prey.

Pretty Annie Dorris, prettier than ever before, was expressing a fear in
her winning way that their happiness was too great to last, and that
something dreadful would happen to them. But she had no suspicion of the
lurking, creeping shadow which had hurried forward, and now stood almost
within arm's length, as her husband replied,--

"I have been so discontented all my life, and am so contented now, that
I believe the Fates will guard me from it in pity. It is not much that I
ask; a country girl to be my wife, and love me--nothing more. And it
will always be my endeavor to be so useful to the country girl that she
will be happy, too, so that the simple boon of peace is not too much to
ask when it will make two people entirely happy. I cheerfully give up my
place in the strife for greatness and riches in which men seem to be
always engaged, and will be content with the good health and plenty
which my simple life here will bring me. As for a living, I can make
that easy enough; I am making more even now than we can possibly spend.
I hope your fears are not substantial."

The country girl had her arm through her husband's, and she looked up
into his face with such a troubled expression that he stopped in the
road.

"It may be that I am fearful only because I love you so much," she said.
"It almost kills me when I think that any harm might happen to you."

"I am glad to hear you say that," he replied, "but you are always saying
something which pleases me. You look handsome to-night; you look
prettier now than before you were married, and I think more of you. You
don't fade out, and I love you for that; you are as fresh and as girlish
as you ever were before we were married. I think it an evidence of good
blood."

"Now you are pleasing me," his wife said laughingly. "I have feared very
often that you would not like me so well when you knew me better, and
that you would finally tire of me."

"But I don't," Dorris replied. "The more I know of you the better I like
you. It's not usual, but I am more in love after marriage than I was
before."

"I have mingled so little with women," the wife said seriously, "that I
sometimes fear that I am not like others of my sex in manners and dress
and inclination. Did you ever notice it?"

"I think I have," he said.

She turned upon him with mock fierceness, and pretended to be very
indignant.

"Because you are not like other women, who act by rule, and are nearly
all alike, is the reason I have no greater ambition than to be tied to
your apron-strings," he said. "I think your freshness and originality
are your greatest charms."

"Long before I ever thought of becoming a wife myself," she said,
seriously again, "I noticed that most men seemed to lack a knowledge of
women; that they regarded them as angels while they were girls, and were
disappointed because they turned out to be women as wives. I am not
unjust, but I have thought the women were partly responsible for this,
since many of them exhibit themselves like dolls, and pretend to be more
than they are. This is the reason why I am pleased that you are not
disappointed in me."

"As to your being an angel," he laughingly replied, "I know you are not
one, and I am glad of it. I have an idea that an angel would soon tire
of me, and fly away in disgust, to warn its companions that men were not
worth saving. There are some women so amiable that no matter to what
extent their affairs go wrong, they cannot muster up enough energetic
regret to cause them to supply a remedy. I am not so fond of amiability
as to desire it at that price. Whenever you find capacity you will find
temper, and I imagine that it would be dangerous to stir you up, for you
are as capable a woman as ever I knew. _Haven't_ you temper?"

"Plenty of it; too much," she answered.

They both laughed at this frank confession, and Dorris took occasion to
say that there was not a spark of it in his nature, though there was
temper written in every line of his countenance, and that he would have
been an ugly man when once fully aroused was certain.

They walked on again, and the shadow followed, as if anxious to hear
what they were saying.

"I can't account for it myself," Dorris continued, "but I enjoy your
company as much now as I did before we were married. It does me as much
good to talk love to you; I suppose it must be because you deserve it.
The fact that you are as careful to look well as you ever did may have
something to do with it, but it is certainly the case. I have heard men
abused a great deal for neglecting their wives after marriage, but it
never occurs to me to neglect you. I don't want to neglect you; I think
too much of you. If I should fail to be as considerate of you as you are
of me, I know that I would no longer receive the full measure of your
confidence and love, which is such a comfort to me, therefore it is my
first ambition to be just and honest with you in everything. The
ambition affords me a great deal of pleasure, too, for I am never so
well satisfied as when in your company. With you by my side, there is
nothing else that I crave in this world or the next."

"O Allan! Nothing in the next?"

They had seated themselves on a rough seat in a sort of park on the
hillside, and Dorris considered the matter.

"Well, if you go to heaven, I want to go. Of course you will go, for you
are good enough, therefore I intend to do the best I can, so that, when
we come to be judged, the Master will realize how much we love each
other, and conclude not to separate us. But I depend on you; He will let
me in to please you--not because I deserve it."

"I know you do not think as I do about it," she answered, "but it is
possible that you have not investigated as I have. I am not a foolish
girl, but a serious woman, and have studied and thought a great deal,
and I am certain there is something more than this life. I have never
mentioned the subject to you before, because I know that a great many
come to dislike religion because they hear so much of it from persons no
better than themselves, but everything teaches us that we shall live
again, and it worries me a great deal because you think lightly about a
matter which seems so dreadfully serious. My mother's faith convinces me
of it, though I cannot tell you why. I am not prepared, as she was, by a
long life of purity to receive the evidence; but promise me that you
will think about it, and not combat your own judgment."

"I have never thought about it much, and investigated but little," he
answered. "It has always been natural for me to think of the grave as
the end of everything, so far as I am concerned. But I have confidence
in your intelligence and judgment; if you have investigated, and
believe, that is enough for me; _I_ believe. Please do not worry about
it any more; I will try very hard to remain with you."

He said it lightly, yet there was enough seriousness in his manner to
convince her that his love for her was honest, even if his religion was
not.

"Religion is not natural with me: I feel no necessity for it or lack of
it," he said again. "But I have no objection to it; on the contrary, I
have always liked the idea, but I lack the necessary faith. It would be
pleasant for me to believe that, in the next country, a day's journey
removed, good gifts might be found; but if I could not believe it, I
could not be reasonably blamed for my refusal to attempt the journey. I
might even regret that the accounts were not true; but I would not
insist that they _were_ true against my honest convictions, because I
_hoped_ they were. I am religious enough in sentiment, but my brain is
an inexorable skeptic. Nothing is more pleasing to me than the promise
of your faith. What a blessed hope it is, that after death you will live
in a land of perpetual summer; and exist forever with your friends where
there is only peace and content! I am sure I can never see as much of
you as I want to in this life, and I cannot tell you how much I hope we
will be reunited beyond the grave, and live forever to love each other,
even as we do now. I am willing to make any sacrifice necessary to
ensure this future; it would be a pleasure for me to make greater
sacrifices than are required, according to common rumor, for they are
not at all exacting, except in the particular of faith; but that I lack,
to a most alarming extent, though I cannot help it. You cannot have
faith because it is your duty any more than you can love because it is
your duty. I only regret that I cannot be religious as naturally as I
love you, but I cannot, though I try because you want me to. I want to
believe that men do not grow old and become a burden to themselves and
those around them; but I know differently, and while I hope that there
will be a resurrection, I know that those who have gone away on the
journey which begins with death send back no messenger, and that nothing
is known of heaven except the declaration of pious people that they
believe in it. I love to hear the laughter of children, but it does not
convince me that all the world is in a laughing mood, and that there are
no tears. No one can find fault with your religion except that they
cannot believe in it. Everything in nature teaches us that we will
return to dust, and that we will be resurrected only as dust by the idle
winds. You don't mind that I speak freely?"

"No."

"I have tried all my life to convince myself that I possessed the spark
of immortality, but my stubborn brain resists the attempt. All my
reasoning convinces me that I live for the same reason that my horse
exists. I am superior to the faithful animal only in intelligence, for
in physical organization I am only an animal. When an animal dies, I see
its body dwindle away until there is nothing left; it becomes dust
again. I _hope_ that I may share a different fate, but I _believe_ that
I shall pass away in precisely the same manner. Understand me; I want to
be religious, but I cannot be. There are some people--I suppose there
are a great many, though I never knew but one personally--who ought to
live forever; they are too rare to die. You are one of them, but I fear
you will be lost to the world in the course of nature. You ought to be
preserved for the good you can accomplish by playing the organ. I never
believe in heaven so much as when I am in the back pews listening to
your music. There is more religion in the old organ when you are at the
keyboard than in all the people who listen to it put together; and I
sometimes think that those who write the music and the songs are
inspired, though when you know them, their personal characters do not
encourage that impression."

She put her hand to his mouth as if to stop him, but he pushed it away
with a laugh, and continued,--

"Let me finish, that you may know what I really am, and then I will
never mention the subject again. But don't think me worse than other men
for my unbelief; they nearly all think as I do, though only the bad ones
say so. All good men rejoice that there is a pleasing hope in religion,
and encourage it all they can, but only a few of them have your faith."

"All be well yet, Allan," the wife answered. "You have promised to try
and get rid of your unbelief, and I know that you will be honest in it.
The Master whom I serve next to you--I fear I am becoming very wicked
myself, for you are more to me than everything else--"

"There it is again," Dorris said, looking at her, half laughing. "That
expression wasn't studied, I know, but it pleases me greatly. You are
always at it, though you have a right to now."

"He is more considerate than any of us imagine, and if He knows you did
not believe, He will also know that you could not, and did not intend
any disrespect."

"There is something in that," he answered. "I loved you before I knew
you, though I did not believe you existed."

"But you _did_ find me. Is it not possible that you will find Him,
though you do not believe He exists?"

"That is worth thinking about. The next time I take a long ride into the
country I will think it over, if I can get you out of my mind long
enough. One thing, however, is certain; I want to follow you, wherever
that leads me. Let me add, too, that in what I have said I intend no
disrespect. It would be impudent in me, a single pebble in the sands
surrounding the shores of eternity, to speak ill of a faith which is
held by so many thousands of intelligent and worthy people. I speak
freely to you, as my wife, my confidant, that you may know what I am."

"But you are leading, Allan, and I am following," she said. "You are
kind enough to believe that my future is assured, but it is not unless
you are saved. You can save both of us by saving yourself. If we were at
the judgment now, and you should be cast out, I would follow you. I
might be of some use to you even there."

"That's horrible to think about," he replied, rising to his feet; "but
it pleases me. Anyway, little woman, we get along delightfully here; I
hope we will always be as well off as we are now. If the next world
affords me as much pleasure as this one has during the past three
months, I shall be more than satisfied. It is said that a man is very
happy when he is in love, and I am growing more in love with my wife
every day. I suppose it is because I never was in love before. I have
had extensive experience in everything else; I know a little of
everything else. This may be the reason why my honeymoon lasts so long."

"When I met you that afternoon, out in the hills," she answered, "you
were such an expert at love-making that I was at first afraid of you. If
ever man made a desperate, cunning love to a woman, you made it to me;
but I soon got over my timidity, and knew you were only desperately in
earnest, which made me love you until I went mad. I had nothing to give
you but myself, and that I gave so readily that I sometimes fear--when
you are away from me; I never think of it at any other time--that you
accuse me for it."

"It so happened," he answered, "that you did exactly what I wanted you
to do, though I am not surprised at it now, since discovering how
naturally you do a hundred things a day to please me. Accuse you?"

He laughed good-naturedly at the thought.

"Instead of that, it is the boast of my life that my sweetheart, my
vision which came true, had so much confidence in me that she placed
herself in my keeping without conditions or promises. You are the hope I
have had all my life; you are the heaven I have coveted; and don't
suppose that I find fault because the realization is better than the
dream. When you go to heaven, and find that it is a better place than
you imagined, you will not accuse the Master of a lack of propriety
because he is more forgiving of your faults than you expected; nor do I.
Dismiss that thought forever, to oblige me, and believe, instead, that
your single fault turned out to be my greatest blessing. If I made
desperate love to you up in the hills, it was natural, for I had no
previous experience. I cannot remember that I ever was a young man; I
was first a child, and then a man with grave responsibilities. But the
fancy I told you about--the Maid of Air--I always loved it until I found
you."

Putting her arm through his, they walked toward the town, and the shadow
emerged from a clump of bushes within a few feet of where they had been
sitting. The married lovers walked on, unconscious of the presence; and
occasionally the laugh of Mrs. Dorris came to the shadow on the wind,
which caused it to listen anxiously, and creep on after them again.

In turning out of the path that led up into the hills, and coming into
the road, Dorris and his wife met Tug and Silas, who were loitering
about, as usual; Tug in front, carrying the gun, and Silas lagging
behind.

"What now?" Dorris said good-naturedly, on coming up with them. "What
are you up to to-night?"

"On a Wednesday night," Tug replied, putting the stock of the gun on the
ground, and turning his head to one side to get a square sight at the
woman, "the woods are full of rabbits. We are out looking for them."

"Why on Wednesday night?"

Tug removed his gaze from Mrs. Dorris to Silas.

"When do we find our game?" he inquired.

"On Wednesday; at night," the little man answered meekly.

"I don't know how it is, myself," Tug continued, this time taking a shot
at Dorris; "but Wednesday it is. You are both looking mighty well."

They thanked him for his politeness, and added that they were feeling
well.

"They didn't think much of you when you came," he said, pointing a
finger at Dorris, which looked like a pistol, "but they have changed
their minds. Even Reverend Wilton says you will do; it's the first kind
word he ever said of anybody. It came out--Silas, how did it come out?"

"Like a tooth," Silas answered, who had been standing by with his hands
in his pockets.

"Like a _back_ tooth, you told me. Come now, didn't you say a back
tooth?"

Silas muttered something which was accepted as an acknowledgment, and
Tug went on,--

"Why didn't you say so, then? Why do you want to put it on me in the
presence of the lady? But Reverend Wilton never said anything bad about
you, or anybody else; he's too lazy for that. I only wonder that he
didn't drop over from exhaustion when he said you'd do. Well, I should
say you _would_ do; eh, pretty girl?"

Annie Dorris made no other answer than to cling closer to her husband,
and Tug regarded them with apparent pleasure.

"And there's Uncle Ponsonboy. Silas, what does Uncle Ponsonboy say?"

"He says that Mr. Dorris is a man of promise," Davy answered.

"Oh, _does_ he? Well, he's not the kind of a man of promise, Uncle
Ponsonboy is, who has been promising to distinguish himself for forty
years. Old Albert reminds me of a nephew of my wife's. I supported him
four years in idleness, but he was always boasting that he was able to
take care of himself, and that _he_ asked favors of nobody. He used to
fill up on my bread and meat, and lounge in front of my fire, and
declare that he never knew solid content until he began to make his own
living, although he did nothing except to write to his folks, and say
that they needn't worry about him,--_he_ was able to take care of
himself. But the old lady holds out against you."

Tug swallowed a laugh with a great effort, apparently locking it up with
a spring lock, for there was a click in his throat as he took aim at
Dorris again and continued, but not before his scalp had returned to its
place after crawling over on his forehead to look at the smile,--

"I am glad of that, though. The old lady and I never agree on anything.
I like the devil because she hates him. I shall be quite content in purg
if she fails to like it."

Allan Dorris looked puzzled for a moment.

"Oh, purgatory," he said, finishing the abbreviation, and turning to his
wife, who laughed at the idea, "we were talking about that just before
you came up."

"Neither of you need worry about _that_," Tug said. "_You_ are all
right. I am the devil's partner, and I know. But if you _should_ happen
down there by any mischance, I will give you the best accommodations the
place affords. If there is an ice-box there, you shall have a room in
it; but no ice-water for the old lady. I insist on that condition."

They were very much amused at his odd talk, and promised that his
instructions should be obeyed in case they became his guests.

"But why are you the devil's partner?" Dorris asked.

"He must have assistants, of course," Tug replied, "and I shall make
application to enter his service as soon as I arrive. I want to get even
with Uncle Ponsonboy."

Tug locked up a laugh again with a sharp click of the lock, and his
scalp hurried back to its place on learning that it was a false alarm.

"I want to get a note from him to this effect: 'Dear Tug: For the sake
of old acquaintance, send me a drop of water.' Whereupon I will take my
iron pen in hand, and reply: 'Uncle Ponsonboy: Drink your tears.' Then I
will instruct one of my devilish assistants to lock him up, and never
let him see the cheerful light of the fires again. As the door closes, I
will say to him, as I now say to you,--Good-night."

Tug and Silas walked toward the hills, and Dorris and his wife toward
the town, but the shadow no longer followed them; it had disappeared.

In case the shadow came back that night to prowl around The Locks, and
peer in at the windows, it found a determined-looking man on guard,
carrying a wicked-looking gun.

Had the eyes of the shadow followed the feet of the man, it would have
noted that they walked around the stone wall at regular intervals, and
that they stopped occasionally, as if listening; it would have seen them
strolling leisurely away at the first approach of dawn, carrying the gun
and Tug's burly body with them.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE RISE IN THE RIVER.


The rain had been falling at intervals for weeks, and the sluggish
river, which usually crawled at the foot of the town in quiet
submission, had become a dangerous torrent. Long since out of its banks,
its waters poured through the bottoms with an angry roar, and at night
those who gathered on the brink in the town to mark its steady rising
could hear cries of distress from the heavy timber, the firing of guns,
and other alarms.

For two days parties had been out with boats of every description,
rescuing those who believed that the waters would soon go down, and
remained until escape was impossible, imprisoned in the upper rooms of
their houses; and each returning party brought the most distressing news
yet heard of the havoc wrought by the flood. Reaching from hill to hill,
the angry waters ploughed up fair fields like heavy shot fired in
battle, and crept into pretty homes to destroy in a night the work of
years, wresting treasures from their fastenings with remorseless fury,
and hurrying away with them like living thieves.

The citizens of Davy's Bend feared that the sun had been drowned by the
flood in the heavens, as the people were being drowned by the flood in
the bottoms, for its kindly face had not appeared in two weeks. The
roads and lanes in the country, highways no longer, were abandoned to
the rain and the mist, for no travellers ventured upon them, and if the
town had been dull before, it was now doubly so, giving the people
abundance of time in which to recount their miseries. Men who ventured
out in wagons told wonderful tales, on their return, of the reign of the
waters, for insignificant streams which had long been regarded with
familiar contempt had become dangerous rivers, roaring and crashing
through fruitful fields in mad haste to join the floods. Great lakes
occupied the low places for so many days that the people feared the land
itself had floated away, leaving caverns in the place of their fields,
and there was distress in the country as well as in the town. Rude boats
to ply upon the newly arrived waters were hastily constructed by men who
did not know how to use them, never having lived near a navigable
stream, but there seemed a chance for them to learn, for the waters
increased steadily every hour.

As they lay in their beds at night, if they wakened and found that the
rain had ceased, the people of the town hoped that the end had come at
last, and that the waters would soon subside, but before they had framed
their congratulations, the gentle patter of the rain was heard on their
roofs once more, which continued through the long night, ceasing only
occasionally, that the cries of distress and the alarms from the bottom
might be heard, whereupon the rain commenced again with joyful vigor,
sure that its fury was not without result.

The rocky hills above and below the town were oozy and wet; and those
who roamed about heard great splashes in the water, and knew that
portions of the bluff were tumbling into the river, as if tired of being
steady and reliable while everything else was failing, and anxious to
join the tide and aid in the general destruction, as well as to get away
from a place which seemed so unfortunate.

The mild river, patient and uncomplaining so long, was master now, and
it roared like a monster proud of its conquest, and declaring its
intention to be wicked and fierce forever. The observers could not
understand, so great was the awful flood, how the waters could ever
subside, for surely all the lower country must have been flooded days
before, and even those who lived in the hills were filled with grave
apprehensions.

Every morning the simple registers, which the people put up along the
creeks and sloughs, showed an alarming rise, and they feared that if the
rain continued the earth itself would become liquid at last, and resolve
itself into a vast sea without shores.

No one knew how the news came, but there seemed to be whispers in the
air that in the upper country the flood was even worse than at Davy's
Bend, which added to the general apprehension, and many believed that
the rainbow was about to prove faithless at last. Houses of a pattern
barely familiar to the people occasionally floated past the town in the
current, and in one of them rode a man who refused to leave his property
when the relief boats put off to him; for he said that he came from
hundreds of miles above, and that since the world seemed to be turning
into water, he preferred his strange craft to the crumbling hills. As he
floated away, stark mad from excitement, fear, and hunger, he called
back to the men to follow if they valued their lives; for a wave twenty
feet high was coming down the river, carrying the towns along the bluffs
with it.

Bridges which had been built across gullies in the highlands were seen
hurrying by every hour, and it seemed that the hill on which Davy's Bend
was built would shortly tremble, and start slowly down the river, at
last gratifying the ambition of the people to get away.

Among those distressed by the unfortunate condition of those living in
the bottoms were Allan Dorris and his wife, safe in their home above the
town. The people seemed so fearful that the rain would never cease that
they neglected to get sick, and Dr. Dorris would have greatly enjoyed
the uninterrupted days he was permitted to spend with his pretty wife
but for the distress around him.

The dripping from the eaves of The Locks at night--he thought of it
again--reminded him of the dripping from the coffin of a body packed in
ice, which he was commissioned to watch, and long before day he left his
bed and walked the floor. His wife soon joined him, and they looked out
of the window at the blank darkness.

"How it reminds me of the first night I came here," he said. "But what a
different man I am! Then I cursed my existence, and was so disturbed in
mind that night was a season of terror. I dreaded its approach as
heartily then as I now hail it as a season of repose, and every day I
have new reason to rejoice that I am alive. What a fortunate fellow I
am! I can sleep nine hours out of every night, and arise every morning
entirely refreshed, not a day older. I am content now to lie down at
night, and let the world wag, or quarrel, or do whatever it likes, for
the only part of it I care for is beside me. Sometimes I waken, and
forget you for a moment, when I wonder how I ever induced such sound
sleep to come to my eyes; but when I remember it all, I feel like
cheering, and go off into dreamland again with the comfort of a healthy
child. It is a wonderful change, and you are responsible for it all; you
have made one man entirely happy, if you have accomplished nothing
else."

As they stood by the window, he had his arms around her, and when she
looked up at him he kissed her tenderly on the forehead.

"Our marriage has brought no more happiness to you than it has to me,"
she answered. "Since you became my husband, I have known only content
and gladness, except when I become childish and fear you are surrounded
by some grave danger. If I could charge you with a wish I could think of
nothing to ask."

"Who would harm me? Who would dare?" he asked.

His wife thought to herself, as she looked at him, that it would be a
dangerous undertaking to attempt to do him an injury. There were few men
his equal in physical strength, and he could hold her out at arm's
length.

"Danger is a game that two can play at," he said, and there was a frown
on his face so fierce as to indicate that some one who was his enemy had
come into his mind. "I have seen the day when I would have allowed
almost any one the privilege of taking my life, if it would have
afforded them pleasure, but let them keep out of my way now! The tiger
fighting for her whelps would not be fiercer than I, if attacked. I have
more to live for than any other man in the world, and I would fight, not
only with desperation, but with skill and wickedness. If any one wants
my life, let him see that he does not lose his own in attempting to take
it."

Allan Dorris had been oppressed with a vague fear ever since his
marriage that his long period of rest meant a calamity at last, though
he had always tried to argue the notion out of his wife's mind. He had
often felt that he was watched, though he had seen nothing, heard
nothing, to warrant this belief. He could not explain it to himself; but
frequently while walking about the town he turned his head in quick
alarm, and looked about as if expecting an attack. Once he felt so ill
at ease at night, so thoroughly convinced that something was wrong, that
he left his wife quietly sleeping, and crawled under the trees in The
Locks' yard for an hour, with a loaded pistol in his hand. But he had
seen nothing, heard nothing, and his own actions were so much like the
presence he half expected to find, that he was ashamed of them, and
laughed at his fears.

But the dark night and the cheerless rain brought the old dread into his
mind, and he said to his wife,--

"We are all surrounded by danger, though I am as exempt from it as other
men, but if I should meet with an accident some time--I take many long
rides at night, and I have often been in places when a single misstep of
my horse would have resulted in death--I want you to know that your
husband was an honorable man. I have my faults, and I have regrets; but
as the world goes I am an honest man. Your love for me, which is as pure
and good as it can be, has had as much warrant as other wives have for
their love. It was never intended that a perfect man or woman should
exist on this earth, as a reproach to all the other inhabitants, and I
have my faults; but I have as clear a conscience as it was intended that
the average man should have."

"I am sure of that," his wife answered. "You always impress me as being
a fair man, and this was one reason why I forget myself in loving you. I
did not believe you would be unjust to anyone; surely not to one you
loved."

"I believe I am entitled to the compliment you pay me," he replied. "I
know myself so well that a compliment which I do not deserve does not
please me; but I deserve the good opinion you have just expressed. I
have known people whose inclinations were usually right; but mine were
usually wrong--either that, or I have been so situated that, by reason
of hasty conclusions, duty has always been a task; but notwithstanding
this I have always tried to be honest and fair in everything. It
sometimes happens that a man is so situated that if he would be just to
himself he must be unjust to others. I may have been in that situation,
and there may be those who believe that I have wronged them; but I am
sure that an honest judge would acquit me of blame. I have often wanted
to tell you my brief and unimportant history; but you have preferred not
to hear it. While I admire you for this exhibition of trust in me, I
have often wondered that your woman's curiosity did not covet the
secret."

"It is not a secret since you offer to tell it to me," she replied. "But
I prefer not to know it now. You once said to me that every life has its
sorrow; mine is the belief that I know what your history is; but I
prefer to hope that I am wrong rather than know my conjecture is right."

He looked at her with incredulity, and was about to inquire what she
knew, when she continued:

"You never speak to me that I do not get a scrap of your past history; I
read you as easily as I read a book. But I knew it when I became your
wife, and I think less of it now than ever; you are so kind to me that I
think I shall forget it altogether in time. It is scarcely a sorrow;
rather a regret, as I regret during my present happy life that I am
growing old. Sometimes I think I love you all the more because of your
misfortune, though I never think of it when I am with you; it is only
when I am alone that it occupies my mind."

"You are sure that you have not made it worse than it is?"

"Quite sure."

"Who was in the right?"

"You were."

"That much is true, anyway," he answered, looking out at the torrent in
the river, which the approaching daylight now made visible. "I formerly
had a habit of talking in my sleep; you may have learned something in
that way."

"A great deal," she replied. "I learned your name."

For the first time since she had known him he seemed confused, and there
was a flush of mortification in his face. He picked up a scrap of paper
and pencil which were lying on a table near them, and handing them to
her, said,--

"Write it."

Without the slightest hesitation, she wrote quickly on the paper, and
handed it back to him. He looked at it with a queer smile, tore up the
scrap, and said,--

"That would have come out in the story you refused to hear. I have never
deceived you in anything."

"Except in this," she answered, putting her arms around him. "You are a
much better man than I believed you were when we were first acquainted;
you have deceived me in that. My married life could not be happier than
it is."

"I do not take much credit to myself that we are content as husband and
wife," he replied. "I think the fact that we are mated has a great deal
to do with it. There are a great many worthy people--for the world is
full of good women, if not of good men--who live in the greatest
wretchedness; who are as unhappy in their married relations as we are
happy. I have known excellent men married to excellent wives, who are
wretched, as I have known two excellent men to fail as partners in
business. You and I were fortunate in our alliance. It often occurs to
me that Mrs. Armsby should have had a better husband, poor woman. How
many brave, capable men there are in the world who would rejoice in the
possession of such a wife; worthy, honest men who made a mistake only in
marrying the wrong woman, and who will die believing there is nothing in
the world worth living for, as I believed before I met you. Everyone who
is out in the world a great deal knows such men, and pities them, as I
do; for when I contrast my past with my present, I regret that others,
more deserving than I, cannot enjoy the contentment which love brings.
You and I are not phenomenal people in any respect, but we are man and
wife in the fullest sense of the term; and others might enjoy the peace
we enjoy were they equally fortunate in their love affairs. It is a
grand old world for you and I, and those like us, but it is a hell for
those who have been coaxed into unsuitable marriages by the devil."

"There is as much bitterness in your voice now as there was when you
said to me in the church that you were going away never to come back,"
his wife said, looking at him with keen apprehension.

"I am a different man now to what I was then," he replied, with his old
good-nature. "Have you never remarked it?"

"Often; every time I hear you speak."

"I find that there are splendid people even in Davy's Bend, and I
imagine that when the mind is not tortured they may be found anywhere.
In my visits to the homes of Davy's Bend, I hear it said in every
quarter that surely the neighbors are the best people in the world, and
their kindness in sickness and death cause me to believe that as a rule
the people are very good, unless you chain two antagonistic spirits
together, and demand that they be content. I know so much of the
weakness of my race--because it happens to be my business--that I wonder
they are as industrious and honorable as I find them. This never
occurred to me before, and I think it is evidence that I am a changed
man; that I am more charitable than I ever was before, and better."

They both looked out the window in silence again. A misty morning,
threatening rain, and the river before them like a sea.

"I must do something to help those who are imprisoned in their homes by
the flood," Allan Dorris said, as if a sight of the river had suggested
it to him. "I will go down where boats are to be had presently, and row
over into the timber. Do you see that line of trees?"

Below the town, in the river bend, a long line of trees made out into
the channel, which were on dry land in ordinary times, but the point was
covered now, for the flood occupied the bottom from bluff to bluff. He
pointed this out, and when his wife saw the place he referred to, she
nodded her head.

"My boat will be carried down the stream by the strong current, and I
will probably enter the timber there. I will wave my good-by to you from
that point."

He went out soon after to prepare for the trip, and during his absence
his wife hurriedly prepared his breakfast; and when he came back he wore
coat and boots of rubber.

"What a wonderful housekeeper you are," he said, as he sat down to the
table. "No difference what I crave, you supply it before I have time to
worry because of the lack of it. But it is so in everything; I never
want to do a thing but that I find you are of the same mind. It is very
easy to spoil a boy, but I think the girls are naturally so good that
they turn out well without much attention. You had no mother to teach
you, but you took charge of my house with as much good grace and ease as
though you had been driven to it all your life. I think a great deal
more of your sex because of my acquaintance with you. If my wife is not
the most wonderful woman in the world, I shall never know it."

"I am almost ashamed to say it after your kind remark," his wife
replied, "but I am afraid I do not want you to go over into the bottoms.
The thought of it fills me with dread, though I know you ought to go."

"And why not?" he said cheerfully. "I may be able to rescue some
unfortunate over there, and there is nothing dangerous in the journey. I
shall return before the night comes on,--no fear of that; but before I
go I want to tell you again how much my marriage with you has done for
me. I want you to keep it in your mind while I am away, that you may
understand why I am glad to return. Until I came here and met you, I was
as discontented as a man could possibly be, and I am very grateful to
you. A life of toil and misery was my lot until you came to my rescue,
and I thank you for your kindness to me. It occurred to me while I was
out of the room just now, that the shadow under the trees is very much
like the shadow I intended to penetrate when you came to me that dark
night and blessed me. Once you came into the room where I was lying
down, after returning from the country, though I was not asleep as you
supposed. The gentle manner in which you touched my forehead with your
lips; that was love--I have thought about it a thousand times since, and
been thankful. The human body I despise, because of my familiarity with
it; but such a love as yours is divine. I only regret that it is not
more general. Love is the only thing in life worth having; if a man who
lacks it is not discontented, he is like an idiot who is always
laughing, not realizing his condition. Some people I have known
suggested depravity by their general appearance; you think of your own
faults from looking at them, and feel ashamed; but it makes me ambitious
to look at you, and every day since I have known you I have been a
better man than I was the day before."

He had finished his repast by this time, and they walked out to the
front door together, arm in arm, like lovers.

"I have heard it said," he continued, as he tied up his rubber boots and
made final preparations for starting, "that if a wife is too good to her
husband, he will finally come to dislike her. _You_ are too good to me,
I suppose, but it never occurs to me to dislike you for it; on the
contrary, it causes me to resolve to be worthy of your thoughtfulness.
It will do me good to go into the shadow for a day; I will appreciate
the sunshine all the more when I return. But if I should not return--if
an accident should happen to me, which is always possible anywhere--my
last thought would be thankfulness for the happiness of the past three
months."

"But you do not anticipate danger?" she said, grasping his arm, as if to
lead him back into the house.

"There is no danger," he replied. "Even if my boat should fail me, I
could swim back to you from the farthest point, for I love you so much.
You have never seen my reserve strength in action; if a possibility of
being separated from you should present itself, I imagine I should
greatly surprise my enemies. Never fear; I shall come back in good time.
I believe that should I get killed, my body would float against the
current and hug the bank at the point nearest The Locks."

He kissed her quickly and hurried away, and his form was soon lost in
the bend of the street.

How dark it was under the trees! The increasing dull daylight brightened
everything save the darkness under the trees; nothing could relieve
that. What if he should go into it never to return, as he had intended
the night they were married! No, no, no; she wrung her hands at that
thought, and ran towards the door, as if intending to pursue him and
bring him back before he could enter it. But Allan was strong and
trusty, and he would come back to laugh at her childish fears as she
took his dripping garments at the close of the day, and listened to an
account of his adventures,--no fear of that.

A half hour later she saw a boat with a single rower put out from the
town, and make slow headway against the strong current to the other
shore. Was he going alone? It was not dangerous; she persuaded herself
of that, but she thought it must be very lonesome rowing about in such a
flood; and he should not go out again, for he would do anything she
wished, and she would ask it as a favor.

Why had she neglected to think of this, and ask him to go with others?
But it was too late now, for the rower soon reached the line of trees he
had pointed out to her from the window, waved his white handkerchief,
which looked like a signal of danger, and disappeared into the shadow.




CHAPTER XIX.

MR. WHITTLE MAKES A CONFESSION.


The first rays of the bad morning, as it looked in at Mr. Whittle's
window, found that worthy busily engaged in cleaning and scouring his
gun. It was not yet his bedtime, for of late he spent all of every
night, instead of part of it, in prowling about--bent on mischief, _he_
said, but Silas Davy knew that Tug had a fierce desire to protect Allan
Dorris, for whom he had taken such a strange fancy, from harm; and that
night after night, whether the weather was good or bad, his friend kept
watch around The Locks, carrying his gun in readiness for instant use.
Silas usually kept him company until he became sleepy, and knew that he
must return in order to keep awake and attend to his work the next day;
but Tug, who slept during the day, seldom deserted his post. He may have
left his beat occasionally for an hour or two, but only to creep
carefully up into the hills back of the house, where he crouched and
listened beside the paths, and then crept back again.

A good many times he walked down to the hotel, always choosing an hour
when he knew Silas would be alone in the kitchen, on which occasions he
never failed to take a shot with his eyes up the alleys, and into all
the dark places; but he did not remain long, so that almost every night,
when Silas went to bed, he had the satisfaction of knowing that if the
shadow should attempt to harm Allan Dorris, there would be an explosion
loud enough to alarm the town.

Silas, who had been out on the bottoms the day before, came in late in
the evening, and, throwing himself on the bed, he slept so soundly that
when Tug appeared, late in the morning, from one of his vagrant tramps,
he was not aroused. And there he lay now, in his clothes, sound asleep,
his face as innocent as a child's, as his mind was.

As Tug scoured away on the gun, rubbing off the rust and dirt, he
occasionally looked at Silas, and the thought no doubt occurred to him,
that if there ever was a thoroughly unselfish, incapable, kind-hearted
fellow, there he was, on the bed, asleep, and resting well.

"He'll soon be awake, though," Tug said aloud, looking up at the window,
and noting the increasing light. "He can't sleep when it's light enough
for him to work. He has been driven to it by his hard masters until he
knows nothing else, and he has a habit of getting up at daylight which
he can never overcome. Silas was ruined by too much work; I was ruined
by too little of it, I suppose. Anyway, I'm ruined; nobody disputes
that. I am so ornery that I am becoming ashamed of myself."

Mr. Whittle meditated a moment, and then putting down his gun he walked
over to a piece of looking-glass, which was tacked against the wall, and
took a long look at himself. The inspection was apparently
unsatisfactory, for he shook his fist at the reflection, made a face at
it, and muttered ill-humoredly as he walked back to his chair.

"If Davy didn't forget so easy," Mr. Whittle said aloud again, rubbing
away on the gun-barrel, "what a fine man he would be! If he could make
money as easily as he is good-natured, he would be a fine fellow; but
they say he works to no purpose, and must have somebody to watch him,
though he means well,--everybody says that. If Davy should be told to
turn a crank, he would do it better than anybody, and keep at it longer;
but the men who make money not only work hard, but use judgment, and
Davy lacks judgment, poor fellow; they all say that. If the hotel should
ketch afire he wouldn't put it out unless somebody told him to; he
wouldn't think of it. But he means as well as any man in America; I can
cheerfully say that for him. An ordinary man never opens his mouth
without saying something mean; but if ever I heard Davy say a mean
thing, or knew him to do a mean thing, may I become a preacher. Well,
the talents must be divided, I suppose; for no person seems to combine
any two of them. _I_ know enough, but somebody else has the honesty, the
industry, the decency, etc., which I lack. Unfortunately, it does not
follow that a sensible man is a square man or a good man. I'd rather
trust a fool for honesty than a man with a big head, any day. The worst
crimes I have ever heard of were the work of men cursed with more brains
than conscience. I thought he couldn't sleep long after the sun was up."

Looking over at his sleeping partner, he saw that he was becoming
uneasy, and soon he sat up on the edge of the bed, and looked around in
bewilderment as he rubbed his eyes.

"Well, rogue, how do you feel?" Tug inquired, stopping his scouring.

"What time is it?" Davy inquired, with a show of excitement, and getting
on his feet without answering the question.

"I should say it was five o'clock, Wednesday morning," Tug replied,
looking out at the window, and then back at his companion, as if
wondering at his nervousness. "Why?"

"I meant to remain awake to tell you of it last night," Silas replied
hurriedly; "but I was so tired, from rowing all day, that I dropped off
to sleep soon after I came in. I have seen the shadow!"

Tug sprang up from the low chair in which he had been sitting, and began
to nervously fumble through his pockets, as if looking for ammunition.

"I was out in the bottoms with Armsby, yesterday," Davy continued, "and
twice we passed a man rowing about alone. We were not very close to him,
but I am sure it was the shadow, and that he meant mischief. Each time
when we encountered him he rowed away rapidly, and when Armsby hailed
him he paid no attention."

Tug was much concerned over this news, for, after finding his
ammunition, he went to loading his gun with great vigor.

"Could you see his short ear?" he stopped to inquire, after ramming down
a great quantity of powder.

"No, his left side was from me, but I am sure it was the same man. And I
am sure that the boat in which he rowed was the same one you took the
little woman out of. I hurried here as fast as I could to tell you, but
when I lay down on the bed to wait for you, I fell asleep. Armsby made
me row all day while he kept a look-out for ducks. I am sorry I fell
asleep."

Silas rubbed his sore arms, and looked very meek, but Tug was too busy
making arrangements to go out to notice him.

"The impudence of the scoundrel," he said, as he poured in the shot. "I
never thought to look for him in daylight. Which way did he go?"

Tug peered into the tube of the gun with his big eye, before capping it,
as if expecting to find his enemy crouching down in the powder, but
finding that the powder primed, he put on a cap, and stood ready to go
out.

"Into the woods," Silas answered. "When we first met him, he was rowing
toward town, but on seeing us he turned the other way. That was about
noon, and just before night we saw him again, coming toward town as
before, but he pulled off to the right when he met us, and disappeared
under the trees. I expected you in every moment when I fell asleep, or I
would have gone up to The Locks, and told Allan Dorris. We ought to tell
him about this man, Tug. His appearance here so regularly means trouble.
Within a year we have seen him a dozen times, and each time he has been
lurking around Allan Dorris. We really ought to do something."

In the emergency Silas did what he had done a hundred times in other
emergencies--he said that something should be done, and folded his
hands.

"Ain't I _trying_ to do something?" his companion answered testily.
"Haven't I tried my best to shoot him? What more can I do? But he has
only been here seven times. Here is the record."

He handed the gun over to Silas, who saw for the first time that there
were seven notches cut in the stock, the particularly long one
representing the time that Tug had shot at the shadow, and missed.

The men had talked of warning Dorris a great many times before, but Tug
had always argued that it was unnecessary; that it would only render him
nervous and suspicious, whereas he was now contented, and very useful to
the townspeople and his young wife. Silas had always been in favor of
putting his friend on his guard against an enemy who seemed to come and
go with the night, but Tug had stubbornly held out against it, and
perhaps this was the reason he guarded The Locks so faithfully.
Sometimes he would only hear a noise in the underbrush; at other times
he saw a crouching figure, but before deciding to fire at it, it would
disappear, but there was always something to convince him that his old
enemy was still occasionally lurking about the town. A few times he had
seen him openly, as has been narrated, but there was always something in
the way of the accomplishment of the purpose nearest his heart; the only
purpose of his life. He did not know himself why he had taken such an
interest in Dorris, nor had he ever attempted to explain it to Silas,
but he admired the man, and the only ambition he had ever acknowledged
was connected with the safety of the person he admired, according to his
own confession, next to Rum and Devilishness, for not even Davy
out-ranked the owner of The Locks in Tug's callous heart. And Dorris
himself was not more pleased when his wife was praised than was the
rusty old lawyer, and at her suggestion he had worked whenever he could
get it to do during the winter which had just passed; at copying,
drawing legal papers, and at keeping books, for he was competent at any
of these occupations. It is probable that had she asked him to go to
work as a day laborer he would have consented, for she was kind to him
in a great many ways, and often invited him to visit The Locks, when he
appeared looking very much like a scarecrow, the result of his attempts
at fixing up, and using his great eye, after arriving, to look around
for refreshments, for he was always hungry. Being a noted character,
when it became known that he had "reformed," and that he was patronized
by the Dorrises, a great many others took pains to patronize him, and
give him work of the kind he was willing to do, for he was still very
particular in this respect. When at The Locks, if he threatened to drink
too much, Mrs. Dorris took his glass and kept it, although her husband
was usually in favor of "turning him on," as Tug expressed it, for he
was very amusing when a little tipsy, and kept them in continued
laughter by his dignified oddity.

"I will tell him to-day," Tug said, taking the gun into his own hands
again. "He must not go into the bottoms unless accompanied by a party,
and as he hasn't been over yet, he may take it into his head to go
to-day. I will tell him in an hour; he won't be up before that time."

"Do you know, Tug," Silas said, "what I think of you?"

"Well, out with it. Let's have it."

"I think you are a better man than you pretend."

"It's a lie!" his companion replied fiercely, hitting the table a hard
blow with his clenched fist. "It's a lie!"

"I have often thought it was very much to your credit that you took such
an interest in a hunted man," Davy said, "who is shadowed by a cowardly
enemy, but perhaps I am mistaken--I usually am; it's not important."

Tug hung his head in mortification at this suggestion, and for once in
his life neglected to be indifferent and dignified at the same time,
which was possible with him, if with no one else.

"Whoever accuses me of being a good man," he said finally, "wrongs me.
When I made the discovery a good many years ago that I could never hope
to become anything, I made up my mind to distinguish myself for
shiftlessness. I despise a common man, therefore I am an uncommonly
proficient loafer. I am better known in this town than some of your
respectable men, and I don't have to work so hard. There are men here,
and plenty of them, who have worked all their lives, and who have no
more than I have, which is nothing. They expect that there is a great
deal in the future for them, but I have sense enough to know there is
nothing very great in the future for any of us, therefore I live as my
fancy dictates. I am a natural-born vagrant; most of us are, but most of
us do not say so. I despise five-cent respectability, therefore I am a
dollar vagrant, and will pass for that anywhere. I had enough of good
people when I was married to one of them; my wife was a _Good Woman_."

"I hope I haven't offended you," the meek little man said, looking at
his fierce companion in alarm. "I didn't mean any disrespect."

"Oh, you needn't take it back," Tug retorted. "You've gone too far. It's
all right; but let me tell you the truth for once in my life--I believe
I never did before. I expect it will set me to coughing, but I will try
it. My wife hasn't a relative in the world that I know of; certainly I
never met any of them. The only objection I have to her is that she is
_Good_. She is so _Good_ that she is a bore; goodness is a fault, and a
grave one with her. She couldn't possibly be more disagreeable than she
is, and her fault is, she is _Good_. When there is a dry spell, she
wants to get up a rain, and whether it rains or not, you are expected to
give her credit for philanthropy. When it is too cold, she moans about
the poor people who are suffering, and those who are around her must
accept this as noble, or be called wicked, or heartless, or something
else. She even has a _Good_ way of gossiping about people, and I despise
her for no other reason than that she is _Good_. I can't tolerate her;
she makes my feet cold."

Tug had uttered the word _good_ in each instance like an oath, and Davy
cowered under his cold stare as though fearing _he_ might be _good_, and
was about to be accused of it.

"Everything she does is right; everything you do is wrong,--there you
have the old women in a mouthful," the outraged husband continued. "She
is always jumping on you for not being _Good_, and for your refusal to
see goodness in her; and no one around her sees a moment's peace, for
she badgers them to death for their neglect to rid the earth of sin, or
some other trifling matter like that. She neglects herself in the most
shameful manner to moan about Rampant Rum, or the Vitality of Vice, for
I never saw her ears clean, and if ever you find her with clean
finger-nails, look out for the pigs, for they will fly. If she is a
_Good Woman_, then hurrah for the devil. The fat, the lean, the long,
the short, the ugly; _they_ go into the _Good_ business, for I never
knew anyone who could attract attention in the ordinary way to engage in
it, and when a woman becomes too fat for society, or too plain to be
admired, she goes to yelling that she is better than anybody else, and
wants everybody to behave, although they may be behaving all right
already. The good-looking and amiable ones remain at home, where they
belong, and I admire them for it. Had I been a rich man, the old women
would have remained with me, and called _that_ good, but since I was a
friendless devil, and a worthless vagabond, she left me, and called
_that_ good; I hope she is the only woman of that kind in the world.
Look how she treats little Ben! Does she act like a mother toward him?
Don't I have to take all the care of him, and look after him, and attend
to his bringing up? Is it common for mothers to neglect their own ragged
children, and weep over fat and contented people? That's what she does;
therefore, if you are a friend of mine, don't call me _Good_."

Silas was not taking as much interest in the recital as he would have
done under other circumstances, for he was thinking of Allan Dorris; but
Tug was determined to talk about the "old womern."

"When we were first married," he continued, "I told her some sort of a
lie about myself; a simple sort of a yarn about nothing, and only
intended to earn cheap glory for myself. In some way she found me out,
for she is always poking her nose around smelling for sin; and, until I
could stand it no longer and finally left her, she was continually
asking me for additional particulars of the fictitious incident I had
related. I say she found me out; I don't know it, but I always believed
she did, and that she only asked these questions to hear me lie, and
gloat over her own virtue. The story I told her was about saving a man's
life, and as he afterwards came to Davy's Bend, and knew the old womern,
I felt sure that she had found me out. After that she asked me a
thousand questions about it, and every time I invented a new lie to go
with the first one. Did she do this because she was _Good_? You bet she
didn't; she did it to convince herself that she was _Good_, and that I
was _Bad_; but I tell you that, average me up, I am as good as she is,
and I am perfectly worthless."

Picking up a rickety chair which stood neat him, Mr. Whittle smashed it
to pieces on the floor, after a tremendous pounding and racket, which
was one of his ways of expressing anger.

Silas was very much impressed by this ferocious proceeding, and looked
on in meek astonishment until his companion was seated again.

"Isn't it time for you to go to The Locks?" he asked.

"Sure enough," Tug said. "I am going up there this morning. I'll go
now."

Without further words, he picked up his gun, and started out, going over
the hills to avoid the frequented streets. He had made up his mind to
make a full breast of the story, so he walked along leisurely, thinking
that he had a genuine surprise in store for his friend.

Arriving at The Locks' gate, he blew the whistle, which was always
looking out into Dorris' room like an eye, and waited for an answer. It
came soon after; the cheerful voice of Annie Dorris, inquiring what was
wanted.

"It's me,--Tug," he answered, "I want to see Dr. Dorris."

"He left an hour ago, to go over into the bottoms," was the reply.
"Anything urgent?"

"Oh, no," the man replied, as he swallowed a great lump which came up
into his throat. "Nothing urgent; I only wanted him to pull a tooth."

With long strides at first, Tug started for the river, but after he was
out of sight from The Locks, he ran like a man pursued, and arriving at
the place where the ferry was tied up, making steam for the day's work,
he seized the first boat within his reach, and pushed off into the
stream. The owner of it called to him to come back, as he wanted the
boat himself; but Tug paid no attention, except to row the harder, and
soon disappeared under the trees.




CHAPTER XX.

THE SEARCH IN THE WOODS.


From noon until twilight Annie Dorris watched the point on the other
shore of the river, where her husband had promised to wave the signal of
his return long before nightfall, but nothing did she see save the
floating debris of the flood, which looked like tired travellers
hurrying forward to find a night's shelter.

Great trees came floating down, with their arms outstretched as if for
help, and occasionally these disappeared in the angry water, as human
floaters might disappear after giving up in despair, believing it to be
impossible to reach the shore.

Boats carrying parties of men came back, one by one, to the town, as the
afternoon wore away, and the ferry came in later in the evening, panting
like a thing of life after its hard day's work; but no boat with a
single, strong rower appeared to cheer the gaze of the faithful watcher.

Everything seemed to be hurrying away from her, and from Davy's Bend,
and from the gathering darkness under the trees, save the returning
boats, and she thought their occupants appeared to be anxious to reach
their own homes, and tell of some horror in the woods. Perhaps some of
the rowers had a message to be delivered at The Locks; and when they did
not come, the fear found its way to her throbbing heart that the news
was dreadful, and that they delayed until they could muster up more
courage.

While it was yet light on the water, an ugly night-shade collected under
the trees where her husband's boat had disappeared, reaching out with
long arms to capture those in the boats, who were hurrying away from
it,--a black monster it seemed, fat with prey, watching the town with
stealthy care until its people were sleeping after the day's work, and
unsuspicious of attack.

As Annie Dorris watched this black shadow grow larger and larger, and
become so bold as to approach still nearer to the town, it seemed to her
that no one within it could ever escape; and though an occasional boat
did come out, it hurried toward the town rapidly, as if in fright, and
this encouraged her to hope that her husband had been delayed in some
way, and would safely return with wonderful adventures to relate. So she
kept up the vigil, and saw the shadow grow blacker as the afternoon
became night.

When it was too dark to see even the river, Annie Dorris stood looking
out into the night, hoping that her husband had returned another way,
and that his footstep would soon be heard on the stair; for she could
think of no danger that could befall him, since rowing in the flood was
safe, in spite of the strong current. Once she heard a light step on the
stair, and she was sure that it was her husband coming up to surprise
her, and there was a pause of long duration on the landing; but when she
threw open the door in joyful expectation, the quiet darkness looked at
her in pity. More than once the footstep on the stair was heard by the
anxious and terrified wife, and more than once she hurried to the door
to look into the hall; but hope seemed to be leaving the house, and she
imagined she heard it in the lower hall, hurrying away.

Returning to the window, she saw such fearful phantoms in the darkness
that she ran, bareheaded, into the street, and up the hill to her
father's house.

"Annie!" Thompson Benton said, as she ran into his room with starting
eyes and dishevelled hair. "Annie, what has happened?"

"Oh, father," she replied, bursting into tears, "my husband has not
returned from the bottoms!"

Thompson Benton had been expecting a calamity to befall Allan Dorris;
for, while he had grown to honestly admire him, there was always
something in his manner which indicated that he was in danger. Perhaps
this suspicious dread grew out of the keen relish with which Allan
Dorris enjoyed his home; as if every day were to be his last. It may
have been the result of the general belief that he remained in the town
to hide away from malicious enemies, or knowledge of the pathetic
sadness which always distinguished his manner; but, whatever it was,
Thompson Benton put on his coat and boots, which he had just taken off,
precisely as a man might do who had been summoned on a long-expected
errand. He had no explanations of the absence to offer to the weeping
wife, but became grave at once, and made his preparations to go out in
nervous haste. So, without speaking an encouraging word to his daughter,
who had sunk down on her knees beside her father's chair, he left the
house and hurried down to the town.

With long strides he reached the river's brink, where a number of boats
were tied, and spoke to a few trusty men who were there, some of whom at
once put oars into two of the boats, while others hurried back into the
town after lanterns and torches.

While they were gone Thompson Benton walked up and down the bank,
pausing frequently to look toward the woods, but he said nothing, and
paid no attention to those who looked at him curiously for an
explanation; for the absence of this grim old man from his home at night
was important; it was particularly important now, since it was known
that he was only waiting for the return of the men with the torches, to
go over into the bottoms.

The news spread rapidly that something unusual was in the air, and when
the two boats, rowed by four men each, pushed out into the stream, half
of the town was left on the bank to talk of their mission in low
whispers, and hope that Allan Dorris would be found safe and well.

Among those who watched the lights in the boats as they were rowed away
and finally disappeared under the trees, was Silas Davy, who felt that
his neglect to warn Allan Dorris of the shadow which followed him so
persistently had resulted in a tragedy at last. The departure of the men
at that hour to look for him, and the preparations they had made for the
search, were dreadfully significant,--there could be no mistake of that;
and Silas wandered along the shore for an hour, hoping to see the boats
return, and hear the men talking cheerfully on the water, indicating
that his friend had been found. But the longer he watched the woods, the
darker they became, and the less prospect there seemed to be that the
lights the men had carried would ever reappear, so he resolved to walk
up to The Locks, hoping to find Dorris there, and be the first to give
the news to the town. But at the gate he met Mrs. Wedge, who anxiously
asked him for information of the missing man; there was nothing cheerful
in her pale, anxious face, nor in the stillness which hung about the
place like a pall.

Silas was compelled to acknowledge that there was so little hope in the
town that he had come there for encouragement. He then told her in a
whisper of the departure of the men in the boats, and of their carrying
lanterns and torches, but Mrs. Wedge did not give him the encouragement
he expected, for she put her hands to her face, and Silas was certain
that she was crying. When she had recovered her composure, she motioned
the little man to follow her, and they walked together up the broad
walk, and up the stone steps until they entered the door. There were no
lights in the house, and the great mass of stone seemed to be a part of
the darkness from the woods. When they were on the inside, Mrs. Wedge
carefully closed the door, and said to him softly,--

"Listen!"

A timid step on the stair, going up and coming down in unceasing
monotony. Occasionally it stopped on going up, as if it were of no use
to look again; on coming down, as if fearing some corner had been
overlooked in the search, but it soon went on again, up and down the
stair, into the room which was sacred to the empty cradle, and out of it
again,--the step on the stair which always gave warning of trouble. Once
it came so near them that Silas half expected, as he stood trembling in
the darkness, that the ghost of poor Helen would lay hands on him, and
inquire in pitiful tones for the little girl who seemed to be lost in
the house. But it passed by, and wearily ascended the stairs, only to
come wearily down again after a short absence in the room where the
light and the life had gone out.

Mrs. Wedge led Silas back to the gate, and, after crying softly to
herself awhile, said to him in a voice so agitated that he could
scarcely understand her,--

"It has not been heard before since they were married. I had hoped that
poor Helen had found rest at last, but her footstep on the stair this
night means--I won't say the word! It might be carried by some evil
spirit to his wife. The poor girl is at her father's, and I am afraid to
look at her. O Annie, Annie!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile the boats pursued their journey into the woods; a man in the
bow of each with a torch to direct the rowers. The underbrush was
submerged, and they made fair progress toward the line of hills opposite
the town, though they drifted about a good deal, for sometimes they were
in doubt as to their bearings, as there was nothing to guide them.
Occasionally they stopped to listen, hoping that Dorris had disabled his
boat, and was safe in some of the trees, but, hearing nothing, they
hallooed themselves, each one taking his turn until they were all
hoarse. But the rippling water laughed with joy because their voices
sounded dead in the forest lake, and seemed afraid to venture out into
the damp, noisome darkness.

Finding a place where the current was not so strong, they pulled to a
point which they believed to be above the town, calling "Halloo!
Halloo!" at every boat's length; but the devilish gurgle in the water
continued, and their voices came back to them, like hounds ordered to
enter a dangerous lair. Occasionally a waterfowl resting for the night
was disturbed, and went crashing through the branches of the trees, but
no other sound came to them, and as the hours wore away they looked at
each other in grave apprehension.

A few times, in the middle of clearings, they came upon deserted houses,
with vagrant water pouring in at the windows, only to creep out at other
windows after making a search in the rooms for lives to destroy. But
most of the people had escaped to the hills with their farm animals,
leaving their household effects to be covered with the reptiles which
had been frightened out of the thickets and tall grass, and which clung
to whatever offered them safety. Under the trees they frequently found
drifts composed of household furniture, bridges, fences, out-houses,
logs, stumps, and what not, and the desolation which reigned supreme in
that dark, damp place was relieved but little by the glare of the
torches, which made the men look like pale-faced spirits rowing about in
an eternal effort to escape.

If the men wearied in the search, a look at the earnest, gray-haired old
man in the largest boat, who was always straining his eyes in attempting
to penetrate the darkness, revived them, and they floated on, pulling to
the right or to the left, as Thompson Benton directed, and crying,
"Halloo! Halloo!" in tones which sounded plaintive, and sad, and
hopeless. Always an earnest man, Thompson Benton had never before been
as earnest as he was this night, and he had called "Halloo! Halloo!" so
frequently that when he spoke it was either in a hoarse voice, or in a
soft whisper.

At the lower point of the bend in the hills which gave the town its
name, a sluggish lake was found, the main current striking diagonally
across the river to shorten the distance in its hurry to do mischief
below, and the boats found their way into this. While floating around
not far from the base of the hills, those who were in the smaller boat
suddenly came upon a gravestone, the top of which was only a foot out of
water.

"We are floating over Hedgepath graveyard," the man who was in front
carrying the torch said to the others. The stone which had attracted his
attention seemed to be taller than the others, for it was the only one
appearing above the surface; the water covered everything except this
rounded piece of stone, which alone remained to mark the resting-place
of the dead, providing the dead had not been seized with the universal
desire for floating off, and gone away to visit graveyards in the lower
country.

He caught hold of the stone to steady the boat, and, throwing his light
upon the other side of it, read:--

"Sacred to the memory of--"

The name in whose honor the slab had been raised was below the water,
and the man put his hand down into it to read, as a blind man reads
raised letters.

"The first letter is A," he said, rubbing the face of the stone with his
fingers, "like the alphabet; and the next is L."

The fellow continued rubbing the face of the stone with the tips of his
fingers, while his lips moved as he tried letter after letter, and gave
them up.

"Hello! Another L!" he said in surprise, at last, drawing up his hand
hurriedly on making the discovery, and shaking it violently to throw off
the water, but there remained on his wrist a sickening scum, which he
hurriedly transferred to the side of the boat.

"I'll read no further," he said, with a frightened look. "I'm afraid it
will turn out to be Allan, with a space and a big 'D' following it."

The torch-bearer still held on to the stone while the rowers rested, but
the other boat, in which Thompson Benton sat, was busy a short distance
beyond them; from one clump of debris to another, as if he only hoped
now to find the lifeless body of the one he sought.

"Strange people are buried here," the torch-bearer said, speaking softly
to his panting companions, while they rested from their hard work.
"Suicides, and those who have died violent deaths; Hedgepath is devoted
to them. I've heard it said that this is a rough neighborhood, but the
best of their dead are put away further up the hill. If the flood has
not drowned out the ghosts, we will see one to-night."

The suggestion of ghosts was not a pleasant one to the rowers,
particularly to those who were farthest from the torch, for they looked
timidly about as though they were likely to be approached from behind by
spirits riding on headstones.

"There is a road running along the edge of Hedgepath, leading from the
ferry into the hills," the torch-bearer said, who was the bravest of the
lot, because he was directly under the light, "and those who have
travelled it at night say that the inhabitants of this place sit on
stumps beside the road and want to argue with the passers-by. One fellow
who was hanged,--_he_ has a great deal to say about the perjured
witnesses; and another who was accused of poisoning himself,--he says he
found it in his coffee, though he does not tell who put it there; and so
many others have horrible stories to tell that travellers usually hurry
by this place as fast as they can."

It was not a cheerful subject, but his companions listened with close
attention, occasionally casting glances behind them.

"The unknown people who are found floating in the river; _they_ are
buried here, and those who travel the Hedgepath road at night say these
offer them letters, and ask that they be posted. I have forgotten who it
was, but somebody told me that he received one of these letters in his
own hand, and mailed it, and that soon after one of the bodies was taken
up by friends from a distance, and carried away."

The grim joker was interrupted by a hail from the other boat, and the
men dipped their oars into the water, and pulled toward it.

Thompson Benton and those who were with him were looking with eager eyes
at a boat which was floating a short distance beyond them, within the
rays of their torch, and which was rising and falling with the ripples,
with both oars hanging helplessly out in the water. The men were waiting
in fear for their companions to come up to keep them company before
approaching it, and when the two boats were side by side, they were held
together, and the outside oars of each were used to row toward the
deserted craft, as a party of men who discover a suspicious object in a
strange locality might move toward it together.

As they drew nearer, the form of a prostrate man was seen seen--

Dismiss thy husband into the shadows from whence he came, O pretty wife,
for he is murdered.

In the bottom of the boat, lying easily on his back, the rowers found
Allan Dorris, dead; his eyes closed as if in disturbed sleep, and his
face upturned to the heavens. His right hand was gripped on the side of
the boat, as if his last wish had been to pull himself into a sitting
posture, and look toward the town where his faithful wife was watching
for his return. The flash of the torches made the face look ghastly and
white, and there was a stain of blood on his lips. Those who looked upon
the face saw in it an expression of regret to die, which remained with
them as long as they lived; they spoke of it tenderly to their children,
who grew up and gave their own children descriptions of Allan Dorris's
pitiful face as he lay dead in his boat on the night when the waters of
the great flood began to recede. It is said that the face of a sorrowing
man looks peaceful in death; it may be equally true that death stamps
unmistakable regret on the face of its victim who is not ready.

O, pitiless Death, you might have spared this man, who was just
beginning, and taken one of the mourning thousands who watch for you
through the night, and are sad because of your long delay. This man
desired so much to live that his white face seems to say now: "I cannot
die; I dread it--Oh, how terrible it would be to die now!" And his eyes
are wet with tears; a touching monument of his dread of thee!

The rough men reverently uncovered their heads as Thompson Benton looked
at the dead man in stupefaction, but when he had recovered, he lifted
the body gently up, and made a hasty examination. Laying it down again,
he looked at the men, and said in a tone which indicated that he had
long expected it,--

"Shot in the back."

Lashing their boats together, the rowers gulled back to town without
speaking a word; that containing the body of Allan Dorris towing behind,
the pathetic face looking up to heaven, as if asking forgiveness. The
stars came out as the rowers pursued their journey back to the town, and
the storm was over.

Peace to the pathetic dust! In the town on the hill, where the twinkling
lights mingle with the stars, waits a weeping woman who knew Allan
Dorris well; let her opinion of the dead prevail, and not that of the
gossiping winds which have been whispering into the ears of the people.




CHAPTER XXI.

LITTLE BEN.


In answer to a note requesting his presence at The Locks, Silas Davy
hurried towards that part of the town as soon as he found relief from
his duties at the hotel, regretting as he went along that Mr. Whittle
was not ahead of him with his gun, for late events had not been of a
cheerful nature, and he felt the need of better company than little Ben,
who dragged his weary frame into the hotel kitchen a few minutes before
Silas started.

Not that Silas did not love the boy; nor had he any objection to his
company on this errand, but with cries of murder in the air, and the
reports of guns, he thought he would have preferred a stouter companion
in his walk; but as they hurried along, little Ben keeping up with
difficulty, Silas thought that perhaps the boy's mild goodness would
keep away evil, and protect them both. It occurred to him for the first
time that in a storm of thunder and lighting he should like to keep
close to little Ben, for though mankind might be unjust to him, the
monsters of strength would pity his weakness, and strike elsewhere,
therefore Silas came to feel quite content in his company.

Of the shot in the bottoms which had created so much excitement in
Davy's Bend, and of the drifting boat which had been found in the flood
by Thompson Benton and his men, Silas knew nothing except as he heard
these matters discussed about the hotel. Although the people went to The
Locks in crowds the day after the body was found, and remained there
from early in the morning until late at night, every new arrival being
taken into one of the darkened lower rooms to look at the dead man,
Silas was not of the number. He was afraid to look at his friend's face,
fearing he could see in it an accusation of his neglect to give warning
of the shadow, so he remained away, and went about his duties in a
dreamy way, starting at every sound, as though he feared that the people
had at last found out his guilt, and had come to accuse him for not
notifying them of the danger of which he had been aware. The receipt of
the note had frightened him, too, and he felt sure that when he entered
the presence of Annie Dorris, she would break down, and inquire why he
had robbed her of a husband in his usual thoughtless way. Perhaps the
sight of little Ben, in his weakness and goodness, would plead for him,
so he picked the child up, and carried him on the way as far as his own
weak arms would permit.

Mrs. Wedge soon appeared in answer to his ring at The Locks gate, and
admitted him into the hall where he had heard the step on the stair on
the night when there was alarm because of Dorris's absence in the
bottoms. It was dark in the hall now, as it was then, and while Silas
waited for Mrs. Wedge to fasten the door at which they had entered, he
listened eagerly for the footsteps, and when he did not hear them, he
trembled at the sound of his own as he finally went up the stairs behind
Mrs. Wedge, followed by little Ben.

Going up to the door leading into the room which had been occupied by
his friend, Silas was ushered into the presence of Annie Dorris, who was
seated near the window where the shadow had twice appeared. There was a
great change in her manner, he noticed at once; the pretty face, which
had formerly always carried the suspicion of a laugh, was now
distinguished by a settled grief, and it was pale and haggard.

Her pale face was in sharp contrast to the dress of mournful black, and
the good fellow who was always trying to do right, but who was always in
doubt as to which was right and which was wrong, would have given his
life cheerfully to have been a month younger.

While Silas stood near the doorway, changing his hat from one hand to
the other in confusion, he noticed that tears started to her eyes.

"Please don't cry," Silas said, walking towards her. "I want to tell you
the guilty part I have taken in this dreadful affair, but I cannot
muster up the courage when there are tears in your eyes. Please don't
cry."

Annie Dorris bravely wiped her tears away at this request, and looked at
Silas with a face indicating that if his presence had opened her wounds
afresh, she would try and conceal it.

"I am oppressed with the fear that I am to blame for this," he
continued, in desperate haste, "and I must tell you, and get it off my
mind, even though you send for the sheriff and have me arrested; I
cannot contain the secret any longer, now that I am in your presence."

Little Ben had crawled into a chair on entering the room, and was
already fast asleep, with his head hanging on his breast, dreaming, let
us hope, of kind treatment, and of a pleasant home.

"Within a month after Allan Dorris came to Davy's Bend," Silas said,
seating himself near Mrs. Dorris, "Tug and I discovered that he was
shadowed by some one, who came and went at night. For more than a
year,--until the day before it happened--we saw the strange man at
intervals, but Tug said it would unnecessarily alarm you both to know
it, so we kept it to ourselves. I am sorry we did it, but we thought
then it was for the best. I always wanted to tell you, but Tug, who
worshipped you both, would never consent to it until the morning your
husband went into the bottoms alone. When he came here, and found that
he had gone, he followed him, and has not been seen since. The day
before, while rowing in the bottoms, I met the shadow, and when Tug
heard this, he came at once to warn your husband not to venture out
alone."

Annie Dorris made no reply. Perhaps this was no more than she expected
from Silas, whom she had sent for to question.

"The shot which once came in at that window was fired by Tug," Davy
continued, pointing to the pane which had been broken on the night of
Allan Dorris's marriage to Annie Benton, "and he fired at the shadow as
it was looking in at your husband. For more than a year Tug has carried
a gun, and has tried to protect you; but he made a mistake in not giving
warning of this stealthy enemy. Of late months he has spent his nights
in walking around this place, trying to get a shot at the shadow; and
though some people accuse him of a horrible crime, because of his
absence from town, he is really on the track of the guilty man, and will
return to prove it. I cannot tell you how sorry I am to see you in
mourning, but I hope you believe I did what I thought was for the best."

When Silas had concluded, they were both silent and thoughtful, and the
heavy breathing of little Ben was all the sound that could be heard.
This attracted the attention of Silas, and he said, respectfully,--

"Would you mind kissing the boy, ma'am? The poor little fellow is so
friendless, and has such a hard time of it, that he makes my heart ache.
If you will be good enough, I will tell him of it, and he will always
remember it gratefully. Poor chap! I don't suppose he was ever kissed in
his life."

Annie Dorris went over to the sleeping boy, and, after kissing him, as
had been requested, picked him up, and laid him down on a lounge which
stood in the room.

"There was always something fierce and mysterious about my husband,"
Mrs. Dorris said, after a time; "but both attracted me to him. I could
not help it. A hundred times he has offered to tell me his story, but I
did not care to hear it; so that now I know nothing about him except
that he was the most worthy gentleman I ever knew, and combined all
those qualities which my heart craved. I knew when we were first married
that some such result as this was probable, but I could not resist him;
and I do not regret it now. Three months of such happiness as I have
known will repay me for future years of loneliness, and his kindness and
consideration are sweet memories, which console me even now while my
grief is so fresh. He was manly and honorable with me in every way; and
the fault, if there has been a fault, was my own. I am sure that he was
a better man because of his misfortune. I believe now that trouble
purifies men, and makes them better; and the more I studied him the more
I was convinced that there were few like him; that a trifling thing had
ruined his life, and that there were hundreds of men, less honorable,
who were more fortunate. Even now I do not care to know more of him than
I already know. I fear that this is a fault; but I knew him better than
anyone else in the world, and his manner was so pathetic at times, and
his love for me always so pronounced, that, though I am now a young
woman, I expect to spend my life in doing honor to a noble memory."

There was something so womanly in her manner that Silas was convinced
that she would live only to honor the memory of his friend. There was
inexpressible sadness in her face, but there was also strength, and
capacity, and love, and honor.

"I am the one person whose good opinion he cared for," she said again;
"and I forget everything except his love for me, and his manliness in
everything. It is nothing to me what he was away from here. A single
atom in the human sea, he may have committed a wrong while attempting to
do right, and came here a penitent, trying to right it; but as I knew
him he was worthy of any woman's profoundest admiration, and he shall
receive it from me as long as I live. The stream of life leads upwards
to heaven against a strong current, and, knowing myself, I do not wonder
that occasionally the people forget, and float down with the tide. He
has told me that he had but one apology to make to any one,--to me, for
not finding me sooner. This was a pretty and an undeserved compliment;
but it was evident that in his own mind he did not feel that he had
wronged anyone, and I feel so. I have no idle regrets, and do not blame
you and Tug. On the contrary, I thank you both for your thoughtful care.
When Tug returns, as I am sure he will, bring him here. Who has not
wounded their best friends in trying to befriend them? Though you two
have grievously wounded me, I recognize the goodness of your motives,
and feel grateful."

She got up at this, and started toward the door, motioning Silas to
follow. From the dark hall she stepped through the door which Dorris had
never entered alive; but he had been carried there dead. A dim light
burned near the door, and there was something in the air--a taint not to
be described, but to be remembered with dread--which made Silas think of
a sepulchre.

On a raised platform, in the room to which the steps of poor Helen were
always leading, stood a metallic burial case, with a movable lid showing
the face under glass. The face was so natural that Silas thought it must
have been preserved in some manner, for his friend seemed to be quietly
sleeping, and he could not realize that he had been dead a week. Even
before Silas had taken his hasty glance, Annie Dorris had knelt beside
the inanimate clay of her husband, and he thought he had better go
away--he could think of nothing else to do--and leave her. And this he
did, only stopping at the door to see a picture which he never
forgot,--the coffin, the sobbing woman, the dim light, and the gloomy
hangings of the room.

On being awakened, little Ben shielded his face with his hands, as if
expecting a blow, which was his usual greeting on opening his eyes, but,
recognizing his friend, he contentedly followed him down the stairs, and
out at the iron gate into the street. Davy was not a large man or a
strong man, but little Ben found it difficult to follow him, and was
compelled to ask his friend to stop and rest before they reached the
hotel. When they finally reached the kitchen, they found it deserted,
and Silas hastily placed meat and bread before the boy. This he devoured
like a hungry wolf, and Davy wondered that such a little boy had so much
room under his jacket.

"They don't feed you overly well at the farm, do they, Ben?" Silas
inquired.

The boy had turned from the table, and was sitting with his hands
clasped around his knees, and his bare feet on the upper round of the
chair. After looking at his companion a moment, he thoughtfully shook
his head.

"You work hard enough, heaven knows," Silas said again, in a tone which
sounded like a strong man pitying some one less unfortunate, but there
was little difference between the two, except age, for there was every
reason to believe that should little Ben's cough get better, he would
become such a man as Silas was.

"I do all I can," little Ben answered, "but I am so weak that I cannot
do enough to satisfy them. I haven't had enough sleep in years: I think
that is the trouble with me."

That cough, little Ben, is not the result of loss of sleep: you must
have contracted that in going out to work in the early morning, illy
clad, while other children were asleep.

"I'm going to tell you something, poor fellow," Silas said, "which will
please you. While you were asleep up at The Locks to-night, the lady
kissed you."

Little Ben put his hand apologetically to his mouth, and coughed with a
hoarse bark that startled Silas, for he noticed that the cough seemed
worse every time the boy came to town. But he seemed to be only coughing
to avoid crying, for there were tears in his eyes.

"You are not going to cry, Ben?" Silas said, in a voice that indicated
that he was of that mind himself.

"I think not, sir," the boy replied. "When I first went to the farm, I
cried so much that I think that the tears have all left me. I was only
thinking it was very kind of the lady, for nobody will have me about
except you, Mr. Davy. My father and mother, they won't have me around,
and I am in Mr. Quade's way; and his wife and children have so much
trouble of their own that they cannot pay attention to me. They live
very poorly, and work very hard, sir, and I do not blame them; but I
often regret that I am always sick and tired, and that no one seems to
care for me."

Little Ben seemed to be running the matter over in his mind, for he was
silent a long while. In rummaging among his recollections he found
nothing pleasant, apparently, for when he turned his face to Silas it
showed the quivering and pathetic distortion which precedes an open
burst of grief.

"If you don't care," he said, "I believe I _will_ cry; I can't help it,
since you told me about the lady."

The little fellow sobbed aloud at the recollection of his hard life, all
the time trying to control himself, and wiping his eyes with his rough
sleeve. He was such a picture of helpless grief that Silas Davy turned
his back, and appeared to be rubbing something out of his eyes; first
one and then the other.

"I am sorry I am not able to help you, Ben," the good fellow said,
turning toward the boy again, after he had recovered himself; "but I am
of so little consequence that I am unable to help anyone; I cannot help
myself much. I have rather a hard time getting along, too, and I am a
good deal like you, Ben, for, though I work all the time, I do not give
much satisfaction."

Little Ben looked at his companion curiously.

"I thought you were very happy here, sir," he said, "with plenty to eat
every day. You are free to go to the cupboard whenever you are hungry,
but often I am unable to sleep because I am so hungry. You never go to
bed feeling that way, do you, Mr. Davy?"

"No," he replied, almost smiling at the boy's idea that anyone who had
plenty to eat must be entirely content; "but I am a shiftless sort of a
man, and I don't get on very well. I always want to do what is right and
fair, but somehow I don't always do it; I sometimes think, though, that
I am more unjust to myself than to anyone else. It causes me a good deal
of regret that I am not able to help such as you, Ben. If I were able, I
would like to buy you a suit of clothes."

"Summer is coming on, sir, and these will do very well," the boy
replied.

"Yes; but you were very thinly clad last winter, Ben, and oftentimes I
could not sleep from thinking of how cold you were when out in the
fields with the stock. If ever there was a good boy, you are one, Ben;
but you are not treated half so well as the bad boys I know. This is
what worries me, as hunger worries you."

"I am sorry to hear you are poor, sir," little Ben said. "Not that I
want you to do more for me than you have done, but you have always been
so kind to me that I thought you must be rich to afford it. You always
have something for me when I come to town, and I am very thankful to
you."

What a friendless child, Davy thought, to consider what he had done for
him the favor of a rich man! A little to eat, and small presents on
holidays; he had been able to do no more than that; but, since no one
else was kind to the boy, these were magnificent favors in his eyes.

"On which cheek did the lady kiss me, Mr. Davy?" the boy inquired later
in the night.

"On this one," Davy replied, touching his left cheek with his finger
tips.

"I was thinking it was that one," little Ben continued. "There has been
a glow in it ever since you told me. I should think that the boys who
have mothers who do not hate them are very happy. Do you know whether
they are, Mr. Davy?"

"I know they ought to be," he said; "but some of them are very
indifferent to their mothers. I have never had any experience myself; my
own mother died before I could remember."

"It seems to me," little Ben continued, "that if I were as well off as
some of the boys I see, I should be entirely satisfied. I must start
home soon, or I will not get there in time to be called for to-morrow's
work, and when I creep into the hay, where I sleep after coming to see
you, I intend to think that the kiss the lady gave me was the kiss of my
mother, and that she does not hate me any more."

For such as you, little Ben, there must be a heaven. The men who are
strong in doubt, as well as in the world's battles, come to that
conclusion when they remember that there can be no other reward for such
as you and Silas Davy, for your weakness is so unfit for this life that
it must be a burden which can only be reckoned in your favor in the
Master's house where there are many mansions.

"If there were not so many happy children," little Ben said again,
"perhaps I should not mind it so much, but I see them wherever I go, and
I cannot understand why my lot is so much harder than theirs. My bones
ache so, and I want to sleep and rest so much, that I cannot help
feeling regret; except for this I hope I would be happy as you are."

Silas Davy is anything but a happy man, little Ben, but, being a good
man, he does not complain, and does the best he can, so when the boy
soon after started for the farm, and Silas walked with him to the edge
of the town, he pretended to be very well satisfied with himself, and
with everything around him. Indeed, he was almost gay, but it was only
mockery to encourage his unfortunate companion.

"Next Christmas, Ben," Silas said, as they walked along, "you shall
have"--he paused a moment to consider his financial possibilities--"a
sled from the store."

"_That_ is too much," Ben replied, with hope and gladness in his voice.
"A sled will cost a great deal, for the painting and striping must come
high. I would like to have a sled more than anything else, but I am
afraid you would rob yourself in buying it. I am afraid that is too
much, Mr. Davy."

"It will not cost as much as you expect, and I can easily save the money
between this and Christmas," the good fellow replied. "I have always
wanted to do it, and I will, and it will be a pleasure. Remember, Ben,
when you feel bad off in future, what you are to get when you come to
see me Christmas morning."

"I will not forget, sir."

"When you own the sled, and I have had the pleasure of giving it to you,
we will feel like very fortunate fellows, won't we, Ben?" Silas said
again, cheerfully, as they walked along.

"We shall feel as though we are getting along in the world, I should
think, Mr. Davy," the boy replied.

They had reached the edge of the town by this time, and Davy stopped to
turn back. He took the boy's hand for a moment, and said,--

"Remember the sled, Ben. Good night."

"Good night, sir. I will not forget."

Silas had scarcely said good night to him before he was lost to his
sight,--he was such a very little fellow.




CHAPTER XXII.

TUG'S RETURN.


A month had passed since Allan Dorris was found floating over the mounds
in Hedgepath graveyard, and the waters having gone down in the bottoms,
the people were busy in rescuing their homes from the ooze and black mud
beneath which they were buried. There had been so much destruction in
the bottoms, and so much loss of trade in the town, that the people were
all mourners like Annie Dorris and Silas Davy, and it did not seem
probable that any of them would ever be cheerful again.

Silas Davy was the only person in the town, save Annie Dorris, who knew
the secret of the murder, and he kept it to himself, believing that Tug
was on the trail of the culprit, and that nothing could be gained by
making the people aware of the mysterious man and his mysterious visits.
He was sure that Tug would return finally, when, if he saw fit, he might
tell the people what he knew; otherwise they might continue their
conjectures, which generally implicated Tug. From the day of the murder
he had not been seen in the town, and while it was not openly charged
that he had fired the fatal shot, a great many talked mysteriously of
his disappearance, and believed that he had something to do with it, for
about this time it became known that he had frequently been seen around
The Locks in the middle of the night, carrying a gun.

Silas had gone down to the old house by the river, to see if the bed
gave any signs of having been occupied, as there was a possibility that
Tug had returned, and was ashamed to make his presence known, not having
accomplished his purpose. But there was no sign. The dust upon
everything was proof enough that the owner was still away, and Silas was
preparing to blow out the light, and return to the hotel, when his
friend came walking in at the door; ragged, dirty, and footsore, and a
picture of poverty and woe, but there could be no doubt that it was Tug,
for he carried in his right hand the old musket that had so long been
his constant companion. His clothes hung in shreds about him, and bare
skin appeared at his elbows and knees; his tall hat was so crumpled that
it looked like a short hat, and his hair and whiskers were long and
unkempt. There were bits of hay and twigs clinging to his clothing, and
Silas was sure that he had been sleeping out at night, and creeping
through the brush during the day.

"Tug, my old friend!" Silas said, in a voice trembling with excitement
and pleasure. "God bless me; how glad I am to see you!"

Tug sat down wearily in a chair, and laid the gun down at his feet. He
was certainly very tired, and very hungry, and very weak, and Silas
thought how fortunate it was he had brought a lunch with him, although
he had only hoped that Tug would eat it. This he placed before his
friend, who pulled his chair up to the table at sight of the sandwiches,
and said in a hoarse voice,--

"I've caught an awful cold somewhere. Do you starve a cold, or stuff it?
I've been starving it for several days, and I think I'll try stuffing.
You don't mean to tell me you have brandy in that bottle, do you?"

It was brandy fortunately, which Silas had been saving for his friend
since his departure, but he seemed so tired now that he could not enjoy
it with his old relish, for he did not look at it with his usual
eagerness, and there was a melancholy air about him which was very
distressing to the little man by his side. As Silas watched him, he
thought that he discovered that he had grown a dozen years older within
a month, and that he would never again be the contented, easy-going man
he was before. He was a serious man now, too, a thing he had always
despised, and it did not seem possible that he could ever recover from
it.

When he had finished his meal, he walked slowly and painfully over to
the bed, and, stretching out upon it, remained silent so long that Silas
feared he had washed his voice down his throat with the brandy.

"How is Missus Pretty?" he inquired at last, turning to Silas, who sat
beside him.

"Very poorly, I am sorry to say," Silas replied, in a husky voice.

This did not encourage Tug to talk, for he became silent again, and
although Silas was keen to hear where his friend had been, he was
silent, too.

"Have you told her that we were to blame?" Tug asked, after a long
pause.

"Yes, I told her everything, but she does not blame us, and asked me to
bring you up immediately after your return."

There was the click in the ragged man's throat that usually
distinguished him when he was about to laugh, but surely Tug had no
intention of laughing now, though he wiped his big eye hurriedly, and in
a manner indicating that he was vexed.

"I might have known that it was wrong not to tell Allan Dorris of this
enemy," Tug said. "I am usually wrong in everything, but I hoped I was
doing them a favor in this matter; for who wouldn't worry to know that
they were constantly watched by a man who seemed to have come a long
distance for the purpose? They were so happy that I enjoyed it myself,
and I wanted to protect them from The Wolf, and though The Wolf was
smarter than I expected, I meant well; you know that."

"I am sure of it," Davy replied.

"A man who has been bad all his life cannot become good in an hour, and
while I meant well, I did not know how to protect them from this danger.
We should have taken them into our confidence when The Wolf first
appeared; I can see that now, after it is too late. It was my fault,
though; you always wanted to. I'll have more confidence in you in
future."

Both men seemed to be busy thinking it all over for several minutes, for
not a word was exchanged between them until Silas inquired,--

"Do you suppose there is any danger of the shadow molesting Mrs.
Dorris?"

Tug was lying on his back, and putting his hand under him he took from
his pistol-pocket a package wrapped in newspapers, which looked like a
sandwich. Handing this to Davy, he said,--

"Look at it."

Going over to the table and the light, Davy began the work of
unwrapping. There was a package inside of a package, which continued
until a pile of newspapers lay on the table. At last he came to
something wrapped in a piece of cloth, and opening this he found a human
ear, cut off close to the head! He recognized it in a moment,--the ear
of the shadow, with the top gone!

He hurriedly wrapped the horrible thing up as he had found it, and while
he was about this he felt sure that Tug's journey had not been in vain;
that somewhere he had encountered the shadow and killed him, bringing
back the ear as a silent and eloquent witness.

When the package had been returned to Tug's pocket, he turned on his
side, rested his head on his hand, and told his story.

"Out into the river like a shot; that's the way I rowed that misty
morning when I found that Allan Dorris had gone into the bottoms alone.
I had no idea where to go to find him, so I pulled over toward the hills
on the east shore, where there was a slow current, and concluded to
float down the stream. It may have been an hour later, while in the
vicinity of the big bend, that I heard a shot below me. Rowing toward it
with all my might, I soon came upon Allan Dorris lying dead in the
bottom of his boat. Only stopping to convince myself that he was stone
dead, I pulled out after his murderer. I knew who it was as well as if I
had seen the shot fired, and I knew that he would be making down the
river to escape, so I made down the river myself to prevent it. He had
the start of me, and seemed to know the bottom better than I did, for
when I came into the main current I could see him hurrying away, a good
half mile ahead of me. But I was the best rower, and within an hour I
was coming within shooting distance, when he suddenly turned under the
trees, near the island where we saw him the first time. I lost track of
him here for several hours, but at last I came upon his boat, a long
distance up the creek, and just when I heard a whistle down at the
station. Had I thought of this before, I might have found him there, and
brought him back alive, for I have since found out that he signalled the
train and went away on it; but it was too late then, so I could do
nothing but go over to the station and wait for the next train."

The narrator's hoarseness became so pronounced that Silas brought him
the remaining brandy, which he tossed off at one swallow.

"A lonely enough place it was," Tug continued, "and nobody around except
the agent, who told me there would not be another train until a few
hours after midnight, so I occupied myself in studying maps of the road.
I had no money, of course, but I felt sure I could make my way to a
certain big town several hundred miles away, which I had once heard
Dorris mention, and it had been in my mind ever since that he came from
there. Of course his enemy lived in the same place, and the certainty
that The Wolf came to the Bend on that road once, and went away by the
same route, and the probability that he always came to the Bend from
that station by rowing up the river, made me feel certain that the
course I had mapped out was right.

"I need not tell you that I had trouble in travelling without money, for
there are many people who cannot travel comfortably even when supplied
with means in abundance; but in course of time I arrived in the city I
once heard Dorris mention, very tired, dirty, and hungry, as you will
imagine, but not the least discouraged; for the more I heard about the
place,--and I inquired about it of every one who would listen to
me,--the surer I was that I would find The Wolf there. The people with
whom I talked all had the greatest respect for the city, as they had
here for Dorris; this was one thing which made me feel sure he came from
there, but there were a great many other evidences which do not occur to
me now. I arrived in the morning, and there was so much noise in the
streets that it gave me the headache; and so many people that I could
not count them, therefore I cannot tell you the population of the place.

"It was so big and gay, though, that I am certain that the Ben's City
people would have been impressed as much as I was, though they put on
airs over us. A Ben's City man would have felt as much awe there as a
Davy's Bend man feels in Ben's City, and it did me a great deal of good
to find out that Ben's City is nothing but a dirty little hole after
all.

"For two weeks I wandered about the streets, looking for that ear. There
were crowds of people walking and riding around who were like Allan
Dorris in manners and dress, and I was sure that they all knew him, and
respected him, and regretted his departure, for I knew by this time that
he came from that place to Davy's Bend. There was an independence and a
rush about the town so unlike Davy's Bend, and so like Allan Dorris,
that I was certain of it. Several times I thought of approaching some of
the well-dressed people, and telling them that I was looking for the man
who had murdered Allan Dorris, feeling sure that they would at once
offer to assist me in the search; but I at last gave it up, fearing they
would think he had taken a wonderful fall in the world to be friends
with a man like me.

"One day, about three weeks after my arrival, I met The Wolf on a
crowded street. I tapped him on the shoulder, and when he turned to look
at me, he trembled like a thief.

"'That matter of killing up at Davy's Bend,' I said, 'I am here to
attend to it.'

"He recovered his composure with an effort, and replied,--

"'What's that to me, vagrant? Keep out of my way, or I'll have you
jailed. I do not know you.'

"'You are a liar,' I replied, 'and your manner shows it. I am dressed
this way as a disguise. I have as good clothes as anybody when I choose
to wear them. I am a private detective.'

"I had heard that a great many vagrants claim to be private detectives,
so I tried it on him, and it worked well; for he at once handed me a
card with an address printed on it, and said,--

"'Call at that number to-night; I want to see you.'

"He had probably heard of private-detectives, too, for I knew he wanted
to buy me off; so I consented to the arrangement, knowing that he would
not run away.

"When it was dark, I went to the street and number printed on the card,
and The Wolf met me at the door of a house almost as big as The Locks,
but land seemed to be valuable there, for others were built up close to
it on both sides. There was a row of houses just alike, as far as I
could see, but different numbers were printed on all of them to guide
strangers. The Wolf led the way up stairs, after carefully locking the
door, and when we were seated in a room that looked like an office, and
which was situated in the back part of the house, he said,--

"What do you want?'

"'I want to kill you,' I replied.

"He was a tall, nervy man, but I was not afraid of him; for I am thick
and stout. He laughed contemptuously, and replied,--

"'Do you know this man's offence?'

"'No,' I answered, 'but I know yours.'

"He sat near a desk, and I felt sure that under the lid was concealed a
pistol; therefore I found opportunity to turn the key quickly, and put
it in my pocket.

"'Now you are in my power,' I said to him. 'You killed Allan Dorris, and
I can prove it, and I intend to kill you.'

"A very cool man was The Wolf; and he watched me from under his heavy
eyebrows like a hawk, taking sharp note of everything I did, but he did
not appear to be afraid. I couldn't help admiring the fellow's nerve,
for he was the coolest man I ever saw, and there was an air of
importance about him in his own house which did not appear when he was
crawling around Davy's Bend. There was something about him that
convinced me he was a doctor, like Dorris, though I heard nothing and
saw nothing to confirm the belief.

"'I have had enough trouble over this affair already,' he said, 'and I
am willing to pay for your silence. You don't know what you are about,
but I do, and I know there is more justice in my cause than there is in
yours. I have been actuated by principle, while you are merely a vagrant
pursuing a hobby. You are interfering in the private affairs of
respectable people, sir, and I offer you money with the contempt that I
would throw a bone to a surly dog, to avoid kicking him out of my way.'

"'I am not a respectable man myself,' I answered, 'but I know that it is
not respectable to shoot from behind. I give you final notice now that I
don't want your money; I want your life, and I intend to have it. Back
in the poor town I came from there is a little woman whose face I could
never look upon again were I to take your money, and I intend to be her
friend and protector as long as I live. I believe the money you offer me
belongs to Dorris; for you look like a thief who believes that every man
is as dishonest as yourself, and has his price. Even my rags cry out
against such a proposition.'

"He was as cool as ever, and looked at me impudently until I had
finished, when he said,--

"'I want to step into the hall a moment.'

"He knew I was watching the door to prevent his escape, and acknowledged
that I was master of the situation by asking my permission.

"'To call help, probably,' I said.

"'No, to call a weak, broken woman; I want you to see her. Whatever I
have done, her condition has prompted me to.'

"I opened the door for him, and he stepped into the dark hall, where he
called 'Alice!' twice. I was so near him that he could not get away, and
we stood there until Alice appeared at the other end of the hall. It was
the little woman we had here one night! But though she was dressed
better than when we saw her, she was paler; and when she came down the
dark hall, carrying a candle above her head to light the way, I thought
I had never before seen such a sickly person out of a grave.

"When she came up to us I saw that she was panting from her slight
exertion, and we stepped into the room together. She did not know me,
and looked at me with quiet dignity, as if she would conceal from me
that she was weak and sick.

"'Does he bring news of him?' she asked, looking from me to The Wolf.

"The woman was crazy; there was no doubt of it. Had she not been she
would have fallen on her knees, and said to me, as she did the night she
was in this room, 'Gentlemen, in the name of God!' for I was determined
to make way with a person who was probably her only protector.

"'Does the gentleman come from him?' the pale woman asked again.

"She is the only person who ever called me a gentleman, and what little
compassion I had before vanished.

"The Wolf paid no attention to her talk, and I thought he was accustomed
to it; perhaps she was always asking questions to which no reply could
be given. She was not a young woman, and there was something about
her--probably the result of her sickness--which was so repugnant that I
almost felt faint. If she had walked toward me, I would have run out of
the house, but fortunately she only looked at me.

"'If you came here at his request,' the little woman said, as she stood
in the middle of the room, 'take this to him for me. I have been writing
it for two years; it will explain everything.'

"I thought the man was pleased because she had commenced the
conversation so readily; for he appeared to be in good humor, as though
she were saying exactly what he had desired she should to impress me.

"'When they told me he was contented in his new home,' she continued, 'I
was satisfied, and I want him to know it. He had life, and vigor, and
energy, and no one ever blamed him but Tom and me. This letter says so;
I want you to take it to him. When I discovered that he disliked me, and
would always neglect me, it was a cruel blow, though he was not to blame
for it, for other men have honestly repented of their fancies. I could
not think of him as a bad man for no other reason than that he was
dissatisfied with me; for all the people were his friends, and he must
have deserved their friendship. I suppose a man may form a dislike for
his wife as naturally as he forms a dislike for anything else--I have
reason to _know_ that they can--and not commit a graver offence than one
who happens to dislike any other trifle which displeases him. I would
have told him this myself had he not kept out of my way so long; it is
all written in this letter, and my name is signed to it. I commission
you to give it to him.'

"She took from her bosom and handed me a crumpled piece of paper, on
which nothing was written, but I carefully put it in my pocket, to humor
her strange whim.

"'I am satisfied now, since I have heard that he is contented, and if
Tom is willing we will never refer to the matter again. He is a good
man; even Tom says that between his curses, and why not let him alone?
Tell him that Alice gave you the letter with her own hands, and that she
will not live long to annoy him. Tell him that Alice rejoices to know
that he is contented; for Tom has told me all about it, and since my
sickness it has been a pleasure for me to think that a worthy man--and
he is a worthy man; for no one can say aught against him except that he
could not admire me, which does not seem to be a very grave offence, for
no one else admires me--has found what his ability and industry entitles
him to,--peace. Peace! How he must enjoy it! How long he has sought it!
I can understand the relish with which he enjoys it.'

"The Wolf was not pleased with this sort of talk; it was not crazy
enough to suit him, and he looked at her with anger and indignation in
his ugly face.

"'I never said it before, Tom,' she continued, evidently frightened at
his wicked look, 'but I must say it now, for I cannot remember the hate
you tried to teach me; I can only remember that a man capable of loving
and being loved buried himself with a woman he could not tolerate, all
from a sense of duty, and looked out at the merry world only to covet
it. I have forgotten the selfishness which occupies every human heart;
it was driven out of my nature with hope and ambition, and I am only
just when I say that he deserved pity as well as I. He was capable of
something better than such a life; and was worthy of it. I might have
been worthy; but I was not capable, and was it right to sacrifice him
because I crept while he ran? Do we not praise men for remedying their
mistakes? You know we do, and I only praise him for it; nothing more.
The truth should always be written on a tomb; this house is like a tomb,
it is so cold and damp, and I must tell the truth here. I am cold; why
don't you build a fire?'

"She put her hand into the flame of the candle she carried, to warm it,
but it did not burn, very much to my surprise; and she looked at me with
quiet assurance while she warmed her hands in this odd manner. As I
watched her I noticed that the wild look which marked her face when she
first appeared was returning; her craze came back to her, and she put it
on with a shiver.

"'Your feet are resting on a grave,' she said to me again, after staring
around the room awhile, and as coolly as she might have called my
attention to muddy boots. 'Please take them off. It may be _his_ grave.
I have brought flowers to decorate it; an armful. Stand aside, sir.'

"I did as she told me, and, advancing toward where I sat, she pretended
to throw something on nothing out of her empty hands.

"'I came across a grave in the lower hall this morning, Tom,' she said
to The Wolf, pausing; and she said it with so much indifference that I
thought she must have meant a moth. 'Of course they would not be
together: I have never expected that. The grave in the hall was shorter
than this one, and it was neglected. But this one,--this shows care. And
look, Tom! The flowers I threw upon it are gone already!'

"There was surprise and pain in the little woman's voice, and she
pretended to throw other flowers from her withered hands on the mound
her disordered fancy had created.

"'They disappear before they touch it!' she said. 'I almost expect it to
speak, and protest against any attention from me. And it is sinking;
trying to get away from me! How much his grave is like him; it shrinks
away from me. I'll gather them up; I'll not leave them here!'

"Out of the air she seemed to be collecting wreaths, and crosses and
flowers of every kind, and putting them back into her arms.

"'I will put them on the neglected mound in the lower hall, for no one
else will do it. How odd the fair flowers will look on a background of
weeds; but there shall be roses and violets on my grave, though I am
compelled to put them there. Open the door, Tom; my strength is failing.
I must hurry.'

"The door was opened, and she passed out of it, and down the dark hall,
staggering as she went. When she reached the door through which she came
at The Wolf's call, at the lower end of the passage, she turned around,
held the candle above her head again, and said,--

"'Be merciful, Tom; I request that of you as a favor. You were never
wronged by him, except through me, and I have never been resentful
except to please you. Let the gentleman return and deliver the letter I
gave him.'

"Opening the door near which she stood, she disappeared.

"So Tom was the cause of all the trouble? I resolved as we stepped back
into the room that he should regret it, and I think there is no doubt
that he does."

Tug turned on his back again, and seemed to be considering what course
he had better pursue with reference to the remainder of his story. At
last he got up from the bed slowly and painfully, and walked over to the
cupboard where his law-book was kept, which he took down and opened on
the table. After turning over its pages for a while, pausing
occasionally to read the decisions presented, he shut up the book,
returned it to the shelf, and went back to the bed.

"I am too much of a lawyer," he said, "to criminate myself, pardner, and
you'll have to excuse me from going into further details. But I can give
you a few conjectures. In my opinion the pale, ugly little woman without
a mind, but who looked respectable enough, was once Allan Dorris's wife,
but I don't know it; I heard nothing to confirm this suspicion except
what I have told you. The Wolf was her brother (a man with an uglier
disposition I never laid eyes on), and I shall always believe that
Dorris married her when a very young man; that he finally gave her most
of his property and struck out, resolved to hide from a woman who had
always been a burden and a humiliation to him. It is possible that he
was divorced from her a great many years before he came here, and that
she lost her mind in consequence; it is possible that he had nothing to
do with her; but I give you my guess, with the understanding that it is
to go no farther. I am not in the habit of telling the truth; but _this_
is the truth: I know no more about his past history than you do; but
while in the city I came to the conclusion I have just given you."

There was another short silence, and Silas became aware of the fact that
Tug was breathing heavily, and that, for the first time since he had
known him, he was asleep in his own house at night.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE GOING DOWN OF THE SUN.


Two years have passed since the great flood in the river, which is still
told about with wonder by those who witnessed it, and Tug Whittle is now
living in the detached building at The Locks, which was occupied so long
by Mrs. Wedge, that worthy lady having long since taken a room in the
main house.

Little Ben, released from his hard work at Quade's, is growing steadily
worse, in spite of the kindness shown him by Mrs. Dorris and Mrs. Wedge.
A victim of too much work is little Ben; but he is as mild and gentle as
ever, and spends his days, when he is able, in wandering about the yard,
and keeping out of the way, for he cannot forget the time when every
hand was against him.

Mr. Whittle has become an industrious man during the two years, and is
as devoted to Mrs. Dorris and her little child as it is possible for a
man to be. The day after Tug's return to the Bend from his tramp to the
lower country, he called on Mrs. Dorris, and related his story as he
related it to Silas Davy, and going into the little detached house after
its conclusion, he did not come out again for two days and nights; and
it was supposed that he was making up for lost sleep. After his
appearance he was fed by Mrs. Wedge, and at once began to make himself
useful around the place. In a little while they learned to trust him,
and he soon took charge of everything, conducting himself so well that
there was never any reason for regretting the trust reposed.

Allan Dorris had died possessed of several farms in the adjoining
neighborhood, and these Mr. Whittle worked to so much advantage, with
the aid of tenants on each, that in a financial way Mrs. Dorris got on
very well; for Mr. Whittle wanted nothing for himself except the
privilege of serving her as he did.

Very often he was absent from The Locks for weeks at a time, looking
after the farm affairs, and he seldom visited his mistress except to
give accounts of his stewardship, which were always satisfactory. He had
been heard to say that it was his fault that she was a widow; therefore
he did not care to see her except when it seemed to be necessary, for
her modest grief gave him such pangs of remorse that he wanted to take
the musket, which he still retained in times of peace, and make away
with himself. Therefore he spent much of his time in managing her
affairs, which called him out of town; and he became known as a
tremendous worker,--to rival his record as a loafer, Mr. Whittle himself
said; but Silas Davy knew, and even the people admitted it, that he was
greatly devoted to his young mistress, and that he had no other aim in
life than to make her as comfortable as possible in her widowed
condition.

Occasionally he came to town, on an errand, after nightfall, and
returned to the country before day, as little Ben had done, and usually
they only knew he had been around the house at all by something he had
left for their surprise in the morning. If he found anything in the
country he thought would please Mrs. Dorris or little Ben, he went to
town with it after his day's work on the farm, and left his bed in the
detached house before day to return.

Besides the harm he had done Mrs. Dorris, the wrong he had done his son
was on his mind a great deal, and he avoided the boy whenever it was
possible. He was ashamed to look into his face, though he was always
doing something to please him. His rough experience on the farm had
forever ruined the boy's health, and his father was continually
expecting to be summoned from the field to attend his funeral.

Tug was still rugged and rough, and unsociable with those with whom he
came in contact in the field or on the road, but he loved those in The
Locks, from Mrs. Dorris down to the baby, with a devotion which made him
a more famous character than he had ever been as a vagrant. He had
become scrupulously honest and truthful, as well as industrious; and
those who marvelled at the change were told by the wiser heads that Tug
had something on his mind which he was trying to relieve by good works.

Silas Davy no longer had reason to regret that he was unable to buy
little Ben a suit of clothes, for little Ben was well clothed now, and
comfortably situated, except as to his cough; but in other respects the
clerk had not changed for the better.

He was still employed at the hotel, and still heard the boarders
threaten to move to Ben's City; for Davy's Bend continued to go slowly
down the hill. He still heard Armsby boast of his fancy shots, and of
his triumphs in the lodge; and, worst of all, he still heard patient
Mrs. Armsby complain of overwork, and knew that it was true.

He occasionally went to The Locks to see Mr. Whittle,--usually on Sunday
evening, when that worthy was most likely to be at home,--and as we come
upon them now, to take a last look at them, it is Sunday evening, and
Tug and Silas are seated on a rude bench, in front of the detached
house, with little Ben between them.

"I have come to the conclusion, Mr. Davy,"--Tug is wonderfully polite
recently, and no longer refers to his companion by his first name,--"I
have come to the conclusion that there is only one way to get along; it
is expressed in a word of four letters--work. Busy men do not commit
great crimes, and they know more peace than those who are idle;
therefore the best way to live is to behave yourself. I don't know
whether I can behave myself enough from now on to do any good, or not;
but I intend to try."

"I think you can, Tug," Davy replied. "You have been very useful during
the past two years."

"But I have been very useless during the past forty and odd," Mr.
Whittle continued, looking at little Ben as though he were evidence of
it. "I have changed my mind about everything, with one exception, within
a few years,--except that I do not believe a certain person is good, I
have no opinion now that I had a year ago,--but on this I will never
change. My acquaintance with Dorris and his wife has taught me a good
many things which I did not know before. His bravery taught me that
bravery comes of a clear conscience, and his wife's goodness and
devotion teach me to believe that a dead man is not so bad off, after
all. Did you know that she expects to meet her husband again?"

Tug waved his hand above his head, intended as an intimation that Mrs.
Dorris expected to meet her husband in heaven, and looked at Silas very
gravely, who only nodded his head.

"She seems to _know_ it," Tug continued, "and why should I dispute her?
How much more do I know than Annie Dorris? By what right do I say that
she is wrong, and that I am right? She is good enough to receive
messages, but I am not; and it has occurred to me that I had better be
guided by her. I have never been converted, or anything of that kind,
but I have felt regret for my faults. I have done more than that. I have
said aloud, as I worked in the fields, 'I'm sorry.' I have frequently
said that,--may be only to myself, but may be to the winds, which are
always hurrying no one knows where. Who knows where they may carry the
sound when a wicked man says, sincerely, 'I'm sorry?'"

Sure enough, who knows? May it not be to heaven?

"I have heard her play hymns on the organ which I felt must be songs of
hope, the words of which promised mercy, for they sounded like it, and
she does not play them for amusement; I believe it is her offering for
the peace of Allan Dorris, and a prayer could not go farther into heaven
than her music. I have known her to go to the church with the little
baby, and I should think that when the Lord hears the music, and looks
down and sees Annie Dorris and the child, He would forget a great deal
when Dorris comes before Him."

Silas had heard the music, too, and he agreed that if it could have been
set to words, they would have been "Mercy! Mercy!"

"I am too old a crow to be sentimental," Tug said again, "but I have
felt so much better since I have been working and behaving myself that I
intend to keep it up, and try and wipe out a part of my former record.
If I should go to sleep some night, and not waken in the morning as
usual to go away to work, very good; but if I should waken in a strange
place, I should like to meet Allan Dorris, and hear him say, 'Tug, I
have reason to know that erring men who have ever tried to do right
receive a great deal of consideration here; you have done much toward
redeeming yourself.'"

Silas was very much surprised to hear his companion talk in this manner,
and said something to that effect.

"I am surprised myself," Tug answered, "but the devotion of Annie Dorris
to the memory of her husband has set me to thinking. The people believe
that Allan Dorris was buried in The Locks' yard, by Thompson Benton, but
I know that his iron coffin still stands in the room where you saw it. I
think his clay feels grateful for the favor, for it has never been
offensive like ordinary flesh. The lid has been shut down never to be
opened again, but when I last looked under it, I saw little except what
you might find in the road,--dust."

The chill of the evening air reminds them that it is time for little Ben
to go in, but the two men remain outside to look at the sunset.

"The people of this town," Mr. Whittle continued, after the boy had
disappeared, "are greatly amused over the statement that when an ostrich
is pursued, it buries its head in the sand and imagines that it is hid.
I tell you that we are a community of ostriches; I occasionally put a
head into the sand myself, and so do you and all the rest of them. When
little Ben is near me, I try to cause him to forget the years I
neglected him, by being kind, but he never looks at me with his mild
eyes that I do not fear he is thinking: You only have your head in the
sand, and there is so much of you in sight that I remember Quade.
Therefore I keep out of his way whenever I can. Do you think his cough
is any better?"

"I am afraid not, Tug," Silas replied. "I was thinking to-day that it is
growing steadily worse."

Tug looked toward the setting sun and the church, and the solemn tones
of the organ came to them; Annie Dorris was playing the hymn the words
of which seemed to be "Mercy! Mercy!"

"Word will be sent to you some day," Tug said, as if the music had
suggested it, "that little Ben is--" he paused, and shivered, dreading
to pronounce the word word--"worse. I wish you would get word to me some
way, without letting any one know it; I want to go away somewhere. Then
you can come out for me, and tell them on your return that I could not
be found. It is bad enough for me to look at him now; I could never
forget my sin toward him were I to see him dead. Of course you will go
with him to the cemetery, with Mrs. Dorris and Mrs. Wedge and Betty; and
I would like to have the baby at poor Ben's funeral, for he thinks so
much of it, but it will be better for me to stay away, though I want
them to think it accidental. When I return, you can show me the place,
and on my way to and from the town I will stop there and think of the
hymn which Mrs. Dorris plays so much."

The sun is going down, and it seems to pause on the hill to take a last
look at the town. Perhaps it is tired of seeing it from day to day, and
will in future travel a new route, where objects of more interest may be
seen. Anyway, it lingers on the hill, and looks at the ragged streets
and houses of the unfortunate town down by the river, which is always
hurrying away, as if to warn the people below to avoid Davy's Bend,
where there is little business, and no joy.

When its face is half obscured by the hill, the sun seems to remember
The Locks, with whose history it has been familiar, and looks that way.
So much shadow has gathered around it already from the woods across the
river that objects are no longer to be distinguished: nothing but the
huge outlines. At last the sun disappears behind the hill, but a
friendly ray comes back, and looks toward The Locks until even the
church steeple disappears; and Davy's Bend, and The Locks, with its
sorrow and its step on the stair, are lost in the darkness.




_By the Same Author._


_THE STORY OF A COUNTRY TOWN._

Howells pronounces it "this remarkable novel ... uncommonly
interesting."

Mark Twain finds the style "simple, sincere, direct, and at the same
time so clear and so strong."

The _Springfield Republican_ finds in it "a distinct flavor of its
own ... the freshness and strangeness of the prairie life."

The _Chicago Inter-Ocean_ finds it "the most dramatic of our American
novels ... a drama of direct appeal."

"There runs through the story a vein of pathos that is absolutely
pitiful, and makes one think of 'The Mill on the Floss'.... It is a
strong, stern, matter-of-fact book. Some of its pages stand out from
their sad background of reality like one of Salvato Rosa's pictures....
Many of the situations are as dramatical as any of Bret Harte's."--_St.
Joseph Gazette._

"Incomparably the best novel of the year, judged from any standard....
There is a grace, a sympathetic and tender feeling, a delicious sense of
humor, that make the book remarkable.--_Brooklyn Union._





End of Project Gutenberg's The Mystery of the Locks, by Edgar Watson Howe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERY OF THE LOCKS ***

***** This file should be named 36237.txt or 36237.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/2/3/36237/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
