The Project Gutenberg EBook of Our Artist in Cuba, Peru, Spain and Algiers, by
George W. Carleton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Our Artist in Cuba, Peru, Spain and Algiers
       Leaves from The Sketch-Book of a Traveller, 1864-1868

Author: George W. Carleton

Release Date: June 7, 2011 [EBook #36348]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR ARTIST IN CUBA, PERU,
SPAIN AND ALGIERS ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)









OUR

ARTIST IN CUBA,

PERU, SPAIN AND ALGIERS.

LEAVES FROM

_THE SKETCH-BOOK OF A TRAVELLER_.

1864-1868.

BY

GEORGE W. CARLETON.

    "Let observation, with expansive view,
     Survey mankind, from China to Peru."

[Illustration]

NEW YORK:

Copyright, 1877, by

_G. W. Carleton & Co., Publishers_.

LONDON: S. LOW & CO.

MDCCCLXXVII.

OUR ARTIST, [Illustration: colophon] HIS MARK.




CONTENTS.


        PAGE

CUBA,      5

PERU,     57

SPAIN,   109

ALGIERS, 131

[Illustration]




AN APOLOGY.


The Author of these unpretending little wayside sketches offers them to
the Public with the hesitating diffidence of an Amateur. The publication
a few years ago, of a portion of the drawings was attended with so
flattering a reception, that a new edition being called for, it is
believed a few more Leaves from the same vagabond sketch-book may not be
intrusive.

The out-of-the-way sort of places in which the Author's steps have led
him, must always present the most enticing subjects for a comic pencil;
and although no attempt is here made to much more than hint at the
oranges and volantes of Cuba, the earthquakes and buzzards of Peru, the
donkeys and beggars of Spain, or the Arabs and dates of Algiers, yet
sketches made upon the spot, with the crispy freshness of a first
impression, cannot fail in suggesting at least a panoramic picture of
such grotesque incidents as these strange Countries furnish.

The drawings are merely the chance results of leisure moments; and Our
Artist, in essaying to convey a ray of information through the glasses
of humor, has simply multiplied with printers' ink his pocket-book of
sketches, which, although caricatures, are exaggerations of actual
events, jotted down on the impulse of the moment, for the same sort of
idle pastime as may possibly lead the reader to linger along its
ephemeral pages.

NEW YORK, _Christmas_, 1877.




PART I.


CUBA.

[Illustration: colophon]


CUBAN SKETCHES.


  SICK TRANSIT.          THE SPANISH TONGUE.

  TWO BOOBIES.           AN UNWELCOME VISITOR.

  A COLORED HERCULES.    AN AGREEABLE BATH.

  THE CUBAN JEHU.        A CELESTIAL MAID.

  IGLESIA SAN FRANCISCO. A STATUE ON A BUST.

  A CUBAN MOTIVE.        A TAIL UNFOLDED.

  AN INFLUENZA.          MONEY IN THY PURSE.

  FLEE FOR SHELTER.      SUGAR AND WATER.

  THE RIDE.              GREEN FIELDS.

  A COCK-FIGHT.          A SEGAR WELL-LIGHTED.

  RATHER COOL.           SHALL REST BE FOUND.

  TAKE YOUR PICK.        ALL ABOARD.

  A SPANISH RETREAT.     THE MATANZAS CAVE.

  SPIDERS AND RATS.      HARD ROAD TO TRAVEL.

  BELLIGERENTS.          A SHADY RETREAT.

  MATERFAMILIAS.         A SPANISH GROCER.

  CULINARY DEPARTMENT.   COLORED HELP.

  A BUNDLE OF CLOTHES.   VERY MOORISH.

  A BUTTON-SMASHER.      CHACUN A SON GOUT.

  WHITE PANTALOONS.      NATURE'S RESTORER.

  CARNIVAL ACQUAINTANCE. AGRICULTURAL.

  BEAUTY AT THE BALL.    A COT IN THE VALLEY.

  A DISAPPOINTMENT.      A COLORED BEAUTY.

  DOLCE FAR NIENTE.      CORNER STONES.

  LOCOMOTION.            A SUDDEN DEPARTURE.




THE START.--THE STEAMSHIP COLUMBIA. AT SEA.

[Illustration: First day out.--The wind freshens up a trifle as we get
outside Sandy Hook; but our artist says he is'nt sea-sick, for he never
felt better in his life.]




IN THE GULF OF MEXICO.

[Illustration: A "Booby"--as seen _from_ the ship's deck.]

[Illustration: A "Booby"--as seen _on_ the ship's deck.]




ARRIVAL AT HAVANA.

[Illustration: A side elevation of the colored gentleman who carried our
luggage from the small boat to the Custom House.]




STREETS OF HAVANA.--CALLE MERCADERES.

[Illustration: The first volante driver that our artist saw in Havana.]




VIEW FROM OUR WINDOW AT THE HOTEL ALMY.

[Illustration: The old Convent and Bell Tower of the Church of San
Francisco,--now used as a Custom House.]




STREETS OF HAVANA.--CALLE TENIENTE RE.

[Illustration: A Cuban Cart and its Motive Power.--Ye patient Donkey.]




AT THE CAFE LOUVRE.

[Illustration: Manners and Customs of a Cuban with a Cold in his Head.]




THE [WICKED] FLEA OF HAVANA.

[Illustration: PART I.--The beast in a torpid condition.]

[Illustration: PART II.--When he "smells the blood of an Englishmun."]




THE NATIONAL VEHICLE OF HAVANA.

[Illustration: Manner and Custom of Harnessing ye Animiles to ye Cuban
Volante.]




A COCK-FIGHT IN CUBA.

[Illustration: I.--Chanticleer as he goes in.]

[Illustration: II.--Chanticleer considerably "played out."]




STREETS OF HAVANA.--CALLE LAMPARILLA.

[Illustration: The cool and airy style in which they dress the rising
colored generation of Havana.]




THE CUBAN TOOTH-PICK.

[Illustration: Two ways of carrying it--behind the ear, and in the
back-hair.]




THE CAPTAIN GENERAL'S QUINTA.

[Illustration: View of the Canal and Cocoa Tree; looking East from the
Grotto.]




THE DOMESTIC INSECTS OF HAVANA.

[Illustration: Agitation of the Better-Half of Our Artist, upon entering
her chamber and making their acquaintance.]




A LITTLE EPISODE IN THE CALLE BARRATILLO.

[Illustration: A slight difference arises between the housekeeper's cat
and the butcher's dog, who has just come out in his summer costume.]




STREETS OF HAVANA.--CALLE COMPOSTELLA.

[Illustration: The Free Negro.--An every-day scene, when the weather is
fine.]




AN INTERIOR IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: Kitchen, chief-cook and bottle-washer in the
establishment of Mrs. Franke, out on the "Cerro."]




HEADS OF THE PEOPLE.

[Illustration: A portrait of the young lady, whose family (after
considerable urging) consents to take in our washing.]




PRIMITIVE HABITS OF THE NATIVES.

[Illustration: Washing in Havana.--$4 00 a dozen in gold.]




WASHING IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: I.--My pantaloons as they went _in_. II.--My pantaloons
as they came _out_.]




CARNIVAL IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: A Masquerade at the Tacon Theatre.--Types of Costume,
with a glimpse of the "Cuban Dance" in the background.]




A MASK BALL AT THE TACON.

[Illustration: Our artist mixes in the giddy dance, and falls
desperately in love with this sweet creature--but]




LATER IN THE EVENING,

[Illustration: When the "sweet creature" unmasks, our Artist suddenly
recovers from his fit of admiration. Alas! beauty is but mask deep.]




STREETS OF HAVANA--CALLE OBRAPIA.

[Illustration: The Cuban Wheelbarrow--In Repose.]




STREETS OF HAVANA--CALLE O'REILLY.

[Illustration: The Cuban Wheelbarrow--In action.]




    FIRST HOUR!      SECOND HOUR!!      THIRD HOUR!!!

[Illustration: Our Artist forms the praiseworthy determination of
studying the Spanish language, and devotes three hours to the
enterprise.]




BED-ROOMS IN CUBA.

[Illustration: The Scorpion of Havana,--encountered in his native
jungle.]




SEA-BATHS IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: Our Artist having prepared himself for a jolly plunge,
inadvertently observes an insect peculiar to the water, and rather
thinks he won't go in just now.]




HOTELS IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: A cheerful Chinese Chambermaid (?) at the Fonda de
Ingleterra, outside the walls.]




HIGH ART IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: A gay (but slightly mutilated) old plaster-of-Paris girl,
that I found in one of the avenues of the Bishop's Garden, on the
"Cerro."]




LOCOMOTION IN THE COUNTRY.

[Illustration: A Cuban Planter going into town with his plunder.]




SHOPPING IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: Our Artist just steps around the corner, to look at a
"sweet thing in fans" that his wife has found.]

[Illustration: RESULT!]




THE NATIONAL BEVERAGE OF HAVANA.

[Illustration: Our Artist indulges in a _panale frio_ (a sort of
lime-ade), at the Cafe Dominica, and gets so "set up," that he vows he
won't go home till morning.]




THE LIZARDS OF CUBA.

[Illustration: Our Artist, on an entomological expedition in the
Bishop's Garden, is disagreeably surprised to find such sprightly
specimens.]




SMOKING IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: An English acquaintance of Our Artist wants a light for
his paper segar; whereupon the waiter, according to custom, brings a
live coal.]




THE MUSQUITOS OF HAVANA.

[Illustration: A midsummer's night dream.--Our Artist is just the least
bit disturbed in his rest, and gently remonstrates.]




PUBLIC SERVANTS IN CUBA.

[Illustration: A gay and festive Chinese brakeman, on the railroad near
Guines.--The shirt-collar-and-pair-of-spurs style of costume.]




ONE OF THE SENSATIONS IN CUBA.

[Illustration: The Great Cave near Matanzas.--Picturesque House over the
Entrance.]




THE GREAT CAVE NEAR MATANZAS.

[Illustration: A section of the interior--showing the comfortable manner
in which our artist followed the guide, inspected the stalactites, and
comported himself generally.]




THE OUTSKIRTS OF MATANZAS.

[Illustration: One of the Fortifications.--Sketched from the end of the
_Paseo_, on a day hot enough to give anything but a donkey the brain
fever.]




ARCHITECTURE IN MATANZAS.

[Illustration: A romantic little _tienda mista_ (grocery store) on a
corner, in the Calle Ona.]




A _CAFFETAL_ NEAR MATANZAS.

[Illustration: Our Artist becomes dumb with admiration, at the ingenious
manner of toting little niggers.]




THE PICTURESQUE IN MATANZAS.

[Illustration: A singular little bit, out of the Calle Manzana.]




A SUGAR PLANTATION, NEAR THE YUMORI.

[Illustration: Our Artist essays to drink the milk from a green Cocoa:]

[Illustration: Fatal effect.--An uncomfortable sensation!]




A BED-CHAMBER IN MATANZAS.

[Illustration: First night at the "Gran Hotel Leon de Oro."--Our artist
is accommodated with quarters on the ground-floor, convenient to the
court-yard, and is lulled to sleep by a little domestic concert of cats,
dogs, donkeys, parrots and game-cocks.]




ECONOMY IS WEALTH.

[Illustration: Showing the manner in which one ox accomplishes the labor
of two, in San Felipe.]




THE SUBURBS OF CALABAZAR.

[Illustration: A Planter's Hut, and three scraggly Palm Trees in the dim
distance.]




PLANTATIONS NEAR MARIANAO.

[Illustration: A Colored Beauty toting Sugar Cane from the field to the
grinding mill.]




ARCHITECTURE IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: A conglomerate _Esquina_, on the corner of Calle Obispo
and Monserate.]




LAST NIGHT IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: Alarm of Our Artist and Wife, upon going to their room to
pack, and discovering that a Tarantula has taken possession of their
trunk.]




PART II.

PERU.

[Illustration]




PERUVIAN SKETCHES.


  FRIENDLY COUNSELS.           GOOD FOR DIGESTION.

  A DISAGREEABLE BERTH.        AN EYE FOR AN EYE.

  A COLORED RECEPTION.         WHO KNOWS? (NOSE).

  THE NAKED TRUTH.             DISCRETION IN VALOR.

  A PANAMA LAUNDRESS.          BLACK WARRIORS.

  A MAN FOR A' HAT.            MUSIC HATH CHARMS.

  DOMESTIC BLISS.              A CHARIOT RACE.

  A BIT OF A CHURCH.           AN ANTIQUE.

  HOT WEATHER.                 FAMILY ARRANGEMENT.

  WHAT AN ASS!                 HEADS OF THE PEOPLE.

  A HAPPY FAMILY.              BY THEIR FRUITS.

  LAND AT LAST.                A BEAST OF BURDEN.

  CALLAO CATHEDRAL.            A NIGHT ADVENTURE.

  A BAGGAGE TRAIN.             A RUNAWAY.

  CATHEDRAL AT LIMA.           THE LIGHT FANTASTIC.

  A WATER-CARRIER.             A ROOSTER.

  A BAG OF CUFFEY.             A CHIME OF BELLS.

  BIRDS OF A FEATHER.          DOG-DAYS.

  A CHINA BOWL OF SOUP.        PORK BUSINESS.

  THING OF BEAUTY.             WHEN SHALL WE THREE.

  FONDEST HOPES DECAY.         UNHAND ME!

  RAT-IFICATION MEETING.       NOTHING VENTURE.

  A BACK SEAT.                 A GREAT SELL.

  AN EXCELLENT VIEW.           A BEGGARLY SHOW.

  BREAD-BASKETS.               A DEAD-HEAD.




THE START--STEAMSHIP "HENRY CHAUNCEY." FROM NEW YORK TO ASPINWALL.

[Illustration: Sea-sickness being a weakness of Our Artist, he
determines to be fore-armed, and accordingly provides himself with a few
simple preventives, warmly recommended by his various friends.]




IN THE CARIBBEAN SEA.

[Illustration: Our Artist, having indulged rather freely in the
different preventives, gets things mixed, and wishes that his friends
and their confounded antidotes were at the bottom of the Dead Sea.]




ARRIVAL AT ASPINWALL.

[Illustration: First impressions of the city and its
inhabitants.--Colored citizens on the dock, awaiting the steamer's
advent.]




ISTHMUS OF DARIEN.

[Illustration: View from the window of a Panama railroad car--showing
the low-neck and short-sleeve style of costume adopted by the youthful
natives of Cruces.--Also a sprightly specimen of the one-eared greyhound
indigenous to the country.]




A VIEW IN PANAMA.

[Illustration: The old and weather-beaten church of Santa Ana--and in
the foreground, with basket on her head, baby under one arm, and bowl of
milk supported by the other, a colored lady of West Indian descent,
vulgarly known as a "Jamaica nigger."]




AN AFTERNOON AT PANAMA.

[Illustration: Deeming it always incumbent upon the traveller to invest
in the products of the country, Our Artist provides himself with a good
sensible Panama hat, and thus with wife and "mutual friend," he
peacefully and serenely meanders around among the suburbs of the city.]




A STREET SCENE IN PANAMA.

[Illustration: Our Artist, with the naked eye, beholds a pig, a
fighting-cock, and a black baby, all tied by the leg, at the humble
doorway of the residence of a colored citizen, in the principal street
of the capital of Central America.]




IN THE BAY OF PANAMA.

[Illustration: Our Artist wanders about the sleepy little neighboring
island, Taboga, where the English steamers lie, and sketches, among
other picturesque bits, the clean little whitewashed cathedral in the
dirty little Broadway of Taboga.]




STEAMSHIP "CHILE." FROM PANAMA TO CALLAO.

[Illustration: Crossing the equinoctial line, Our Artist discovers that
the rays of a vertical sun are anything but bracing and cool.]




PAYTA--A SEAPORT IN PERU.

[Illustration: Our Artist, having understood that this town is chiefly
remarkable for its fine breed of mules, ironically inquires of a native
Venus if this can be considered a good specimen. The N. V. treats Our
Artist with silent, stolid, Indian contempt.]




NATURAL HISTORY IN PERU.

[Illustration: Our Artist visits a coasting-vessel just arrived from
Guayaquil, loaded with every variety of tropical fruit, and a sprinkling
of tame monkeys, parrots, alligators, white herons, iguanas, paroquets,
spotted deer, etc.]




ARRIVAL AT CALLAO--THE HARBOR.

[Illustration: The landing-boat being a trifle too much loaded by the
head, Our Artist finds it somewhat difficult to steer.]




ARCHITECTURE IN CALLAO.

[Illustration: The little one-story Cathedral on the Plaza, which the
earthquakes have so frantically and so vainly tried to swallow up or
tumble down.]




ARRIVAL AT LIMA.

[Illustration: Triumphal entry of Our Artist and his
much-the-better-half; reviving the brilliant days of Pizarro and his
conquering warriors, as they entered the "City of the Kings."--The
Peruvian warriors in the present century, however, conquer but the
baggage, and permit the weary traveller to walk to his hotel at the
tail-end of the procession.]




THE CATHEDRAL AT LIMA.

[Illustration: An after-dinner sketch (rather shaky) from our balcony in
the Hotel Morin, on the Grand Plaza.]




DOMESTICS IN PERU.

[Illustration: One of the waiters at our hotel, clad in the inevitable
_poncho_--A genuine native Peruvian, perhaps a son of "Rolla the
Peruvian," who was "within."]




A PERUVIAN COOK.

[Illustration: Peeping into the kitchen one day, Our Artist perceives
that a costume, cool and neglige, may be improvised by making a hole in
a coffee-bag and getting into it.]




STREETS OF LIMA--CALLE JUDIOS.

[Illustration: Almost every other street in Lima has a stream of filthy
water or open sewer running through the middle of it, offering rich
fishing-grounds to the graceful _gallinazos_ or turkey-buzzards, who
thus constitute the street-cleaning department of the municipal
government.]




CELESTIALS IN PERU.

[Illustration: Our Artist is here seen resisting the tempting offer of a
bowl of what appears to be buzzard soup, in front of one of the Chinese
cook-shops that abound in the neighborhood of the market at Lima.]




DOLCE FAR NIENTE--A DREAM OF PERU.

[Illustration: Our Artist before going to Lima, during little poetical
siestas, had indulged in lovely romantic reveries, the burden of which
he sketches in his mind's eye, Horatio--but]




THE SAD REALITY.

[Illustration: Alas! too frequently his thirsty eye is met only by such
visions as the above--and the lovely beauties of Lima, where are they?]




BEDROOMS IN PERU.

[Illustration: A section of the inner-wall to our chamber at the Hotel
in Lima.--The condition of things at the witching hour of night, judging
by the sounds.]




STREETS OF LIMA.--CALLE PALACIO.

[Illustration: A young Peruvian accompanying its mamma to market in the
morning.]




STREETS OF LIMA--CALLE PLATEROS.

[Illustration: A picturesque little _mirador_ or lookout at the corner
of Calle Plateros and Bodegones, opposite the Hotel Maury, with
balconies _ad lib._]




OCCUPATIONS IN LIMA.

[Illustration: The _panadero_, or baker, as he appears on his mite of a
donkey, rushing round through the streets of Lima, delivering bread to
his customers.]




CARRIAGES AND PAVEMENTS IN LIMA.

[Illustration: Our Artist, after a hearty dinner, extravagantly engages
a three-horse coupe, and goes out for a regular, genuine, native
Peruvian ride.

That his bones are unbroken, and that he is yet alive to tell the tale,
remains to him an unfathomable mystery.]




COSTUMES IN LIMA.--THE SAYA Y MANTO.

[Illustration: Our Artist has heard a good deal about the magnificent
eyes of the Limanian women; but as he never sees more than one eye at a
time, he can't say much about them, with any regard for the truth.]




HEAD-DRESSES IN LIMA.--THE MANTO.

[Illustration: The Senoritas look very prettily sometimes, with their
black mantillas thrown gracefully over their heads, (_See Geographies,
etc._,) but when you come across a party possessing a decided nose, in
profile, the effect is rather startling.]




REVOLUTIONS IN PERU.

[Illustration: Our apartments look out upon the Grand Plaza, where the
fighting usually takes place; and as the windows are mostly broken by
the balls of the last Revolution, (Nov. 6, 1865,) and it's about time
for another, Our Artist gets into ambuscade every time he hears a
fire-cracker in the street.]




THE WAR WITH SPAIN.

[Illustration: Two native and dreadfully patriotic Peruvian soldiers on
review before their superior officer.]




MARTIAL MUSIC IN PERU.

[Illustration: The National Hymn, with variations, as rendered by the
Royal Band in front of President Prado's palace on the Grand Plaza.]




FINE ARTS IN PERU.

[Illustration: A hasty sketch of Mistress Juno and her peacocks, as
represented by fresco in the doorway of a Lima palace--Calle
Ayachucho.]




DARK AGES OF PERU.

[Illustration: The old unfinished church and deserted monastery of San
Francisco de Paula--Calle Malambo.]




LOCOMOTION IN SOUTH AMERICA.

[Illustration: What the country people would do down there, if the
jackasses were only long enough.--What they _do_ do, is but slightly
caricatured by Our Artist.]




HAIR-DRESSING IN LIMA.

[Illustration: Ladies' style as seen at the theatre.

Also Our Artist before and after he had his hair cut in the latest Lima
fashion.]




A FRUIT-STALL AT CHORRILLOS.

[Illustration: Our Artist, as he appeared when stricken with amazement
at the huge clusters of white grapes that are everywhere, for a mere
song, sold in Peru.]




SHOPPING IN PERU.

[Illustration: A Peruvian materfamilias, having bought a few simple
house-keeping articles in town, is here seen returning to her mountain
home, accompanied by her purchases.]




THE FLEAS OF LIMA.

[Illustration: Having been nearly devoured by these carnivorous little
devils, Our Artist sprinkles himself with Turkish flea-powder one night
before retiring, and is charmed at the rapid and parabolic manner with
which they desert him.]




THE LLAMAS OF PERU.

[Illustration: Our Artist had heretofore fancied that it would be
immensely jolly to ride one of these singular beasts of burden; but when
he encounters this one, on a lonely road outside the walls one day, he
begs to be excused.]




TERPSICHORE IN PERU.

[Illustration: Our Artist assists at a mask-ball in the Jardin Otaiza,
and is puzzled at the nationality of the costumes worn by the dancers.]




CHURCH ORNAMENTS IN LIMA.

[Illustration: The statues in the niches and on the spires of the
Cathedral look very well in the daytime; but at night, when the
turkey-buzzards roost on their heads, the solemnity of the thing is
somewhat marred.]




THE BELLS OF LIMA.

[Illustration: Lima is full of churches, and the churches are full of
bells; and as they ring and bang away from dewy eve till early morn,
their cadences are calculated to disturb somewhat the peaceful slumbers
of Our Artist.]




PERUVIAN BARK--IN THE ROUGH.

[Illustration: Our Artist is treated to plenty of this quinine (canine)
salutation, whenever and wherever he pays a visit in Lima.]




TRANSPORTATION IN PERU.

[Illustration: "This pig went to market," but as he wouldn't go
decently, he was tied upon the back of the ever-patient donkey, and so,
_nolens volens_, came to Lima, crossing the bridge over the Rimac, where
Our Artist sketched him.]




PRIESTS AND FRIARS OF LIMA.

[Illustration: A theological discussion of the gravest import takes
place between three jolly Fathers of the Roman Catholic Church--a
Dominican, a Mercedarian, and a Buena-Muertean.

Scene--The square in front of the church of San Francisco, with its
crooked cross.]




ENTOMOLOGY IN SOUTH AMERICA.

[Illustration: Our Artist doesn't want to say anything against the
insects of Peru; but the way in which one of his hands swelled up, after
a bite from some unknown varmit in the night, was, to say the least,
alarming.]




LOTTERIES IN PERU.

[Illustration: Having invested in the semi-monthly Lima lottery, Our
Artist feels so confident of drawing the $4,000 prize, that he gets
extravagant, wears his good clothes, and smokes one-dollar cigars; but a
revulsion of feeling takes place after the drawing produces nothing for
him but blanks.]




CURIOSITIES OF PERU.

[Illustration: Having been informed by a musty old sepulchral monk that
the remains of Pizarro might be seen behind this grating, Our Artist
tremblingly gazes therein--but as it is pitch dark, he doesn't recognize
Pizarro.]




A COUP D'OEIL IN LIMA.

[Illustration: A picturesque view of the great stone bridge over the
rapid river Rimac, showing the towers of the church Desamparados, the
Arch with illuminated clock, and the spire of Santo Domingo.--Sketched
with about ninety-seven Peruvian beggars looking over Our Artist's
shoulder.]




LAST DAY AT LIMA.

[Illustration: A visit to the Museum--which contains a not very
remarkable collection of Peruvian antiquities--and where Our Artist sees
all that remains of the once magnificent Atahualpa, last king of the
Incas.

Alas, poor Yorick! To this complexion must we come at last.--Fit sketch
wherewith to end this strange, eventful history of "Our Artist in
Peru."]




PART III.

SPAIN.

[Illustration]




A SPANISH OVERCOAT.

[Illustration: Our Artist, upon his arrival in "Sunny Spain," is
overtaken in the Pyrenees, on the French Frontier, by a terrific
snow-storm, and is compelled to provide himself, at BAYONNE, with an
Overcoat of the Country.]




HACKMEN IN SPAIN.

[Illustration: Portraits of the three Hackmen, who (upon our arrival at
the City of BURGOS, in the dead of night,) meet us at the Rail Road
station, and propose accompanying us to our Hotel.]




A CITIZEN OF VALLADOLID.

[Illustration: Here is a faithful portrait of the Old Party who entered
the cars at VALLADOLID; carrying with him a few travelling
conveniences.]




A MADRID HAT.

[Illustration: This is a Spanish Dandy at the Grand Opera House in
MADRID:--first, with his cigarette and new Hat of the period; second,
after his Hat had been sat upon by a fat old Senora, during the third
act of Lucia di Lammermoor.]




LOTTERIES IN SPAIN.

[Illustration: Nearly all the Lottery tickets in Spain are publicly sold
in the streets by Beggars: and _this_ is the sort of Vagabond in MADRID
to whom Our Artist confided $16 for a ticket that won a prize of $5.]




SIGHT-SEEING IN SPAIN.

[Illustration: There are so many hundred apartments to be seen in the
famous PALACE OF THE ESCORIAL, that Our Artist is obliged to follow his
Brigand of a Guide rather rapidly, in order to view them all in one
day.]




NAPOLEON BONAPARTE.

[Illustration: Our Artist sees from the car-window, at a Rail-Road
Station near Toledo, what, at a first glance, appears to be a statue of
Napoleon Bonaparte,--but: (_see next page_.)]




A RAIL-ROAD OFFICIAL.

[Illustration:---- the Statue suddenly becomes animated and revolves;
and the side-view reveals a CIVIL GUARD, with carbine and knapsack
beneath his big military cloak.]




ARCHITECTURE IN CORDOVA.

[Illustration: A picturesque little half Moorish and half Spanish
dwelling house, in the Calle Jesus Maria; with a couple of Priests in
earnest discussion.]




BALCONIES IN SEVILLE.

[Illustration: Sketch of a private residence in Calle San Pablo; from
the upper Balcony of which, Our Artist had a rose thrown to him, while a
cloaked Assassin of a probable Lover, glowered savagely at him from the
doorway.]




IL BARBIERE DI SIVIGLIA.

[Illustration: The Barber of Seville, according to Rossini's Opera, and
according to the way in which he is popularly believed to disport
himself.--(_See next page._)]




A BARBAROUS PROCEEDING.

[Illustration: The Barber of Seville, as he actually exists in that
city, and precisely as he appeared while operating upon our Artist, one
day, in the Calle de las Sierpes.]




A CAFE IN SEVILLE.

[Illustration: Our Artist discovers, one day, in the Calle Tunidores,
not exactly the most fashionable Cafe in SEVILLE, but a Cafe glorying in
the ambitious name of JULIUS CAESAR!]




TYPES OF SPANISH CHARACTER.

[Illustration: Fellow Passengers in the Diligence to MALAGA--one, a
corpulent and famous Bull-Fighter, and the other, an envious and
admiring follower of the same ennobling Profession.]




SPANISH STAGE-COACHES.

[Illustration: The light and graceful antediluvian Diligence that
transported us up the Sierra Nevada Mountains, from MALAGA To LOJA.]




LOCOMOTION IN SPAIN.

[Illustration: This sketch is an attempt to display the general
character and construction of one of the seven Mules that drew our
Diligence over the hills from MALAGA To LOJA.]




THE SPANISH GUITAR.

[Illustration: A characteristic little sketch of a Guitar Player, in the
window of a second-story dwelling, on the Alemeda de Verano, at
GRENADA.]




BEGGARS IN SPAIN.

[Illustration: Our Artist, having in a generous moment, distributed a
handful of copper coins to the poor of GRENADA, finds himself,
thereafter, in all his strolls about the ALHAMBRA, at the Head of such a
Procession as this!]




THE ALHAMBRA.

[Illustration: Sketch of the famous Gate of Justice, the principal
modern Entrance to the far-famed Moorish Palace of THE ALHAMBRA--with a
little Spanish Flirtation going on in the corner.]




THE ALHAMBRA.

[Illustration: Outline Sketch of an Ancient Moorish Well, inside the
enclosure of the ALHAMBRA; with a bit of the Old Wall.]




A SPANISH VEGETABLE MARKET.

[Illustration: A sketch in GIBRALTAR--This fellow was seen wandering
around the streets, selling vegetables to the natives, and steering his
Donkey by the tail.]




PART IV.

ALGIERS.

[Illustration]




LANDING IN AFRICA.

[Illustration: We leave Gibraltar by Steamer, and upon reaching the city
of NEMOURS, Our Artist and his Better-Half are taken ashore from the
small boat by the Natives in this summary manner!--A couple of inviting
Hotel-keepers are awaiting them on the beach.]




AN ARAB BEGGAR.

[Illustration: One of the first Objects that greets the eagle eye of Our
Artist, as he wanders around the streets of NEMOURS, is this cheerful
"What-is-it," who mournfully begs for a few grains of corn.]




AFRICAN WATER CARRIERS.

[Illustration: Sketch of a fantastic little Fountain in one of the
streets of the City of ORAN.]




BED-ROOMS IN AFRICA.

[Illustration: This is the sort of Thing that you find meandering round
on your pillow, when you retire to your Chamber for the night, at the
Hotel in ORAN.]




ANOTHER ARAB BEGGAR.

[Illustration: This Gentleman, who accosted us in the suburbs of ORAN,
assured us in tremulous accents that he had eaten nothing in seventeen
days--and we saw no reason for doubting his word.]




LOCOMOTION IN AFRICA.

[Illustration: Upon our arrival in the City of ALGIERS, we are much
amused at the first vehicle we see; where a diminutive donkey is hitched
in front of an enormous horse.]




COSTUMES IN AFRICA.

[Illustration: Alarm of Our Artist, as he, for the first time,
encounters a Moorish maiden, as she appears around the corner from a
dark and narrow street, in the Kasbah quarter of the City of ALGIERS.]




SOLDIERS IN AFRICA.

[Illustration: A French Zouave off duty, as he appeared while listening
to the Military Band that played every afternoon in the Place du
Gouvernment, ALGIERS.]




A STREET IN ALGIERS.

[Illustration: The Rue Staoueli--a narrow street in the old Arab Quarter
of ALGIERS, where the houses nearly touch each other at their tops.]




MANUFACTURES IN AFRICA.

[Illustration: Sketch in the Rue Kasbah.--A couple of Moorish Jews,
engaged in silk spinning, at the door of their palatial residence.]




MOORISH SHOP-KEEPER.

[Illustration: This graceful and fairy-like Will-o'-the-Wisp, sold us
some lovely silk embroideries, in ALGIERS, the like of which, Solomon,
in all his glory never dreamed of.]




FINE ARTS IN AFRICA.

[Illustration: We visit the not very interesting Museum in ALGIERS, and
sketch, among other curious objects, a Cast of an Arab Martyr [one
Geronimo], who had been buried alive in a box of Plaster of Paris.]




JARDIN D'ESSAI, ALGIERS.

[Illustration: Merely a sketch (for the last page of this little book)
of a Date-Palm Tree, in ALGIERS, with a couple of Arabs trying to get in
its shade.]

       *       *       *       *       *


=THE UNITED STATES LIFE INSURANCE CO.=

This company is one of the oldest in this city, and has a high
reputation for conservative and skilful management. Its Board of
Directors comprises a number of the best known, most influential, and
wealthiest of our merchants and bankers. Its officers are men of proved
integrity and ability.

The annual statement, submitted last January, and accepted by the State
Commissioner of Insurance as correct, shows the assets to be $4,654,274,
and the surplus, as already stated, to be over $800,000, or more than
twenty per cent, of all the liabilities.

The United States Life Insurance Co. is known in Life Insurance circles
as one of the most carefully handled institutions in the city.

So well has it been managed that its business has increased rather than
retrograded during the past year, as bad as it has been for all kinds of
business. And its losses have been less this year than in any of the
five preceding.

Its officers are among the best known and most highly esteemed citizens
of New York. JAMES BUELL, Esq., the President, is the President of the
Importers and Traders' Bank, a man whose name is a synonym for integrity
and skill in finance, and its stockholders are men equally well known in
business circles, and hold an equal share of public esteem.

=Organized 1850.=

=JAMES BUELL, _President_.=

C. P. FRALEIGH, Sec'y.      T. H. BROSNAN, Supt. Agencies.

HENRY W. BALDWIN,

Supt. Middle Department,

Office: Drexel Building, cor. Wall & Broad Streets,

NEW YORK.


OUR

=ARTIST IN CUBA,=

PERU, SPAIN AND ALGIERS

[Illustration]

BY

GEORGE W. CARLETON.

[Illustration]

Price

50 Cents.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Our Artist in Cuba, Peru, Spain and
Algiers, by George W. Carleton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR ARTIST IN CUBA, PERU,
SPAIN AND ALGIERS ***

***** This file should be named 36348.txt or 36348.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/3/4/36348/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
