The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Canterbury Pilgrimage, by Joseph Pennell
and Elizabeth Robins Pennell


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Canterbury Pilgrimage


Author: Joseph Pennell and Elizabeth Robins Pennell



Release Date: June 11, 2011  [eBook #36383]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE***


E-text prepared by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (http://www.archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 36383-h.htm or 36383-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/36383/36383-h/36383-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/36383/36383-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/canterburypilgri00penniala





A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE

This work is Copyright in England and America.


A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE.

Ridden, written, and illustrated by

JOSEPH AND ELIZABETH ROBINS PENNELL.

[Illustration]







London: Published by Seeley and Company,
xlvi. xlvii. xlviii. Essex Street. Mdccclxxxv.




  _TO_ Mr. Robert Louis Stevenson,

  _We, who are unknown to him,
  dedicate this record of one of our short
  journeys on a Tricycle,
  in gratitude for the happy hours we have spent
  travelling with him and his Donkey._




We do not think our book needs an apology, explanation, or preface; nor
does it seem to us worth while to give our route-form, since the road from
London to Canterbury is almost as well known to cyclers as the Strand, or
the Lancaster Pike; nor to record our time, since we were pilgrims and not
scorchers. And as for non-cyclers, who as yet know nothing of time and
roads, we would rather show them how pleasant it is to go on pilgrimage
than weary them with cycling facts.

JOSEPH PENNELL.
ELIZABETH ROBINS PENNELL.

  36 BEDFORD PLACE,
      _May 14th, 1885_.




First Day

[Illustration]

Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.




[Illustration]


A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE


[Illustration]

It was towards the end of August, when a hot sun was softening the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and ripening the hops in the pleasant land
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.
What we wanted was in all reverence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lay one night and held counsel, making
stations by the way at the few places they mention by name, and ending it,
as they did, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cathedral. How better could this be done than by riding over
the ground made sacred by them on our tricycle?

[Illustration: _Our only Race._]

And so it came to pass that one close, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russell Square before any one was
stirring but the policeman, making his last rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn and past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to race
us; past the now silent and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapside; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mist was heavy on the river and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, and where hucksters greeted us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, up in the second
story?' A short way up the Borough High Street, from which we had a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought to be. This was to
have been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours had no beginning, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was a serious difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked up at the old sign of
'_Ye Old Tabard_,' hanging from the third story of the tall brick building
which has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantial. And we rode on with what good cheer we could.

[Illustration]

Then we went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for the confusion of cyclers, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran into the groove of the track, and we had to dismount
and lift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. If he had his
way, he said, he would burn all _them things_. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mine host and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped a few minutes
opposite a little street full of old two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while we rested there said
that an old fountain had stood in the open space near by, it pleased us to
think that here had been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight from the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handsome brick house to
our left.

[Illustration: The Pilgrims are Chased by Dogs.]

After Blackheath the mist vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone on the fields and woods, and the ugly barracks and pretty
cottages by which we wheeled. Red-coated soldiers turned to look and dogs
ran out to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on their hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiny gardens, overflowing with roses and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. London was many miles behind
when, at a few minutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men were smoking their morning pipes, and
as many boys were leaning over the wall, lazily staring into the river
below, or at the cool stretches of woodland and shady orchards on the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waited, the village clock struck
nine, and at once the loud bell in the factory on the other side of the
little river Cray began to ring. One by one the older loungers knocked the
ashes from their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape of an old man in a tall white cap, came
out, and at his bidding they left the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one over the other to reach a terrace of shining white
houses at the top. The first of these was but one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot threw a soft blue shadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretched along the terrace
patches of cabbages alternated with luxuriant crops of weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geraniums. About them all there was a
feeling of warmth and light, more like Italy than England. J. took out his
sketch-book. Several women, startled by the novelty of strangers passing
by, had come out and were standing in their small gardens. When they saw
the sketch-book they posed as if for a photographer--all except one old
woman, who hobbled down the street, talking glibly. Perhaps it was as well
we did not hear what she said, for I think she was cursing us. When she
was close at our side and turned, waving her hands to the other women, she
looked like a great bird of ill-omen. 'Go in! go in!' she croaked: 'he's
takin' of yere likenesses. That's wot he's arter!' Her wrath still fell
upon us as we wheeled out of Crayford.

[Illustration: Crayford, August 84]

There were many pilgrims on the road; a few, like us, were on machines,
but the greater number were on foot. As in Chaucer's day, both rich and
poor go upon pilgrimage through Kent; but, whereas in his time there were
monasteries and hospitals by the way where the latter were taken in at
night, now they must find shelter under hedges or in dingles. Their lot,
however, did not seem hard. It is sweet to lie beneath the sky now as it
was when Daphnis sang. And the pilgrims whom we saw looked as if soft turf
was luxury compared to the beds they had just left, for they belonged to
the large army of hop-pickers who, every autumn, come from London to make
the Kentish roads unsafe after dark and the householder doubly watchful.
Whitechapel and other low quarters are nearly emptied at this season. It
is pleasant to know that at least once a-year these people escape from
their smoky, squalid streets, into green places where they can breathe
pure air, but their coming is not welcomed in the country. Many poor,
honest women in towns and villages thereabouts will rather lose a few
shillings than let their children go to the hop-fields during the picking
season, lest they should come away but too much wiser than they went. As
we rode further the number of tramps increased; all the morning we passed
and overtook them. There were grey-haired, decrepit men and women, who
hobbled painfully along, and could scarcely keep pace with their more
stalwart sons and daughters; there were children by the score, some of
whom ran gaily on, forgetting fatigue for joy of the sunshine; others
lagged behind, whimpering and weary; and still others were borne in their
mothers' arms. Almost all these people were laden with their household
goods and gods. They carried heavy bags thrown over their shoulders, or
else baskets and bundles slung on their arms, and pots and kettles and all
manner of household furniture. One man, more enterprising than the
others, had brought a push-cart; when we saw it, two babies, almost hidden
in a confused mass of clothing and pots and pans, were sleeping in it, and
one clasped a kitten in her arms. Now, with a sharp bend in the road, we
came suddenly upon a man sitting under a tree, who, though we rang our
bell right in his ear, never raised his eyes from a hole in an old silk
handkerchief he was holding; and now we came to a man and woman resting on
a pile of stones by the roadside, who sat upright at the tinkling of our
bell. I shall never forget the red and swarthy face of the woman as she
turned and looked at us, her black hair, coarse and straight as an
Indian's, hanging about her shoulders and over her eyes: she was
unmistakably young in years but old in vice, and ignorant of all save
evil--compared to hers an idiot's face would have been intelligent, a
brute's refined. I could now understand why honest countrywomen kept
their children from the hop-fields. As a rule, the tramps were as
careless and jolly as Beranger's Bohemians, and laughed and made merry as
if the world and its hardships were but jests. We, as figures in the
farce, came in for a share of their mirth. 'That's right! ladies fust!'
one old tattered and torn man called after us, gaily; 'that's the
principle on which I allus hacts!' Which, I suppose, is a rough way of
saying '_Place aux dames_.' A very little joke went a great way with them.
'Clear the path!' another man cried to the women walking with him, as we
coasted down the hill outside of Dartford: 'ere's a lady and gen'leman on
a happaratus a-runnin' over us!' 'They're only a 'enjoyin' of 'emselves,'
an old hag of the party added; 'so let luck go wi' 'em!' Then she laughed
loud and long, and the others joined with her, and the sound of their
laughter still reached our ears as we came into the village.

[Illustration: _An Enterprising Pilgrim._]

[Illustration: _An Indifferent Pilgrim._]

[Illustration: _Unwelcome Pilgrims._]

Dartford, from a cycler's point of view, is a long narrow street between
two hills, one of which is good to coast, the other hard to climb. The
place, as we saw it, was full of hucksters and waggons, and footmen and
carriages, and we passed on without stopping, save by the river that runs
near a church, with a tower and an unconventional clock looking out from
one side instead of from the centre, which is the proper place for clocks.

From Dartford to Gravesend the road became more pleasant every minute.
Here and there were brown fields, where men were ploughing, or perhaps
burning heaps of stubble, and sending pale grey clouds of smoke
heavenwards; here and there were golden meadows where gleaners were busy,
and then, perhaps, a row of tall, dark poplars, or a patch of brilliant
cabbages. To the south, broad plains, where lazy, ease-loving cattle were
grazing, stretched as far as the eye could see. To the north, every now
and then, as the road turned, we saw the river, where ships were at
anchor, and steamers were steaming up to London, and black barges, with
dark-red sails, were floating down with the tide. The water was blue as
the sky, and the hills in the distance seemed to melt into a soft purple
mist hanging over them. By the road and by the river were many deep
deserted quarries, whose white chalk cliffs could be seen from afar, while
they brought out in strong contrast the red roofs of the cottages built at
their feet. We came to one or two small villages and another church, with
its tower and a clock awry, so that we wondered whether this was a fashion
in Kent. And all along the hedges were white and pink with open
morning-glories, and the trees threw soft shadows over the white road,
and everywhere the air was sweet with the scent of clematis.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: _Burning Stubble near Gravesend._]

Gravesend is not a very striking place as you enter it from the road. It
was to us remarkable chiefly for the Rosherville Gardens, which hitherto
we had known only in our Dickens. But we found a pleasant 'ale-stake' by
the river, where we rested to 'both drinke and biten on a cake;' or,
rather, on substantial beefsteak and vegetables. There was no one else in
the coffee-room, but one or two dogs strayed in from the private bar, and
seeing we were at dinner became very sociable. The maid who waited on us
was friendly too, and while J. was busy putting away the tricycle she was
even moved to confide in me. She was the only maid in the house, she said.
There had been another, but she had gone some time ago; 'and there's a
jolly hard lot of work for one woman to do, ma'am,' she went on. 'I'm not
used to it, and I can't stand it much longer. I've always been in a
private before. It's easy enough to go from a private to a public, but to
get from a public to a private again is another thing. Onst in a public is
always in a public, ma'am!' Then some one called her. I was glad to have
her go, for her way of telling her trouble had in it something of the
Greek doctrine of fate, and so long as her eye was upon me I had an
uncomfortable feeling, as if I were one of the instruments decreed from
all time to work out her cheerless destiny. It was more agreeable to look
out of the window on the little lawn in front, where two comfortable
matrons were drinking beer, and a Blue-coat boy, home for the holidays,
was running around, showing his orange legs to the best advantage. It was
quiet on the river. Large steamers, small steam-tugs and row-boats, were
lying at anchor. An old coastguard hulk was moored opposite, and an
officer walked solemnly up and down the deck, every now and then halting
to look through a spyglass for suspicious craft. But as we stood on the
pier, after we had dined, the tide turned, and swiftly and silently all
the boats turned with it. Tugs gave shrill whistles in warning of their
speedy departure. Sail-boats unfurled their sails. Sailors came down the
watersteps, leading from the houses built on high walls at the water's
edge, and rowed quickly to the coastguard boat, saluted the solitary
officer, and disappeared below. In the large P. and O. steamer, anchored
at some distance from the pier, we could see the red turbans and white
tunics of Lascars moving to and fro on the decks. The river was now as
lively as it had before been quiet. But it monopolised the activity of the
place, for when we went back for our tricycle we met only one or two
seamen and a handful of children.

[Illustration: _By the River at Gravesend._]

When we set forth again the air was warm and sleep-inspiring. This,
together with the consciousness of having well dined, it must be
confessed, made us return to the pedals unwillingly. Not even the fact
that a whole Sunday school, off for a picnic, waited to look at us, could
stimulate us into speed. A sun-dial on a church tower just outside of
Gravesend seemed to take us to task for our indolence. In large black
letters on its white face it said--

  'Be quick: your time's short!'

But we knew better. Rochester was but seven miles off, and in Rochester we
had made up our minds to sleep that night. The tramps had grown as lazy as
we, but they did not even pretend to struggle with their laziness. All
along the road we saw them lying under the hedges and in shady places.
Some were asleep, others day-dreaming. Three women had roused themselves
somewhat, and were making preparations for afternoon tea. They had kindled
a fire by the wayside, and hung their kettle over it. A little further on,
a mother and her children were just coming to the road from the deep,
sweet shade of a dingle. On the hill beyond was a grey church, with a
graveyard whose graves straggled down the hillside, and next to it a large
farmhouse, with red roof and walls, whose colour was softened and
harmonised by time. When the children saw we had stopped the machine they
ran up at once to beg us to buy queer little round calico-balls, which
they called pin-cushions. One had bright black eyes, and, not in the least
discomfited by our refusal of the balls, danced merrily around the
tricycle. Then she peered into J.'s sketch-book.

[Illustration: _Afternoon Tea._]

'He's drawrin!' she called to her mother, in a loud stage whisper.

The latter bade her mind her manners. But she still continued her
observations.

'Oh, mother, it's the church!' was her next cry.

'Which, I'm sure, it's a werry decent church,' the mother declared, as if
to encourage us with her approval; and then they went their way.

Later, when, as we were coasting down a hill, we overtook the party, the
same child jumped and clapped her hands, 'It's goin' all by its lone
self!' she screamed; but her sister trudged stolidly on, and spake never a
word.

Of the many places on the road to Canterbury, made famous by latter-day
pilgrims, few are better known and loved than Gad's Hill, where honest
Jack Falstaff performed his deeds of valour, and where Charles Dickens
spent the last years of his life. We had counted upon making it, too, a
station by the way. But whether it was that we were just then drifting
along in lotus-eaters' fashion, our feet moving mechanically, or whether
the prospect of another long coast made us forgetful of all else, certain
it is that, with a glance of admiration at the dark spreading cedars, and
another at the inn and its sign, adorned with the picture of Falstaff, we
went by without a thought as to where we were. At the foot of the hill a
baker told us that up yonder was the house where Mr. Dickens had lived.
Were we already in danger of forgetting the aim of our pilgrimage? Would
we sacrifice our great end for what we had intended to be but a means to
it? 'Let us,' I said humbly, 'try to keep our wits from wool-gathering
again, lest we ride through Rochester and Canterbury without knowing it!'
We collected our thoughts in good time; for, lo! as mine host said to the
monk, Rochester stands there hard by. Before many minutes we saw in the
distance the town of Strood, and beyond it the broad Medway and Rochester,
its castle and cathedral towering above the houses clustering about them.

We stayed all night in Rochester. The early pilgrims went to the 'Crown.'
But the 'Crown,' alas! stands no longer, and so we slept at the 'Queen's
Head,' the C. T. C. headquarters. There is, somewhere in the city, the
chapel where pious travellers of old stopped to pray, but we could not
find it. The further we went the more it seemed as if we were in pursuit
of a shadow. And, indeed, it was here that we discovered that even the
road we had ridden over was not that along which mine host and his company
had passed as they told their tales. There was no use, however, in our
going back to London and starting out again, so as to take the right road;
for, alas! it--that is, as far as Rochester--has gone the way of the
Tabard and Crown. Only the yew-trees, planted at intervals along its
course, survive to show where it once ran.

After we had had our tea, we walked out in the twilight. The town deserves
the name of Dulborough, given it by Dickens; and so, indeed, our little
maid at the inn thought. There was nothing to do to amuse one's self, she
said. She had been up to London for a month in the spring, and since then
she couldn't abide Rochester.

Having produced a Castle and ruined it, and a Cathedral and restored it,
it has ever since rested on its laurels. We wandered a little way through
the narrow twisting street, meeting only soldiers and a few young girls
and men, and through the gabled gatehouse, where opium-eating Jasper
lived; past the wonderful Norman doorway of the Cathedral and then to the
Castle, where we rested awhile in the public garden the city has made
around it. The pigeons had gone to roost, two or three women sat silently
on the benches, a group of children played a singing game in the Pavilion.
Away in the west, beyond the river, we could see the green and yellow
fields and the poplars, radiant in the light of the afterglow; on the
horizon, a dark windmill rose above the hillside like a sentinel on duty,
and its long arms moved slowly around. It was even more peaceful down by
the river: two men were pulling a long outrigger against the tide; a few
heavy-laden barges floated up the stream with it. The figures of the men
on board were silhouetted in black against the now fading western light.
The red sails were furled and the masts slowly fell as the barges neared
the bridge; noiselessly and swiftly they disappeared under the black
arches. They seemed to carry with them all the sounds of the day; the
silence of night came over the place, our voices sank lower, and we walked
quietly back to the lonely street and to the Inn.




Second Day

[Illustration]

Oh, what a Fall!




Second Day


[Illustration]

There was a little more stir in the place the next morning, but it was
because it was filled with tramps, who were wisely taking advantage of the
early coolness and hurrying on their way. But when we turned off the High
Street the town was as still in the glare of day as it had been in the
late twilight. The high brick walls of the private gardens might have
enclosed dwelling-places of the dead rather than of the living, for not a
sound came over them. The little pointed houses might have been sepulchres
for all the signs of life they gave. The whole town, instead of one little
street, should be called Tranquil Place. It seemed very characteristic
that the Cathedral should be closed, and this at the season when the
tourist is abroad in the land. It was being cleaned, an old man told us.
We looked through the iron railing of the door into the nave, and at the
marble floor, and the tall, white, rounded arches. 'It's like looking down
the throat of Old Time!' Mr. Grewgious thought when he stood there. At
the farther end by the chancel steps a charwoman was at work on bended
knees. By her side was one small bucket. Here, truly, was a Liliputian set
to do the work of Brobdignag. At that rate it is probable visitors were
shut out for many months.

After we had looked at the 'Bull,' which still reminds the public by a
sign of the good beds enjoyed by Mr. Pickwick and his friends, at the Town
Hall where Pip was apprenticed, at the many-gabled, lattice-windowed house
in which Rosa Bud bloomed into young ladyhood, and were standing in front
of the 'Six Poor Travellers'' lodging-place, reading the inscription over
the door, and wondering who were the proctors classed with rogues who
could not rest within, a benevolent Englishman passing that way fell upon
us. He was a worthy fellow-citizen of Richard Watts. Seeing we were
strangers, he, without waiting to be asked, bestowed upon us the charity
of information.

'Do you know what a Proctor is, Sir?' he asked, addressing himself to J.,
who meekly, as befits one receiving alms, said that he did not. 'No! Well,
then, I will tell you. It is a proc-u-ra-tor,--one who collects Peter's
pence for the Pope, Sir. Richard Watts lived in the sixteenth century,
when Protestantism made people feel bitterly, Sir, and he would have no
friends of the Pope beneath his roof. Proc-u-ra-tor! That's what a Proctor
is, Sir.'

He had disappeared around the curve of the street before we had finished
thanking him. As the information was new to us, I, with the common belief
that others must be as ignorant as myself, now imitate his benevolence,
and here bestow it in alms upon whoever may be in need of it.

It was one o'clock when we mounted our tricycle and set out once more for
Canterbury. The sky was still unclouded and the day warm, but a good
breeze was blowing, and we were fresh for our ride. The streets of Chatham
were as busy as those of Rochester were idle, and blocked with waggons, so
that we had to fall in line and go at snail's pace. Once, with a sudden
halt, we were brought so near a horse just in front, that my foot knocked
against his leg; but he bore the blow stoically, as if he were used to
Chatham streets. An American circus was about to start out on its grand
street parade, and children hung about corners and out of windows. At the
foot of the hill outside the town, and marked 'Dangerous' by the National
Cyclists' Union, for the benefit of cyclers, two very small boys offered
to 'Push it up, Sir!' but as it looked as if _it_ would push them down, we
declined. At the top we met a cycler on his way from Canterbury, and he
gave us evil tidings of the road. It became worse with every mile, he
said, and it was heavy and hilly, and the dust was enough to stifle one.
To this last statement his appearance bore good testimony.

[Illustration: _The Marshes._]

But at first we found it fair enough. From Chatham to Sittingbourne our
journey was one of unmixed pleasure. The wheels went easily, and the wind
blew on our backs. Now we passed on our right a vast treeless expanse,
divided into squares of green, and golden, and brown, all shining softly
in the sunlight, with here and there a windmill; but to the left we could
see far below us the white line of the river winding between the flat
grey marshes, where in Pip's day the escaped convicts prowled. Again we
wheeled through small, sleepy villages, with church and tower half hidden
in clumps of trees, and with red oasts, whose crooked cowls loomed up over
the chimney-pots of the low cottages: for we had come to the hop country,
and at every step the land of Kent grew fairer. Beyond Rainham the road
lay between hop-gardens, as they are appropriately called, and
cherry-orchards. In places the vines formed tall, shady hedges; in others
the gardens were shut in by bare poles hung with coarse brown cloth, to
defy the wind and the depredations of small boys, and other destructive
animals: but the prettiest fields were those which were in no way hedged
about, so that we could look down the long, narrow, green aisles, which
seemed to lead to fields of light beyond. The vines twisted lovingly up
the poles, which in many places bent beneath masses of green fruit, or
else the topmost shoots crossed and intertwined from one pole to another,
and the whole field was woven into a large arbour. Where the sunlight fell
upon the green clusters it turned them to pure gold, and the leaves,
blowing gently to and fro, seemed to rejoice in their great beauty. The
cherry-orchards were so pretty and trim that I wondered if, like the
hop-fields, they were not sometimes called gardens. The trees had been
long stripped of their fruit, but their branches were well covered with
cool green leaves, and their shadows met on the grass beneath. There was
one in particular, before which we rested. Sheep were browsing placidly on
the downy turf, and when we looked low down between the trees we could see
the shining white river far in the distance. I half expected to hear a
new Daphnis and Menalcas singing their pastorals in gentle rivalry.

[Illustration: _A Cherry Orchard._]

We met few people. The tramps who come down to Kent for the hop-picking
turn off from Rochester to go to Maidstone, where the largest hop-fields
are, and where there is more chance for them to be hired; but a
comparatively small number go on to Canterbury. Some cyclers were making
the most of the fine day. As we sat idly between the hop-gardens three
passed us. Two rode a tandem; the third, a bicycle; but they were of the
time-making species, for whom the only beauty of a ride is that of speed.
Looking at them, and then at the sheep in a field beyond, I thought the
latter were having the best of it. A little further on we met a party of
three Frenchmen. One rode ahead on a bicycle, the two others followed on a
tandem like ours. One of the latter, when he saw us, called out to the
bicycler, '_C'est bon d'aller comme ca!_' I suppose he thought we should
not understand him, and if we did--well, ought not a Frenchman always to
be gallant?

[Illustration: A Kentish Pastoral.]

We rode on with light hearts. An eternity of wheeling through such perfect
country and in such soft sunshine would, we thought, be the true earthly
paradise. We were at peace with ourselves and with all mankind, and J.
even went so far as to tell me I had never ridden so well!

It was, then, in a happy frame of mind, that we reached the inn at
Sittingbourne. It was an unassuming place, but quiet and clean; the bar
was on one side of the hall, the coffee-room on the other. The latter was
empty, and the landlady, after laying the cloth for our bread and cheese
and shandy-gaff--of all drinks the most refreshing to the cycler--left us
alone to study this printed notice, which hung in a frame over the door:--

  'Call frequently,
  Drink moderately,
  Pay honourably,
  Be good company,
  Part friendly,
  Go home quietly.'

We soon had the opportunity of putting into practice one clause of this
advice, for the door was suddenly burst open, and a short man with a bald
head, who wore the Cyclists' Touring Club uniform, rushed in.

[Illustration]

'Are you the lady and gentleman that came on the tandem?' he asked, before
he was quite in the room.

We said we were.

'I don't like tandems, do you?' he continued, fiercely, as if he were
daring us to differ from him. He seemed to think we had come there that he
might tell us his grievances; which he did, with much elaboration, while
we ate our lunch. He and his wife had been down to Margate from London,
and were now on their way back, he said. They had made the trip on a
tandem; it was the first time he had ridden one, and it would be the last,
for he didn't like tandems--they were horrid things! Did we like tandems?
To avoid repetition, I may here mention that this expression of dislike,
together with the query as to our opinion, was the refrain to everything
he said. It was always given with the same interest and emphasis as if it
were an entirely original remark. The only variation he made was by
sometimes beginning with the statement, and at others with the question.
He explained the reasons for his dislike. The principal was, that the
people one met on the roads always insulted riders on a tandem. Why, he
had been off his machine a dozen times that morning, fighting men who had
been chaffing him! I thought, with a shudder, of the crowd of hucksters
J. would have had to fight by London Bridge, had he been of the same mind.
Then, the next objection was, that he had to sit behind his wife--she had
to steer, and he would not be surprised if he were seriously injured, or
even killed, before he got back to London. Women were heedless things, and
easily frightened. His wife, who had joined us a few minutes before, here
grew angry, and a slight skirmish of words followed between them: she
reminded him of the dangers they had escaped through her nerve and
skill; he recalled the dangers into which they had run owing to her
thoughtlessness and timidity. But, just at this point of the discussion J.
took out his watch. At sight of it the little man forgot his anger to
pounce upon it, with never as much as 'An it please you!' Then, looking up
in triumph, he exclaimed, 'I knew it! it's an American watch! They know
how to make watches over there, but they're ruining our trade.' Then he
explained that he was a London watchmaker, and he pulled out of his pocket
a large substantial specimen of his workmanship.

The talk now turning upon America, we told him, in answer to his
inquiries, that we were Americans.

'From Canada?' his wife asked.

'Oh, no!' I answered; 'from Philadelphia.'

'Dear me!' the watchmaker said; 'then you're _real_ Americans! But you
speak English very well!'

'Yes,' J. admitted, modestly. 'But then, you know, English is sometimes
spoken in our part of the world!'

All this made the fierce little cycler very friendly, and he next wanted
to know where we were going.

'To Canterbury,' we said.

'To Canterbury!' he cried; and then, to give greater force to his words,
he came and stood directly in front of us on the other side of the table.
'To Canterbury! Well, then, my advice to you is, if you have no other
object than pleasure, don't go! No, don't you go! I've been there, and I
know what I say. It's a rotten place. There's nothing in it but an old
cathedral and a lot of old houses and churches, and they charged me
sixpence for keeping my tandem one night. I don't like tandems-horrid
things! Do you like tandems? Yes, it's a rotten place, and if I had my way
I'd raze it to the ground!'

I now understand why it is that Mr. Matthew Arnold thinks the average
Briton so very terrible.

By this time we had finished our lunch, and were ready to start. The
watchmaker and his wife had engaged in another battle. She did not agree
with him in his opinion of Canterbury. Indeed I believe they did not
agree upon any one subject, and the tandem had tried their tempers. They
had both said they wanted to see us off, and to compare machines; but we,
being modest people, thought we would as lieve escape without their
comments and farewells. This seemed a favourable opportunity. In the heat
of the argument we left the room and paid our bill, without their noticing
our retreat; but just as we had mounted our tricycle, and were wheeling
softly away, we heard a voice calling, 'Oh, I say now! do come back a
minute: I want to show you my machine!' It would have been more than
uncivil to have refused, so we sat patiently while the much-abused tandem
was brought out. The owner, in his pride, rode out on it, pedalled by us,
and then wheeled round and faced us with an abruptness that fairly took
away our breath. It was the shortest turn I have ever seen, and I waited
for the end with the same uncertainty with which one watches a trapeze
performance. Then there was some little talk about bells and brakes, and
tyres and saddles. In the meantime the landlady, with two or three of her
friends, had come out, and was staring at us with a curiosity for which I
could not account. But presently she said, 'Are you going back soon?' And
then I knew she had heard we were Americans, and had come to have a look
at these strange people who had sailed across the sea, apparently for no
other reason than to test the cycling properties of the roads of Kent.
After this exhibition was over we said good-bye very pleasantly, and rode
off, followed by their wishes for our good luck, while the watchmaker
called out encouragingly, 'You Americans ride pretty well; but I don't
like tandems. Horrid things! Do you like tandems?'

But their wishes were the only good luck we met with. We had not gone far
from Sittingbourne, when we admitted that the pilgrim we had met just
outside of Chatham was no false prophet after all; for the road now began
to be heavy with sand and rough with flints. And oh, the hills! They were
not very steep, but I was a novice in cycling. No sooner were we on
up-grades than I exhausted myself by my vigorous back-pedalling. I have
heard the uninitiated say that tricycling must be _so_ easy, just like
working the velocipedes of our childhood. But let them try! The country
had lost none of its beauty. Fields were as green and golden, orchards as
shady, and sheep as peaceful, as those we had seen before lunch. There
were little churches on hilltops and pretty dingles by the wayside;
handsome country-houses with well-kept lawns, and fields where cricketers
were playing, and young girls in gay-coloured dresses were applauding;
and there were old-fashioned farm-houses and quaint inn-yards. We passed
through villages by which little quiet rivers ran, some with boats lying
by the shore, and others, as at Ospringe, where horses and waggons were
calmly driven through the water. But the heaviness had spread from the
road to my heart, and all joyousness had gone from me.

[Illustration: _A Farmhouse near Rochester._]

[Illustration: _A Little River._]

The worst of it was, that as the road here wound little, we could see it
miles ahead--a white perpendicular line on the purple hill which bounded
the horizon. We knew this must be Boughton Hill, the fame of whose
steepness has gone abroad in the cycling world. With the knowledge of what
was to come ever before me, I began to pedal so badly that J. told me so
very plainly, and said, moreover, that I was more of a hindrance than a
help to him. For some time we rode on very silently. Earlier in the
afternoon we had been passed by a man driving an empty carriage, of whom
we had asked one or two questions. He had stopped to watch the
cricket-match, but he now overtook us, and, to add to my misery, asked me
if I would not like him to drive me into Canterbury. All this was hard to
bear.

[Illustration]

Finally, we came to Boughton, a small village with ivy-grown houses and a
squirrel and a dolphin staring at each other amicably from rival inns. It
is right at the foot of Boughton Hill. Now that we were near it, the white
line we had seen for so long widened into a broad road, but it looked no
less perpendicular. It was here that Chaucer's pilgrims

                      'gan atake
  A man that clothed was in clothes blake,
  And undernethe he wered a white surplis.'

There is no record that mine host and the Chanones Yeman dismounted and
walked to rest their horses. But all the many waggons and carriages and
cycles we saw above us on the modern road were being led, not driven.
Halfway up was an old lumbering stage, with boxes piled on the top, and
big baskets and bundles swinging underneath. The driver was walking; but a
tramp, who had made believe to push when on level ground, now sat
comfortably on the backseat, taking his ease. A little lower was the
friendly driver with his empty carriage, for he had rested at the
'Squirrel,' and so we had caught up to him again. At the top we looked
back to see that the West was a broad sea of shining light. A yellow mist
hung over the plain, softening and blending its many colours. Far off to
the north the river glittered and sparkled, and a warm glow spread over
the green of the near hillsides. The way in front of us was grey and
colourless by comparison. It was almost all down-hill after this. Did I
want to be driven into Canterbury, indeed? My benevolent friend might now
have asked us to pull him in. The stage made a show of racing us, but we
gave it only a minute's chance. An officer in braided coat driving a drag
passed us triumphantly while we were on our up-grade; but when we came
again to a level we left him far behind.

  'Wete ye not wher stondeth a litel toun,
  Which that ycleped is Bob up-and-doun,
  Under the blee in Canterbury way?'

It is better known now as Harbledown. A little of our trouble here came
back, for the road leading to that part of it 'ycleped Bob-up,' was steep
and heavy, and we had to walk. To our right were the old red-brick
almshouses and the little church of St. Michael, one of the many oldest
churches in Kent, and of which all we could see was the ivy-covered tower.
It was here that Henry, when on his way to the holy shrine, dismounted,
that, as became his humble calling of pilgrim, he might walk into
Canterbury. And it was here, too, that the Person began his long-winded
discourse. But we, less reverent than King Henry, now mounted again; and,
less phlegmatic than the Person, we held our peace. For as we rode further
up we heard far-away chimes, just as Erasmus did when he went from
Harbledown; and there gradually rose before us a tall, grey tower, then
two more, and at last, as we reached the top of the hill, we saw in the
plain below the great Cathedral itself, standing up far above the low red
roofs of Canterbury. We were almost at our goal.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

A little further on we passed a hop-field, where the picking had already
begun. In one part the poles were stripped of their vines, so that it
looked as if the farmer had reaped for his sowing a crop of dead
sticks. In the other the poles were still green, but the day's work was
just over. Women were packing up kettles and pans, jugs and bottles, and
stowing babies and bundles into perambulators, while two or three men were
going the rounds with bag and basket, measuring the day's picking, and
marking off the account of each picker by notching short, flat pieces of
wood held up for the purpose. In the road beyond a large cart, packed with
well-filled bags, was being drawn homewards by three horses, while a young
man rode up and down the green aisles. 'I beg your pardon, Sir,' a farm
hand said to J., who had been sketching, 'but you've been takin' some of
our people, and now you hought to take our Guvnor on his 'oss;' and he
pointed to the young man. All the way into the town we passed groups of
pickers: women with large families of children, small boys with jugs and
coats hung over their shoulders, and young girls with garlands of hops
twisted about their hats, and all were as merry as if they had been on a
picnic. We saw them still before us, even after we had turned into Saint
Dunstan's Street, from which the gold of the afterglow was fast fading,
and were riding between the quaint, gabled houses, through whose
diamond-paned windows lights were beginning to appear. Before us was the
old, grey-towered city gate, through which royal and ecclesiastical
processions and knights and nobles once passed, but where we now saw only
the tramps who had arrived at the eleventh hour sitting at its foot with
their bags and baggage.

[Illustration: Westgate from without.]

We 'toke' our inn at the sign of the 'Falstaff,' without the gate. Honest
Jack, in buff doublet and red hose, hanging between the projecting windows
and far out over the pavement by a wonderful piece of wrought-iron work,
gave us welcome, and within we found rest and good cheer for weary
pilgrims. Then we 'ordeyned' our dinner wisely, but it was too late to go
to the Cathedral that same evening, as we should have liked to have done,
and we were forced to wait for the morrow. After we had come downstairs
from our dimity-curtained bed-chamber, had dined, and were sitting over
our tea in a little, low-ceilinged room, from whose window we looked into
a pretty garden of roses and grapevines, a stranger sent us greeting, and
asked if he might come and sit with us. He was a priest, also making
pilgrimage, who had ridden from Rochester on a machine like ours; so that
we became friendly forthwith, and, like the pilgrims who rested at the
'Chequers of the Hope,' every man of our party

          'in his wyse made hertly chere,
  Telling his felowe of sportys and of chere,
  And of other mirthis that fellen by the way,
  As custom is of pilgrims and hath been many a day.'

And just before we parted for the night we held counsel together and
agreed that, in the morning, we would in company visit the holy shrine.




Third Day

[Illustration]

A Tale of the Verger.




Third Day


[Illustration]

We rose early the next day, and, that we might be in all possible things
like the men in whose steps we were walking, we 'cast on fresher gowns'
before we started to walk through the town. Then, after we had
breakfasted, we set out with our new friend for the Cathedral. Our way led
through the gate, on which the sun shone brightly, and where tramps were
still waiting to be hired; and then through the High Street, filled with
other pilgrims, who spake divers tongues, who wore not sandal, but canvas
shoon, and who had their 'signys' in their hands and upon their 'capps,'
for many had puggarees about their hats, and still more carried red
guide-books. The air was warm, but fresh and pure as if the sea-breeze had
touched it; and the gables and carvings of the old houses were glowing
with sunlight. The reflection of the red roofs and of geraniums and
hollyhocks in gardens by the way made bright bits of colour in among the
tall reeds of the little river Stour, and as we went slowly along we
talked, as befitted the occasion, of bygone times, for at every step we
were reminded of those earlier travellers whose humble followers we were.
Here we came to the Hospital of St. Thomas, now an almshouse, of old the
place where poor pilgrims found shelter; and here, in the ground-floor of
a haberdasher's shop, we saw a few arches of what was once the
'Chequers of the Hope,' where the rich were lodged; and so, when in
Mercery Lane, where the houses almost met above in a friendly,
confidential way, we saw a man in cocked-hat and knee-breeches and much
gold lace, it seemed as if he, like everything else in Canterbury, must be
a relic of the olden time.

[Illustration: _Waiting to be Hired._]

[Illustration: On the Stour.]

'I must know who that fellow is!' the priest exclaimed; and, without more
ado, walked up to him and boldly addressed him thus: 'Ahem!--I say
now--who are you, any way?'

And the man, in his wonder, forgot to take offence, and answered, 'Why I,
Sir, am the town crier!'

Talk of Yankee cheek indeed!

Then we went on down the lane, past the round marketplace, where women
were selling sweets, and under the stone gateway with its time-worn
tracery, to the south porch of the Cathedral, where a tricycle was
standing. As the pilgrims had to pray before they could approach the
sacred tomb, so we, after we had entered the nave, had to wait and listen
to morning service. Then we were told that no one could go to the shrine
unless led thither by the verger. There was nothing to do but to fall into
the ranks of a detachment of tourists on their way to it. With them we
were marshalled through the iron gate, separating the choir from the
chapels, by a grey-bearded, grey-haired man, who kept his eye sternly
upon us as we deposited our sixpences, our modest offerings in place of
'silver broch and ryngis.'

'Where is the shrine?' we asked, as soon as we were on the other side of
the gate.

'The shrine which it lies but a few steps further on,' the verger
answered; 'and you will come to it in good time.'

Then he showed us the 'horgan and its pipes, which they lie in the
triforium,' and the 'Norman Chapel of Saint Hanselm, which it is the
holdest part of the building,' and about all of which he had much to say.
But we interrupted him quickly. 'Take us to the shrine,' we commanded. But
just then another tourist, eager for information, began to ask questions
not only about the Cathedral, but about the whole city. Before we knew
where we were, she had carried us all out to Harbledown, and then, without
stopping, whisked us off to Saint Martin's-on-the-Hill. This was too much.
We started to find the shrine for ourselves, but our friend the priest ran
after us.

'You must wait for the verger,' he said. 'I hope you don't mind my telling
you; but then, you know, you're Americans, and I thought you mightn't
understand.'

[Illustration: Canterbury, from the river.]

His interest by degrees extended from us to the rest of the party. By some
peculiar method of reasoning he had concluded that, because we were
Americans, all who were following the verger, except himself, must be so
likewise. Every now and then he would dart from our side to ask each one
in turn, in a gentle whisper, 'You're an American, are you not?' The
results were not always satisfactory. I saw one Englishman, with John Bull
written in every feature, glare at him in suppressed rage; while a lady,
after saying, rather savagely, 'Well, is there any harm in being one?'
dismissed him abruptly, as if to remind him that not she, but the
Cathedral, was the show.

The verger lingered on the broad stairway, 'which the pilgrims they
mounted it on their knees, as is seen by the two deep grooves in the stone
steps.' He stood long by the tomb of Prince Hedward, the Black Prince, and
when we came to the stone chair used only when archbishops are
consecrated, he deliberately stopped, to suggest that some lady might like
to sit in it, 'though which it won't make her a harchbishop,' he added.
Then at last he led us to the chapel just beyond, and close to the choir.
He waited until we had all followed and formed a semicircle around him,
then he pointed to the pavement,--

'Which now,' he said, solemnly, 'you have come to the shrine of the
saintly Thomas.'

We had reached our goal. We stood in the holy place for which Monk and
Knight, Nun and Wife of Bath, had left husbands and nunnery, castle and
monastery, and for which we had braved the jests and jeers of London
roughs, and had toiled over the hills and struggled through the sands of
Kent. Even the verger seemed to sympathise with our feelings. For a few
moments he was silent; presently he continued--

''Enery the Heighth, when he was in Canterbury, took the bones, which they
was laid beneath, out on the green, and had them burned. With them he took
the 'oly shrine, which it and bones is here no longer!'

       *       *       *       *       *

Shrine and Tabard, Chapels and Inns by the way, all have gone with the
pilgrims of yester-year.


_FINIS._


  _London: Printed by_ STRANGEWAYS & SONS,
  _Tower Street, Upper St. Martin's Lane._


[Illustration]



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE***


******* This file should be named 36383.txt or 36383.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/6/3/8/36383



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

