The Project Gutenberg EBook of Blackie & Sons Catalogue - 1886, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Blackie & Sons Catalogue - 1886
       Books for Young People

Author: Various

Release Date: June 14, 2011 [EBook #36411]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLACKIE & SONS CATALOGUE - 1886 ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






"It is due to Messrs. Blackie to say that no firm of publishers turns
out this class of literature with more finish. We refer not only to the
novel tinting of the illustrations and the richness of the covers, but
more particularly to the solidity of the binding, a matter of great
importance in boys' books."--_The Academy._



BLACKIE & SON'S

BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE.

_The New Season's Books._


BY G. A. HENTY.
  THE LION OF THE NORTH:
      A TALE OF GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS AND THE WARS OF RELIGION.
  THROUGH THE FRAY:
      A STORY OF THE LUDDITE RIOTS.
  FOR NAME AND FAME:
      OR, THROUGH AFGHAN PASSES.
  THE DRAGON AND THE RAVEN:
        OR, THE DAYS OF KING ALFRED.

BY G. MANVILLE FENN.
  BROWNSMITH'S BOY.
  PATIENCE WINS:
      OR, WAR IN THE WORKS.

A NEW EDITION OF GULLIVER'S TRAVELS
      WITH 100 ILLUSTRATIONS BY GORDON BROWNE.

BY PROFESSOR A. J. CHURCH.
  TWO THOUSAND YEARS AGO:
      OR, THE ADVENTURES OF A ROMAN BOY.

BY HARRY COLLINGWOOD.
  THE CONGO ROVERS:
  A TALE OF THE SLAVE SQUADRON.

BY HENRY FRITH.
  THE SEARCH FOR THE TALISMAN:
  A STORY OF LABRADOR.

BY MRS. R. H. READ.
  SILVER MILL:
  A TALE OF THE DON VALLEY.

BY EMMA LESLIE.
  GYTHA'S MESSAGE:
  A TALE OF SAXON ENGLAND.

BY MISS M. A. PAULL.
  MY MISTRESS THE QUEEN.

BY MRS. AUSTIN.
  MARIE'S HOME:
      OR, A GLIMPSE OF THE PAST.

BY J. C. HUTCHESON.
  THE PENANG PIRATE AND THE LOST PINNACE.

 BY THOMAS ARCHER.
  LITTLE TOTTIE,
  AND TWO OTHER STORIES.

FAMOUS DISCOVERIES BY SEA AND LAND.

STIRRING EVENTS IN HISTORY.




New Eighteenpenny Books.


A TERRIBLE COWARD. By G. MANVILLE FENN.

YARNS ON THE BEACH. By G. A. HENTY.

THE PEDLAR AND HIS DOG. By MARY C. ROWSELL.

TOM FINCH'S MONKEY, and other Yarns. By J. C. HUTCHESON.

MISS GRANTLEY'S GIRLS, and the Stories She Told Them. By THOMAS ARCHER.


Also, New Books in the Shilling, Sixpenny, and Fourpenny Series

By JULIA GODDARD, ANNIE S. SWAN, DARLEY DALE, GREGSON GOW, EMMA LESLIE,
and other favourite Authors.


BY PROFESSOR CHURCH.

TWO THOUSAND YEARS AGO:

Or, The Adventures of a Roman Boy. By Professor A. J. CHURCH, Author of
"Stories from the Classics." With 12 full-page Illustrations by ADRIEN
MARIE, in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges,
6_s._

  Prof. Church has in this story sought to revivify that most
  interesting period, the last days of the Roman Republic. Scarcely
  recovered from the effects of her long struggle for supremacy in
  Italy, and from the evils of the terrible strife of the nobles
  against the people, Rome was engaged in suppressing the revolt of
  Spartacus and the slaves and the insurrection of Sertorius, while at
  the same time she was waging war with Mithradates, king of Pontus.
  Meanwhile the pirates held almost undisputed possession of the
  Mediterranean Sea, till Pompey eventually put them down in B.C. 67.
  The hero of the story, Lucius Marius, is a young Roman who, through
  the influence of Cicero, obtains an official appointment in Sicily.
  He has a very chequered career, being now a captive in the hands of
  Spartacus, again an officer on board a vessel detailed for the
  suppression of the pirates, and anon a captive once more, on a pirate
  ship. He escapes to Tarsus, gets a position under Deiotarus, tetrarch
  of Galatia, is taken prisoner in the war with Mithradates, and
  detained by the latter in Pontus for a number of years. There is thus
  plenty of scope for the narration of stirring adventure and exciting
  episode.

  While boys will follow with the deepest interest the career of
  Lucius, they will gain a clear insight into the history and life of
  the ancient Roman world.


THE UNIVERSE:

OR THE INFINITELY GREAT AND THE INFINITELY LITTLE. A Sketch of
Contrasts in Creation, and Marvels revealed and explained by Natural
Science. By F. A. POUCHET, M.D. Illustrated by 273 Engravings on wood.
8th Edition, medium 8vo, cloth elegant, gilt edges, 7_s._ 6_d._;
morocco antique, 16_s._

    "We can honestly commend this work, which is admirably, as it is
    copiously illustrated."--_Times._

    "As interesting as the most exciting romance, and a great deal more
    likely to be remembered to good purpose."--_Standard._

    "Scarcely any book in French or in English is so likely to
    stimulate in the young an interest in the physical
    phenomena."--_Fortnightly Review._


CHEEP AND CHATTER:

Or, LESSONS FROM FIELD AND TREE. By ALICE BANKS. With 54 Character
Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Small 4to, cloth, handsome design on
cover, 3_s._ 6_d._; gilt edges, 4_s._

  About a dozen highly dramatic sketches or little stories, the actors
  in which are birds, beasts, and insects. They are instructive, suited
  to the capacities of young people, and very amusing. The character
  drawings, with which the book is profusely illustrated, are
  delightfully funny.

    "The real charm of the volume lies in the illustrations. Every one
    is a success. With birds and mice and insects the artist is equally
    at home; but his birds above all are inimitable."--_Academy._

    "This is a very pleasing book for the young. The morals of the
    stories are very sound, and by no means obtrusive."--_Daily News._


BY G. A. HENTY.

    "Surely Mr. Henty should understand boys' tastes better than any
    man living."--_The Times._


THE LION OF THE NORTH:

A Tale of Gustavus Adolphus and the Wars of Religion. By G. A. HENTY.
With 12 full-page Illustrations by JOHN SCHOeNBERG, in black and tint.
Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.

  In this story Mr. Henty gives the history of the first part of the
  Thirty Years' War, a struggle unprecedented in length, in the fury
  with which it was carried on, and in the terrible destruction and
  ruin which it caused. The issue had its importance, which has
  extended to the present day, as it established religious freedom in
  Germany. The army of the chivalrous King of Sweden, the prop and
  maintenance of the Protestant cause, was largely composed of
  Scotchmen, and among these was the hero of the story. In such a time
  of war and turmoil there was an opportunity for unlimited adventure.
  But the chief interest of the tale turns on the great struggle
  between Gustavus and his chief opponents Wallenstein, Tilly, and
  Pappenheim. The story terminates shortly after the murder of
  Wallenstein.


WITH CLIVE IN INDIA:

Or the Beginnings of an Empire. By G. A. HENTY, author of "Facing
Death," "Under Drake's Flag," "By Sheer Pluck," &c. With 12 full-page
Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine
edges, 6_s_.

  The period between the landing of Clive as a young writer in India
  and the close of his career was critical and eventful in the extreme.
  At its commencement the English were traders existing on sufferance
  of the native princes. At its close they were masters of Bengal and
  of the greater part of Southern India. The author has given a full
  and accurate account of the historical events of that stirring time,
  and battles and sieges follow each other in rapid succession, while
  he combines with his narrative a tale of daring and adventure which
  gives a lifelike interest to the volume.

    "In this book Mr. Henty has contrived to exceed himself in stirring
    adventures and thrilling situations, while the realities are
    preserved. The pictures are by Mr. Gordon Browne, who may be
    congratulated on their success in adding to the interest of the
    book."--_Saturday Review._

    "Among writers of stories of adventure for boys Mr. Henty stands in
    the very first rank, and Mr. Gordon Browne occupies a similar place
    with his pencil.... Those who know something about India will be
    the most ready to thank Mr. Henty for giving them this instructive
    volume to place in the hands of their children."--_Academy._

    "He has taken a period of Indian History of the most vital
    importance, and he has shown by what means the work was
    accomplished. He has embroidered on the historical facts a story
    which of itself is deeply interesting. Young people assuredly will
    be delighted with the volume as a whole."--_Scotsman._


BY G. A. HENTY.

    "Mr. Henty as a boy's story-teller stands in the very foremost
    rank."--_Glasgow Herald._


THROUGH THE FRAY:

A Story of the Luddite Riots. By G. A. HENTY. With 12 full-page
Illustrations by H. M. PAGET, in blank and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 6_s_.

  The author in this story has followed the lines which he worked out
  so successfully in "_Facing Death_." As in that story he shows
  that there are victories to be won in peaceful fields, and that
  steadfastness and tenacity are virtues which tell in the long run.
  The story is laid in Yorkshire at the commencement of the present
  century, when the high price of food caused by the war and the
  introduction of machinery drove the working-classes to desperation
  and caused them to band themselves in that wide-spread organization
  known as the Luddite Society. There is an abundance of adventure in
  the tale, but its chief interest lies in the character of the hero,
  and the manner in which by a combination of circumstances he is put
  on trial for his life, but at last comes victorious "through the
  fray."


TRUE TO THE OLD FLAG:

A Tale of the American War of Independence. By G. A. HENTY. With 12
full-page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE in black and tint. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

  Owing to the unsuccessful termination of the war between Great
  Britain and her American colonies, the subject is one which English
  writers have for the most part avoided. In the present volume the
  author has gone to the accounts of English officers who took part in
  the conflict, and lads will find that in no war in which British
  soldiers have been engaged did they behave with greater courage and
  good conduct. The historical portion of the book being accompanied
  with numerous thrilling adventures with the redskins on the shores of
  Lake Huron, a story of exciting interest is interwoven with the
  general narrative and carried through the book.

    "Mr. Henty undoubtedly possesses the secret of writing eminently
    successful historical tales: and those older than the lads whom the
    author addresses in his preface, may read with pleasure a story
    which combines with the personal adventures of the youthful hero,
    an accurate and interesting account of the American War of
    Independence."--_Academy._

    "Mr. G. A. Henty's extensive personal experience of adventures and
    moving incidents by flood and field, combined with a gift of
    picturesque narrative, make his books always welcome visitors in
    the home circle."--_Daily News._

    "Very superior in every way. The book is almost unique in its class
    in having illustrative maps."--_Saturday Review._


BY G. A. HENTY.

    "Mr. Henty's books never fail to interest boy readers."--_Academy._


IN FREEDOM'S CAUSE:

A Story of Wallace and Bruce. By G. A. HENTY. With 12 full-page
Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

  In this story the author relates the stirring tale of the Scottish
  War of Independence and of the exploits of Wallace and Bruce. The
  extraordinary valour and personal prowess of these historical
  characters rival the deeds of the mythical heroes of chivalry Roland
  and Arthur, and indeed at one time Wallace was ranked with these
  legendary personages. The researches of modern historians have shown,
  however, that he was a living, breathing man--and a valiant champion.
  The hero of the tale fought under both Wallace and Bruce, and while
  the strictest historical accuracy has been maintained with respect to
  public events, the work is full of "hairbreadth 'scapes" and wild
  adventure.

    "Mr. Henty has broken new ground as an historical novelist. His
    tale of the days of Wallace and Bruce is full of stirring action,
    and will commend itself to boys."--_Athenaeum._

    "It is written in the author's best style. Full of the wildest and
    most remarkable achievements, it is a tale of great interest, which
    a boy, once he has begun it, will not willingly put on one
    side."--_The Schoolmaster._

    "Scarcely anywhere have we seen in prose a more lucid and
    spirit-stirring description of Bannockburn than the one with which
    the author fittingly closes his volume."--_Dumfries Standard._


UNDER DRAKE'S FLAG.

A Tale of the Spanish Main. By G. A. HENTY. Illustrated by 12 full-page
Pictures by GORDON BROWNE in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6_s._

  A story of the days when England and Spain struggled for the
  supremacy of the sea, and England carried off the palm. The heroes
  sail as lads with Drake in the expedition in which the Pacific Ocean
  was first seen by an Englishman from a tree-top on the Isthmus of
  Panama, and in his great voyage of circumnavigation. The historical
  portion of the story is absolutely to be relied upon, but this,
  although very useful to lads, will perhaps be less attractive than
  the great variety of exciting adventure through which the young
  adventurers pass in the course of their voyages.

    "A stirring book of Drake's time, and just such a book as the youth
    of this maritime country are likely to prize highly."--_Daily
    Telegraph._

    "Ned in the coils of the boa-constrictor is a wonderful picture. A
    boy must be hard to please if he wishes for anything more
    exciting."--_Pall Mall Gazette._

    "It is well illustrated, and is a real good story really well
    told."--_Punch._

    "A book of adventure, where the hero meets with experience enough
    one would think to turn his hair gray."--_Harper's Monthly
    Magazine._


BY G. A. HENTY.

    "Among writers of stories of adventure for boys Mr. Henty stands in
    the very first rank."--_Academy._


FOR NAME AND FAME:

Or, Through Afghan Passes. By G. A. HENTY. With 8 full-page Illustrations
by GORDON BROWNE, in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 5_s._

  At a moment when Afghanistan is again the centre of interest, this
  story of the last war in that country is especially appropriate. The
  hero is apprenticed to a Yarmouth smacksman whose boat is run down in
  the North Sea by a ship bound for the East. After being wrecked and
  going through many stirring adventures among the Malays, he finds his
  way to Calcutta, and enlists there in a regiment on the point of
  going north to join the army forming at the mouths of the Afghan
  passes. He accompanies the force under General Roberts to the Peiwar
  Kotal, is wounded, taken prisoner and carried to Cabul, he is present
  at the massacre of the mission, and at the subsequent fights round
  Cabul. He is then transferred to Candahar, and takes part in the
  battle of Maiwand, and the final defeat of the army of Ayoub Khan.


THE DRAGON AND THE RAVEN:

Or, The Days of King Alfred. By G. A. HENTY. With 8 full-page
Illustrations by C. J. STANILAND, R.I., in black and tint. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, 5_s._

  In this story the author gives an account of the desperate struggle
  between Saxon and Dane for supremacy in England, and presents a vivid
  picture of the misery and ruin to which the country was reduced by
  the ravages of the sea-wolves. The historical incidents of the
  struggle, as related by contemporary writers, are faithfully adhered
  to. The hero of the story, a young Saxon thane, takes part in all the
  battles fought by King Alfred, and the incidents in his career are
  unusually varied and exciting. He is driven from his home, takes to
  the sea and resists the Danes in their own element, and being pursued
  by them up the Seine, is present at the long and desperate siege of
  Paris.


YARNS ON THE BEACH.

By G. A. HENTY. With 2 full-page Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
1_s._ 6_d._

  These "yarns" of manly prowess and bold adventure are attractive
  because of their liveliness, and the change from one tale of
  adventure to another provides something to suit different moods or
  varying tastes. It is a capital book for a young reader, or a reader
  who retains a youthful fancy and a fresh appreciation, and seeks
  diversion from study or work.


BY G. A. HENTY.

    "Mr. Henty is one of the best of story-tellers for young
    people."--_Spectator._


ST. GEORGE FOR ENGLAND:

A Tale of Cressy and Poitiers. By G. A. HENTY. With 8 full-page
Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, 5_s._

  No portion of English history is more crowded with great events than
  that of the reign of Edward III. Cressy and Poitiers laid France
  prostrate at the feet of England; the Spanish fleet was dispersed and
  destroyed. Europe was ravaged by the dreadful plague known as the
  Black Death, and France was the scene of the terrible peasant rising
  called the Jacquerie. All these stirring events are treated by the
  author in _St. George for England._ The hero of the story, although
  of good family, begins life as a London apprentice, but after
  countless adventures and perils, becomes by valour and good conduct
  the squire, and at last the trusted friend of the Black Prince.

    "Mr. Henty, as a boy's story teller stands in the very foremost
    rank. With plenty of scope to work upon he has done his work well,
    producing a strong story at once instructive and entertaining."--
    _Glasgow Herald._

    "A story of very great interest for boys. In his own forcible style
    the author has endeavoured to show that determination and
    enthusiasm can accomplish marvellous results; that courage is
    generally accompanied by magnanimity and gentleness, and that if
    not in itself the highest of virtues, it is the parent of nearly
    all the others, since but few of them can be practised without
    it."--_Pall Mall Gazette._

    "Mr. Henty has developed for himself a type of historical novel for
    boys which bids fair to supplement, on their behalf, the historical
    labours of Sir Walter Scott in the land of fiction."--_Standard._


BY SHEER PLUCK:

A Tale of the Ashanti War. By G. A. HENTY. With 8 full-page
Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, 5_s._

  The Ashanti Campaign seems but an event of yesterday, but it happened
  when the generation now rising up were too young to have made
  themselves acquainted with its incidents. The author has woven, in a
  tale of thrilling interest, all the details of the campaign, of which
  he was himself a witness. His hero, after many exciting adventures in
  the interior, finds himself at Coomassie just before the outbreak of
  the war, is detained a prisoner by the king, is sent down with the
  army which invaded the British Protectorate, escapes, and accompanies
  the English expedition on their march to Coomassie.

    "Mr. Henty keeps up his reputation as a writer of boys' stories.
    'By Sheer Pluck' will be eagerly read."--_Athenaeum._

    "No one could have done the work better than he has done it. The
    lad must be very difficult to satisfy who is not satisfied with
    this."--_Scotsman._

    "The book is one which will not only sustain, but add to Mr.
    Henty's reputation. The illustrations are particularly
    good."--_Standard._

    "Written with a simple directness, force, and purity of style
    worthy of Defoe. Morally, the book is everything that could be
    desired, setting before the boys a bright and bracing ideal of the
    English gentleman."--_Christian Leader._


BY G. A. HENTY.

    "The brightest of all the living writers whose office it is to
    enchant the boys."--_Christian Leader._


FACING DEATH:

Or the Hero of the Vaughan Pit. A Tale of the Coal Mines. By G. A.
HENTY. With 8 full-page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE in black and
tint. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 5_s._

  "Facing Death" is a story with a purpose. It is intended to show that
  a lad who makes up his mind firmly and resolutely that he will rise
  in life, and who is prepared to face toil and ridicule and hardship
  to carry out his determination, is sure to succeed. The hero of the
  story, though only a colliery lad, is a character that boys will
  delight in. He is a typical British boy, dogged, earnest, generous,
  and though "shamefaced" to a degree, is ready to face death in the
  discharge of duty. His is a character for imitation by boys in every
  station.

    "The tale is well written and well illustrated, and there is much
    reality in the characters."--_Athenaeum._

    "If any father, godfather, clergyman, or schoolmaster is on the
    look-out for a good book to give as a present to a boy who is worth
    his salt, this is the book we would recommend."--_Standard._


BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN.

NAT THE NATURALIST:

Or a Boy's Adventures in the Eastern Seas. By G. MANVILLE FENN, author
of "The Golden Magnet," "In the King's Name," &c. Illustrated by 8
full-page Pictures by GORDON BROWNE in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, 5_s._

  This is a pleasant story of a lad who, though he is brought up in a
  strictly quiet fashion by an aunt, has a great desire to go abroad to
  seek specimens in natural history, and has that desire gratified by
  an uncle who comes home from distant lands, whence he brings a
  beautiful collection. The boy Nat and his uncle Dick go on a voyage
  to the remoter islands of the Eastern seas, and their adventures
  there are told in a truthful and vastly interesting fashion, which
  will at once attract and maintain the earnest attention of young
  readers. The descriptions of Mr. Ebony, their black comrade, and of
  the scenes of savage life, are full of genuine humour.

    "Mr. Fenn has hit upon a capital idea. This is among the best of
    the boys' books of the season."--_The Times._

    "We can conceive of no more attractive present for a young
    naturalist."--_Land and Water._

    "This sort of book encourages independence of character, develops
    resource, and teaches a boy to keep his eyes open."--_Saturday
    Review._

    "The late Lord Palmerston used to say that one use of war was to
    teach geography: such books as this teach it in a more harmless and
    cheaper way."--_Athenaeum._

    "One of the best issues, if not absolutely the best, of Defoe's
    work which has ever appeared."--_The Standard._


THE LIFE AND SURPRISING ADVENTURES OF ROBINSON CRUSOE.

BY DANIEL DEFOE.

Beautifully Printed, and Illustrated by above 100 Pictures Designed by
Gordon Browne.

Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

  There have been countless editions of "Robinson Crusoe," and they
  have mostly been imperfect, inasmuch as they have been so largely
  altered from the original text that the language in many instances
  has not been that of Defoe but of his revisers. The present volume
  has been carefully printed from the original edition, and all
  obsolete or little known terms and obscure phrases are explained in
  brief foot-notes. The "Editing" is not a corruption or pretended
  improvement of Defoe's great work.

    "The best edition I have come across for years. If you know a boy
    who has not a 'Robinson Crusoe,' just glance at any one of the
    hundred illustrations in this edition and you will go no further
    afield in search of a present for that fortunate
    youth."--_Truth._

    "Of the many editions of Defoe's immortal story that have passed
    through our hands in recent years, we are inclined to rank this the
    most desirable as a present for a good boy. Gordon Browne's
    illustrations satisfy the high expectation we had formed from his
    work of last year."--_The Academy._

    "One may be pardoned for growing enthusiastic over the ideal
    edition which Messrs. Blackie have published this season. Well
    printed, handsomely bound, and beautifully illustrated, the volume
    may well become the standard edition of Defoe's evergreen
    work."--_Edinburgh Courant._


BY HARRY COLLINGWOOD.

    "Mr. G. A. Henty has found a formidable rival in Mr.
    Collingwood."--_Academy._


THE CONGO ROVERS:

A Tale of the Slave Squadron. By HARRY COLLINGWOOD. With 8 full-page
Illustrations by J. SCHOeNBERG, in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, 5_s_.

  The scene of this tale is laid on the west coast of Africa, and in
  the lower reaches of the Congo; the characteristic scenery of the
  great river being delineated with wonderful accuracy and completeness
  of detail. The hero of the story--a midshipman on board one of the
  ships of the slave squadron--after being effectually laughed out of
  his boyish vanity, develops into a lad possessed of a large share of
  sound common sense, the exercise of which enables him to render much
  valuable service to his superior officers in unmasking a most daring
  and successful ruse on the part of the slavers. There is the true
  flavour of salt water, the true scent of the sea-breeze in every
  page, while not a single expression or suggestion is to be found
  throughout the book to which the most fastidious reader could object.


THE PIRATE ISLAND:

A Story of the South Pacific. By HARRY COLLINGWOOD. Illustrated by 8
full-page Pictures by C. J. STANILAND and J. R. WELLS, in black and
tint. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 5_s._

  This story details the adventures of a lad who was found in his
  infancy on board a wreck, and is adopted by, and brought up as, a
  fisherman. By a deed of true gallantry his whole destiny is changed,
  and, going to sea, he forms one of a party who, after being burned
  out of their ship in the South Pacific, and experiencing great
  hardship and suffering in their boats, are picked up by a pirate brig
  and taken to the "Pirate Island." After many thrilling adventures,
  they ultimately succeed in effecting their escape. The story depicts
  both the Christian and the manly virtues in such colours as will
  cause them to be admired--and therefore imitated.

    "A capital story of the sea; indeed in our opinion the author is
    superior in some respects as a marine novelist to the better known
    Mr. Clarke Russell."--_The Times._

    "The best of these books.... The events are described with
    minuteness and care. The result is a very amusing book."--_Saturday
    Review._

    "Told in the most vivid and graphic language. The youthful hero
    plays just the distinguished part which youthful readers will
    recognize with the most thorough satisfaction. It would be
    difficult to find a move thoroughly delightful
    gift-book."--_Guardian._

    "One of the best boys' books we have seen for a considerable time;
    there is thrown in just a dash of the modern novel, which will
    doubtless go far to make the book a favourite."--_Glasgow Herald._


GULLIVER'S TRAVELS.

A NEW EDITION, beautifully printed, and illustrated by more than 100
pictures from designs by GORDON BROWNE. In crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 5_s._

  The wonderful travels of Gulliver "into several remote regions of the
  world" are still as fresh and entertaining as when they were first
  presented to the public more than a hundred and fifty years ago. In
  this edition the text has been judiciously curtailed by the omission
  of several passages quite unsuited for the perusal of the young or
  for family reading; and foot-notes to the text have been added to
  explain and throw light on those allusions, references, obsolete
  words, &c., which a young reader would not understand. The numerous
  vivacious and amusing illustrations by Gordon Browne greatly add to
  the attractions of the narrative.


BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN.

    "Mr. Manville Fenn may be regarded as the successor in boyhood's
    affections of Captain Mayne Reid."--_Academy._


BROWNSMITH'S BOY.

By GEORGE MANVILLE FENN. With 12 full-page Illustrations by GORDON
BROWNE, in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges,
6_s._

  The career of Grant Denison ("Brownsmith's Boy") embraces for the
  most part the home adventures of an orphan, who, having formed the
  acquaintance of an eccentric old gardener, accepts his offer of a
  home and finds that there is plenty of romance in a garden, and much
  excitement even in a journey now and then to town. In a half-savage
  lad he finds a friend who shows his love and fidelity principally by
  pretending to be an enemy. This boy, however, is always staunch, and
  saves his companion from many a peril, and in more than one fierce
  fight aids him against the cruel oppression of older lads. In
  "Brownsmith's Boy" there is abundance of excitement and trouble
  within four walls.


BUNYIP LAND:

The Story of a Wild Journey in New Guinea. By G. MANVILLE FENN. With 12
full-page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6_s._

  "Bunyip Land" is the story of Joseph Carstairs, son of an eminent
  botanist, who, in his search for new plants for the London
  nurserymen, ventures into the interior of New Guinea. Years pass
  away, and Professor Carstairs does not return; and though he is
  supposed to be dead, his young wife and son, who live at a station in
  Australia, refuse to believe this to be the case; and as soon as he
  is old enough young Joe goes in search of his father, accompanied by
  Jimmy, a native black. They journey into the interior, which Jimmy
  believes to be full of the native demons or bunyips, as he calls
  them, hence the title Bunyip Land. Their adventures are many and
  exciting, but after numerous perils they discover the professor a
  prisoner among the blacks, and bring him home in triumph.

    "Mr. Fenn deserves the thanks of everybody for the two books
    'Bunyip Land,' and 'Menhardoc,' that he contributes for the
    gratification of 'our boys' during the coming holidays, and we may
    venture to promise that a quiet week may be reckoned on whilst the
    youngsters have such fascinating literature provided for their
    evenings' amusement."--_Spectator._

    "'Bunyip Land' and 'The Golden Magnet,' are two of the best tales of
    adventure produced by any living writer, combining, as they do, the
    inventiveness of Jules Verne, and the solidity of character and
    earnestness of spirit which have made the English victorious in so
    many fields of labour and research."--_Daily Chronicle._


BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN.

    "There is a freshness, a buoyancy, a heartiness about Mr. Fenn's
    writings."--_Standard._


THE GOLDEN MAGNET:

A Tale of the Land of the Incas. By G. MANVILLE FENN. With 12 full-page
pictures by GORDON BROWNE, in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6_s._

  The tale is of a romantic lad, who leaves home to seek his fortune in
  South America by endeavouring to discover some of that treasure which
  legends declare was ages ago hidden to preserve it from the Spanish
  invaders. He is accompanied by a faithful companion, who, in the
  capacity both of comrade and henchman, does true service, and shows
  the dogged courage of the English lad during the strange adventures
  which befall them.

    "Told with admirable force and strength. Few men other than Mr.
    Fenn have the capacity for telling such stories as this, and we do
    not remember to have seen one of his productions which has exceeded
    it in merit."--_Scotsman._

    "There could be no more welcome present for a boy. There is not a
    dull page in the book, and many will be read with breathless
    interest."--_Journal of Education._


IN THE KING'S NAME:

Or the Cruise of the _Kestrel_. By G. MANVILLE FENN. Illustrated
by 12 full-page Pictures by GORDON BROWNE, in black and tint. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "In the King's Name" is a spirited story of the Jacobite times,
    concerning the adventures of Hilary Leigh, a young naval officer in
    the preventive service off the coast of Sussex, on board the
    _Kestrel_. Leigh is taken prisoner by the adherents of the
    Pretender, amongst whom is an early friend and patron who desires
    to spare the lad's life, but will not release him. The narrative is
    full of exciting and often humorous incident.

    "Mr. Manville Fenn has already won a foremost place among writers
    of stories for boys. 'In the King's Name,' is, we are inclined to
    think, the best of all his productions in this field."--_Daily
    News._

    "Told with the freshness and verve which characterize all Mr.
    Fenn's writings and put him in the front rank of writers for
    boys."--_Standard._


A TERRIBLE COWARD.

By G. MANVILLE FENN. With 2 full-page Illustrations in black and tint.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 1_s._ 6_d._

  The tale of a lad who never bounced, bragged, or bullied, and who,
  from his unwillingness to risk his life in foolhardy tricks and
  dangerous frolics, won for himself the distinction in the Cornish
  village where he lived of being called a "terrible coward." When the
  time came, however, that put the most venturesome to the test, the
  coward was found to be the one who went to the front, and distanced
  all by his cool unflinching English courage.


BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN.

    "No one can find his way to the hearts of lads more readily than
    Mr. Fenn."--_Nottingham Guardian._


PATIENCE WINS:

Or, War in the Works. By G. MANVILLE FENN. With 8 full-page
Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE, in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, 5_s._

  This is a graphic narrative of factory life in the Black country. The
  hero, Cob, and his three uncles, engineers, machinists, and
  inventors, go down to Arrowfield to set up "a works." They find,
  however, that the workmen, through prejudice and ignorance, are
  determined to have no new-fangled machinery. But Cob and his uncles
  are of the genuine kind that never know defeat, and war is declared.
  The workmen attack and the masters defend the works by night and by
  day, in spite of which the machinery is destroyed, the workshops
  almost blown up, and endless attempts made to do injury. After a
  series of narrow escapes and stirring encounters, in which both sides
  get worsted in turn, the workmen by degrees find that no malice is
  borne against them, and at last admiration takes the place of hatred.
  A great business is built up, and its foundation is laid on the
  good-will of the men.


MENHARDOC:

A Story of Cornish Nets and Mines. By G. MANVILLE FENN. With 8
full-page Illustrations by C. J. STANILAND, R.I., in black and tint.
Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 5_s._

  The scene of this story of boyish aspiration and adventure is laid
  among the granite piles and tors of Cornwall. Here amongst the hardy,
  honest fishermen and miners the two sons of Mr. Temple meet with Will
  Marion, the nephew of a retired purser of the Royal Navy and owner of
  several fishing-boats. The London boys are inducted into the secrets
  of fishing in the great bay, they learn how to catch mackerel,
  pollack, and conger with the line, and are present at the hauling of
  the nets, although not without incurring many serious risks. There is
  a good deal of quaint character throughout, and the sketches of
  Cornish life and local colouring are based upon experience in the
  bay, whose fishing village is called here Menhardoc. This is a
  thoroughly English story of phases of life but little touched upon in
  boys' literature up to the present time.

    "They are real living boys, with the virtues and faults which
    generally characterize the transition stage between boyhood and
    manhood. The Cornish fishermen are drawn from life, they are racy
    of the soil, salt with the sea-water, and they stand out from the
    pages in their jerseys and sea-boots all sprinkled with silvery
    pilchard scales.... Those who buy it as a Christmas gift for their
    juvenile relatives will find it a pleasant companion for their own
    idle hours when the boys have done with it."--_Spectator._

    "Mr. Fenn has written many books in his time; he has not often
    written one which for genuine merit as a story for young people
    will exceed this."--_Scotsman._

    "A description of Will Marion's descent into a flooded mine is
    excellent. Josh is a delightfully amusing character. We may
    cordially praise the illustrations."--_Saturday Review._


BY ASCOTT R. HOPE.

STORIES OF OLD RENOWN.

Tales of Knights and Heroes. By ASCOTT R. HOPE. With nearly 100
Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine
edges, 5_s._

    "The stories are admirably chosen. It is a book to be coveted by
    all young readers."--_Scotsman._

    "One of the beat, if not the best, boys' book of the season."--_Truth._


THE WIGWAM AND THE WAR-PATH:

Stories of the Red Indians. By ASCOTT R. HOPE. With 8 full-page
Pictures by GORDON BROWNE, in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
5_s._

  "The Wigwam and the War-path" consists of stories of Red Indians
  which are none the less romantic for being true. They are taken from
  the actual records of those who have been made prisoners by the red
  men or have lived among them, joining in their expeditions and taking
  part in their semi-savage but often picturesque and adventurous life.

    "Mr. Hope's volume is notably good: it gives a very vivid picture
    of life among the Indians."--_Spectator._

    "All the stories are told well, in simple spirited language and
    with a fulness of detail that makes them instructive as well as
    interesting."--_Journal of Education._


BY HENRY FRITH.

THE SEARCH FOR THE TALISMAN:

A Story of Labrador. By HENRY FRITH. With 6 full-page Illustrations by
JOHN SCHOeNBERG, in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._
6_d._

  A stirring tale of adventure in Labrador. Four youths and two elder
  relatives proceed in search of a "talisman" left by the father of two
  of the young explorers when an officer in the Hudson's Bay Company's
  service. They get blown out of their course, and are obliged to
  anchor in an almost ice-locked bay. On an exploring expedition they
  are separated, and various adventures result until they unite again
  and land amongst the Esquimaux. After suffering many vicissitudes
  they succeed in recovering the talisman, with which they return to
  England.


JACK O' LANTHORN.

A Tale of Adventure. By HENRY FRITH. With 4 full-page Illustrations in
black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 2_s._ 6_d._

  This is a story of the days when George the Third was king, and when
  "Jack the Painter" was trying to set fire to the shipping in
  Government dockyards. The hero gets into certain scrapes, and at the
  sea-coast makes the acquaintance of Jack o' Lanthorn, the keeper of a
  light-ship. The lad and a companion drifting out to sea in an open
  boat, discover in a singular manner the approach of the Spanish
  fleet, and Jack accompanies the hero of the tale to report what they
  have seen. Seized by a press-gang they are taken off to sea, and
  eventually take part in the defence of Gibraltar.

    "'Jack o' Lanthorn' will hold its own with the best works of Mr.
    Henty and Mr. Manville Fenn."--_Morning Advertiser._

    "The narrative is crushed full of stirring incident, and is sure to
    be a prime favourite with our boys."--_Christian Leader._



BY LEWIS HOUGH.

DR. JOLLIFFE'S BOYS:

A Tale of Weston School. By LEWIS HOUGH. With 6 full-page Pictures in
black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

  A story of school life which will be read with genuine interest,
  especially as it exposes some of the dangers which may beset lads who
  are ill instructed at home or have been thrown among unscrupulous
  companions. The descriptions of the characters of the boys at Dr.
  Jolliffe's are vivid and truthful. The narrative throughout is
  bright, easy, and lighted by touches of humour.

    "Young people who appreciate 'Tom Brown's School-days' will find
    this story a worthy companion to that fascinating book. There is
    the same manliness of tone, truthfulness of outline, avoidance of
    exaggeration and caricature, and healthy morality as characterized
    the masterpiece of Mr. Hughes."--_Newcastle Journal._


BY JOHN C. HUTCHESON.

    "Mr. Hutcheson bids fair to take a prominent place among our best
    writers of boys' books."--_The Academy._


THE WRECK OF THE NANCY BELL;

Or, Cast Away on Kerguelen Land, By JOHN C. HUTCHESON. Illustrated by 6
full-page Pictures in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._
6_d._

  This is a book after a boy's own heart. The story narrates the
  eventful voyage of a vessel on her way from the port of London to New
  Zealand, and the haps and mishaps that befell her, culminating in the
  wreck of the ill-fated _Nancy Bell_ on Kerguelen Land. There is no
  lack of incident. From the opening chapter, with the cowardly
  steward's alarm of "a ghost in the cabin" to the end of the story,
  which details the rescue of the shipwrecked passengers, one
  engrossing narrative holds the attention of the reader, until he
  reaches the final page.

  "A full circumstantial narrative such as boys delight in. The ship so
  sadly destined to wreck on Kerguelen Land is manned by a very
  life-like party, passengers and crew. The life in the Antarctic
  Iceland is well treated."--_Athenaeum._


PICKED UP AT SEA:

Or the Gold Miners of Minturne Creek, and other Stories. By JOHN C.
HUTCHESON. With 6 full-page Pictures in tints. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
3_s._ 6_d._

  The story of a young English lad, rescued in mid Atlantic from a
  watery grave, and taken out west by a party of gold-diggers to the
  wild regions of the Black Hills in Dakota. Here, after warring with
  the elements during months of unceasing toil in their search for the
  riches of the earth, and having the result of their indefatigable
  labour well-nigh torn from their grasp when on the verge of victory,
  success at last rewards the efforts of the adventurous band.

    "This is the first appearance of the author as a writer of books
    for boys, and the success is so marked that it may well encourage
    him to further efforts. The description of mining life in the
    Far-west is true and accurate."--_Standard._

    "A capital book; full of startling incident, clever dialogue,
    admirable descriptions of sky and water in all their aspects, and
    plenty of fun."--_Sheffield Independent._


TOM FINCH'S MONKEY,

And other Yarns. By JOHN C. HUTCHESON. With 2 full-page Illustrations
in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 1_s._ 6_d._

  This is a collection of sea-stories. "Tom Finch's Monkey" is about a
  gallant lieutenant and his pet chimpanzee, and will make many boys
  laugh; while the escape of "The Cranky Jane" will excite their
  deepest interest; and as for "Jim Newman's Yarn," the real story of
  the great sea-serpent, it will fairly enchant them. Grave and gay
  alike, these yarns are suited to almost any taste.


BY MRS. R. H. READ.

SILVER MILL:

A Tale of the Don Valley. By Mrs. R. H. READ. With 6 full-page
Illustrations by JOHN SCHOeNBERG, in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, 3_s._ 6_d._

  The story of a girl and boy. The chief interest centres around Ruth,
  who is supposed to be the orphan child of a working-man, but who
  eventually turns out to be the daughter of the cynical, though
  essentially kind-hearted, owner of Silver Mill. In tracing the
  character of Ruth as she develops from an impulsive girl to noble
  womanhood, the author has drawn a picture at once pleasing and
  suggestive.


DORA:

Or a Girl without a Home. By Mrs. R. H. READ. With 6 full-page
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._ 6_d._

  The story of a friendless orphan girl, who is placed as pupil-teacher
  at the school in which she was educated, but is suddenly removed by
  hard and selfish relatives, who employ her as a menial as well as a
  governess. Through a series of exciting adventures she makes
  discoveries respecting a large property which is restored to its
  rightful owners, and at the same time she secures her escape from her
  persecutors. The character of Dora is a very sweet one, and the
  interest of the story is so sustained that it can scarcely fail to
  please the reader.

    "One of the most pleasing stories for young people that we have met
    with of late years. There is in it a freshness, simplicity, and
    naturalness very engaging."--_Harper's Magazine._

    "It is no slight thing, in an age of rubbish, to get a story so
    pure and healthy."--_The Academy._

    "The heroine is a beautiful character, well conceived and well
    portrayed. The tale is a fascinating one."--_Schoolmistress._

    "Mrs. Read has succeeded in writing an exciting tale. The character
    of Dora is one which every girl would do well to imitate."--_The
    Schoolmaster._


OUR DOLLY:

Her Words and Ways. By Mrs. R. H. READ. With many Woodcuts, and a
Frontispiece in colours. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._

  A story for children, showing the growth and development of character
  in a little girl, and describing the surroundings of the family and a
  series of entertaining small adventures suitable for very juvenile
  readers.

    "Prettily told and prettily illustrated."--_Guardian._

    "Sure to be a great favourite with young children."--_School
    Guardian._

    "The little London child will read with a longing heart the story
    of _Our Dolly_."--_School Board Chronicle._


FAIRY FANCY:

What she Heard and what she Saw. By Mrs. R. H. READ. With many Woodcut
Illustrations in the text, and a Frontispiece printed in colours. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, 2_s._

  The tale is designed to show the influence of character even among
  little children, and the narrative is such as to awaken and sustain
  the interest of the younger readers.

    "The authoress has very great insight into child nature, and a
    sound healthy tone pervades the book."--_Glasgow Herald._

    "All is pleasant, nice reading, with a little knowledge of natural
    history and other matters gently introduced and divested of
    dryness."--_Practical Teacher._


BY F. BAYFORD HARRISON.

BROTHERS IN ARMS:

A Story of the Crusades. By F. BAYFORD HARRISON. With 4 full-page
Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE, in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, 2_s._ 6_d._

  A story which, while it provides exciting incidents and vivid
  descriptions, will be of real value to the young reader because of
  its containing accurate historical information on the subject of the
  Crusades and the doings of Richard the Lion-heart and his army in the
  Holy Land. There are few tales which comprise within so brief a
  compass, such picturesque representations of life in that olden time,
  and such stirring and well-told adventures.

    "Full of striking incident, is very fairly illustrated, and may
    safely be chosen as sure to prove interesting to young people of
    both sexes."--_Guardian._

    "Will delight all boyish readers. It is a most thrilling
    tale."--_The Record._

    "One of the best accounts of the Crusades it has been our privilege
    to read. The book cannot fail to interest boys."--_Schoolmistress._


BY JOHN C. HUTCHESON.

THE PENANG PIRATE

And THE LOST PINNACE. By JOHN C. HUTCHESON. With 3 full-page
Illustrations in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._

  The first story in this volume deals not with a fictional creation of
  the past, but with the real pirates of the present who infest the
  Malayan Archipelago and the great water-high ways of the East. In it
  the reader will discover how a party of Malayan freebooters were
  caught in their own toils and "hoist with their own petard," and how
  the gallant ship _Hankow Lin_ voyaged from the Canton river through
  the straits of Sunda.

  In the second tale the adventures of a party of blue-jackets
  belonging to one of the pinnaces of the East African squadron are
  narrated. Both stories are founded on fact, and abound in sensational
  episode and stirring incident.


BY MARY C. ROWSELL.

TRAITOR OR PATRIOT?

A Tale of the Rye-House Plot. By C. J. STANILAND. With 6 full-page
Pictures by C. O. MURRAY and C. J. STANILAND, R.I. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, 3_s._ 6_d._

  A romantic tale of the later days of the reign of Charles II. The
  main theme of the story is the conspiracy for the assassination of
  the king and the Duke of York, which was to be effected on the return
  of the brothers from Newmarket to London. The hero of the story,
  Lawrence Lee, a young farmer, accidentally learns the truth, and
  thereupon starts on horseback for Newmarket to warn the king. After a
  series of adventures, the young man succeeds in his loyal enterprise,
  and duly receives his reward for his conspicuous share in the
  frustration of the "Rye-House Plot."

    "The writer has made a careful study of the times, and tells her
    tale with some vivacity."--_Spectator._

    "Here the Rye-House Plot serves as the ground work for a romantic
    love episode, whose true characters are life like beings, not dry
    sticks as in many historical tales."--_Graphic._

"The character of the heroine, Ruth, is singularly pretty and
attractive: we thank the author for so charming a creation."--_Bristol
Mercury._


THE PEDLAR AND HIS DOG.

By MARY C. ROWSELL. With 2 Illustrations by GEORGE CRUIKSHANK, in black
and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 1_s._ 6_d._

  A story of English life in the time of Good Queen Bess. Accompanying
  John Pennycuick and his dog Shock in their wanderings, we get a
  pleasant view of rural England, quiet and peaceful then, as it is
  now, and of London with its quaint old streets and houses. Juvenile
  readers who admire the historical and legendary, when introduced into
  a narrative that is light and sparkling, are sure to appreciate this
  book.


BY ELIZABETH J. LYSAGHT.

BROTHER AND SISTER:

Or the Trials of the Moore Family. By ELIZABETH J. LYSAGHT. With 6
full-page Illustrations. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

  An interesting story for young people, showing by the narrative of
  the vicissitudes and struggles of a family which has "come down in
  the world," and of the brave endeavours of its two younger members,
  how the pressure of adversity is mitigated by domestic affection,
  mutual confidence, and hopeful honest effort.

    "A pretty story, and well told. The plot is cleverly constructed,
    and the moral is excellent."--_Athenaeum._

    "A charming story, admirably adapted for young people."--_Society._


BY MRS. EMMA RAYMOND PITMAN.

    "Mrs. Pitman's works are all to be prized for their ennobling
    character--pure, elevating, interesting, and intellectual."--_Christian
    Union._


GARNERED SHEAVES.

A Tale for Boys. By Mrs. E. R. PITMAN. With 4 full-page Illustrations
in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

  This is a tale showing by incidents from life the wide difference
  between the honourable, upright youth, and one who is clever and
  cunning, but dishonest.

    "This book is of unusual merit. It breathes out good thoughts in
    earnest and true tones that speak to the heart, with that force
    which a story does when well told. It would grace any child's
    library."--_Schoolmistress._


LIFE'S DAILY MINISTRY.

A Story of Everyday Service for Others. By Mrs. E. R. PITMAN. With 4
full-page Illustrations in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
3_s._ 6_d._

  A story of self-sacrifice and of some touching experiences of life,
  showing that true honour and happiness are to be found in serving
  others.

    "Full of stirring interest, genuine pictures of real life, and
    pervaded by a broad and active sympathy for the true, beautiful,
    and good."--_Christian Commonwealth._


FLORENCE GODFREY'S FAITH.

A Story of Australian Life. By Mrs. E. R. PITMAN. With 4 full-page
Illustrations in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "This is a clever, and what is better still, a good book, written
    with a freshness and power which win the reader's sympathies, and
    carry the story along unflaggingly to the close."--_Christian
    Globe._


MY GOVERNESS LIFE:

Or Earning my Living. By Mrs. E. R. PITMAN. With 4 full-page
Illustrations in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._
6_d._

    "Told in the author's usual winsome style, which holds the reader
    spell-bound from first to last."--_Christian Union._

    "A beautiful and instructive story.... Mrs. Pitman never fails to
    interest her readers."--_The Rock._


FAMOUS DISCOVERIES BY SEA AND LAND.

With 4 full-page Illustrations in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, 2_s._ 6_d._

  Narratives, chiefly, of the stirring times when the great achievement
  of Columbus had shown that beyond the Atlantic there were new worlds
  and new oceans to discover and explore--stories of bold adventure and
  heroic effort which, while strictly historical, are invested with all
  the charm of romance.


STIRRING EVENTS IN HISTORY.

With 4 full-page Illustrations by JOHN SCHOeNBERG. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, 2_s._ 6_d._

  In history there are some events which stand out as eminently
  notable, either from their importance, their intrinsic interest, or
  the greatness of the men or women concerned in them. In this work a
  number of these events have been gathered together and thrown into
  the form of short narratives. The incidents have been drawn from
  times and countries wide apart, the aim having been to give variety
  rather than a finished view of any definite period--to present the
  young reader with a series of historical pictures which, while
  instructive in themselves, may induce a taste for further reading in
  the same direction.


STORIES OF THE SEA IN FORMER DAYS:

Narratives of Wreck and Rescue. With 4 full-page Illustrations by FRANK
FELLER. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._ 6_d._

  While no attempt is made in "Stories of the Sea" to paint the
  sailor's life in glowing colours, or invest it with a glamour of
  romance, the narratives selected are full of such thrilling incidents
  of peril, suffering, and shipwreck, as are always deeply interesting
  to the young reader.

    "Next to an original sea-tale of sustained interest come
    well-sketched collections of maritime disaster and suffering which
    awaken the sympathies by the realism of fact. 'Stories of the Sea,'
    are a very good specimen of the kind, and some of the chapters
    which are pleasantly written are altogether fresh to us."--_The
    Times._

    "Many boys will appreciate this book, as the adventures of
    impossible boy pirates are not equal in interest to much of the
    simple truth here told."--_Athenaeum._


ADVENTURES IN FIELD, FLOOD, & FOREST:

Stories of Danger and Daring. With 4 full-page Illustrations by FRANK
FELLER. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._ 6_d._

  Incidents of daring, hardship, and danger have ever had, and
  doubtless always will have a powerful fascination for the youthful
  mind, and these narratives of real personal experience in "Field,
  Flood, and Forest," while in no sense fictitious, will be found quite
  as exciting and more truly interesting than the most cunningly
  devised fables.

    "One of the series of books for young people which Messrs. Blackie
    excel in producing. The editor has beyond all question succeeded
    admirably. The present book cannot fail to be read with interest
    and advantage."--_Academy._

    "All admirably told. It will be counted one of the best of the
    story-books that Christmas produces."--_Scotsman._


BY THOMAS ARCHER.

LITTLE TOTTIE,

And Two Other Stories. By THOMAS ARCHER. With 3 full-page Illustrations
by J. J. PROCTOR. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._

  A thrilling-little drama of real life, of child life, of the life of
  a poor neighbourhood with sordid surroundings, and perhaps fuller of
  suggestion than many more pretentious tales. It stirs the emotions by
  representing actual scenes and possible people, with the
  peculiarities and habits that belong to them and make them easily
  recognized.


MISS GRANTLEY'S GIRLS,

And the Stories She Told Them. By THOMAS ARCHER. With 2 Illustrations
by GORDON BROWNE. Cr. 8vo, cloth ex., 1_s._ 6_d._

  The stories that Miss Grantley tells to her girls, during pleasant
  evenings after school, are such as are likely to prove attractive to
  the girls in other schools. They are small romances of real life with
  a good deal of genuine pathos and exciting incident in them, and are
  eminently suited for family reading or for tales to tell out of
  school as Miss Grantley told them.


BY ROSA MULHOLLAND.

HETTY GRAY;

Or Nobody's Bairn. By ROSA MULHOLLAND. With 4 full-page Illustrations
in black and tint. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._ 6_d._

  "Hetty Gray" is the story of a girl who, having been found as an
  infant by a villager, is brought up by his wife, and is a kind of
  general pet, till an accident causes a rich widow to adopt her. On
  the death of her adoptive mother Hetty, who is left unprovided for,
  is taken by the widow's relatives to be educated with a view to her
  gaining her livelihood as a governess, an event which is prevented by
  a rather remarkable discovery.

    "A pleasantly told story for girls, with a happy
    ending."--_Athenaeum._

    "A charming story for young folks. Hetty is a delightful
    creature--piquant, tender, and true--and her varying fortunes are
    perfectly realistic."--_World._


FOUR LITTLE MISCHIEFS.

By ROSA MULHOLLAND. With 3 full-page Pictures in colours. Crown 8vo,
cloth extra, 2_s._

  The history of Kitty, Jock, Bunko, and Ba, who, after successfully
  weathering the mumps in their London nursery, are sent to the country
  to recruit. The book is full of innocent fun, and abounds in
  attractive and instructive incident.

    "Will be read with absorbing interest by the youngsters."--_Land
    and Water._

    "A charming bright story about real children."--_Watchman._


BY KATE WOOD.

WINNIE'S SECRET:

A Story of Faith and Patience. By KATE WOOD. With 4 full-page Pictures
in black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._ 6_d._

  Tells the story of two orphan girls, who, at an early age, are left
  in a miserable den of London to struggle for a living. The
  vicissitudes of the little sisters are narrated with touching
  sympathy, at times sad enough, but relieved by flashes of fun and
  gleams of genuine humour.

    "A very pretty tale, with great variety of incident and subtle
    character study, written precisely in the style that is surest to
    win the hearts of young folks."--_Pictorial World._

    "One of the best story books we have read. Girls will be charmed
    with the tale."--_Schoolmaster._


A WAIF OF THE SEA:

Or, the Lost Found. By KATE WOOD. With 4 full-page Illustrations in
black and tint. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._ 6_d._

  "A Waif of the Sea" deals very pathetically with the sorrows and
  trials of children, and of mothers who are separated from their
  children. The narrative is full of human interest, and the lives and
  struggles of the people of a poor London neighbourhood are well
  portrayed.

    "Little Birdie is a beautiful child-character, with whom no one can
    come in contact without feeling purer and fresher for life's
    work."--_Glasgow News._

    "This is a very touching and pretty tale of town and country, full
    of pathos and interest, embodied in a narrative which never flags,
    and told in a style which deserves the highest praise for its lucid
    and natural ease."--_Edinburgh Courant._


BY ESME STUART.

MISS FENWICK'S FAILURES:

Or "Peggy Pepper-Pot." A Story. By ESME STUART, author of "Isabeau's
Hero," &c. With 4 full-page Illustrations in black and tint. Crown 8vo,
cloth extra, 2_s._ 6_d._

  A pleasing narration of the failures of Peggy Fenwick, who, before
  her sixteenth birthday, had to assume the responsible position of
  head of her father's house. The story abounds in capitally told
  domestic adventures; and while it has an excellent moral purpose, it
  is brimful of fun and never flags in interest.

    "Instead of drawing a heroine of romance Esme Stuart may be
    commended for producing a girl far more true to real life, who will
    put no nonsense into young heads."--_Graphic._

    "There is not a dull page in it; while it is so graphically written
    and abounds in such touches of genuine humour and innocent fun that
    when we reach the end of the book we wish it were longer."--_Freeman._


BY EMMA LESLIE.

GYTHA'S MESSAGE:

A Tale of Saxon England. By EMMA LESLIE, author of "Glaucia the Greek
Slave," &c. With 4 full-page Pictures by C. J. STANILAND, R.I. Crown
8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._ 6_d._

  This is a story of the time of "Harold, the last of the Saxon Kings."
  The scene is laid mostly within the house of a Saxon Thane, where
  Gytha is a little slave girl. Though mainly a domestic tale, we yet
  get a glimpse of the stirring events taking place in the country at
  that period. We hear of the death of the "Confessor," the election of
  Harold, his fight with the Danes and defeat at Hastings; and the
  picture is presented to us of England subsiding into peace under the
  sway of the Conqueror. A good deal is learned of Saxon manners and
  customs, and both boys and girls will delight to read of the home
  life of Hilda and Gytha, and of the brave deeds of the impulsive
  Gurth and the faithful Leofric.


BY M. A. PAULL.

MY MISTRESS THE QUEEN.

By Miss M. A. PAULL, author of "I, Benjamin Holbeck," &c. With 4
full-page Illustrations by C. T. GARLAND, in black and tint. Crown 8vo,
cloth extra, 2_s._ 6_d._

  This is an historical tale. "My Mistress the Queen" is Mary, daughter
  of James II., into whose service the narrator, a girl of 16, enters
  just before the marriage of Mary to William III. The descriptions are
  graphic, and the views of historic personages and of manners at the
  courts of Charles II. and William III. accurate and life-like. The
  language is simple, and imitative of the quaint quiet style of that
  period.


BY MRS. AUSTIN.

MARIE'S HOME:

Or, A Glimpse of the Past. By Mrs. AUSTIN. With 3 full-page
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._

  This story introduces the reader to the pleasant home of an English
  maiden, to whom, on her fifteenth birthday, is given the diary of her
  great-grandmother and namesake Marie Hamilton. This record of an
  early life, spent partly in the same old English home and partly amid
  stirring scenes of the French revolution, teaches the younger Marie
  just such lessons of unselfish love as are of value at her age.


BY DARLEY DALE.

THE FAMILY FAILING.

By DARLEY DALE, author of "Little Bricks," &c. With 4 full-page
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 2_s._ 6_d._

  This is a lively and amusing account of a family, the members of
  which while they lived in affluence were remarkable for their
  discontent, but who, after the loss of fortune has compelled them to
  seek a more humble home in Jersey, become less selfish, and develop
  very excellent traits of character under the pressure of comparative
  adversity. Their escapades and narrow escapes from serious dangers
  form an exciting part of the narrative, which contains many pleasant
  episodes of life in the Channel Islands.

    "This is a cheery tale. The lesson is Content, and very nicely the
    story is told."--_Tablet._

    "This is at once an amusing and an interesting story, and a capital
    lesson on the value of contentedness."--_Aberdeen Journal._


BY CHARLES PEARCE.

THE BALL OF FORTUNE;

Or Ned Somerset's Inheritance. By CHARLES PEARCE. With 4 full-page
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._ 6_d._

  A story of plot and character dealing with some out of the many
  scenes of London life, and founded on the strange bequest left by a
  sea captain, and the endeavours of some unscrupulous persons to
  obtain possession of it before the discovery of the true heir in the
  person of a neglected street Arab. The story is lively and
  attractive, and the incidents move so quickly that the attention of
  the reader is sustained throughout.

    "A capital story for boys. It is very simply and brightly written.
    There is plenty of incident, and the interest is sustained
    throughout."--_Journal of Education._

    "It is a bright genial story, which boys will thoroughly enjoy....
    We have seen few better stories for boys this season."--_Birmingham
    Daily Post._

    "The most exciting of them all."--_The Times._


BY ALICE CORKRAN.

ADVENTURES OF MRS. WISHING-TO-BE.

By ALICE CORKRAN, author of "Latheby Towers," &c. With 3 full-page
Pictures in colours. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._

  The strange adventures of a very young lady, showing how she met with
  the wonderful people of nursery legend and the manner of her
  introduction to them. A tale for the Little Ones.

    "Simply a charming book for little girls."--_Saturday Review._

    "Written just in the style and spirit to win the hearts of
    children."--_Daily News._

    "Well worth buying for the frontispiece alone."--_Times._


BY GREGSON GOW.

NEW LIGHT THROUGH OLD WINDOWS.

A Series of Stories illustrating Fables of AEsop. By GREGSON GOW. With 3
Pictures in colours. Cloth extra, 2_s._

  Stories designed to bring before the young mind, in a new and
  entertaining form, some of the shreds of wit and wisdom which have
  come down to us from ancient times in the guise of fables. Although
  amusement has been a chief end aimed at, most of the tales will be
  found to suggest some important truth, or teach some sound lesson in
  practical morality.

    "Agreeable reading for the young."--_Athenaeum._

    "The most delightfully-written little stories one can easily find
    in the literature of the season. Well constructed and brightly
    told."--_Glasgow Herald._


DOWN AND UP AGAIN:

Being some Account of the Felton Family, and the Odd People they Met.
By GREGSON GOW. With 2 Illustrations in colours. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, 1_s._ 6_d._

  A story of city life, in which, though the chief aim is to amuse
  through the recital of interesting events and the exhibition of
  original and humorous character, the reader may see something of the
  spirit in which misfortune should be met, find an illustration of the
  maxim that "Heaven helps those who help themselves," and receive an
  impulse towards kindliness of deed and charity of thought.

    "Very neatly told, with some fairly dramatic incidents, and
    calculated altogether to please young boys."--_Scotsman._

    "The story is simply but remarkably well told. Though intended for
    young people it might with advantage be perused by many older
    readers."--_Northern Chronicle._


TROUBLES AND TRIUMPHS OF LITTLE TIM.

A City Story. By _Gregson Gow_. With 2 Illustrations in colours.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra. 1_s._ 6_d._

    "Strong in character and full of incident, and the narrative all
    through is interesting and touching."--_Edinburgh Daily Review._

    "An unmistakable undercurrent of sympathy with the struggles of the
    poor, and an ability to describe their feelings under various
    circumstances, eminently characteristic of Dickens, are marked
    features in Mr. Gow's story."--_North British Mail._


A LITTLE ADVENTURER.

By GREGSON GOW. With Coloured Frontispiece, square 16mo, cloth extra,
1_s._


MAGNA CHARTA STORIES:

Or Struggles for Freedom in the Olden Time. Each Story written by an
Eminent Author, and the whole edited by ARTHUR GILMAN, A.M. With 12
full-page Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._

  These stories of heroic deed in the cause of national liberty, from
  Marathon and Thermopylae to the times of King Alfred and the _Magna
  Charta_, are designed to stimulate a love of history, and add to
  the inspiration of freedom, which should be the heritage of every boy
  and girl.

    "Light and graceful in its style, with moral inspiration streaming
    from each tale of the olden days, this is a book which will
    exercise an educational influence at every fireside to which it
    comes."--_Christian Leader._

    "A book of special excellence, which ought to be in the hands of
    all boys. It is as readable as it is instructive, and as elevating
    as it is readable."--_Educational News._


THE WINGS OF COURAGE,

AND THE CLOUD-SPINNER. Translated from the French of GEORGE SAND, by
Mrs. CORKRAN. With 2 coloured Illustrations. Crown 8vo; cloth extra,
2_s._

  These stories are among the most attractive of the many tales which
  the great French novelist wrote for her grandchildren. They are full
  of fancy, of vivid description, and of a keen appreciation of the
  best way to arouse the interest of juvenile readers. The romantic
  manner in which they are told lends to them the kind of enchantment
  which thoughtful children deeply appreciate.

    "Mrs. Corkran has earned our gratitude by translating into readable
    English these two charming little stories."--_Athenaeum._

    "The finest of all these books beyond question is the 'Wings of
    Courage,' which ranks with the writings of Erckmann-Chatrian for
    finish, beauty, and naturalness. The whole story is
    delightful."--_Dundee Advertiser._


NAUGHTY MISS BUNNY:

Her Tricks and Troubles. A Story for Little Children. By CLARA
MULHOLLAND. With 3 Illustrations in colours. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
2_s._

  This is a book which will amuse quite little folks, as a story of the
  wayward tricks of a spoiled child, and the scrapes into which they
  lead her. The story consists of small incidents such as please small
  listeners, who will be interested not only in Miss Bunny's
  naughtiness, but in her reformation.

    "This naughty child is positively delightful. Papas should not omit
    'Naughty Miss Bunny' from their list of juvenile
    presents."--_Land and Water._


BOX OF STORIES.

Packed for Young Folk by _Horace Happyman_. A Series of interesting
Tales for the Young. With 2 Illustrations printed in colours. Crown
8vo, 192 pp., cloth extra, 1_s._ 6_d._


WARNER'S CHASE:

Or the Gentle Heart. By ANNIE S. SWAN. With 3 Illustrations printed in
colours. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2_s._

  "Warner's Chase" is a domestic story, in which we see the failure of
  an essentially self-seeking and self-assertive nature to secure
  happiness to itself, or bestow it upon others, and the triumph of
  gentleness, love, and unselfish service, in the person of a feeble
  girl, over the coldness and indifference of a heart contracted and
  hardened by a life-long pursuit of gain.

    "Is a good book for boys and girls. There is nothing sentimental
    and no sickly goodyism in it, but a tone of quiet and true religion
    that keeps its own place."--_Perth Advertiser._

    "In Milly Warren, the heroine, who softens the hard heart of her
    rich uncle, and thus unwittingly restores the family fortunes, we
    have a fine ideal of real womanly goodness."--_Schoolmaster._


INTO THE HAVEN.

By ANNIE S. SWAN. With 2 Illustrations printed in colours. Crown 8vo,
192 pp., cloth extra, 1_s._ 6_d._

    "No story more attractive ... by reason of its breezy freshness and
    unforced pathos, as well as for the wholesome practical lessons it
    conveys."--_Christian Leader._


MADGE'S MISTAKE.

A Recollection of Girlhood. By ANNIE E. ARMSTRONG. With 2 coloured
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 1_s._ 6_d._

  This is a lively, interesting little story, the characters are well
  marked, and the plot, although simple, is so well worked out as to
  lead the reader, young or old, on to the last word.

    "Will please the eye and the fancy of girls, for its illustrations
    are as excellent as its letterpress."--_Academy._

    "We cannot speak too highly of this delightful little tale. It is
    charmingly written, and abounds in interesting and laughable
    incidents."--_Bristol Times._


THE PATRIOT MARTYR:

And other Narratives of Female Heroism in Peace and War. With 2
Coloured Illustrations. 192 pp., cloth extra, 1_s._ 6_d._

    "It should be read with interest by every girl who loves to learn
    what her sex can accomplish in times of difficulty and
    danger."--_Bristol Times._


THE HAPPY LAD.

A Story of Peasant Life in Norway. From the Norwegian of Bjoernstjerne
Bjoernson. With Frontispiece in colours. Crown 8vo, 192 pp., cloth
extra, 1_s._ 6_d._

    "This pretty story has a freshness and natural eloquence about it
    such as are seldom met with in our home made tales. It seems to
    carry us back to some of the love stories of the Bible."--_Aberdeen
    Free Press._




THE SHILLING SERIES OF BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE.

Square 16mo, neatly bound in cloth extra. Each book contains 128 pages
and a coloured Illustration.

    "The whole of the set will be found admirably adapted for the use
    of the young. The books, well printed and elegantly bound in cloth,
    are a marvel of cheapness."--_Journal of Education._

    "They are unusually good, and are calculated to produce sound,
    wholesome, moral effects."--_Glasgow Herald._


OLIVE MOUNT. By ANNIE S. FENN.

A bright and sparkling story about a family of boys and girls left,
through the death of both parents, to the charge of their eldest
brother. For a time the children fairly run riot in the pleasant
country-side at Olive Mount; till the wholesome discipline of sorrow
and the gentle influence of Miss Orpen their governess, lead them to
find enjoyment in doing what is right.


A LITTLE ADVENTURER. By GREGSON GOW.

Tells how little Tommy Treffit started off to search for his father in
Australia. How he hid himself on board a vessel bound for Madeira, and
how, after many adventures, he at last found his father, not in
Australia, but safe at home.


TOM WATKINS' MISTAKE. By EMMA LESLIE.

Tom Watkins, having given way to the temptation to commit acts of petty
pilfering in the carpenter's shop where he is apprenticed, ultimately
suffers the consequences of his wrong-doing, and not only learns that
honesty is the best policy, but comes to see the sinfulness of his
conduct.


TWO LITTLE BROTHERS. By HARRIET M. CAPES.

This is a pleasant account of some of the incidents which befel two
little brothers, whose home was in a seaside village. It tells of their
adventures on the shore and of the wonderful sights they saw during a
trip to London, and how a kind father taught them to practise at all
times self-control and courtesy.


THREE LITTLE ONES: Their Haps and Mishaps. By CORA LANGTON.

A simple tale of home life. Children are sure to love and admire bright
Mabel, affectionate Eddie, and sad little Lucy, while the story of
Mabel's sin and Lucy's sorrow will teach them truthfulness and
obedience.


THE NEW BOY AT MERRITON. By JULIA GODDARD.

    "A story of English school life. It is an attempt to teach a
    somewhat higher code of honour than that which prevails among the
    general run of schoolboys, and the lesson makes a very good
    story."--_School Board Chronicle._


THE BLIND BOY OF DRESDEN.

    "This is a family story of great pathos. It does not obtrusively
    dictate its lesson, but it quietly introduces, and leaves it within
    the heart."--_Aberdeen Journal._


JON OF ICELAND: A True Story.

    "'Jon of Iceland' is a sturdy, well-educated young Icelander, who
    becomes a successful teacher. It gives children a clear idea of the
    chief physical features of the island, and of the simple and manly
    character of its inhabitants."--_School Guardian._


STORIES FROM SHAKESPEARE.

    "The stories are told in such a way that young people having read
    them will desire to study the works of Shakespeare in their
    original form."--_The Schoolmistress._


EVERY MAN IN HIS PLACE. The Story of a City Boy and a Forest Boy.

    "This is the history of the son of a wealthy Hamburg merchant, who
    wished to follow in the steps of Robinson Crusoe. He was put to the
    test, and became convinced in the end that it is better to live the
    life of a wealthy merchant in a great city than to endure hardship
    by choice."--_School Board Chronicle._


FIRESIDE FAIRIES and FLOWER FANCIES: STORIES FOR GIRLS.

    "Nine stories are included, all for girls, encouraging them to try
    and do their duty. Young servants would find this book very
    interesting."--_The Schoolmistress._


TO THE SEA IN SHIPS: STORIES OF SUFFERING AND SAVING AT SEA.

    "_To the Sea in Ships_ records several noted disasters at sea, such
    as the foundering of the _London_ and the wreck of the _Atlantic_.
    It also contains narratives of successful rescues. This is a
    capital book for boys."--_School Guardian._


JACK'S VICTORY: AND OTHER STORIES ABOUT DOGS.

    "Every boy, and some girls, take great delight in reading about
    dogs. Well, Jack was a dog; a famous and wonderful one, too. He
    became leader of a team in Greenland, and some rare exploits he
    took part in. Besides 'Jack's Victory' there are ten other stories
    about dogs in this volume."--_The Schoolmistress._


THE STORY OF A KING, TOLD BY ONE OF HIS SOLDIERS.

    "This book recounts the boyhood and reign of Charles XII. of
    Sweden. The wars in which he was engaged and the extraordinary
    victories he won are well described, and equally so are the
    misfortunes which latterly came on him and his kingdom through his
    uncontrollable wilfulness."--_Aberdeen Journal._


LITTLE DANIEL: A Story of a Flood on the Rhine.

    "A simple and touching story of a flood on the Rhine, told as
    well as George Eliot so graphically wrote of _The Mill on the
    Floss_."--_Governess._


PRINCE ALEXIS: A Tale of Old Russia.

This is a legend wrought into a story, rendering a fiction of Life in
Russia, something more than a hundred years ago; a state of things
which, as the author says, "is now impossible, and will soon become
incredible."


SASHA THE SERF: And other Stories of Russian Life.

The stories in the volume comprise:--The Life of Sasha, a poor boy who
saved the life of his lord, and finally rose to wealth and gained his
freedom,--Incidents of remarkable personal bravery in the Russian army,
&c. &c.


TRUE STORIES OF FOREIGN HISTORY. A Series of Interesting Tales.

The book contains stories--How Quentin Matsys the Antwerp smith became
a great painter,--The rise and fall of Jean Ango the fisherman of
Dieppe,--The heroism of Casabianca the little French midshipman, &c.
&c.




THE SIXPENNY SERIES FOR CHILDREN.

Neatly bound in cloth extra. Each book contains 64 pages and a Coloured
Illustration.


NEW VOLUMES.

  WILD MARSH MARIGOLDS. By DARLEY DALE.

  FANNY'S KING. By DARLEY DALE.

  KITTY'S COUSIN. By HANNAH B. MACKENZIE.

  CLEARED AT LAST. By JULIA GODDARD.

  LITTLE DOLLY FORBES. By ANNIE S. FENN.

  A YEAR WITH NELLIE. By ANNIE S. FENN.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  THE LITTLE BROWN BIRD: a Story of Industry.

  THE MAID OF DOMREMY: and other Tales.

  LITTLE ERIC: a Story of Honesty.

  UNCLE BEN THE WHALER: and other Stories.

  THE PALACE OF LUXURY: and other Stories.

  THE CHARCOAL-BURNER: or, Kindness Repaid.

  WILLY BLACK: a Story of Doing Right.

  THE HORSE AND HIS WAYS: Stories of Man and his best Friend.

  THE SHOEMAKER'S PRESENT: a Legendary Story.

  LIGHTS TO WALK BY: Stories for the Young.

  THE LITTLE MERCHANT: and other Stories.

  NICHOLINA: a Story about an Iceberg.

    "The whole of the set will be found admirably adapted for the use
    of the young."--_Schoolmaster._

    "A very praiseworthy series of Prize Books. Most of the stories are
    designed to enforce some important moral lesson, such as honesty,
    industry, kindness, helpfulness, &c."--_School Guardian._




A SERIES OF FOURPENNY REWARD BOOKS.

_Each 64 Pages, 18mo, Illustrated, in Picture Boards._


NEW VOLUMES.

  HOLIDAYS AT SUNNYCROFT. By ANNIE S. SWAN.

  WORTHY OF TRUST. By H. B. MACKENZIE.

  MAUDIE AND BERTIE. By GREGSON GOW.

  PHIL FOSTER. By J. LOCKHART.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  BRAVE AND TRUE. By GREGSON GOW.

  POOR TOM OLLIVER. By JULIA GODDARD.

  THE CHILDREN AND THE WATER-LILY. By JULIA GODDARD.

  JOHNNIE TUPPER'S TEMPTATION. By GREGSON GOW.

  FRITZ'S EXPERIMENT. By LETITIA M'CLINTOCK.

  CLIMBING THE HILL. By ANNIE S. SWAN.

  A YEAR AT COVERLEY. By ANNIE S. SWAN.

  LUCY'S CHRISTMAS-BOX; or, How Georgie found his Cousin.

  * * These little books have been specially written with the aim of
   *  inculcating some sound moral, such as obedience to parents, love
  for brothers and sisters, kindness to animals, perseverance and
  diligence leading to success, &c. &c.

    "Any one who wishes to send a dainty packet of story-books to a
    household blessed with little children will find in these exactly
    what he wants. They are issued with the prettiest of all the
    coloured covers we have yet seen."--_Christian Leader._

    "We have seldom seen any series of children's stories of so
    high-class a character placed so prettily within the reach of even
    the humblest purchaser."--_Newcastle Journal._




VERE FOSTER'S WATER-COLOR DRAWING-BOOKS.

    _The Times_ says:--"We can strongly recommend the series to young
    students."


PAINTING FOR BEGINNERS.

FIRST STAGE. Teaching the use of ONE COLOR. Ten Facsimiles of Original
Studies in Sepia by J. CALLOW, and numerous Illustrations in pencil.
With full Instructions in easy language. 4to, cloth elegant, 2_s._
6_d._

    "Sound little books, teaching the elements of 'washing' with
    much clearness by means of plain directions and well-executed
    plates."--_Academy._


PAINTING FOR BEGINNERS.

SECOND STAGE. Teaching the use of SEVEN COLORS. Twenty Facsimiles of
Original Drawings by J. CALLOW, and many Illustrations in pencil. With
full Instructions in easy language. 4to, cloth elegant, 4_s._

    "The rules are so clear and simple that they cannot fail to be
    understood even by those who have no previous knowledge of drawing.
    The letterpress of the book is as good as the illustrations are
    beautiful."--_Birmingham Gazette._


SIMPLE LESSONS IN FLOWER PAINTING.

Eight Facsimiles of Original Water-Color Drawings, and numerous Outline
Drawings of Flowers, after various artists. With Instructions for
Drawing and Painting. 4to, cloth elegant, 3_s._

    "Everything necessary for acquiring the art of flower painting
    is here: the _facsimiles_ of water-color drawings are very
    beautiful."--_Graphic._

    "Such excellent books, so carefully written and studied, cannot
    fail to have great advantage in the creation and fostering of a
    taste for art."--_Scotsman._


SIMPLE LESSONS IN LANDSCAPE PAINTING.

Eight Facsimiles of Original Water-Color Drawings, and Thirty
Vignettes, after various artists. With full Instructions by an
experienced Master. 4to, cloth elegant, 3_s._

    "As a work of art in the book line we have seldom seen its equal;
    and it could not fail to be a delightful present, affording a great
    amount of pleasurable amusement and instruction, to young
    people."--_St. James's Gazette._


SIMPLE LESSONS IN MARINE PAINTING.

Twelve Facsimiles of Original Water-Color Sketches. By EDWARD DUNCAN.
With numerous Illustrations in pencil, and Practical Lessons by an
experienced Master. 4to, cloth elegant, 3_s._

    "The book must prove of great value to students. Nothing could
    be prettier or more charming than the marine sketches here
    presented."--_Graphic._


STUDIES OF TREES,

In Pencil and in Water-Colors. By J. NEEDHAM. A Series of Eighteen
Examples in Colours, and Thirty-three Drawings in pencil. With
descriptions of the Trees, and full Instructions for Drawing and
Painting. First Series, cloth elegant, 5_s._; Second Series, cloth
elegant, 5_s._

    "Charmingly printed and illustrated by chromo-lithography--in which
    the art of drawing foliage is very pithily but neatly set forth.
    The letterpress descriptions are remarkably well written."--_Pictorial
    World._

    "We commend them most heartily to all persons of taste who may be
    wanting to cultivate the great accomplishment of Water-color
    Drawing, or who want a gift-book for a lad or girl taking up the
    study."--_Schoolmaster._


ADVANCED STUDIES IN FLOWER PAINTING.

By ADA HANBURY. A Series of Twelve beautifully finished Examples in
Colors, and numerous Outlines in pencil. With full Instructions for
Painting, and a description of each plant by BLANCHE HANBURY. 4to,
cloth elegant, 7_s._ 6_d._

    "Apart from its educational value in art training this is a lovely
    book: we have seen nothing to equal the coloured plates."--_Sheffield
    Independent._

    "The handsomest and most instructive volume of the series yet
    produced."--_Daily Chronicle._

    "Coloured sketches of flowers which it is literally no exaggeration
    to term exquisite."--_Knowledge._


ILLUMINATING.

Nine examples in Colors and Gold of ancient Illuminating of the best
periods, with numerous Illustrations in Outline, Historical Notes and
full descriptions and instructions by Rev. W. J. LOFTIE, B.A., F.S.A.
In Four Parts 4to, 1_s._ each; or one volume, cloth elegant, 6_s._


EASY STUDIES IN WATER-COLOR PAINTING.

By R. P. LEITCH and J. CALLOW. A Series of Nine Pictures executed in
Neutral Tints. With full Instructions for drawing each subject, and for
sketching from Nature. 4to, cloth elegant, 6_s._


SKETCHES IN WATER-COLORS.

By T. M. RICHARDSON, R. P. LEITCH, J. A. HOUSTON, T. L. ROWBOTHAM, E.
DUNCAN, and J. NEEDHAM. A Series of Nine Pictures executed in Colors.
With full Instructions for drawing each subject, by an experienced
Teacher. 4to, cl. eleg., 6_s._

    "To those who wish to become proficient in the art of water-color
    painting no better instructor could be recommended than these two
    series."--_Newcastle Chronicle._




BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS

_Classified according to Price._

ELEGANTLY BOUND IN EXTRA CLOTH.


Books at 7s. 6d.

The Universe; or The Infinitely Great and Infinitely Little. By F.
A. POUCHET, M.D. Advanced Studies in Flower Painting.


Books at 6s.

  The Lion of the North. By G. A. HENTY.
  Through the Fray. By G. A. HENTY.
  In Freedom's Cause. By G. A. HENTY.
  With Clive in India. By G. A. HENTY.
  True to the Old Flag. By G. A. HENTY.
  Under Drake's Flag. By G. A. HENTY.
  Two Thousand Years Ago. By Prof. A. J. CHURCH.
  Brownsmith's Boy. By G. M. FENN.
  Bunyip Land. By G. MANVILLE FENN.
  The Golden Magnet. By G. M. FENN.
  In the King's Name. By G. M. FENN.
  Robinson Crusoe. Over 100 Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE.
  Lessons in the Art of Illuminating.
  Easy Studies in Water-Colors.
  Sketches in Water-Colors.


Books at 5s.

  Gulliver's Travels. Over 100 Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE.
  For Name and Fame. By G. A. HENTY.
  The Dragon and the Raven. By G. A HENTY.
  St. George for England. By G. A. HENTY.
  By Sheer Pluck. By G. A. HENTY.
  Facing Death. By G. A. HENTY.
  The Congo Rovers. By H. COLLINGWOOD.
  The Pirate Island. By H. COLLINGWOOD.
  Patience Wins. By G. M. FENN.
  Menhardoc. By G. MANVILLE FENN.
  Nat the Naturalist. By G. M. FENN.
  Wigwam and War-Path. By ASCOTT R. HOPE.
  Stories of Old Renown. By A. R. HOPE.
  Studies of Trees in Pencil and Water-Colors. Two Series.


Book at 4s.

  Painting for Beginners, 2nd Stage.


Books at 3s. 6d.

  Search for the Talisman. By H. FRITH.
  Silver Mill. By Mrs. R. H. READ.
  The Wreck of the Nancy Bell. By J. C. HUTCHESON.
  Picked up at Sea. By J. C. HUTCHESON.
  Dr. Jolliffe's Boys. By LEWIS HOUGH.
  Traitor or Patriot? By M. C. ROWSELL.
  Brother and Sister. By Mrs. LYSAGHT.
  Dora. By Mrs. R. H. READ.
  Cheep and Chatter. By ALICE BANKS.
  Garnered Sheaves. By Mrs. PITMAN.
  Life's Daily Ministry. By Mrs. PITMAN.
  Florence Godfrey's Faith. By DO.
  My Governess Life. By Mrs. PITMAN.


Books at 3s.

  Simple Lessons in Flower Painting.
  Simple Lessons in Marine Painting.
  Simple Lessons in Landscape Painting.


Books at 2s. 6d.

  Gytha's Message. By EMMA LESLIE.
  My Mistress the Queen. By M. A. PAULL.
  Brothers in Arms. By F. B. HARRISON.
  Winnie's Secret. By KATE WOOD.
  Miss Fenwick's Failures. By   ESME STUART.
  Jack o' Lanthorn. By HENRY FRITH.
  A Waif of the Sea. By KATE WOOD.
  Hetty Gray. By ROSA MULHOLLAND.
  The Ball of Fortune. By CHAS. PEARCE.
  The Family Failing. By DARLEY DALE.
  Famous Discoveries.
  Stirring Events in History.
  Stories of the Sea in Former Days.
  Adventures in Field, Flood, and Forest.
  Painting for Beginners, 1st Stage.


Books at 2s.

  The Penang Pirate. By J. C. HUTCHESON.
  Little Tottie. By THOMAS ARCHER.
  Marie's Home. By Mrs. AUSTIN.
  Warner's Chase. By ANNIE S. SWAN.
  The Wings of Courage. By GEORGE SAND.
  Four Little Mischiefs. By ROSA MULHOLLAND.
  Mrs. Wishing-to-be. By ALICE CORKRAN.
  Magna Charta Stories.
  New Light through Old Windows. By GREGSON GOW.
  Our Dolly. By Mrs. R. H. READ.
  Fairy Fancy. By Mrs. R. H. READ.
  Naughty Miss Bunny. By CLARA MULHOLLAND.


Books at 1s. 6d.

  A Terrible Coward. By G. M. FENN.
  Yarns on the Beach. By G. A. HENTY.
  Miss Grantley's Girls. By T. ARCHER.
  The Pedlar and his Dog. By MARY C. ROWSELL.
  Tom Finch's Monkey. By J. C. HUTCHESON.
  Down and Up Again. By GREGSON GOW.
  Little Tim. By GREGSON GOW.
  Madge's Mistake. By ANNIE E. ARMSTRONG.
  The Happy Lad. By BJOeRNSON.
  Into the Haven. By ANNIE S. SWAN.
  Box of Stories. Packed by HORACE HAPPYMAN.
  The Patriot Martyr: and other Narratives of Female Heroism.


Books at 1s.

  A Little Adventurer.
  Olive Mount.
  Two Little Brothers.
  Three Little Ones: their Haps and Mishaps.
  Tom Watkins' Mistake.
  The New Boy at Merriton.
  The Blind Boy of Dresden and his Sister.
  Jon of Iceland: A True Story.
  Stories from Shakespeare.
  Every Man in His Place.
  Fireside Fairies and Flower Fancies.
  To the Sea in Ships.
  Little Daniel: a Story of a Flood on the Rhine.
  Jack's Victory: Stories about Dogs.
  The Story of a King: told by one of his Soldiers.
  Prince Alexis, or "Beauty and the Beast."
  Sasha the Serf: Stories of Russian Life.
  True Stories of Foreign History.


Also, the SIXPENNY SERIES, 18 Books, and the _Fourpenny Series_, 12
Books. See List at pages 35 and 36.


  LONDON: BLACKIE & SON, 49 OLD BAILEY, E.C.;
  GLASGOW, EDINBURGH, AND DUBLIN.






End of Project Gutenberg's Blackie & Sons Catalogue - 1886, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLACKIE & SONS CATALOGUE - 1886 ***

***** This file should be named 36411.txt or 36411.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/4/1/36411/

Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
