The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nineteenth Century Apostle of the
Little Ones, by E. Uhlrich

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Nineteenth Century Apostle of the Little Ones

Author: E. Uhlrich

Release Date: June 16, 2011 [EBook #36449]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK
THE NINETEENTH CENTURY APOSTLE OF THE LITTLE ONES ***




Produced by Michael Gray, Diocese of San Jose




THE NINETEENTH CENTURY APOSTLE OF THE LITTLE ONES.

BY E. UHLRICH.



An article published in THE CATHOLIC WORLD in 1903, about Don Bosco.
Today, he is better known as Saint John Bosco, the patron saint of young
people.

[Illustration: Don Bosco and Bartholomew Garelli.]


WHEN one man in his lifetime has cared for, trained, and sent out into
the world, as useful and law-abiding citizens, ten million children,
then the attention of people may well be drawn to him again and again,
for it is the lives of such men that keep the heart of the world from
despair.

He who was to have such wonderful sympathy and even more wonderful
influence on neglected and unfortunate childhood and youth, began his
life as a poor, hardworking boy, even as St. Vincent de Paul did in his
day. Giovanni Bosco was his name, and he was the son of humble peasants
and herded his father's sheep until he was fifteen years old. Then a
kindly priest discovered the boy's unusual gifts of mind and heart, and
taught him the elements of Latin and Greek. After that Giovanni was sent
to the seminary at Chieri, where he was ordained to the priesthood in
1841. Full of zeal to fit himself for his work as a shepherd of souls,
he went to Turin and entered an institute for the training of priests in
practical work.

It is notable that his first experience was in visiting prisons. Here
his heart and mind were touched by the spectacle of the many youthful
criminals he met, and he was constantly thinking how to reclaim them
and, even more important, how to prevent them from entering upon
criminal ways at all.

It was on the 8th of December, in 1841, that Don Bosco found, in a most
humble occurrence, the occasion which showed him the mission for which
God had destined him. It was, as so often happens, but a simple thing;
but, when we are open to the guidance of the Divine Will, the simplest
things may have the greatest import. There was no boy to serve his Mass,
and a street-boy, who happened to look into the sacristy, was asked by
the sexton to do so.

"I do not know how," said the boy.

"Never mind," said the sexton; "I'll show you what to do."

"But I never was at Mass before."

"Stupid creature!" said the sexton, angry now, "what are you doing here
then?" And he boxed the boy's ears so hard that the little fellow went
off crying. At this Don Bosco turned around and reproved the astonished
sexton for his crossness.

"But what difference does that make to your reverence?"

"It makes a great deal of difference to me, for that boy is my friend.
Call him back at once; I must talk to him."

The sexton did so and the poor boy came back; Don Bosco asked him kindly
if he had never heard Mass before, and he said "No."

"Then," said Don Bosco, "stay for this Mass which I am going to
celebrate, and when it is over I shall talk to you a little while, if
you will wait."

The boy, whose heart had been won by Don Bosco's kindly manner, gladly
agreed to stay.

After Mass, Don Bosco said to him: "What is your name, my little
friend?"

"Bartolomeo Garelli."

"Where are you from?"

"Asti."

"Is your father still living?"

"No, he is dead."

"And your mother?"

"She is dead too."

"How old are you?"

"I am fifteen years old."

"Can you read and write?"

"I don't know anything at all."

"Did you make your first Communion?"

"No, not yet."

"Did you ever go to confession?"

"I did when I was very little."

"Why don't you go to Sunday-school?"

"I am ashamed because the other boys are all younger than I am and know
so much more, and I always have such old clothes."

"If I were to teach you all by yourself, would you like to come?"

"Oh I would be very glad to come, if no one would box my ears for
coming."

"You need not be afraid of any one. You are my friend now; no one else
will have anything to say to you. When shall we begin?"

"Whenever it pleases you, father."

"Very well, we will begin at once."

Don Bosco found that the boy did not even know how to make the sign of
the cross. Yet this poor, untaught child of the street became the
corner-stone, so to say, of Don Bosco's life-work. In a little while
Bartolomeo brought friends of his along, and they in turn brought their
friends. By the 25th of March, in 1842, there were thirty members of Don
Bosco's class. Some of them were apprentices to the different trades,
some were street vagabonds, and some of them grown men. The next year
there were three hundred of them. Don Bosco had to find a place of
meeting larger than his little sacristy; but, alas! no sooner was he
well established in his new quarters than notice was given him to move.

People insisted that they did not want him and his noisy, disreputable
vagabonds in their own respectable neighborhood. When, at last, there
seemed no hope of finding a suitable meeting place in the city for his
boys he did not despair. For two months, each Sunday he led them out
into the suburbs of Turin, said Mass for them in some church, then
taught them under the open sky. Afterwards he let them play games and
amuse themselves, and in the evening the whole crowd went back into the
city, singing hymns as they went.

In 1844, with the help of some kindly priests, Don Bosco opened the
first night schools, teaching reading, writing, and arithmetic. These
schools were soon imitated all over Italy.

Don Bosco, however, continued to meet with trials and tribulations in
his work, as seems true in every good cause. His plans were so novel and
so large that he was even accused of being crazy. A crazy man, however,
ought to be out of harm's way, and so it was quietly arranged that Don
Bosco should be taken to an insane asylum. Two prominent gentlemen of
Turin were to manage his transfer to the asylum. They hired a closed
carriage and drove to Don Bosco's house. He received them very kindly,
and soon was talking to them enthusiastically about the oratorium and
the great church he wanted to build, the schools and the workshops which
would be grouped around this centre. He spoke so glowingly that one
could have thought he saw the whole thing before his eyes. The gentlemen
looked at each other knowingly, as if to say: "It is plain that he is
out of his mind."

"A little fresh air will be good for you, Don Bosco," one of them
ventured. "We have a carriage outside. You might drive a little way with
us."

Don Bosco smiled and went out with the two gentlemen. They stepped back
in order to let him enter first, but he begged them to precede him. They
did so and then Don Bosco hastily shut the carriage door and called out
to the driver, "Ready."

The driver had been instructed to drive to the asylum as fast as the
horses could go, and not to mind any possible protests or resistance. So
he started off at a gallop at Don Bosco's word.

When the carriage arrived at the asylum, the gentlemen inside were in
such a rage that the superintendent ordered them put into separate cells
at once, and, if necessary, in straitjackets. Luckily for them, the
chaplain of the asylum knew them, and they were let go about their
business. However, they at least were convinced that Don Bosco was saner
than some people thought him, and did not wish to be the agents of any
more forced cures for him.

Don Bosco's trials now took another form. The police of Turin began to
take note of his boys and to suspect in them potential socialists.
Indeed, the very existence of the work was threatened, when King Charles
Albert, then King of Sardinia, took personal action in behalf of "Don
Bosco's young rogues," as he put it, and even sent sixty dollars to help
the work along. With that the worst storms were over. Don Bosco
organized his Oratorium of St. Francis of Sales, as he called his
meeting place, for he had a special devotion to St. Francis. He chose
the name "Oratorium" because the earliest meetings were in the chapel in
which he met that first, pitifully ignorant street boy.

In the spring of 1846, however, he was homeless once more--put out again
for the sake of his boys. Thereupon he leased a piece of enclosed land
outside of the city. Here, in the open air, under the free sky, the
Sunday meetings were again held undisturbed. Early in the morning Don
Bosco was there, seated on a grassy mound and hearing confessions. Some
of the boys were kneeling near by, waiting their turn, others were
saying their prayers, and still others, farther away, were quietly
playing. At nine o'clock Don Bosco called his boys together. He had no
bell, so one of the boys beat on an ancient drum as a signal. Then he
separated them into little divisions, and sent each division into a
particular church to hear Mass. Later they returned, and there was
Sunday-school, games, and singing.

After awhile a little shed near by was rented and arranged for a chapel.
In the fall of 1846 he added a few rooms, and thus he began his first
school. To be sure the boys' dormitory was nothing but a hayloft pressed
into service, while the housekeeper was Don Bosco's sturdy peasant
mother, who had come to the city to help on the work of her beloved son.

In 1851 he was able to build a church dedicated to St. Francis de Sales,
and two new houses.

Now there is a magnificent group of buildings on this same land. The
church is in the centre; two imposing wings are the "Oratorium," of
which Don Bosco had dreamed and talked so enthusiastically that once
people even thought him crazy. The dream has more than come true. There
is a little town in itself here. All about are buildings representing
various kinds of trades and activity. There is a great printing
establishment with ten presses, a book bindery, a large locksmith shop,
a carpentering shop, a shoe factory, and a tailoring establishment.
There are, moreover, libraries, study-rooms, classrooms, dormitories,
gardens, and playgrounds. Over one thousand people live here and follow
their various employments.

Don Bosco is dead; he died on January 31, 1888. But his work went on
under Don Michelle Rua, who was himself an orphan, raised and trained by
Don Bosco. Here, in the mother house, are some thirty Salesian priests,
as the members of the congregation founded by Don Bosco, at the
suggestion of Minister Ratazzi, are called; nearly two hundred Salesian
brothers, who are the master workmen, and four hundred students. In
addition to the resident pupils that are being trained and cared for,
about five hundred boys and apprentices spend their Sundays and
recreation hours at the institution, something in the way in which
children in this country go to the Settlements that have been
established here and there in the large cities.

More than one hundred and fifty of these institutions were founded by
Don Bosco in Italy, France, Spain, the Tyrol, and England. He also
founded a sisterhood, so as to be able to take care of young girls as
well as of boys, and to help in the missions which he established in
South America, especially in Patagonia, where fourteen thousand savages
were baptized by his missionaries before Don Bosco's death. Latterly the
sisterhood he founded has been working among the neglected Italians in
this country too, especially in New Orleans, and there are Salesian
Fathers of Don Bosco in New York City. This special missionary work,
however, was not counted in the general estimate of the ten million
children saved by Don Bosco.

Every year eighteen thousand apprentices leave his institutions and go
out to work, trained in body and mind for contact with the world.

As a means of maintaining his work, Don Bosco founded a third society to
which men and women, lay or clerical, can belong, their object being to
help provide means for this great work, and the Holy Father himself
belongs to this third society.

In appearance Don Bosco, the simple country boy, who was destined to do
this great work in this day and age, and to show the world one true way
of helping to solve the problems of labor and capital and government
that disturb the nations of the earth so much now, was a tall man of
very pleasing features and manner. He was not very eloquent as a talker,
but his heart was filled with a heavenly love for poor and unhappy
childhood. Few of us are so limited in means, or in opportunity, but we
can follow him a little way. Even the young children who go to Sunday-school
often know, or could easily learn, of some neglected child that
has perhaps no parents, or has parents who have no faith, and which
therefore hears nothing of religion and of right. Like Garelli, Don
Bosco's first pupil and follower, regular Sunday-school children could
take such a child to their own Sunday-school. The children of the
Paulist Sunday-school in New York City, for instance, are constantly
encouraged to bring with them any child they know which does not go to
Sunday-school in any other place. If, in addition to its spiritual
neglect, the child is in bodily want, bringing it to Sunday-school
attracts the attention of older people who are able, on occasion, to
give it material as well as spiritual help.

To those of us who are older, surely there can be no greater appeal than
that of childhood for love and instruction. To withhold these is a more
bitter injustice even than to withhold food and clothing. The one causes
the body to suffer, but the other may mean the death of the soul, and
delivers the body to the lawlessness and to the excesses that lead to
untimely death in one generation and help on that lamentable
degeneration--physically, morally, and mentally--in the succeeding
generations which is, to-day, one of the most discouraging questions in
the dark problems of the great cities.

And it must always be remembered that among the poor and the unfortunate
the inspiration for better things must come from those who have more
than they of means, of time, of intelligence, and, above all, of
devotion.

In every age God seems to have raised up men with a genius for holiness,
to speak to the people according to the needs of their day. And thus, in
a century in which the powers of darkness were directed towards
destroying childhood and youth by godless teaching, and by lack of any
teaching at all, either sacred or profane, the providence of Divine Love
raised up the humble peasant priest of Turin as an apostle to youth and
a bulwark against its enemies.

There is a vast margin for the following and the extension of his
example right here among us. We have with us always, not only the
unfortunate and neglected little ones of every race and color on the
earth, but, even more pitiable, those little ones who, by nature and
inheritance, would be with us, as a matter of course, were it not for
the careless drifting of their parents on the easy and pleasant current
of indifference, that spiritual sluggishness in some ways more
reprehensible and certainly less respectable than honest doubt or
definite unbelief.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nineteenth Century Apostle of the
Little Ones, by E. Uhlrich

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK
THE NINETEENTH CENTURY APOSTLE OF THE LITTLE ONES ***

***** This file should be named 36449.txt or 36449.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/4/4/36449/

Produced by Michael Gray, Diocese of San Jose

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
