The Project Gutenberg EBook of Riches of Grace, by E. E. Byrum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Riches of Grace
       A Compilation of Experiences in the Christian Life

Author: E. E. Byrum

Release Date: June 20, 2011 [EBook #36476]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RICHES OF GRACE ***




Produced by David Garcia, Joel Erickson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





CHRISTIAN LIFE SERIES






Riches of Grace

  A Compilation of Experiences in the Christian Life--A Narration
  of Trials and Victories Along the Way


BY E. E. BYRUM

       *       *       *       *       *

    By grace are ye saved through faith.--Eph 2:8.


    Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may
    obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.--Heb. 4:16.

       *       *       *       *       *

  GOSPEL TRUMPET COMPANY
  Anderson, Indiana, U. S. A.


  Copyright, 1918
  BY
  E. E. Byrum


  Riches of Grace                                            (Cloth) $1.00

  OTHER BOOKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR

  Startling Incidents and Experiences in the Christian Life  (Cloth) $1.00
  The Ordinances of the Bible                                (Cloth)   .40
  How We Got Our Bible                                       (Paper)   .10
  What Shall I Do To Be Saved?                               (Cloth)   .35
  The Secret of Salvation: How to Get It and How to Keep It  (Cloth)   .60




CONTENTS


                                                                Page

   1. The Joy and Blessings of a Christian Life                   13
   2. Experience of a Minister                                    21
   3. The Testimony of a Prisoner                                 55
   4. A Little Chinese Girl                                       59
   5. Persecutions and Victories of an Evangelist                 69
   6. The Secret of a Perfect Life                                89
   7. Conversion of a Young Jewish Rabbi                          99
   8. Among Mohammedans in Egypt                                 129
   9. A Daughter's Faith Rewarded                                141
  10. Missionary Experiences in British West Indies              145
  11. The Rescue of an Australian Lad                            155
  12. Heathen Customs in China                                   159
  13. Deliverance from Discouragements and Extremism             167
  14. Liberated from Faultfinding                                199
  15. Help from God in Fiery Trials                              205
  16. Experience of a School-Teacher in India                    235
  17. Unconquered Will Won by Love                               237
  18. An Experience of a Hundred Years Ago                       245
  19. An Indian Mother's Submission                              253
  20. The Conversion of My Father                                257
  21. My Spiritual Struggles and Victories                       271
  22. Thought He had Sinned away His Day of Grace                283
  23. Spiritual Tests                                            293
  24. The Confession of a Murderer                               301
  25. Making a Complete Surrender                                307
  26. Interesting Narratives and Helpful Instruction             313
      _a._ Failed to Forgive Those Who Wronged Him               315
      _b._ Despondency and Discouragement                        316
      _c._ Unnecessary Self-Accusations                          318
      _d._ Troubled about Making Confessions                     319
      _e._ Accused God of Not Being Just                         323
      _f._ When the Tempter Comes Oftenest                       324
      _g._ Trials Made Stepping-Stones to Greater Victories      325
  27. Zion's Bank (A Poem)                                       331




Author's Preface


To be right with God and to have a constant knowledge of his approval is
the desire of every Christian. Many people deep in sin and others honest
at heart have a longing to live a righteous life, but they have always
found obstacles in their pathway and have been defeated in every
attempt.

In the preparation of this volume the author has aimed to refer to such
obstacles and hindrances in the lives of others, so that any one passing
through a trial or laboring under a heavy burden or oppression may, by
reading these narratives, learn how to find relief.

A lady who was victor over many trials and impositions of the enemy, and
who knew that I had been passing through some severe ordeals, said to
me: "It does me good, and is a source of great encouragement, even to
know that you and others who are supposed to be strong in faith have
trials and severe testings occasionally." It is hoped that the trials
and the victories mentioned herein will be not only a source of
encouragement to others but such an inspiration to their faith that they
will be enabled to understand and do the will of God.

This book is a compilation of experiences from people in various parts
of the world who have written by special request of the author. The fact
that they were written by people in China, India, Australia, Egypt, West
Indies, and other countries, is evidence that although the environment
and circumstances may differ, yet God is everywhere the same to fulfil
the promises given in his Word, in all countries and among the people
of every nation. Although the names and addresses are not given, the
experiences are genuine, and the author will take pleasure in furnishing
information concerning any of them.

The "Experience of a Hundred Years Ago," given on page 245 was taken
from an old book that in my early childhood days I often saw my mother
read. The book was old and worn long before I was born, and I have only
a few pages as a relic of early remembrances. It was entitled "The
Riches of Grace."

No doubt the title of this old book, together with a knowledge of the
comfort and consolation that my mother received from reading the many
Christian experiences it contained, contributed to my inspiration in
presenting these pages for the benefit of others.

I hereby acknowledge my indebtedness and heartfelt thanks to those who
have so kindly contributed to this compilation of experiences, and I
trust that every burdened soul that reads these experiences may take
courage and may henceforth abound in the riches of the grace of God.

Yours for a victorious life,

  E. E. BYRUM.

  Anderson, Indiana, January 16, 1918.




RICHES OF GRACE




The Joy and Blessings of a Christian Life

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 1


The pathway of life has its shadows and sunshine, its pleasures and
sorrows; and in the Christian life, I am convinced, many people live in
the shadow more than in the sunshine, when they could very well have it
otherwise.

When I was about thirteen years of age, I yielded myself to the Lord and
made a decision to spend my life in his service. Since that time, like
Christian in Bunyan's "Pilgrim's Progress," I have met with many and
varied experiences; but one beautiful encouraging thought has been that,
no matter how hard my trials, how near my strength was gone, nor how
little my courage lacked of failing, just at that time, when I was the
most helpless, God was always present to help either by his Spirit or by
sending one of his servants to encourage and strengthen me.

I have, indeed, found the Christian life to be a warfare. Every
individual who enlists in the service of the Lord will have the forces
of evil to battle against, but God has made provision whereby every
child of God can be an overcomer in every conflict. The one who has a
firm decision to be true at any cost will receive such power and help
that Satan can not prevent him from serving the Lord. The enemy may
try to hinder by causing trials, difficulties, and perplexities, and
at times the way may seem dark, with no apparent hope of day; but our
God, who is mighty, will turn all these seeming hindrances into real
blessings and make them stepping-stones to glory.

In my youthful days I felt a deep desire to work for God and longed to
fill some place in life where I could feel that I not only was living a
life of salvation, but was really engaged in my Master's service. As I
knelt in earnest prayer and consecrated myself fully to the Lord for him
to direct me as seemed best, a dark sorrow filled my heart; for Satan
whispered: "You are too young. You can not stand against the powers of
evil that all young people must meet. Your covenant with the Lord is too
great for you to keep." But with tears I cried unto the Lord to know if
these suggestions were true. At that moment the Lord gave me the
assurance that if I decided to serve him he would teach me how to do so.
He would give me grace in every time of need.

Some time after this I became very ill and knew unless God came to
my aid I should soon have to leave this world. As I thought of my
condition, a joy filled my soul that I might soon be with the Lord.
With this joy came also a sadness, as I realized that I had done nothing
in the vineyard of the Lord. It seemed that I could not bear to go
empty-handed. I prayed God to spare my life that I might work for him.
He graciously and instantly touched my body with his healing power, and
in a few days I was able to attend school.

Once I was about to make a decision and take a step that would have
hindered me from filling the place the Lord designed I should fill. At
that moment the Lord made known to me by his Holy Spirit in such a way
that I could not question his leadings that he had called me to his
service, and also made known to me the place that I was chosen to fill.
Immediately I was reminded of my covenant with the Lord, although I had
to stand against the pleadings and earnest entreaties of some of my very
dear friends.

Before this I had decided not to leave my mother, but to work near
my home so that I could readily respond in case of sickness. After
considerable meditation about the matter of leaving my father and
mother, brothers and sisters, in order to take up my work for the Lord,
the matter became very serious. Finally I went to the Lord one morning
in earnest prayer. I shall never forget that season of prayer, when I
seemed to be in the direct presence of the Lord. My consecration was
put to a test as one question after another was presented, as to whether
or not I should be willing to die, to really give my life, if God so
designed, that my unsaved loved ones might be saved, or to do the same
for lost souls who were not dear to me according to the ties of nature.
And again, should I be willing to give my life for lost sinners and
have them scoff and spurn me? These were hard questions, but my heart
said: "Lord, thy will be done. Where thou leadest I will follow." I was
solemnly impressed with the thought: Jesus came to save a lost world,
but they crucified him; instead of accepting his love, they rejected it.

Within a short time I had the matter settled beyond a doubt that the
time had come for me to enter upon the mission whereunto the Lord had
called me. The way began to open before me, and as I bid loved ones
farewell, a sweet assurance filled my soul that my decision and action
was in accordance with His will. It gave me much sorrow to leave home,
but God so blessed and directed me that I have never been sorry that I
obeyed his voice. Over and over I have proved that God's way is best.
His way may cause pain and sorrow at times, which we may not be able to
understand, but in the end we can know of a truth that God has caused
all things to work together for our good and for his glory.

At one time I was very much tested, and discouragements presented
themselves. I was trying hard to be an overcomer and to cast every
burden upon the Lord. The enemy would suggest that it was of no use for
me to try to stand against the things that were oppressing me and that
it would be better to surrender, and even give place to discouragements,
and that even though I should come out a conqueror later, no one would
ever know anything about it. At first this suggestion seemed plausible,
but upon further consideration I said: "No, I will not surrender. If no
one else ever knows, I will know, God will know, and the devil will
know, that I stood true and came out victorious." This experience has
since that time often been a real encouragement to me.

At another time I had for weeks been passing through real testing times.
Occasionally the trials would lift and God would bless my soul, but
again the darkness of depressions would settle over me. I began to weary
and to long for deliverance. The suggestion came that it would be better
for me to cease serving God and never to try again. Over and over
something whispered that there was no use to continue; that if others
who were older and better qualified fell by the wayside and could not
stand, there was positively no use in my trying. Finally the enemy
insisted that there was nothing else for me to do than to give up, and
that, after all, I was in a deplorable spiritual condition; that there
was no hope for me. At this point I discerned that it was the enemy,
and, kneeling before God, I promised him that if he could get more glory
out of my life by my being in such a trial all the rest of my days,
I was willing to submit to the trial. When I came to this decision my
trial vanished suddenly, and God poured the glory into my soul and
the victory was far sweeter than the trial had been bitter.

Sometimes I have had trials in which I could see no good nor from which
I could not perceive how any good could possibly result; but later I
would be enabled to know that those very trials were worth more to me
than any treasure this earth could afford.

As I look upon my past life and see how mercifully God has dealt with
me, how he has guided and protected, and how he has shielded me from the
power of the tempter, my heart cries out, "What a mighty God! What a
great and loving Father!" Counting my blessings, I find they so far
outnumber my trials that it brings me real courage to press on, knowing,
as I do, that grace will be given me to meet whatever may yet lie in my
pathway. "For there hath no temptation taken you but such as is common
to man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to
escape, that ye may be able to bear it" (1 Cor. 10:13).




Experiences of a Minister

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 2


A careworn woman once asked a philosopher how she might obtain relief
from and victory over the trials and sorrows of life. He said to her,
"Fetch me a cup of salt from some home where sorrow and care has never
entered, and I will then tell you the secret of victory." After a long
and weary journey, she returned to him saying that she had given up the
search in despair; for in all her travels she found no home entirely
free from care and sorrow. Like this poor woman, I once longed and
sought for some state or condition in life where I might be free from
the cares and perplexities that distressed me, but my search too seemed
fruitless. At last, after many disappointments, I found the more
excellent way of victory over my trials through simple, trusting faith
in Him who notes even the sparrow's fall.

Before I fully learned this lesson, there were times in my life when it
seemed I was on the verge of despair, so severe were my trials. As I now
look back to those scenes and experiences, there come to my mind the
pathetic lines of Longfellow's poem "The Bridge."


  For my heart was hot and restless,
    And my life was full of care,
  And the burden laid upon me
    Seemed greater than I could bear.

  But now it has fallen from me,
    It is buried in the sea;
  And only the sorrow of others
    Throws its shadow over me.

  And I think how many thousands
    Of care-encumbered men,
  Each bearing his burden of sorrow,
    Have crossed the bridge since then.


For the sake of the many thousands who are still trying to bear their
own burdens, I send forth the following account of some of my life's
experiences. I trust the Lord may use it to help some on their way to
the feet of Him who said, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are
heavy-laden, and I will give you rest" (Matt. 11:28).

There are doubtless thousands whose sins have been forgiven, but
who have not yet learned by actual experience the precious privilege
expressed in these words: "Casting all your care upon him, for he careth
for you" (1 Pet. 5:7). An old lady was once trudging along a hot and
dusty highway carrying a heavy basket. She was soon overtaken by a kind
man, who invited her to take a seat in the rear of his carriage. After
some time had passed, he looked back to see how his passenger was
getting along, when he was astonished to see her holding that heavy
basket on her lap. "Grandma," said he, "there is plenty of room; why do
you not set your basket down?" "Oh," she replied, "you are so kind to
take me in that I thought I would make the load as light as possible for
your horses, so I concluded to carry the basket myself." We may smile at
her reply, yet many who have trusted the Lord to forgive their sins, are
nevertheless trying still to carry their own burdens.


MY CONVERSION

In early childhood I was taught to pray and to reverence God's Word.
I was deeply impressed with the truths that I learned at Sunday-school.
Even as a child I loved the preaching-service, and the Word of God made
a strong and lasting impression upon my mind.

When I was about ten years old, a revival was held in my home community.
At an afternoon service, held especially for the children, I responded
to the altar-call, and there I was completely broken up, the tears
running in profusion down my face. My dear mother knelt by my side:
"My boy," she said, "if you should desire anything good that I could
bestow upon you, would you ask me for it?" I promptly replied in the
affirmative. "Then," she continued, "would you believe that your request
would be granted?" Again I answered in the affirmative. "That is the way
to receive God's blessings," she said. "Now, when you ask the Lord to
forgive your sins, believe that he hears and answers your prayer."
In simple, child-like faith I believed the promise, and the peace of
God gently flooded my soul. One of the most prominent features of my
childhood experience was the peculiar love I felt for every one.
I longed to see my companions saved.


EARLY TRIALS

Soon after my conversion and before that special series of meetings
closed, I heard the pastor relate the experience of a certain boy who
had sought and found the Lord. He said that after a period of earnest
seeking, all the darkness was instantly dispelled and the boy was
wonderfully saved. Judging from this vivid description, I decided
that the boy must have witnessed some sudden manifestation of light.
Immediately I began to doubt my experience. I was still more disturbed
when I saw older persons struggling night after night at the altar and
then finally experiencing some powerful emotions which seemed to be far
more wonderful than anything that I had experienced. Sometimes I wished
that I too might go to the altar again and pray and struggle until some
wonderful demonstration should be given to me; but I was naturally
backward and timid, and could scarcely make up my mind to go through
such an ordeal of struggling as I had witnessed in some of more mature
years.


ENCOURAGEMENTS

Although at times I was greatly distressed, yet often when I was in
secret prayer, my heart was greatly comforted and I experienced seasons
of quiet, peaceful blessings. I noticed, too, that some who had
wonderful outward demonstrations at the time they were converted, did
not hold out very long, but soon drifted back into sin, while in my own
heart the desire still remained to be true to the Lord.


CONFLICTS

I did not, however, enjoy constant victory. At times I gave way to
ill-temper or selfish motives. My conscience being tender, I often felt
instant condemnation after yielding to these things, and then I would
pour out my heart in secret prayer for forgiveness and for grace and
strength to resist the temptation more successfully the next time. I
remember, also, occasions when, upon the approach of temptation, I would
steal away to the secret place of prayer and ask for strength to keep me
sweet in my soul. I could then go forth to meet my trials with the
utmost calmness and serenity, and victory then seemed easy.

Although I had a Christian home, yet sorrows and trials came into my
young life, very painful ones at times. How often I would seek the place
of prayer and there in simple, child-like faith unburden my heart to the
Lord. Whenever I called upon him, he always gave me relief and never
failed to provide a way of escape from every temptation and difficulty.

  "In seasons of distress and grief,
  My soul has often found relief,
  And oft escaped the tempter's snare,
  By thy return, sweet hour of prayer."


HEALING

Although I had never received any definite teaching on the subject of
divine healing, yet almost intuitively, it seems, I would call upon the
Lord for help when afflicted, and would receive the needed help. Several
times my mother seemed to be at the point of death. With troubled heart,
I sought the place of prayer to tell the Lord all about it. My heart was
comforted, my prayers were answered, and Mother was spared.


CALL TO THE MINISTRY

Even in childhood I learned to pray and to testify in public. At first
these things were very hard for me, owing to my timid disposition.
However, I was always blessed in the effort. The impression came to me
early in life that some day I should preach the gospel; in fact, I would
occasionally find myself mentally addressing an imaginary audience. Many
of my acquaintances also were impressed that the ministry would be my
life-work.


DRIFTING

As time went on, formality again found its way into our meetings, and I
also imbibed its spirit. My conscience was no longer as tender as it had
been, and I actually indulged in things that were sinful. Still I kept
up my profession, attended the services, testified and prayed in public,
and was generally counted a good Christian.


CONVICTION

At last a humble man of God became our pastor. Without fear, and yet in
gentleness and meekness, he preached the Word of God as far as he had
light. As I sat under his preaching, the truth went straight to my
heart, and I began to see my lack. The revival meeting had now begun,
and I saw that I must either serve God in earnest, obeying him in all
things, or quit professing.


RECLAIMED

One night after services, while on the way to my room, I resolved to get
where the Lord would have me to be even if I should have to pray all
night. I began; but the more I prayed the worse I felt. I was shown one
thing after another that I should have to give up or make right if I
would enjoy God's favor. About the midnight hour, I had said the last
yes to God, and then came the test of faith. That very evening I had
heard the minister instructing seekers to give up all sin, to ask God's
forgiveness, and then to believe his promise that he forgives and
saves, whether any change was noticed in the feelings or not; and
although I had always longed for the great emotions I thought others had
experienced, yet in the absence of any particular feeling, I was willing
to believe God's promise.

When I first began to pray, I was conscious of a great deal of fear,
which deepened until it seemed I was almost in despair; but as I yielded
my will to God's will, all fears subsided, and just before I grasped the
promise, I was void of any particular emotion. It seemed to please the
Lord to take this plan to teach me that, after all, salvation does not
come by feeling. Then calmly and quietly I laid hold upon the promise,
"If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness" (1 John 1:9). I said to the
Lord, "Now I am willing to forsake all sin and do all thou wouldst have
me to do; and although I do not feel any great change, yet I believe
that, according to thy Word, thou dost save me now." Quietly but
earnestly I said from the depths of my heart, "Jesus saves me now."
In a short time the peace of God gently flooded my soul, and I knew
that my sins were forgiven.

After spending some time in peaceful communion with God, I went to
sleep, knowing beyond a doubt that if I should never awaken, my spirit
would immediately take its flight to the realms of the blest. In my
gratitude, the tears streamed down my face, and I wondered how I had
ever been content to live at such a distance from God as I had lived
during the past few years.


CONFLICT WITH DOUBTS

When I awoke the next morning, the peace of God was still in my soul;
but Satan faintly whispered, "Perhaps, after all, you were mistaken last
night; you may not have a genuine experience of salvation." He suggested
also, "You do not feel quite so joyful as you did." In spite of all
this, I knew that a great change had taken place in me. Some whom I had
previously hated, I now most tenderly loved. Life had a new charm for
me, and I remarked to my mother that it seemed that I had just begun
to live. So in spite of all the doubts suggested by the evil one,
I testified publicly how God had most wonderfully blessed me. While
testifying, I was blessed again.


FEELINGS

I now turned my attention toward my feelings and decided that the normal
experience of the Christian was to be happy and joyful constantly. My
joy soon settled down into a deep, calm peace. Soon the enemy began to
suggest, "Where is your joy? You must be losing out." At these times
I tried to stir my emotions again by meditation and earnest prayer.
However, I was not always successful; and often great distress settled
over my spirit. Sometimes I would almost decide that I must be unsaved,
although I also had victory over the sins that formerly held me in
bondage, and my supreme desire was to do God's will in all things. Yet
my feelings were so variable that perhaps one day I would feel glad and
joyful and would conclude that I was truly saved. At such times I would
decide never to doubt my experience again; then probably the next day,
if not the very same day, my feelings would change, and the old doubts
would come back again.


SEVERE TEMPTATIONS

I was also surprized in another respect. The old temptations that had
seemingly left me never to return, as I had hoped, came back with
renewed force. By earnest prayer, however, I obtained complete
deliverance. This taught me the necessity of watching and praying.


RESTITUTION

After some time I received light on the subject of restitution. Although
I had never committed any grave or serious wrongs against any one, yet
I need to confess some things and to make proper restitution to certain
individuals. This was very humbling to me, as I was generally considered
a good boy and a model young man in the community where I was born and
reared and where I still resided at the time of my restoration to the
favor of God. In fact, many seemed to believe that I was a pretty good
Christian at the very time I was in my backslidden condition. It,
therefore, took a great deal of grace to humble myself sufficiently to
make these wrongs right. However, I was always blessed in making the
required restitution.


GOING TO EXTREMES

At first Satan tried to keep me from making any restitution. Then, after
I had started, and he saw he could not prevent me, he pushed me to the
other extreme. One little neglect or forgetfulness after another came to
mind until it seemed to me there would be no end of making reparation.
These little shortcomings were so trivial in their nature that, as I now
review them, I am convinced that they were either no wrongs at all or
else merely mistakes resulting from a lack of wisdom or knowledge, and
that they had been readily overlooked at the time or soon forgotten by
all parties concerned until my own mind began to search for them.

The following will suffice as a fair sample: I had by oversight
forgotten to return a borrowed lead pencil, which had been about
three-fourths used up. Months afterwards I happened to think of it, and
I became so worried and accused that I finally attempted restitution,
as I had already done in perhaps dozens of other just such trivial
instances.

I was also driven to the consideration of my past conduct in the light
of my present experience. I then made apologies one after another for my
past failures. In some instances this was perfectly proper; but again I
was driven to such extremes that I scarcely had any peace. The natural
result was that I watched every word and act so carefully that often
I was afraid to smile, for fear I might laugh at the wrong time. I was
so busy watching myself that I did not get much enjoyment out of my
religious experience. Indeed, the standard I set for myself was so rigid
that I speedily came into bondage. I was unhappy myself and made others
unhappy about me. However, I had no intention of going back into sin.


BECOMING ASCETIC

I took a great interest in reading religious books and papers. Although
doubtless the motives of those who wrote these were high and noble, and
their sole aim and purpose was to further the interests of God's kingdom
on earth, yet some of these productions were written in such a manner as
to cause a conscientious soul to feel that it is almost impossible for
an ordinary person to reach a standard of experience and life such as
they set up. My natural tendency, however, impelled me to try in my weak
way to pattern after the most rigid examples. I noticed that some of the
characters mentioned were given to much fasting and to abstinence from
all except the very plainest of foods. My tendency toward extremes again
asserted itself, and sometimes I felt condemned for enjoying even a
wholesome meal. I remember one occasion when I worried because I had
indulged in eating a reasonable amount of meat which was pleasing to
my taste.

The last year I was in school these morbid tendencies reached their
climax. I had read of devoted men in the ministry who had labored so
zealously that they allowed themselves only six hours sleep. Besides
their daily tasks, which were enormous, some of these men had spent as
long as two hours each day in private devotions. I tried to force myself
to this rigid routine, besides keeping up with my classes in the
university. Almost every night religious services were held either in
the chapel or in some cottage. On Sunday there were four and sometimes
five services. Of course, I felt duty bound to attend all of these,
besides keeping up daily my two hours of private devotions. Sometimes
I was obliged to lose a part of the six hours allotted for sleep, in
order to carry out this rigid program I had set for myself. Not only did
I suffer from exhaustion induced by the constant and heavy strain; but
if I happened to fail in spending the full two hours in prayer or in
reading the Scriptures, I would sometimes be so terribly accused that
I would resort to a public confession of my "neglect," and once I went
to the public altar under accusation that was largely due to this very
cause.

I had heard a great deal, also, concerning our obligation to do personal
work and threw myself into this phase of Christian activity. Of course,
I soon went to extremes. If I happened to be in the company of some one
for a short time and failed to speak to him about his soul's welfare,
I was likely to be dreadfully accused for gross neglect of duty. Under
such circumstances it was hard for me to testify, because the accuser
could always find some "neglect" or "oversight" with which to trouble
me. On the other hand, I was afraid not to testify lest I should soon be
hopelessly backslidden if I neglected this duty. So I finally drifted
into the habit of silently asking God's forgiveness for any possible
"neglect" in any way, just before rising to testify, so as to make sure
that I was in a proper condition to witness for the Lord. All this was
exceedingly wearing on my whole being.


A MORBID CONSCIENCE

At last my conscience became so morbid that every sermon I heard and
every religious book or tract I read was at once compared with my
experience to see if I lacked in even the lightest details. I happened
to read of one devoted man who literally gave all his possessions to
the Lord's work. Immediately I thought of the small amount of money that
I had with which to pay my winter's tuition in the university. It was
not quite enough to pay all my expenses, and yet when I would decide
that I could not give my "all" to the Lord's work, terrible accusations
would crush me down until it seemed that my reason itself would become
unbalanced. In my despair, I opened up my heart to a trusted friend, and
he showed me that this was clearly an accusation from Satan and should
be entirely ignored. All these things told sadly on my mental and
physical condition, so that when the school year ended and I returned
home to my friends, they were very much disappointed in me. Finally they
became alarmed at my morbid condition.


OBTAINING RELIEF

Satan at last overdid himself; and by the help of kind friends, I
discerned his devices and the extremes to which I had been driven. Once
the following lines were quoted to me: "If you want to be distracted,
look about you; if you would be miserable, look within; but if you would
be happy, look to Jesus." These I shall never forget. A friend also
pointed out the fact that I was constantly feeling my spiritual pulse.
He said that this was just as detrimental to my spiritual condition as
the constant counting of heart-beats would be to my physical health.
Just as a patient would be likely to imagine himself afflicted with
heart-trouble, so the same habit in the spiritual realm would, if
continually indulged, prove disastrous to constant peace and victory.

It took some time to throw off entirely the "straight jacket" which had
been imposed upon me; but by patient persistence, with God's grace, I
was made an overcomer. I was taught to discern the difference between
accusations and the workings of the Spirit of God. The voice of the
accuser is harsh, cruel, nagging, or exacting; God's Spirit is mild,
gentle, and encouraging. When God's Spirit reveals anything, it is made
clear and plain. The accuser bewilders, confuses, and discourages. I
also learned that our kind heavenly Father is not watching for an
opportunity to cast us off, but rather he is seeking by the wooings of
his gentle Spirit to lead us into green pastures and beside the still
waters, where we may nourish our souls and become strong to meet the
battles and trials of life. He will show us our shortcomings, but not
in a way that will discourage or crush us.

Oftentimes while I was under such crushing accusations, the tempter
would say, "How can you ever hope to preach the gospel, when you are so
unsettled in your own experience?" One day there came to my mind the
scripture in Eph. 3:20, which says that he is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we can ask or think. I decided that in some
way God would work out his purpose concerning my life if I would
patiently serve him to the best of my knowledge and ability.


INHERITED DISPOSITION TO WORRY

Another lesson I needed to learn was to trust God with the future. I was
naturally inclined to worry. For several generations back my ancestors
on one side of my family tree had been given to excessive worry, their
condition at times bordering on utter despondency. I was painfully
conscious of this inheritance in my constitutional make-up. In my morbid
imagination, nearly every threatening trouble was magnified to the
proportion of a dreadful disaster. Many an hour, and even days, I wasted
in useless worry. Perhaps not one tenth of my gloomy forebodings ever
materialized.


FACING A NERVOUS COLLAPSE

In order to teach me more thoroughly the lesson of trust, the Lord
permitted me to pass through a peculiar and severe trial. As I looked
forward to the time when I hoped to take up the active work of the
ministry, I had a great desire to be at my best in every way. I had
hoped to be in good health so that I might be able to bear the strain of
the work and to meet every emergency that might arise. But just as I was
about ready to enter upon my life's mission, I found my health breaking
and myself on the verge of a nervous breakdown. This was indeed a keen
disappointment to me. My sufferings at times seemed almost intolerable.
I could not understand it: I longed so much to be of real service to God
and to accomplish what I regarded as my life-work--the ministry.

Although the prospects seemed gloomy and my friends expected a complete
breakdown in my health, yet I determined to go forward in the name of
the Lord and to do the best I could. I even began to fear that my reason
would be dethroned. However, I said nothing about my condition to my
congregation, but sought to be a blessing to them in every way. I
finally tried to form the habit of beginning each day with a season of
thanksgiving for all the blessings I could think of. This proved to be
very helpful.


RELIEVED BY HELPING OTHERS

Some days were more trying than others. While passing through the
severest tests I learned that it was very helpful to look for some other
tried or tempted ones and do my best to cheer and comfort them. Just a
few doors from where I roomed was a lady past middle age, who had been a
sufferer for eleven years. She had been helpless during the greater part
of that time. I went to see her often and did what I could to lighten
her burdens. She knew nothing of my sufferings, however. She was so
grateful for everything I did for her, and the Lord's presence was so
real every time I talked or prayed with her that invariably I was
abundantly helped in the very efforts put forth to cheer and comfort
her. Sometimes my heart carried an almost intolerable burden; but after
a call in this home of affliction, my burden would grow light and I
would sometimes wonder which had been helped the more, she or I. Also,
when I considered what she had endured for so long, I was ashamed to
tolerate anything like discontent concerning my own lot, which, though
seemingly so hard at times, was so much better and easier, in some
respects at least, than hers.

There were times when, to add to my sufferings, Satan would bring
against me accusations that I could not have borne without special help
from God. Often the old temptations to doubt my experience of salvation
would return with tremendous force, and if I had listened to the enemy's
suggestions, I should have cast aside my experience in spite of all
that God had ever done for me. The accuser would sometimes begin by
suggesting that I had never been truly sanctified. (I obtained the
experience of entire sanctification soon after entering the work of
the ministry.) Then the enemy would become more bold and would suggest,
"You know that you have often had serious doubts concerning your
experience of justification, and after all, perhaps you have never been
truly converted."

After annoying and distressing me in this manner, Satan would fling at
me such taunts as these: "You are a pretty example of a minister who is
supposed to be truly called and qualified of God to preach his Word."
Many times I would have a conflict like this just before rising to
preach. If I had given way to feelings, I would rather have sought some
place of quiet seclusion than to have faced the waiting congregation
before me. But then the thought would come, "Perhaps in the congregation
there are tempted and tried souls who need special help"; and so I would
decide to preach, not according to how I felt, but according to actual
knowledge of God's Word, which is ever unchanging. It seemed that
whenever I was most severely tried in this manner, I would get the
greatest victory and blessing by moving out in the performance of
whatever duty confronted me. Indeed, I do not remember a single instance
when I failed to preach at the appointed hour on account of the state of
my feelings.

I sometimes wondered why the conflict was so long, for I suffered thus
month after month. Sometimes I comforted myself with the thought that
some day death would bring relief; but I learned at last that God was
only permitting these sufferings in order to refine the gold. My best
and most helpful sermons were preached while I was in the very midst of
the deepest suffering.


BECOMING RECONCILED

At last I came to realize that it mattered not so much, after all,
how much I suffered, just so the people whom I served were helped and
blessed; that true blessedness in life does not consist in freedom from
suffering, but in accomplishing one's mission in the world according to
the divine plan.


CHRIST MORE REAL

Some of my most precious seasons of fellowship with Christ were
experienced, when, in the absence of all feeling, except that of severe
suffering, I would say by faith alone, "Thou, O Christ, art by my side.
Thou wilt never leave me nor forsake me." At last I accustomed myself to
believe his presence was real in spite of my feelings, so that by faith
I could almost imagine him at my side. As I walked, it seemed that we
kept step together; as I faced my congregations, he stood by my side,
unseen of course by physical eyes, but under such circumstances the
natural eyes can not be compared with the spiritual sight for clearness
of vision. I then learned what Paul meant to express when he said,
"While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things
which are not seen are eternal" (2 Cor. 4:18). "Whom having not seen, ye
love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with
joy unspeakable and full of glory" (1 Pet. 1:8).


SOME LESSONS LEARNED

Thus my trials and hardships taught me that a genuine experience of
salvation is obtained, as well as maintained, not by working up some
great feeling or emotion, but by simple, trusting faith in God, and
implicit obedience to his Word.

I found that our God is a loving Father and not a hard taskmaster.
"Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that
fear him" (Psa. 103:13). Neither does he require us to do anything that
is unreasonable. "I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of
God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable
unto God, which is your reasonable service" (Rom. 12:1).

I also learned that the true test of our Christian experience is not the
state of our feelings, but the power to resist temptation, to keep sweet
under severe trials, and to manifest the meek and gentle spirit of the
Master. I learned, moreover, that the Lord is not anxious to cast us off
for every little failure, but is long-suffering and patient with us as
long as we have a sincere aim and purpose to please him in all things.
I learned more fully the secret of "casting all my care upon him,"
knowing that "all things work together for good to them that love God"
(Rom. 8:28).

The last few years of my life have been marked by great victory in my
experience. The former trials through which I passed have increased
my usefulness by helping me to be more unselfish. I wondered at the
time why God permitted such trials and sufferings; but now as I look
back upon the past, I see that I could not afford to be without the
discipline and training which those severe trials brought to me. In
my work as a pastor I am all the more qualified to sympathize with and
to help those who are meeting with similar trials and difficulties.
As I remember my own conflicts and trials, I can be more charitable
for others.


CONCLUSION

As the Lord turned again the captivity of Job and restored to him his
former blessings, so he restored my health in due time, together with
great victory along every line. Though I still meet with hard trials
and perplexing problems, yet I have learned to take them all to him
in  simple, trusting faith, fully assured that he will direct in all
things. As already explained, my natural tendency was to worry;
yet  through God's grace I have been able to meet some of the most
perplexing problems with calmness and even in the face of these things
to enjoy refreshing sleep, knowing that "he is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think" (Eph. 3:20).

I have ceased to long for an experience like that of some one else,
knowing that God has given me one that is best for me. Peter and John
were both true disciples of our Lord, yet how differently did they
manifest outwardly the workings of God's Spirit within, which is ever
the same!

Some years ago I discerned the oneness of God's people and became
fully convinced that the Word of God should be our guide in all things
pertaining to our spiritual welfare; that none of it should be omitted
or cast aside. Since that time the light has been constantly increasing,
and each succeeding year becomes more blessed in his service. I am
learning more and more, as Paul expresses it, that "in whatsoever state
I am, therewith to be content" (Phil. 4:11). With the past all under the
blood, I have no gloomy forebodings concerning the future; "for I know
whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him against that day" (2 Tim. 1:12).




The Testimony of a Prisoner

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 3


"The heart is deceitful above all things, and is desperately wicked"
(Jer. 17:9). The truthfulness of this scripture has been verified in my
life. For more than twenty years I lived a most shameful life to satisfy
the desires of my wicked heart. I have learned that the more a person
yields to the sinful desires of the heart, the more wicked he becomes.

Many times during my early school days I yielded to the tempter and
played truant and ofttimes concluded that it was too hot to study and
yielded to the suggestion to go for a swim in the pond, regardless of
consequences. After playing truant the first time, I found a repetition
of the act much easier, until finally my parents became disgusted with
me and sent me away to work, and I have worked ever since that time.
While in the coal-mines, I received many hard knocks and bumps, and my
education neglected; whereas, had I not yielded to my wilfulness and
the deceitful desires of my heart in the beginning, I might have had a
splendid education and today be the possessor of a responsible position.

On my fifteenth birthday I took my first drink, yielding to the
temptation of taking my dinner-pail and getting ten cents' worth of beer
to drink beneath a shady tree. Oh, that God would have taken me before
it ever touched my lips! I am unable to relate all my experiences since
I took my first drink, but would say that I have suffered beyond measure
and have paid a great price for my folly. It has robbed me of my
character, reputation, friends, a beloved wife, and four beautiful
children--three boys and a girl--whom I loved more than my own life.

After drink had robbed me of all that was dear to my heart, then the
suggestion came for still further destruction by committing suicide. The
evil one suggested that as there was nothing left worthy a continuation
of my life, it were better to end it all and find sweet rest in the
grave. I was cast into prison, and the way before me truly seemed dark.

While I was serving a prison sentence I learned there was help for me
through the salvation of Jesus Christ. It was in the Bible that I
learned that the Lord would create within me a new heart if I would only
let him in, and "old things are passed away; behold, all things are
become new." I thought that I was too far gone to be forgiven, but the
words found in Isa. 1:18 gave me assurance: "Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be white as snow: though they be red like crimson,
they shall be as wool." These words were to me what a life-preserver is
to a drowning person. I grasped them with a trembling heart and found
peace to my soul.

Now, instead of destroying my own life by committing suicide and seeking
rest in the grave, as Satan had often suggested, I found sweet rest to
my soul in turning to Jesus, and the most earnest desire of my heart is
to serve him and do that which is pleasing in his sight. Now it is a
pleasant pastime, a joy and pleasure, to read the Bible and religious
books, tracts, and papers, whereby I can learn more of the beauties of a
life of salvation. May God help sinners everywhere to seek him while he
may be found.




A Little Chinese Girl

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 4


She was only a little Chinese girl, like ten thousand of others in the
great heathen land of which she was a native. She was the youngest of
three children, and her father died while she was but a babe. The
mother, being left a poor widow, was unable to support her little
family. Therefore, according to Chinese custom, the son (who was the
oldest of the three) was to receive the mother's attention, but the two
daughters were to be sold into other homes, to become wives as soon as
they were of marriageable age.

It is about the baby girl, Baulin, of whom I wish to tell you in this
story. The case was put into her grandfather's hands for management, who
arranged for her to go into her uncle's home, and to finally become the
wife of her cousin, who was a little younger than herself. As soon as
she was a few years old she was trained to help wash the clothes, cook
the family rice, and clean the bowls; and at an early age she had to work
many long hours in a silk-factory for only a few cents a day. These few
cents helped to buy her own rice, and as her uncle was a poor man, he
could not afford to support his "si-fu" (daughter-in-law) without
receiving something for it. Never a day was this dear child sent to
school. It was not customary to educate Chinese girls, except it should
be those of greater wealth or rank.

Time went on until Baulin was about fourteen years old. In the meantime
her uncle had come in contact with missionaries representing the
full gospel of Jesus Christ. As he became better acquainted with the
doctrine, and obtained an experience of salvation, he saw that it would
not be right to enforce the marriage of Baulin to his son; the matter
was to be left to their own choice, when they grew old enough to decide.
Still the responsibility was upon him to continue supporting her to the
same extent that he previously had.

In the course of another year or two, Baulin not only had shown an
interest in the gospel, but had a desire to take up her abode in the
mission compound to assist with the cooking for the other natives who
lived there. In this capacity she faithfully labored a few months,
during which time she came for prayer for salvation. The missionaries
in charge had found difficulty in obtaining native help for their own
kitchen. One day it suddenly dawned upon the mistress of the house that
Baulin might be trained for the culinary department. When the idea
was suggested, this dear young girl was delighted at the thought of
promotion in usefulness. Arrangements were immediately made, and the new
plan proved successful. Though she did not so much as know how to pare
potatoes, fry eggs, nor set the table for foreign food, yet her eager
willingness to learn made her easy to teach. Her natural inability to
take responsibility, to manage, and to exercise her own judgment, were
points greatly against her becoming a competent cook. However, by
the mistress continuing to plan the meals and to bear the general
responsibility, Baulin soon developed into a very reliable and useful
worker.

Two years later when the missionaries moved to another station, she
was pleased to accompany them and to continue as their cook. In the
meantime, however, a serious change came over her uncle, which made
Baulin entertain fears concerning her former engagement for marriage.
This man, who was so dependable before, gradually became entangled in
business matters, swindled others out of a considerable amount of money,
resulting in his utter spiritual downfall. Instead of making efforts
to rise again, he seemed to sink deeper and deeper into sin, until all
hope was given up for his return. Baulin was exceedingly fond of her
own people, and her relatives were not a few. But after her uncle had
backslidden, she began to receive more or less persecution from her
people. It so happened that the new station to which she accompanied
the new missionaries was the city in which her mother lived. She was
employed there as servant for a high-class family. The mother, though
having been in contact with the Christian religion for many years, still
remained a rank heathen, having great faith in the worship of idols. The
time came when the missionaries were about to depart on furlough to the
homeland, and now a serious question confronted Baulin: "What shall I
do, or what can I do?"

But before continuing this narrative, let me say here that during the
three years that she was employed as cook, she made a perfect record of
honesty and uprightness--something which probably can not be said of one
out of a hundred of Chinese cooks. Not once was she even suspected of
taking without permission, so much as a crust of bread or a spoonful of
anything belonging to the foreign kitchen. When other natives of the
compound would ask her for a bit of food which happened to be left in
the dishes, she would never give it without first asking permission to
do so. She seldom broke dishes, but when she did, she lost no time in
making acknowledgment. Thus her honesty, conscientiousness, and modesty
won a warm place in the hearts of those whom she served, and when she
appealed to them for help in solving the problem which so perplexed her
mind about the time that she must be separated from them, they gladly
shared her burden. It was by seeing her stedfastness through this trial
that her real worth could be appreciated more than ever before.

From a Chinese point of view, she was still under age, though she was
now about eighteen. Her mother had never given up the idea that she
should be married to her cousin when they both became old enough. At
this time her uncle was in a backslidden state, and in all probability
would insist on the marriage. The boy himself, her cousin, was growing
up rather a worthless young man. He had been in school more or less,
but was not extra bright. Recently his father had placed him as an
apprentice in a shoeshop. He had shown no inclination whatsoever toward
spiritual things, though he had had many advantages of hearing the
gospel. Baulin knew that she would soon be out of employment, and this
meant much to the young girl; for she was now fully self-supporting and,
besides, had helped her uncle more than once in his financial straits.
To return to the former mission station, at which city most of her
people lived, seemed the only open door before her. Yet this meant more
persecution, and should she have to return to the silk-factory to work,
she would be deprived of attending meeting, for the girls and women
employed there must toil on from early morn till late at night, seven
days a week.

It was when she heard that her uncle was making a business trip to the
city where she was now living and where her mother also lived, that
she became more anxious concerning a quick settlement of that marriage
question, and it was in this that she earnestly begged the missionary to
help. A meeting was called at which Baulin, her mother, her uncle, the
missionary, and a few others were present. Baulin requested a written
agreement signed by her mother and uncle, that the engagement to her
cousin was broken, and that they should have no power to compel her
engagement to any one else, but that she should have the right herself
to make choice of her life companion. The question was discussed, but
met with extreme opposition at first by the mother, insomuch that the
girl finally declared that because she was a Christian and desired to
do the right she would die rather than be compelled to marry a man who
was not a Christian and one whom she did not love. The uncle's greatest
objection was that he had no money to buy another girl for his son, and
the son would blame his father for not having a wife ready for him,
according to Chinese custom.

After several meetings, hours of discussion, and much prayer on the part
of the Christians, a paper and a duplicate were finally signed, which
set this dear young Christian free from her childhood engagement, and
oh, what a beaming countenance she wore! Keenly did she realize it would
not be easy to return to her home city and face her heathen relatives,
who would all be against her on account of the step she had taken, but
she was very happy in knowing that her persecution was for righteousness'
sake. Well able did she feel, through the grace of God, to meet the
worst that might come.

Her joy was increased some days later, when word was received that the
mission station in the same city where her people lived would be glad to
use her as cook and general helper in the house. Thus she would not need
to go back to the factory to earn a living, but could be employed more
directly in the service of God and be under the care of the church.

I hope all who read this true story will not forget to breathe a prayer
for this dear young girl, who so boldly took her stand for the truth and
right, in the midst of opposition from heathen relatives. We can not but
hope that she may some day be as reliable a spiritual worker as she is
today a temporal worker.




Persecutions and Victories of an Evangelist

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 5


It is with pleasure and gratitude that I take advantage of this
opportunity of telling of God's wonderful dealings with me. It is now
a little over ten years since I was converted. I had the advantage of
being reared in a Christian home. My parents having been saved for a
good many years.

When I first heard of people who believed the entire Word of God as
it was preached in the days of the apostles, I wondered what kind of
people they were. Some of the ministers were conducting some meetings
not far from where we lived, and, hearing of these people, I asked my
father if it would not be possible for them to come to our community.
Being surprized at my question and glad to hear that I was interested
in hearing those people, he suggested that I should speak to them
personally and ask them to come. These meetings were conducted about
eight miles from our home.

It was a cold October day when I drove to the place with horse and
buggy and asked the people to come to our town. They were glad for
the invitation, and we returned to my home the same day. There was
especially one thing about them which surprized me, and that was how
happy and contented they seemed to be; but I was a little unwilling to
believe that it was really possible for a person to enjoy religion, for
my association with so-called Christian people had made the impression
upon my mind that Christianity, or salvation, was only for those who
could not enjoy themselves in the world.

When the company that were to hold the meeting came to our home,
I decided to study and examine their lives to find out whether they
really possessed the joy and satisfaction that I was longing for. Their
quiet, devoted lives convinced me of the fact that I ought to become
a Christian. Deep conviction settled down upon me in the meetings.
My mother and father, whose lives had made a deep impression upon me,
pleaded with me to yield to God, but I was still unwilling to surrender.

After the meetings closed I tried to quench the Spirit by indulging in
worldly pleasures and associating with my old friends, but it seemed
that the Spirit of God was working so powerfully upon me that it was
impossible to resist him. I remember especially an experience one
afternoon. I was brought face to face with the supreme question, Are you
ready to meet God? I decided that I would not yield, but that I would
enjoy the pleasure of sin and the world for some years and later become
a Christian.

Not being able to quench the convictions that the Spirit of God had
wrought upon me, I deliberately indulged in blasphemy, determined
to make the Holy Spirit leave me, but I am glad to say that God was
merciful to me in not permitting my soul to be lost. For a moment I felt
as though I had committed the unpardonable sin, that heaven was closed,
and that my soul was lost forever. But I turned to God with tears
and a broken heart, the Spirit of God again strove with me, and my
sins were mercifully forgiven. The joy of heaven filled my soul, and
I received the assurance that my name was written in the Book of Life.
This was November 5, 1905.


SANCTIFICATION

My soul was perfectly satisfied, and for some time I felt as though all
that heaven could give to a human being in this world had been given to
me. But later I began to realize the need of something more. I heard
teaching on the doctrine of entire sanctification and began to study
about it in the Bible. The knowledge thus obtained caused me to seek
for the experience, but I did not receive it as soon as I had expected.
After some very hard struggles and much disappointment I finally
concluded that the teaching was wrong in regard to this matter and that
it was impossible to obtain the experience as it had been presented to
me. Trying to comfort myself with this thought, I let the matter rest
for a while, but I was not satisfied.

About two years after my conversion I decided that this matter should be
settled between God and my soul. Going to the Lord in earnest prayer, I
made a perfect consecration of all to God. The Lord began talking to my
soul, and he made it clear to me that the reason why I had not obtained
the experience sooner was not because the doctrine I had heard was
wrong, but because I had an exaggerated idea of what sanctification
really would do. I was under the impression that everything in my human
nature which had caused me trouble would be removed in sanctification.
I had failed to see that in sanctification human desires are not taken
away but sanctified. I saw clearly that the cause for the most of my
troubles was that I had failed to discriminate between carnality and
humanity.

While I was consecrating, the Lord spoke to me, not audibly but by his
Spirit, and asked me if I was willing to go to Denmark with the gospel.
I was able to surrender on all points but this one, seeing that going
to a foreign country would conflict with all my plans for the future.
I felt very much like Abraham when he went to Mount Moriah with his only
son to offer him there upon God's altar. But seeing that this was the
only way and desiring to obtain the experience, I surrendered, placed
all on the altar, and immediately I was sanctified and baptized with the
Holy Ghost. Praise the Lord!

There were no outward demonstrations, no special manifestations of the
power of God; but the Holy Ghost, being enthroned in my heart, gave me
a power over the world and self which I had not experienced heretofore.
This glorious experience I have now enjoyed for several years, and
it never was more precious to me than it is at the present time.
Halleluiah!


GOING TO A FOREIGN COUNTRY

For a while I did not think more about my call to the work of God in
Europe, but there was a deep longing in my soul to see people saved,
and whenever time permitted I would do all the personal work I could,
distributing literature, visiting people in their homes, helping in
meetings, etc.

My parents being Danish, they naturally made me think more of the
Scandinavian people than I otherwise would have thought, and my heart
was often burdened that this glorious truth might be brought to them.
These thoughts I kept to myself, speaking only to God about the matter.
At last the burden became so heavy that I opened my heart to a minister
in whom I had very much confidence, and he told me that a year before
that time the Lord had clearly shown that I should go to Denmark with
the gospel.

Next I opened my heart to my parents. Naturally they felt sorry that I
should leave them, but in another sense they were glad to see me enter
the work of the Lord. The Lord had revealed to my mother the evening of
my conversion that I should preach the gospel, but she did not think
that my field of labor would be in a foreign country.

An older minister, who had for some time been thinking of going to
Scandinavia, asked me if it would not be possible for me to accompany
him; and when the matter was brought before the church, it was finally
decided that I should go. We sailed from New York Dec. 18, 1909, and
arrived in Denmark, Jan. 3, 1910. This brother and his wife stayed with
relatives, while I made my home with different people, some of them
unsaved; and the most disagreeable thing that I met at the beginning
was that I was often obliged to stay in homes where I knew I was not
welcome. But in all the trials and disappointments there was one thing
that especially encouraged and comforted me, and that was that I knew
God had sent me to Scandinavia.

I shall never forget the first time God gave me a little favor among
the people. An old gentleman expressed his desire to have me give my
testimony after the sermon. I was at that time unable to express my
thoughts in the Danish language, but in my heart I carried a very heavy
burden for the people. With this burden on my soul I arose, and the
feelings I could not express in words I expressed in tears. That evening
four souls came to the altar and were gloriously saved. From that time
on my services were in demand, and it was not long until a goodly number
sought the Lord in the meetings.

About a year from this time a Baptist minister asked me to come to his
town and hold a four days' meeting. After earnestly praying over the
matter I decided to break my engagement at another place (something I
do not do unless specially directed of the Lord) and to hold these
meetings. Instead of holding four meetings, I held one hundred and
thirty meetings, and about one hundred souls were gloriously saved.
There were a number of young men in the town who determined that they
would break up the meetings, but we asked them to come and take part in
the song-service, which generally commenced about a half hour before the
preaching-service. Often the stores would be closed early in order that
the people might be able to attend the meetings, and it was not long
until nearly all the young men of the town were sitting on the front
seats listening to the word with tears in their eyes.

An intoxicated man, who was sent out by a saloon-keeper to make
disturbance, attacked me in front of the congregation. A young man who
also was under the influence of liquor but who was in sympathy with the
work I was doing, stepped to my side and offered to defend me with his
fist. In anger he said to the other man, "I want to tell you that we are
not going to let you disturb =our= meetings." I tried to calm them, but
in spite of all I did, the man was unmercifully treated as soon as he
got outside by the people whose sympathies had been won by the gospel.


PERSECUTED FOR THE GOSPEL'S SAKE

The saloon-keeper mentioned above, who almost failed in business because
of the revival, tried to work out a plot against me. He had a friend
who lived in the State of Michigan, to whom he wrote for information
concerning my life. This man wrote back: "The minister who is preaching
in your town is a professional white-slave trader, and has escaped the
authorities here in America and fled to Europe." This letter was taken
to the officials in Denmark, and immediately I was arrested. One of the
best detectives in the kingdom and several state officials were working
on the case. A number of impressions were taken of my fingers and my
picture was hung up in police stations among those of professional
thieves and criminals.

A very bitter persecution also broke out in the Scandinavian press.
Among the people I was generally known as "The Prophet." My aunt and
cousin in Copenhagen were nearly dumbfounded one day, when, as they
passed one of the large printing-houses in the city, they saw on the
news bulletin of a prominent daily in large bold type, which could be
read at a long distance, the following:

    "The Prophet Morris Johnson--White-Slave Trader--Baptized
    Naked Women--Stole Church's Money-Box--Went to America
    with Fifty Young Girls and Sold Them to the Houses of
    Ill-Fame--Escaped the Hands of the Authorities."

None of these things were true, however; but wherever I went I was
carefully watched by the authorities. My name was associated with the
most ignoble, immoral, and dishonorable things, and the matter was given
such publicity that I could not board a train or a steamer without its
being made known to those around me.

Finally the people of God to whom I had been preaching considered it
their duty to encourage me to appeal to the law for protection, one
brother offering to spend five thousand crowns on the case. This I could
not do, for it would have conflicted with my Christian principles; but
at last I saw that the only way I could satisfy them was to do something
to prove that I was not guilty of the accusations.

Accordingly I went to Copenhagen, spoke to the United States Minister
and to a prominent lawyer about the matter. They encouraged me to take
up a law suit against the parties who had so inhumanly treated me, but
feeling that I should grieve God by doing so, I decided to patiently
suffer, knowing that God would stand by me and that in the end his name
would be glorified. I must admit that had it not been for the fact that
the people of God were praying for me and that God in a special way
comforted and strengthened me, I should not have been able to stand
through this trial.

About three months after the time I had been in Copenhagen, a state
official published in the paper an article in which he made known to the
public that after a thorough examination of my case they were satisfied
that I was innocent and was worthy of the moral support of the people.


REVIVALS

I am glad to say that this persecution resulted in a wonderful outbreak
of spiritual life in Scandinavia. Hundreds of people came out to the
meetings and a large number of souls were saved. The State Bishop, a
very influential man, was called upon to oppose the meetings. In a
public discourse he mentioned my name twenty times, but this only
aroused a greater curiosity in the hearts of the people to hear the
word, and in this way people were brought under the influence of the
gospel who would never have been reached any other way.

I shall never forget an experience I had in a revival in Hjorring,
Denmark. We had rented a large hall, and the first evening there were
about five hundred people present. I had been passing through some very
hard trials just before this meeting, but the trial reached its climax
as I stood before that audience. I did not feel the help of the Holy
Spirit at all as I was preaching. I went to my room that evening with
a heavy heart and spent some time on my knees in earnest prayer.

Later it was made clear to me why God permitted me to pass through this
trial. The following Sunday evening the power of the Holy Spirit was
poured out upon that audience in such a measure that it was almost
impossible for the people to resist it. There were about 750 people
present, and most of them stayed for the altar-service. There was not
room at the altar for those who wanted to seek God, so the people fell
on their knees and began to pray, and all over the hall one could hear
sinners crying to God for mercy. Many of them were saved. The meeting
did not close until after midnight. I then saw that the reason why God
had permitted me to pass through that test was that he might prepare me
for the great blessing presently to be poured out upon the meeting.


ALL-NIGHT MEETING

In Lokken, Denmark, the people of God gathered one evening for a
special meeting. The word of God became so precious to us that we
could not leave the place. A large number testified and after midnight
we had an ordinance-meeting, which was followed by a sermon, and
that by an altar-call. Several came forward and sought the Lord for
sanctification, and a few who were so much interested that they could
not leave, came and were saved. The altar-service was broken up when a
brother came in and exclaimed, "Hurry up, or you'll miss the train."
This was the morning train, which left at five o'clock. The good work
continued at this place, and there were open doors for me to preach the
gospel in all parts of the kingdom where before warnings had been
published against me.


MEETING A PHILOSOPHER

During my stay in Copenhagen it was my privilege to become acquainted
with an educated young man, a doctor of philosophy, who had been
influenced by higher critics, such as have doubted the miraculous
accounts given in the Holy Scriptures. When I was introduced to him, I
noticed that he thought it would not be very difficult for him to weaken
my faith and confidence in regard to religious matters. He immediately
expressed his desire to have some private talks on religious questions,
to which I gladly consented, but greatly feeling my need of special
wisdom and grace from God. We would often sit up until after midnight,
but I enjoyed these conversations and discussions, for they gave me an
understanding of the position that such persons generally take in regard
to religion.

One evening he accompanied me to the country, where I held a meeting in
a private home. About fifteen minutes after I had entered the pulpit, I
noticed that a deep conviction settled down upon him. Tears filled his
eyes, and he was unable to hide his emotions. One night at one-thirty
in the morning he said to me: "I have a question I want to ask you. I
have had your life under my microscope for a while and have come to the
conclusion that you are one of the happiest and most contented young men
I have ever met. Still I have noticed that you have no interest whatever
in the enjoyments and pleasures that other young men of your age seem to
be so taken up with. Tell me, what is the source of your happiness?" My
reply was, "The source of my joy and happiness is the Christ that you
are trying to deny." Tears filled his eyes, and he said to me, "In my
public lectures and discourses and with my pen I have tried to influence
people against Christianity, but now I have found that Christianity can
satisfy and make happy; so I will never use my influence in that way any
more." I did not have the privilege of seeing this young man converted,
but I am sure that some day I shall meet him in heaven.


TRUSTING THE LORD

When I entered the gospel field, I decided that I should trust God to
supply all my needs. My father upon bidding me good-by said, "Now, my
son, if you ever need help financially, you must let me know, and I
shall be glad to help you." I thanked my father, but told him that he
should not feel under obligations to me more than to any other
missionary and that it was my intention to trust God.

I paid my own fare to Europe with the exception of one dollar, which
was given me by a kind brother. For a while I got along well, for I
had a little personal money; but the time came when I needed help. I
especially remember one occasion when I needed some means. I prayed
and wept before the Lord as a child before its father, asking the Lord
what he was going to do with me now. After I had prayed a while, the
Lord assured me that my prayer was heard. Two days later I received a
money-order from a brother in South Dakota and was able to meet all my
obligations and even had some to spare. Praise the Lord!

Another time during my stay in Norway I needed a certain amount of money
and began to pray to God concerning the matter. The amount needed was
about twenty dollars. A few days from that time I received a money-order
for eleven dollars from some one in Copenhagen from whom it would have
been altogether unreasonable for me to expect financial help. But this
person wrote that God had made it clear that this money should be sent
to me. I also received a letter from a man in America with a money-order
for ten dollars. He wrote: "I am sending you ten dollars, and feel that
I must send it off immediately. Hope you will receive it in time." My
needs were supplied, and you can be sure I was a happy man. I have
learned by experience that there is no life happier or nobler than the
life that is fully surrendered and consecrated to God.




The Secret of a Perfect Life

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 6


A little more than half a century ago I drew my first breath of life. It
was a day in early May, so I have been told: the sun was shining, the
birds were singing, and the early flowers were in bloom. It is not to be
supposed that my environment in life's early hour had any influence upon
the passions of my soul; nevertheless, from my earliest recollection I
have been an ardent lover of the esthetical in nature. Many of the days
of my childhood were spent wandering through the fields in the bright
sunshine, admiring and culling the flowers; rambling through the leafy
wood, listening with glad heart to the songs of birds; or sitting on the
mossy bank of the rippling brooklet delighted by the music made by its
crystal waters as they played among the rocks.

But the happy, innocent days of childhood do not last always: the sun
does not always shine, nor the birds sing; neither do the flowers always
bloom along our way. Oh, if we could only have been overlooked--many of
us have thought in the dreary days of after-life--by Father Time and
been left behind to be always in the green, sun-lit fields of childhood,
how happy we should have been! But it was not so; and now, since I have
found the riches of grace, I am glad it was not so. No one can escape
the onward-leading hand of Time. He will lead us, despite our protests,
into days where the sun has ceased shining, where the birds have flown
to a more genial clime, and where the flowers have faded. As our
much-loved poet has said,

  "Into each life some rain must fall--
  Some days must be dark and dreary."

My life has been a confirmation of these words.


MY FIRST SIN

Among the recollections of my early childhood, one is more deeply
impressed on my mind than any other, so deeply and firmly stamped that
the many and varied experiences of fifty years have failed to make it
less clear and distinct to the vision of memory than it was the day it
occurred. It was the committing of a sin. It may have been my first
wilful transgression, but, however that may be, it was one that caused
an awful sense of guilt to come into my heart, and I trembled, as it
were, in an unseen presence. No one had ever spoken to me of God, of
shunning the wrong, or of doing the right, except my mother (sweet
today is my memory of her); so I carried my trouble to her, and in her
presence the tempter led me into falsehood, so that I was made more
wretched than before.


GETTING DEEPER INTO SIN

The days sped on; and after a few years, I had won the title of "Bad
Boy." Though the sins of those youthful days (over which I prefer to
throw the relieving mantle of forgetfulness) were dark and deep, I did
not altogether lose my love for the beautiful and the good. In those
shadowy days, a ray of sunlight would now and then break through, a
bird-note would be heard, and a fragrant flower would raise its drooping
head. In such hours, I would get a glimpse of a better life. An unseen
hand would set before me a picture of a pure life, and in my fancy I
would see myself a good man. Oh, that the dreams of those youthful days
were more perfectly fulfilled! but I must give praise to God for what he
has wrought in me.

Many a time at the midnight hour in those youthful days, after I had
left some den of vice, there would be whisperings in my soul of a
higher, nobler life. As I, in my fancy, gazed down through the years,
the angel of goodness would shift before me bright pictures of the
different characteristics of a holy life. At this distant day, on
looking back, I am surprized to note in what trueness the Holy Spirit
set before me the ideal godly life.

But I must be brief, as only a few pages of this work are allotted to me
in which to tell you how I found--or, rather, what I found to be--the
secret of a perfect life.


MY CONVERSION

I was converted at the age of twenty-eight. A few months later,
realizing the need of a deeper spiritual life, I yielded myself a living
sacrifice to God, and he gave me the desire of my heart. Bless his name!
To tell you the joy of my soul in these experiences, is immeasurably
beyond the power of my pen. The happiness of a pure life fancied in
the day-dreams of my youth were more than realized. Although I was of
a highly imaginative mind, the joy my heart found in the riches of
redeeming grace was numberless times greater than the fancied joys
pictured to my mind in my boyhood hours.

My heart now flowed out in a gushing stream of love to God, and my mind
glowed with thoughts of him. It was the poet Milton who said: "As to
other points, what God may have determined for me, I know now; but this
I know--that if he ever instilled an intense love of moral beauty into
the breast of any man, he has instilled it into mine. Ceres, in the
fable, pursued not her daughter with a greater keenness of inquiry than
I, day and night, the idea of perfection." And I think the same was true
of me.

Early in my religious life I became conscious that the law of
development is written in the Christian heart, and that this law, if
given full scope, will raise us year after year into higher degrees of
perfection. The Holy Spirit revealed to me also at this time the secret
of attaining to this perfect life by a natural growth in grace day after
day. In love and humility lies the secret of a perfect and successful
Christian life. The earnestness with which we seek God is in proportion
to our love for him. Just as truly as the seven colors are woven
together in one white ray of sunlight, so truly are the laws of a
perfect life gathered up and fulfilled in the life of those who love
God. "Love is the fulfilling of the law." No man can escape the effect
of breaking a law of love. What fragrance is to the flower, obedience is
to love. Any act of unfaithfulness to God or man sounds a false note on
the golden harp of love. He who loves truth intensely will dwell with
truth; he who loves purity of thought will think only on things that
are pure. Vain thoughts will he hate. He who loves learning will seek
after learning and just to that intensity of his love for it. He who
loves home will dwell at home as much as possible, and home will become
sweeter home. He who loves God will dwell with God, will seek after God,
thereby strengthening his affection for God and daily growing into his
perfection.


HUMILITY NEEDED

But love alone will not suffice; humility is needed that love may be
rightly directed. If humility be lacking, love unconsciously begins to
center in self. With a feeling of shame I confess that twice in my life
since becoming a Christian, I have lost the ballast of humility so that
love went astray. I thought to love God and be faithful; I thought that
I was attaining to greater love; but to my surprize, when the Holy
Spirit set my heart before me in the clear light of pure love, I found
within that awful, ghastly, defiling principle of self-love.

If your soul loves the perfect life, "humble yourself under the hand of
God" and "keep yourself in his love." After years of experiences and
some sad failures, I have found, with a greater certainty than ever,
that love ballasted by humility is the secret of a happy, holy life. I
trust that during the remaining days of my life my soul shall flourish
like the palm-tree, and grow strong like the cedars of Lebanon, and that
I shall develop into that greater fulness of God--into a more perfect
image of him.

Today I know that "God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth
in God, and God in him." As my inner man is renewed day by day, to my
spiritual eyes the ideal perfect life grows in loveliness. As I journey
on toward the setting of life's sun, I can see farther into the beyond,
catch clearer glimpses of unseen things, hear more distinctly the songs
of angels, scent in greater sweetness the fragrance from the flowers
that grow in that celestial land, and feel the beauty of the Lord
growing upon me. I have passed through the furnace flames; but God has
brought me through, and he will bring you through.


A PERFECT IDEAL

Have there been times in your life when a glowing feeling crept into
your heart and you beheld a vision of ideal perfection? Oh, be "obedient
to the heavenly vision," remembering this, that the secret of approach
to your ideal is love and humility. Humility will keep you in the right
path as love hurries you on after your ideal. Neither the rocks, the
thorns, the waves, nor the furnace flames, retard the lover in his race
for a perfect life when the vision is kept clear before his soul. Have
you made failures? So have I--greater failures, perhaps, than any you
have made or ever will make; but the God who transforms the caterpillar
into the butterfly will transform you into his perfect image if you only
love him intently and be submissive to all his will.




Conversion of a Young Jewish Rabbi

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 7


I was born in an orthodox Jewish family. When I was but four years of
age, my parents took me to England and put me in charge of the late
Rabbi Horowitz of London to fully teach me the basis of rabbinical life.
At the age of seventeen years I completed my course of instruction as a
fully legalized rabbi, but was too young to take the responsibilities of
a district or synagog. At that time I returned to the United States and
soon drifted into socialism and became a socialist orator, traveling
from city to city and State to State, until I left the first principles
of my rabbinical teaching.

While traveling through Canada I became acquainted with an anarchist and
partly accepted his belief. I strayed so far away from my early teaching
that from time to time while speaking, I would hold up my Hebrew Bible
and tear it to pieces, cursing God and denying that there was a God.
I really became so hardened that I almost believed in my heart that
there was no God.

On the twenty-sixth day of October, 1907, I came to Chicago, and while
I was speaking that night on the platform, holding the Hebrew Bible,
tearing it, and ready to curse God, there came a sudden strong voice,
as it were, and, to my surprize, repeated to me the following words:
"They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn
after him as one mourneth for its only begotten, and they shall be in
bitterness after him as one is in bitterness after his first-born."

While I listened to this, I thought that some one was behind the
platform speaking these words. I looked behind the platform, but could
find no one. When I resumed my speech, the voice came again speaking the
same verse, and I became almost paralyzed for a while. After the meeting
was over, as I walked toward my apartments, I heard the voice for the
third time, speaking to me in stronger terms than ever. The miserable
feelings came stronger and stronger. In fact, I began to look for peace
to my conscience, but did not know how to find it. In this trouble of
soul, no one among all the orators, Jewish rabbis, or religious people
of different denominations came up to tell me how to do better nor to
give me advice.

I left Chicago for New York, but could not find rest. The words of
that voice never left me day or night. One night, while walking the
streets of New York looking for something to comfort me, I saw a sign
reading, "Men Wanted for the United States Army." At nine o'clock
the next morning I went to the recruiting-station and asked for an
application-blank. The man at the station thought it strange that a Jew
would come to enlist, but he gave me an application-blank. I filled it
out and was examined and sent to Ft. Slocum, New York, where I was sworn
in for three years' faithful service for the United States Army. After I
enlisted I began to look for peace; but the more I looked, the worse and
more trouble came to me. In fact, persecutions from different soldiers
were very bitter because I was a Jew and did not do what they were doing.

While in Ft. Slocum I contracted fever and was taken to a hospital. From
Ft. Slocum I was sent to Ft. Sill, Oklahoma, where I was assigned to
Battery B, First Field Artillery. There was only one Jewish man besides
me amongst over three hundred Roman Catholics, and they believed in
making things hot for us, so the more I looked for peace the worse
misery and persecutions I found.

On Decoration Day, 1908, they were playing football, and after the game
they went into the kitchen, procured large butcher knives, and came out
to cut the "sheenies" up. When we saw them coming with the knives, we
ran into the tailor-shop and locked ourselves in, hiding underneath
mattresses between the covers. They broke the door, but through
Providence they could not find us. Then for the first time since I had
embraced socialism I began to think there was a God, since our lives
were so spared.

On the sixth of June we went bathing in the Red River on the
reservation, and the boys came and turned us head down and feet up in
the water and wanted to drown us, but it seemed that through Providence
I was once more saved from being destroyed by these blood-thirsty men.
Upon our return, we found the tailor-shop flooded. This was reported to
the commander, but no action was taken in regard to this or any other
case of persecution.

We decided to desert the army after pay-day. When pay-day came, I had
coming to me about $200 from the tailor-shop and $13 as pay for the
month from the army, but out of the $200 I collected only about $70.
That afternoon we walked to Lawton, Oklahoma, to get the train from
there to St. Louis. Upon our arrival at St. Louis, the other man got a
job, and I wrote to my uncle in Chicago, who sent me a ticket to come
to Chicago. When I arrived there, he advised me to go to Canada and
said that he would support me all the time that I was there, as they
would apprehend me in the United States for a deserter.

I went to Canada, but was still in much distress. Some time later I
had a desire to leave Vancouver, British Columbia, and go over the
border into the State of Washington, but went under the assumed name of
Friedman. While under that name I looked for a position, but could not
find one; so I cabled to my parents for money and two weeks afterward I
received enough money to open up a little store. I took for my next name
Feldman. I opened a book-store, but within three months I lost almost
$3,000. Then I left Seattle, Washington, for Tacoma under the name Gray.

Three weeks later I left Tacoma for Portland, Oregon, under the name of
Grayson, where I looked up a friend of mine. He was at that time manager
of the Oregon Hotel. The next morning I was more miserable than ever
before and thought that I was sick. The night preceding I related to my
friend all my troubles, with the exception of my being a deserter from
the army.

While I was looking for a charity physician who could give me something
to relieve my distress and trouble, I found a Salvation Army man and
asked him if he knew of any physician who worked for charity and would
give me treatment. He told me that he had a friend who was a physician
and who was a lover of Jewish people. This was the first time that I
ever heard that a Christian loved a Jew.

I went to the office of the doctor, whose name was Estock, and he gave
me a cordial welcome. Putting his right hand on my right wrist and his
left hand around my neck, he said that he loved the Jews because his
Savior was a Jew and that he was glad God had sent me to his office in
answer to his prayers. I was dumbfounded and unable to answer. The
doctor said, "You do not need a physician for your body, but you need
the Lord Jesus to heal your soul, for your trouble is with your soul,
and the Lord Jesus is able to save you from your distress and troubles."
He gave me a little bottle and said: "Here is a little medicine, but you
do not need it. The only thing that will help you is prayer, and I will
'phone to my wife and ask her to pray for you, and I will also pray for
you. This will be the only way you will get peace."

The next morning as I was offering my thanks to him he said, "Do not
thank me, but thank God that he sent his only begotten Son, that through
him such poor unworthy people as we should be saved through his love."

"What can this mean?" I answered. "Is there a God that will love such a
man as I am?--a man who curses him? a man that stamped his Bible under
his feet and fought against him? Is it true that he will love me so?"

The doctor answered, "He died for such men as you, that he might
save you." He further said: "My house belongs to the Lord, and I owe
everything to him. The God of Abraham and Isaac is my God, and the
God of David and also the Prophets. He is my God, and he is your God,
whether you want him or not; and I beg you to come with me to my house."

"It is impossible for me to go into your house," I answered, "because I
do not believe that there is a God, and if there is one, I am unworthy
to go into such a house."

He pleaded with me further to go, and I went with him. I lived at the
doctor's house for thirty days. We had the strongest arguments on
Scriptures, he trying to prove to me that Jesus is the Messiah that came
to save his people from sin. I contradicted every word of his with the
Old Testament Scriptures.

On the thirtieth day in the doctor's house I was more vile than ever
before. I got up in the morning looking for the first chance to get
even with the doctor because of his persistence in mentioning the Lord
Jesus on every occasion. When I came down-stairs, they were ready for
breakfast. I sat at the table brewing within myself, full of hatred,
malice, and bitterness against them because of their holding up to
me the Lord Jesus as my only Savior. While at the table I could not
withhold my bitterness, and when they read the Scriptures after the
meal, I began to laugh, mock, and curse, calling them all kinds of
vile names.

While I was doing this they went down on their knees to pray as they did
every morning. Looking up to me, the doctor said, "My friend, if you
will not respect God nor respect me as your only and personal friend
in the city, for the Lord's sake respect this house, for this house is
consecrated unto God."

These words sank deep into my heart, and I kneeled down still with
bitterness in my heart against Jesus and the doctor. While I was down
on my knees, I was cursing, mocking at them and their Lord. The doctor
prayed first, then his wife, and then his little boy, who said, "Lord
Jesus, you have promised to save him; won't you save him?"

These words broke my heart, and I began crying, "If there is a God, come
and prove yourself." The carpet around me was wet with the tears which
I had shed in crying for God to come and prove himself. I felt within
myself a love for the Lord Jesus and soon had a living faith that the
Lord Jesus died for me and that through his death I was saved. After I
rose from my knees, the doctor, his wife, and the little boy stood with
eyes full of tears, rejoicing with me that there was power in the blood
of Jesus Christ to save such a vile sinner as I was.

One hour later I left the house of the doctor to tell my friend, the
manager of the hotel, that the Lord Jesus was now my Savior and that he
had saved me from my sins. He took a heavy chunk of wood and hit me on
my right side, nearly breaking my ribs.

I said, "May God forgive you for this and not hold it against you,"
while the tears were streaming down my face. This is the first time in
my life that I ever said to any one, "May God bless you!" Then I said to
him, "If it were only yesterday that you had done this to me, I would
have killed you; but now the Lord Jesus has taken anger out of my heart,
and I will endeavor to pray for you that God may have mercy upon you."
Walking out of his hotel crippled as I was and holding my side with my
hand, I said again, "God bless you!"

While walking down the street, I saw a company of mission workers on the
corner of Jefferson and Washington Avenues. I pushed myself through the
crowd, seeing that there were some Jews there, and I began to preach
to my own people for the first time that the only way of salvation is
through the Lord Jesus Christ. In answer, there came rotten eggs and
rotten tomatoes at my head and body until I was covered from head to
foot.

After the meeting I walked on singing a song and rejoicing that the Lord
Jesus had seen fit to save such a poor sinner as I was. Thus ended my
first day as a convert. I thank God for the first pay I ever received in
the gospel--a crippled side and rotten eggs. I continued to preach the
gospel to my people in Portland for several days.

Three days after my conversion, while I was on my knees praying, it
occurred to me that I had better write to my relatives and tell them
what love the Lord Jesus had for me, and that he had died to save them
as well as me, and that he was the only true Messiah. I reasoned for
several days against this; but at last I had to write, because I saw
that the Lord was on one side and my relatives on the other side, and
that I had to choose between them. So I wrote to them, sending to each a
separate letter telling them that Jesus was my Savior and that he is the
only and true Messiah.

Sometime after this, answer came from my relatives that they could not
believe that there was any power to save me, because, if I could leave
my first principles and leave my own people, the teaching which I was
brought up under and drift so far away as to curse God, they did not
believe there was any power to save me. I kept sending them Testaments
and Gospels, but still they could not believe.

One day I went to see my sister and told her the truth. She at first did
not believe me, but I asked her to attend a street-meeting which I was
to hold, and she heard me preach Christ. She then wrote to my mother,
who began to grieve herself to death because I had accepted the Lord
Jesus for my Savior. Then they wrote me different letters and were
patient with me, thinking that they would win me back to Judaism. When
they saw there was no hope of getting me back, they were done with me.

On one occasion while standing in the street and preaching, there came
a thought to me with great force, "If the authorities get you for a
deserter, what will you do?" This question troubled me so that I could
not continue my meetings. I went to the doctor's office and said to him,
"Dr. Estock, do you know what they do to a person that has deserted the
United States Army?"

"They give him three or four years in the military penitentiary," he
answered.

"Do you know that I am a deserter from the United States Army?"

He looked at me puzzled and said, "How can this be?"

"It is true, and I must give myself up to the army authorities before
they get me and disgrace my belief in the Lord Jesus."

I proposed giving myself up the next day, but the doctor told me to be
in no haste and said he would ask several people of God to pray for me
to learn what the mind of God was before I took another step. After a
few days they came to the conclusion that they would send me to Canada,
where I should be out of the jurisdiction of the United States and
should be free. Thinking that this offer was of the Lord, I accepted it
and left for Toronto, Canada. Upon my arrival at Toronto I felt the Lord
speaking to me and saying, "The more you run away from my law, the more
miserable you will feel. Go back to the United States."

This was while I was in the hotel at night and could not sleep. I felt
very miserable to know that the step I had taken in coming to Toronto
was not God's will and in his order. I had only $3.10 in my possession.
In the morning I went to the ticket-office to inquire how much it cost
to go to Buffalo. They told me it would cost $3.10. I then purchased a
ticket for Buffalo. When I arrived I telegraphed to the doctor, stating
that I was glad that I had come back to the United States to give myself
up to the army authorities. The doctor replied by telegraph, stating
that I was out of God's will and order in coming back to the United
States to give myself up, and that therefore he could not have
fellowship with me any more. Bitterly weeping over the message, I said
to myself, "Now the only friend I have is gone." But this promise
encouraged me, that my God would never turn against me nor forsake me.
There I was, left without a friend and without money in my pockets to
procure a night's lodging.

As it was bitterly cold, I prayed to the Lord that he would send
somebody along that would take me home with him. As I was praying, a man
passed by, and I asked him if he knew whether there was any child of God
in the city. He said a woman who was his neighbor was a child of God,
and he took me to her home. It was true that she was a child of God and
her home a godly one.

Soon after this I went to Pittsburg, and the Lord opened up the hearts
of a few Jewish people, who sent me to Washington. As I walked up to
the barracks, fear came over me, and I decided to go to Baltimore,
where I remained with a Jewish missionary until the last of April.
Then I returned to Washington, went to the commanding officer,
Lieutenant-Colonel Langfitt, and told him why I was giving myself up.

He said: "Are you a Jew and a believer in Jesus? Are you willing to give
yourself up for his sake? Do you know what it means to give yourself up?
It means three or four years in the penitentiary and to be dishonorably
discharged."

I told him that I would gladly do anything to make this matter right
before man and before God.

"I am also a Jew," he replied, "and I do not know how you can believe
in Jesus and suffer these things for his sake."

Then he doubted my being a deserter. I begged him to put me in the
guard-house and to go and investigate the matter.

He said, "I wish that I had the power to set you free now; but you are
too honorable a man to call the guard to take you to the guard-house,
and so I will walk there with you myself."

Upon coming to the guard-house, he called the sergeant of the guard and
said, "Sergeant, do not search this boy, for I know that he will not
take in anything but that which is lawful."

He then asked me whether I wanted to stay in the big cell with the rest
of the prisoners or go into one small cell by myself. I asked him for
one by myself so that I might study the Bible.

When he was bidding me good-by, he said: "For the first time I shake
a prisoner's hand, and I must say that I do not look upon you as a
prisoner but as the most honorable man that we have in this post, and I
must confess that you have done a most honorable thing in the sight of
man and God, and I will help you with all that lies within my power to
make everything easy for you."

The next morning the lieutenant-colonel came into the guard-house asking
for me. When I came near the door, he reached out his hand and grasped
mine, saying, "Neither my wife nor I have slept during the night, and
I have decided to recommend you for a year's clemency, so that you will
have only two years to serve."

It did not sound very good to me, but I went into the guard-house and
prayed. The thought came to me, "Can you not trust the Lord to carry you
through all these difficulties?" I said to myself, "Yes, I leave all in
the hands of the Lord."

After a few weeks the court was detailed. The president of the court
was Captain Koester, who, I was informed, was an infidel. The next man
of his court, Captain Ottwell, was a Christian Scientist, and the rest
of the court, including eleven officers, were Roman Catholics. They
detailed Lieutenant Rockwell to be my counsel for defense. He came up
to the court-house and said:

"You are a Jew, are you not?"

"Yes."

"And you believe in Jesus Christ, do you not?"

"Yes."

"I have no use for Jews, especially for a turncoat, and I will see that
you get the limit of the court."

This broke me all up, and I said, "Lieutenant, if you can, God will let
you go ahead."

I then walked into my cell and knelt down to pray, broken-hearted. The
scripture came to me, "Fear them not; for I the Lord thy God shall fight
for you." I rejoiced to know that the Lord was fighting my battles and
that he would do it well. Thirteen days afterwards I was tried.

When I came to the court, the lieutenant came to me with a piece of
paper in his hand and said: "I am sorry for the words which I spoke to
you, but I have suffered for them, and with God's help I will recommend
you to clemency. The same Lord that saved you has also saved me."

The judge of the court asked me what I would plead to the charge.

"I plead guilty to the charge of desertion and violation of the
forty-seventh article of war."

He asked me again if I knew what it meant to plead guilty. I answered
that I knew.

He then asked me what my plea on the specification of the forty-seventh
article of war was.

"Guilty," I answered.

He said to the court, "I want to make plain to this boy the solemnity of
these charges, that he may know the consequences thereof." He then asked
me if I had any pleas to make.

I told him no, and repeated the scripture that the Lord had given me:
"Fear them not; for I the Lord thy God shall fight for you." I said,
"I fear you not, for my Lord will fight for me and will deliver me."

Then the counsel for the defense arose and made this statement:

"Fellow Officers: You all know what a bitter man I was against the Jews.
You know that I was not going to make any plea, but to let this boy get
all that the court could give him, and be sorry afterwards that the
court could not give him more. But the same God that he serves troubled
me and made me sick, as you know, until I realized that the same God
must be my God and the same Savior my Savior; and furthermore, the same
Jesus that saved this Jewish boy has saved me also."

The court was greatly surprized, but my counsel went on further and
handed the court a paper and explained verbally the different reasons
for his pleas until tears came to the eyes of Captain Koester, Captain
Ottwell, and the different members of the court. Four of the worst
officers arose and recommended me for eighteen months' clemency and
thirteen dollars a month fine and reinstatement to duty.

The recommendation of the court was sent to the Department Commander of
the East, Major-General Leonard A. Woods, who earnestly considered the
case, according to his statement, for several hours, not knowing what to
do. He also expressed himself by saying that if he had full power to
release me, he would gladly do so, without any punishment. Also, through
prayer and petitions to the Lord the case reached President Taft, the
Adjutant-General of the army, and then it reached Brigadier-General
Davis, who was the Judge-Advocate General of the United States Army.
They also had notified the Department Commander to be as lenient as he
could before the case had reached the War Department in Washington.

In fifteen days after my trial, the sentence came back approved by the
Department Commander for eighteen months' clemency and thirteen dollars'
fine a month and reinstatement to duty to serve out my enlistment.

While I was in the guard-house in Washington Barracks, District of
Columbia, serving the sentence imposed upon me for the charge heretofore
mentioned, I was sawing wood one day, when a fellow prisoner hit me with
a piece of wood behind my ear and knocked me down. About two months
later this prisoner was saved, and the other prisoners became bitter
against me, for they believed that I was the cause of the conversion of
one of the worst men in the guard-house. I learned later that a number
of the officers were converted.

After I left the Washington Barracks, I went to Ft. Slocum, New York.
From there I was sent to Ft. Sheridan, where I was assigned to Battery
F, Fifth Field Artillery. After I had been there two days, I asked
permission of Lieutenant Osborn to hold religious services in front of
the battery. On account of its being so cold, he told me to go into the
pool-room and hold services if I thought my God was living.

I went into the pool-room, where they were playing pool, and began to
preach the gospel. Two balls were thrown at me, and I was also hit
across the back with the thick end of a cue. They took me to the
hospital and after a short time came back and said that the Jew would
not preach Jesus Christ any more. After another week I felt impressed
to preach the gospel again. While I was preaching, the cook came out
of the kitchen with a pail of hot lard and threw it on me. I was burned
on both of my hands and arms.

While I was at the hospital, black poison set in, and the doctor
said my arm must be cut off. I told him that I would not submit to any
operation; that as I suffered this for the gospel's sake, the Lord would
heal my arm. Five weeks later he looked at my arm, as the poison was
getting worse in my system, and he said, "If I do not cut off this arm,
you are going to die from the effects of blood-poisoning." I said that
I still had faith in God that he would heal this arm for his glory.

"What church do you belong to?" he inquired.

"I belong to the church of God," I answered.

"Your arm can not heal," he replied and began to laugh.

Several days afterward the poison had come up to my shoulder. When the
doctor saw it, he said, "The only thing to do is to cut your arm off at
the shoulder."

I told him that I had more faith than ever in God that he would heal my
arm, even after my whole body should be poisoned. I believed that the
Lord would heal me for his glory.

That night my fever was 104, and the doctor was called. He gave orders
to put me into a bathtub full of ice-water, but after I came out I was
much worse, and they said I could not live through the night. At five
o'clock the next morning a sudden change came and my arm turned a
yellowish color and the discharge ceased little by little. When the
doctor came, he said, "I had thought that the arm must be cut off, but
now it will get well." In two weeks I was able to use my arm as well as
ever and was again assigned to duty.

After coming out of the hospital I preached much more the unsearchable
riches of Christ, for which at different times I was cast into prison.
The post-commander of Ft. Sheridan told me that I might just as well
use the gymnasium-hall to preach the gospel six nights in the week.
While I preached there, a number of souls were brought to the Lord.

While I was at Ft. Sheridan, a letter came to me from my mother stating
that if I wanted to save her life I should turn back to Judaism and
forsake the impostor Jesus, and that if I would do this they would
receive me back again with full honor, as I was defiled before them
and the only means to save her life was for me to turn back from this
heathen belief. I wrote her as follows:

"My Dear Mother: I have received your letter and thank you very much for
it. I do really love you, but my love for you now is much different than
before. I love you because the Lord Jesus loved you and died for you.
Yet if my accepting Jesus will not and can not save you from dying, then
my rejecting him will not save you either, and I can not forsake the
Lord Jesus."

About two months later I received a cable-message saying that the last
words of my mother were, "My only son is the cause of my death." After
that period they made a burial service, took all my little belongings,
put them in a casket and buried it, and put a stone on the grave,
signifying that I died on October 29, 1908. After this they mourned for
me for eight days. Now though I am supposed to be dead to my family
and to my nation, yet I am glad that I am alive for Christ and still
preaching the unsearchable riches of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
to my own people as well as to the other nations. The Lord has enabled
me to preach free of charge to any and every one and to give unto them
freely even as I have freely received. This scripture has been very real
to me since that time: "All things work together for good to them that
love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose."

In 1912 my father died, leaving me of his large estate five dollars to
buy a rope and soap to hang myself if I did not come back to Judaism.

The foregoing account of my conversion has been written after nearly
seven years of experience and preaching the unsearchable riches of
Christ to my own people as well as to Gentile people in this country,
in the Islands of the Azores, in Spain, France, Germany, Italy, Syria,
Egypt, Palestine, Greece, and Austria.

The most bitter people against the gospel I have found are my own
people. The gospel has been misrepresented to them, and they have not
been made to realize the heart experience. There are over 12,000,000
Jewish people in this world, yet there are very few faithful and tried
missionaries amongst them to explain to them the way of salvation.
However, the comparatively little work that has been done amongst them
has met with large results despite the bitter persecution. I am deeply
encouraged and comforted to see how open and receptive they are,
although they bitterly persecute the one who comes in the name of the
Lord. Saul of Tarsus was a great persecutor of Christianity, but finally
yielded and became a true follower of Jesus Christ.

May God help us as Christians to see our great privilege in giving the
Jews the gospel and praying for them that their blindness may depart and
that they may see that the Lord Jesus is the only way, the truth, and
the light.




Among Mohammedans in Egypt

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 8


Nothing is said in the New Testament about the persons who first related
the story of the cross in Egypt. But there is a universal tradition that
the Evangelist Mark went to Egypt and preached the gospel with great
success until he was martyred for the name of Jesus Christ. His head is
believed by the Copts to have been buried in the place where the Coptic
Church in Alexandria now stands. From the records of history it is clear
that the Christian religion was carried to Egypt a few years after the
ascension of our Lord, that many in Egypt accepted the new religion
before the close of the first century, and that the numbers rapidly
increased until Egypt became Christian and churches filled the land.
Abyssinia, too, whether through the Ethiopian's return to his country
after his baptism or through others, also accepted the Christian faith,
and many of her people retain the Christian name and boldly defend a
form of Christian doctrine to this day.

The church in Egypt, as we learn from the pages of history, passed
through the fires of persecution as other churches did in the Roman
Empire, and many suffered martyrdom for their unwillingness to deny Him
who redeemed them with his precious blood. The persecution in Egypt
especially was severe in the reign of Diocletian. Milner says on the
authority of Eusebius: "Egypt suffered extremely. Whole families were
put to various kinds of death; some by fire, others by water, others by
decollation, after horrible tortures. Some perished by famine, others by
crucifixion, and of these, some in common manner. Others were fastened
with their heads downwards and preserved alive that they might die by
hunger. Sometimes ten, at other times thirty, sixty, and once a hundred
men and women with their children, were murdered in one day by various
torments. And there was still the appearance of joy among them. They
loved Christ above all, and bravely as well as humbly met death for
Christ's sake."

But as the years passed on, great importance was laid on fasting,
hermitage, and image-worship, and little by little they lost sight of
the merits of Christ's life, sufferings, and death. Today the majority
of the Copts are far away from the gospel purity of doctrine and
are bound with the chains of superstition, and need help to loosen
themselves from such chains that they may enjoy the light and liberty
of the gospel.


THE REAL CHARACTER OF ISLAM

The population of Egypt today is 12,000,000, of which 90 per cent are
followers of Mohammed. Mohammedanism entered Egypt in 638 A.D., and
from that time it has continued to be the prevailing religion. I will
now mention briefly the ethics of Mohammedanism in order to give the
reader some idea about the pollution, corruption, brutality, and
wickedness that exist among the adherents of this false religion.

"Islam," says Adolph Wuttke, "finds its place in the history of the
religious and moral spirit, not as a vital organic member, but as
violently interrupting the course of this history, and which is to be
regarded as an attempt of heathenism to maintain itself erect under
an outward monotheistic form against Christianity."

The ethics of Islam bear the character of an outwardly and crudely
conceived doctrine of righteousness. Conscientiousness in the sphere of
the social relations, faithfulness to conviction and to one's word, and
the bringing of an action into relation to God are its bright points;
but there is a lack of heart-depth of a basing of the moral in love. The
highest good is the outwardly and very sensuously conceived happiness of
the individual.

Among Islamites the potency of sin is not recognized; evil is only
an individual, not a historical, power; hence there is no need of
redemption, but only of personal works on the basis of prophetic
instruction. Mohammed is only a teacher, not an atoner. God and man
remain strictly external to and separate from each other. God, no less
individually conceived of than man, comes into no real communion with
man; and as moral, acts not as influenced by such a communion, but only
as an isolated individual. The ideal basis of the moral is faith in God
and in his Prophet; the moral life, conceived as mainly consisting in
external works, is not a fruit of received salvation, but a means for
the attainment of the same. Pious works, particularly prayer, fasting,
and almsgiving, and pilgrimage to Mecca, work salvation directly of
themselves. Man has nothing to receive from God but the Word, and
nothing to do for God but good works; of inner sanctification there
is no thought. Thus, among Islamites today we find, instead of true
humility, only proud work-righteousness. Nothing but the enjoyment of
wine, of swine-flesh, of the blood of strangled animals, and games of
chance are forbidden.

After this summary of the real character of Mohammedan ethics, an
account of its practical teaching and effect will make the picture
more vivid to the reader, although still darker.


THE MOSLEM IDEA OF SIN

Moslem doctors define sin as "a conscious act of a responsible being
against known law." They divide sin into "great" and "little" sins.
Some say there are seven great sins: idolatry, murder, false charges of
adultery, wasting the substance of orphans, taking interest on money,
desertion from Jihad, and disobedience to parents. Mohammed himself
said, "The greatest of sins before God is that you call another like
unto the God who created you, or that you murder your child from an idea
that he or she will eat your victuals, or that you commit adultery with
your neighbor's wife."

All sins except great ones are easily forgiven, as God is merciful and
clement. What Allah (God) allows is not sin. What Allah or his Prophet
forbids is sin, even should he forbid what seems right to the conscience.
It is as great an offense to pray with unwashed hands as to tell a lie,
and pious Moslems who nightly break the seventh commandment will shrink
from a tin of English meat for fear they will be defiled by eating
swine's flesh. Oh, what ignorance! The false prophet Mohammed said:
"One cent of usury which a man takes for his money is more grievous
than thirty-six fornications, and whosoever has done so is worthy of
hell-fire. Allah is merciful in winking at the sins of his favorites
(the prophets and those who fight his battles), but is a quick avenger
of all infidels and idolaters."


THE LOW IDEAL OF CHARACTER OF ISLAM

A stream can not rise higher than its source. The measure of the moral
stature of Mohammed is the source and foundation of all moral ideas
of Islam. His conduct is the standard of character. We need not be
surprized, therefore, that the ethical standard is so low among his
followers. Raymond Lull, the first missionary to Moslems, used to show
in his preachings that Mohammed had none of the seven cardinal virtues,
and was guilty of the seven deadly sins. He may have gone too far, but
it would not be difficult to show that pride, lust, envy, and anger were
prominent traits in the Prophet's character.

To take an example, what Mohammed taught regarding truthfulness is
convincing. There are two authenticated sayings of his given in the
traditions on the subject of lying: "When a servant of God tells a lie,
his guardian angels move away to the distance of a mile because of the
badness of its smell." "Verily a lie is allowable in three cases--to
women, to reconcile friends, and in war." It is no wonder, then, that
among the Prophet's followers and imitators "truth-telling is one of the
lost arts" and that perjury is too common to be noticed. As I pass in
the streets of Cairo, many times I hear the Moslems utter the word,
b'ism Allah, "in the name of God," while the speaker knows very well
that his words are altogether a lie.

There are certain things which the ethics of Islam allow, of which it is
also necessary to write. They exist, not in spite of Islam, but because
of Islam, and because of the teachings of its sacred book.


POLYGAMY, DIVORCE, AND SLAVERY

These three evils are so closely intertwined with the Mohammedan
religion, its book, and its prophet, that they can never be wholly
abandoned without doing violence to the teaching of the Koran and the
example of Mohammed.

A Moslem who lives up to his privileges and follows the example of their
saints can have four wives and any number of slave concubines; can
divorce at his pleasure; can remarry his divorced wives by a special,
though abominable, arrangement; and in addition to all this, if he
belong to the Shiah sect he can contract marriages for fun (metaa),
which are temporary. The Koran permits a Moslem to marry four legal
wives, and to have as many concubines, or slave-girls, as he can support.
In Turkey, Moslems call a woman cow.

In Islam, marriage is a kind of slavery; for the wife becomes the slave
(rakeek) of her husband, and it is her duty absolutely to obey him in
everything he requires of her, except in what is contrary to the laws
of Islam. Wife-beating is allowed by the Koran.

The other ethic, which is much worse than all the rest, is slave-trade.
According to the Koran, slavery and the slave-trade are divine
institutions. From the Koran we learn that all male and female slaves,
either married or single, taken as plunder in war are the lawful
property of the master, his chattel. Slave-traffic is not only allowed
but legislated for by Mohammedan law and made sacred by the example of
the Prophet.

For five hundred years Islam has been supreme in Turkey, the fairest and
richest portion of the Old World, and what is the result today? The
treasury is bankrupt; progress is blocked; "instead of wealth, universal
poverty; instead of comeliness, rags; instead of commerce, beggary."

Such are the chief tenets and religious requirements of Mohammedans in
Egypt, Turkey, and in other countries where the people believe in the
Koran. Christianity exists in Turkey by a kind of sufferance. The Turks
hate, ridicule, foster pride and passion toward Christians; the ignorant
populace are taught by their learned men to regard themselves infinitely
better than any Christian. The mosques are generally the hotbeds of
fanaticism. The usual manner of speaking of the Christian was and still
is to call him, in Turkey, "Imansig Kevour" (unbeliever); in Egypt,
"Nasrani," (Nazarene), or "Ya din el kalb," (you dog). Peace, harmony,
and happiness in the homes of Mohammedans are of a very transitory
nature.

Mohammedans may be stedfast and unswerving in their faith and yet guilty
of some of the most heinous crimes. Having lived among them, I have
had many opportunities to learn of their treachery as well as of their
sterling qualities. The Mohammedans are in great need of the gospel of
Jesus Christ, which is a gospel of pardon, peace, purity, righteousness,
and true wisdom.

Notwithstanding the fact that from their earliest childhood their
ideas are perverted by their traditions and false teaching, and their
consciences defiled through their vain religion, the melting power of
the Spirit of God reaches some of their hearts when the gospel of Jesus
Christ is preached. Their lives of deception bring to them many a snare,
yet from among their ranks in the Orient have come some of the most
staunch ministers of the gospel. Gross darkness once reigned throughout
the land of Egypt, and now fervent prayers are ascending to the throne
of God for the light of the gospel to drive the spiritual darkness from
the hearts of the people.




A Daughter's Faith Rewarded

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 9


I was brought up by Christian parents, that is, they were strict
church-going people; but I never knew what it was to have a change of
heart, though I feared God and did at times try to draw near to him.

It was after I graduated from school that I met those who believe in
living holy lives. I was very much impressed with them, but I did not
give my heart to God at that time. I continued to meet them and after
some months became convicted that I was a sinner and under the wrath
of God. Having attended church and Sunday-school from childhood, I had
considered myself a Christian; but when the Bible standard was lifted
up before me, I soon saw my true condition.

One day while alone I yielded myself fully to God, and he received me
into his family. I did not know at that time, though I was very happy
in my new-found love, what a treasure I had really found; but the
eighteen years I have already spent in His service verifies to me that
the path of the righteous shineth more and more unto the perfect day.

A spirit of love and gratitude begets a spirit of service. I wanted to
do something for God, so began visiting the sick. Soon I felt a desire
to go into the work of the Lord, but this step was much opposed in my
home, my family having had a life of worldly honor mapped out for me. I
waited, hoping a way would open for me to go, but it seemed my friends
were becoming more opposed to the life I had chosen. I was forced to
leave home against the wishes of my friends, especially my dear mother,
but I see more clearly now than I did then that God's hand was in it and
that he was leading me.

Mother was so displeased that she took steps to disinherit me, but
afterwards, through the persuasion of others, she relented. She also
forbade me the privilege of returning home, but in this she also
relented. I wondered at this change in my dear mother, who was one of
the best of mothers, for this new life I had received seemed to have
made a great gulf between us. It certainly had made a marked change in
the once rebellious, self-willed girl, and I could not understand why my
mother, who had spent many anxious moments because of my wilfulness, was
not rejoicing instead of opposing me. I now see that my course thwarted
her worldly ambitions for me; hence the bitterness.

I had spent a number of years working for the Master, which were
very profitable and beneficial to my soul. To me it was like God's
training-college. My mother came to visit me sometimes, vainly hoping I
would return with her. She told me that if I would just return home she
would buy me worldly vanities, such as fine dresses, etc., which I had
once loved. She could not understand when I told her I did not want them
any more. She even told me I could receive the attentions of a certain
young man who for her sake I had once refused. But that fancy also had
been removed far from me, and I praised God as I explained to her what
a change had been wrought in me.

About one year after this my mother had a severe nervous attack. She
came to where I was living, saying that she wanted to make her peace
with God and die. Some ministers and I had prayer with her, and God
graciously pardoned her soul. Oh the joy that filled my heart when I saw
my dear mother humble herself before the Lord! She not only received
pardon, but received a divine touch in her body also. She became a bold
witness before all our friends and relatives to what God had done for
her. It seemed she could never praise him enough. Though she was a woman
of very strong character and personality, she became as gentle and
teachable as a little child. Her nature seemed to be entirely changed.
While I write this, tears of gratitude flow because of the greatness of
God's salvation. She spent a few happy months here below, and then God
took her.




Missionary Experiences in British West Indies

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 10


It was a warm, sultry morning late in December. The tropical air was
scarcely fanned by a breeze. The missionary heard the peculiar tapping
of the postman at the gate and hurried to get his morning mail. He took
the single letter that was handed him, and with a pleasant nod to the
postman broke the seal as he stepped back to the veranda.

It was a long letter; so before reading it the man sank into a chair and
glanced away to the gleaming sea; but meeting only the dazzling light
there, he let his eyes rest upon the distant blue-green mountains for
a moment. Then for some time he was occupied with the contents of this
lengthy letter. It was written in a neat, scholarly manner, and the
missionary noted it all as he read.

As he finished reading, a bright-faced woman came through the garden
with a baby in her arms. "Come here, Jennie," he said; and his wife
came quickly to him. "Here is a letter, Jennie, that requires very
careful answering. You know how busy I am; so I will commit this into
your care. This person, a Mr. K. L. Jones, has asked many questions on
the church and other points of doctrine." He looked up as he spoke, and,
finding the baby holding out its chubby arms to him, he took it and
handed the letter to his wife.

Thoughtfully she took it and began reading. She loved to write letters,
and this, she felt, was her special part of the work. But here she
perceived she had a task that was very difficult; for the writer,
evidently a scholar, had put forth a dozen numbered questions that must
be carefully answered or this dear soul would be hindered from walking
in the truth. God would give the needed wisdom, she knew, and she folded
the letter back into its envelope and sat meditating on the different
points he had raised. After a while, she asked:

"How was the meeting last night?"

"Very good! Brother Owen spoke, and he did very well indeed. He used the
text: 'Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall
ye be my disciples.' Several came forward for help afterwards. Ah, by
the way, do you remember Sister Tilton? She was out to meeting last
night."

"Sister Tilton? She must be a new sister!"

"Ah, well, perhaps we did not tell you about her. This young girl came
to meeting once some time ago, but afterwards became very ill. Her folks
wanted the doctor for her, but she refused, not telling them why. But as
her sickness increased, they became alarmed and insisted on calling the
doctor. But the girl still refused the medicine. The doctor said she
would probably not live. Her people begged to know the reason for her
refusal to take the medicine, and she then said that she had been to
the church of God meeting and had been made very happy, and that she
believed if they would send for the elders of that church she should
be healed. So word came, and Brother Owen went and anointed her in
accordance with Jas. 5:14, 15. She has been getting better right along,
and tonight she was at the meeting. She is saved now and seems to have
a clear experience."

"Thank God!" was the hearty response. "How I should have loved to be
at the meeting last night!--but for the present here is my meeting,
and here is my work," and, catching up the baby and waving the letter
happily, she ran into the house at the sound of children's voices
within.

After the baby had been bathed and put to sleep, and the other children
were sitting quietly at play on the side veranda, Sister Patience
settled herself with her Bible at her husband's desk to answer this
important letter. Bowing her head she besought God for this soul and for
wisdom to answer his difficult questions aright. Then taking up her pen,
she began the letter. She was so glad to write; she loved writing; and
the joy of it always seemed to get into the very letters and shine back
from the pages. She addressed Mr. Jones cordially and kindly, and then
took up the substance of the letter itself. In calling his attention to
certain truths she referred to the Bible time after time, and again and
again she prayed, for the letter seemed particularly important to her.
Long she meditated over some of the knotty questions, endeavoring to
find the wisest explanation. Sometimes she was interrupted by the
children just when she most needed to be quiet; but she had learned that
interruptions often come as blessings in disguise, for often God had
given thoughts that were clearer and better when she had patiently gone
to attend to the children, and when she was free to return to her work
she had found an answer preparing itself in her mind without an effort
on her part. Thus, after several hours of close application, she
finished the letter and sent it off with a trusting spirit.

Sister Patience hoped to receive an answer to her letter immediately,
but week after week passed, and there was no response. Dread began to
creep upon her that this soul would not accept the truth. She took him
earnestly to God many times and trusted that God would in some way
overrule. However, as four months passed and she had not heard again,
she gave him over as being no longer interested.

Then it was that one morning there came, to her surprize, a letter in
the same fine handwriting. How cordially he wrote! He thanked her for
answering the former letter so fully and said he had been searching and
proving her answers by the Word during the long interval. And now there
were still a few points remaining that he disagreed with her upon; again
she found a few numbered questions to answer.

These, like the first, were very shrewd, puzzling questions, and only
sagacious answers would satisfy the inquirer. Again Sister Patience
labored over the letter with prayer and meditation. Then, leaning hard
upon God, she wrote another encouraging letter setting forth expositions
of Scripture as clearly as possible. This time she invited her
correspondent to a series of meetings they were expecting to hold during
the coming winter season, when they hoped to have with them one or two
ministers from America for a short period.

Again she waited long for an answer; but this time she did not give him
up. Several months passed, and then one of the brethren, a colporteur,
came. He had been away for several months, and Sister Patience was very
glad to see him.

"And tell me now, Brother Delworth," she said, after the first greetings
were over, "where have you been all this time?"

"Mostly in Arendon and Lawney. I went from Panville to Mayfield, and
from there to Paldings."

"Paldings! You were at Paldings? Do you know one K. L. Jones?" asked
Sister Patience with great interest.

"Ah yes, a fine old gentleman, a school-teacher. He is saved. I sold him
some books. He seems very much interested. And, by the way, he asked me
to say to you when I should see you that he hoped to come over to the
meeting next month, when the brethren are here from America. You will
hear from him soon."

The time was drawing near for the coming of the brethren from America.
Arrangements had been made for a meeting during their stay, which would
be only for a few days. And then one day a letter came from Brother
Jones inquiring as to the date of the meeting, and saying that if
possible he should like to attend it. So again Sister Patience wrote
him, urging him to be at the meeting, if possible.

Thus it was that during the exciting days of the meeting, when many
from different parts of the country had gathered in to meet the brethren
from America in this meeting, Sister Patience first met Brother Jones.
It happened in this way: One morning before meeting-time, she was
passing through the little sitting-room in her home, when she noticed a
fine-looking native man of venerable appearance sitting at one side of
the room. People were all about him, but he was looking over some tracts
that had been handed him. Making her way to him, she said:

"Good morning, Brother, I have not met you before, have I?"

"Ah, no," he said, and, quickly rising, he gave her a courteous bow.
"Can this be Sister Patience? My name is K. L. Jones, of Paldings."

"How glad I am to meet you!" she replied. And then followed an animated
conversation in which she was able to recognize and admire the fine
qualities of his matured mind. Finally he expressed the desire to speak
with the foreign brethren himself, and so an audience was arranged
for him after the next service. Then it was, Sister Patience learned
afterwards, that Brother Jones inquired deeply into the subjects of
sanctification and baptism. Later in the day it was announced that there
would be a baptismal service early the next morning to accommodate
Brother Jones, who was to return home by an early train.

Some years have passed since then. God has wonderfully used the dear old
brother, and a congregation has been raised up about him, who look up to
him as their pastor. These are backward mountain people where he has
labored, yet such has been his patience and faithfulness and love that
they have become established in holiness and truth. Brother Jones, as
we call him, is becoming feeble now, but he is still standing faithful
as the shepherd of this little flock, faithful unto death.

Does it pay to use patience and prayer when dealing with precious souls?
Ah yes; eternity alone can tell all that it means.




The Rescue of an Australian Lad

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 11


It was in the town of Goulbourne, New South Wales, Australia, that
I began my career in life. Until I reached the age of four years, a
prosperous father provided the comforts of a good home, but a great
change took place upon my suddenly being left fatherless. A few months
later found me in a little town on the St. Lawrence River, in the
Providence of Ontario, Canada. I had accompanied my mother to this
place, but she soon placed me with a strange family and went to a
distant city.

As I was now separated from every family tie, life began in real
earnest. It was also the beginning of a record of many interesting and
often sad experiences extending over a number of years. In my wanderings
in different parts of Canada and in many localities of the United
States, the incidents varied all the way from being rescued from
drowning to landing in jail as a vagrant. Space forbids a detailed
account of my experience, which to me affords material for interesting
and often regretful recollection. It may, however, all be summed up and
described as analogous with the casting of an innocent infant into the
mighty Niagara River to be swept along at the mercy of the on-rushing
and maddening current, which knows no relenting, but bears its victim to
an untimely end over the brink of the mighty falls. There destruction
on the ragged rocks below awaits it unless an unseen hand should
miraculously dip into the water and save that form for life and service.

Thank God, in his tender mercy he stretched forth his hand to rescue my
poor, lost, helpless soul from the turbulent rapids of sin when I was
seventeen years of age. He set me on the solid rock of his truth and
gave me the Holy Spirit as an eternal guide and propelling power. He has
proved to be a comforter in whom I can safely put my trust when stemming
the rising tide of unbelief and doubt.

It is with thanksgiving that I can at the present time recount the divine
care of which I have been the object, so far in my pilgrimage through
life. I rejoice to be a partaker of the Father's love, which is pure,
warm, and changeless. There is an abiding assurance of safety so long as
I walk in the path of obedience to his will and trust implicitly in his
mighty power to keep my feet while I take steps toward the threshold of
heaven. I am grateful, also, for a soul-conviction that the most worthy,
most desirable and glorious life is the one that finds its outlet in the
glad service of love to God and discovers complete happiness in serving
others. A soul without Christ is like an idle straw driven at the mercy
of the wind, but the soul redeemed through the blood of Jesus will
experience a sweet essence that turns the unfruitful life into a garden
of unspeakable delights.




Heathen Customs in China

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 12


To those who have been reared in Christian nations, it is difficult to
conceive of the vague ideas of the true worship of the Creator, that
are really bred and born into the worshipers of idols. Generation upon
generation, for thousands of years, have been taught the same form of
worship, or nearly so, until such heathen ideas and doctrines have
become just as much a part of their nature as is any other sinful
disposition.

Having been a personal observer of a few of their customs, I shall here
be mentioning what I have seen, with a prayer that my account may at
least help the reader more fully to appreciate the access that every
worshiper of the true God has to the bountiful storehouse of blessings
provided by our Creator.

For nearly five years I lived a short distance outside a large city in
China. Almost as far as we could see in any direction, the hills and
valleys were dotted with little mounds. (Some of the valleys, however,
were under cultivation.) How came all these little mounds, some round,
some long, some large and some small, some carefully covered over with
fresh green sod, and others greatly weather-beaten and nearly washed
away by the rains of the season? These mysterious little mounds mark the
last resting-places of thousands of Chinese. Should the mortal remains
in a mound be those of a child, little or no attention is shown it; but
should it be those of a father or a mother, the relatives who are left
behind do not fail to show great respect and attention to the spirit of
the departed one. Should they not render such attention, they believe
the spirit has power to inflict upon them great sorrow and adversity.

Some of their methods of showing respect I have observed to be as
follows: After a body is prepared for burial, candles and incense are
kept burning, near the head and the feet; also bowls of rice and other
food, with a pair of chopsticks, are placed within easy reach, for
the use of the spirit. On the day of the funeral some one is hired to
scatter representations of paper money along the road, just ahead of the
bier. In determining the position of the coffin at the grave, great care
is taken to have the head turned directly toward some favorite temple,
that the spirit may have no trouble in finding its way there. Before the
casket is covered with sod, a religious ceremony is held in this way:
All the relatives present, beginning with the nearest kinsman, kneel
down and bow from one to three times, to the one whom they now hold
in such great esteem. Even the tiniest children are taught to thus bow
before and reverence their ancestor. This being finished, there is
then kindled, at the foot of the casket, a small fire of paper money,
by which means they believe the value thereof is transported to the
spirit-world for the use of their departed one.

A day or two after the funeral, and on special feast-days, the near
relatives carry food to the grave and offer the food to the spirit by
placing it in bowls before the grave. They also again burn paper money
or incense. While the fire burns, and the food remains to be received by
the spirit, a woman, usually the nearest relative, kneels by the side of
the grave and begins a long-drawn-out season of lamenting and wailing
for the sorrow that has come upon her on account of the death of the
one by whose grave she is kneeling. She soon almost prostrates herself.
During this season of weeping, she enumerates over and over, all the
virtues and good qualities of the departed one, and begs him to come
back to her. She usually continues in this frenzy until some one who has
accompanied her, pulls her up, bidding her cease the wailing. The bowls
of food previously offered to the spirit are now given to the children
or carried home for others to eat. By this manner of worship the woman
is supposed to show great honor and reverence to the deceased, whether
he was her father, brother, husband, or son.

Well do I remember the strange feelings that came over me the first few
times I witnessed from my window such a scene as I have just described.
I felt such a longing to go to the weeping woman, put my arms around
her, and comfort her sad heart. But to my utter astonishment, within
two or three minutes after all her touching lamentations she was up
laughing, talking, and having a jovial time with those about her!
Whence came those agonizing groans, and whither had they flown? Had
"He who is touched with the feeling of our infirmities" comforted her
heart? Had the God of heaven, who is a present help in every time of
trouble, stretched forth his loving hand to dry her tears of sorrow?
Ah, no; sadly enough, no. Believe me, reader, when I say that these
superstitious women worshiping the spirits of departed ones have a
form of sorrow and make a great pretense of distress, but that, in
reality, it is only a custom or habit which has been copied from their
grandmothers for generations back. This may seem hard to believe, but
one thing which convinced me the quickest was that they all have
precisely the same tune or swing to their wailing. After hearing it
once or twice, you always recognize it afterwards, wherever you are,
whether you see the person or not. It is like a recitation or song
committed to memory. There may be no signs whatsoever of sorrow
until after the woman has taken her place beside the grave, when she
immediately begins in tones that could probably be heard, on a quiet
day, a quarter of a mile away, and continues wailing in the same pitch
until some one bids her cease, when her outward appearance of sorrow
ceases as abruptly as it began. I do not mean to say that never is there
any real sorrow mingled with the outward form. There may be, but it is
the outward form which constitutes the worship and which every woman
seems to know how to perform when the occasion presents itself.

Now permit me to tell something concerning the worship of idols.
Originally, I had the idea that the inside arrangement of a heathen
temple was very much the same as that of a Christian chapel; namely,
that seats were orderly arranged for the worshipers and that the idols
would be standing in the front where the pulpit should be. But upon
my first visit to a temple, I saw that I was mistaken. At or near the
temple door stand two very large, fierce-looking idols, known as guards
of the temple. Arranged all around the sides are numerous other idols,
of various kinds and sizes. But in the center of the building stands
one or more large idols, who are supposed to impart different kinds
of blessings to the worshiper. Standing near by are a number of
incense-pots, from which ascends smoke continuously on worship-days.
On the floor can be seen a number of thick, round mats, on which the
worshipers kneel as they bow before the idols. They do not have fixed
hours of worship and all assemble at the appointed time, but at any time
throughout the day few or many may go in and bow before whatever idols
are supposed to bestow the kinds of blessings desired. The idol is not
supposed to give out the blessing at the time the worshiper bows before
him, as some readers may have believed. For instance, at the beginning
of a new year, if a man bows before the god of wealth, he does not
expect the idol to hand out money to him, but rather he expects that
during the coming year he shall have financial prosperity.

I remember once seeing a father bow before an idol, then take his three
little children, one by one, show them how to kneel upon the mat, fold
their little hands, and bump their heads several times upon the floor
in front of the hideous idol, of which the little ones were afraid. The
father noticed that I was observing closely the procedure. When it was
all finished, he looked at me with a smile, as if to say, "Didn't they
do well?"

These things can not but make sad the heart of a child of God. Catching
a glimpse now and again of a bit of real idol-worship helps one to
realize that the church, in evangelizing the world, has indeed a mighty
undertaking. From a human standpoint, it may seem impossible, but with
God all things are possible.




Deliverance from Discouragements and Extremism

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 13


Along the narrow way that leads to heaven, the Christian meets with many
experiences that to him seem strange and inexplicable. That at times
he should walk in light and then again in darkness; that sometimes he
should run with ease and then again be compelled (as Bunyan puts it) "to
fall from running to going, and from going to clambering upon his hands
and his knees, because of the steepness of the place"; that he should
stand today upon the mountain-top of glory and tomorrow find himself
plunged into the valley of despondency and gloom; that today he should
feel so clearly his Savior's presence, and tomorrow be left seemingly so
entirely to himself; all these and many other things of like nature tend
to puzzle and confuse the souls of pilgrims on the way to glory. That
discouragements and disappointments would come from outside sources
almost all have expected, but that the inward life should be changeful
and varied in any wise many have not thought consistent with true
Christian experience.


VARIED EXPERIENCES

Some, upon discovering that the Christian's pathway leads not always
through verdant valleys and beside still waters, conclude that the
way is too often rough and that therefore the prize is not worth the
running, become discouraged and turn back into sin. Others, after
wondering and seeking in vain for a way always bright and easy, and
learning that all Christians have similar experiences of inward light
and shade, conclude that these things are part of the way and determine
to take them as a matter of course and make the best of them. They
consider the prize too great to miss, and so they press on at any cost,
having settled down to endure what must be endured and to enjoy what may
be enjoyed, hoping some day for an end to it all, but never discovering
the causes, or being able to think the thoughts of God concerning their
difficulties.

Another class can not be satisfied with this condition of mingled light
and shade. Their souls must ever see the face of God, and with nothing
short of that can they abide content. They would make any sacrifice if
only the glory and joy they desire might be theirs, and without it they
can not be still. Everywhere they turn crying, "Wherefore hidest thou
thy face," "Make me to know my transgression and my sin" (Job 13:23,
24); and, like Job again, 'they go forward, but he is not there; and
backward, but they can not perceive him'; on the right and left they
seek, but can not find him (Job 23:8, 9). But they never quiet their
souls sufficiently for God to tell them the causes of the conditions
which they so much deplore.

Yet another class of Christians go through like experiences with the
others, but somehow God by his grace enables their hearts, perhaps after
years of struggling, to settle down at last into a state of stillness
and calm submission where he can teach them the causes of their troubles
and so bring them out into that "wealthy place" which is the normal
state of a mature Christian. Then they can sing with Job, "I have heard
of thee by the hearing of the ear; but NOW mine eye seeth thee" (Job.
42:5).

In religious as truly as in physical and temporal affairs, there is
never an effect without an adequate cause. If the Word of God loses
its richness, if darkness falls upon the soul, if it is hard to pray,
if there is a lack of victory in any respect, there is a reason, a
sufficient cause for such a condition. Let it be understood here that
the causes are not always, in fact often are not, sins. Much confusion
has arisen from imagining that every chastening of the Lord is the
punishment of some sin, when, in fact, each of God's sons must endure
chastisement that they may become in a fuller sense partakers of his
holiness. Thus, we conclude that all the unpleasant experiences with
which we meet in the upward way must be for the sake of eliminating
something of self and of conforming us more to the divine image. We do
not meet them simply because they are in the way, but they are in the
way because we need them. Hence the best way to meet all such things is
to bring them quickly to Father, not inquiring impatiently, "Why must
I suffer so?" but rather: "What is there in my nature that makes this
suffering necessary? What is it that thou art endeavoring to do for me?
And how may I conduct myself so as to receive the benefit?"


TESTS IN EARLY CHRISTIAN LIFE

Happy is the child of God who can say that from the day of his
conversion he has never sinned nor grieved the Spirit of God. Such,
however, has not been the experience of the writer. For several years
I was plunged, sometimes within the space of a few hours, from extreme
happiness and joy into deepest gloom and sadness. Weeks of walking in
the joy of the Lord often terminated in some sad failure, causing untold
misery of soul. When faith again gained the victory, praises in the day
and songs in the night were mine until some other episode or depression
of feeling caused me anxiety and fear. In spite of God's matchless grace
and patient endeavor to teach me the lessons of absolute dependence and
humble trust in him, this condition continued until gradually and almost
imperceptibly my soul reached a place where I seemed past feeling, joy
was no longer mine, love seemed a sensation foreign to my heart, the
power of prayer was gone, and I felt that God had indeed forsaken me. My
testimonies (for I was not conscious of any sin and could not give up my
hope in Christ) sounded to my own ears as "tinkling cymbal and sounding
brass."

That a soul who commits no known sin and who never loses the
determination to serve God could get into such a state seems incredible.
Such, however, was my condition, and I have met some who are on the way
to just such a place of confusion, others who have reached and are now
suffering in the same state of misery, and still others who have passed
through and found that sweet rest of soul so plainly promised to all who
come to Jesus. Such, then, as may be passing through or who are entering
upon such experiences, I trust to be able to show how my feet came to
sink into the miry clay and how at last God graciously set me upon the
solid rock of his eternal truth and gave me new songs of praise and love
once again.


A DEEPER SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE

For the two years intervening between my conversion and the time when
I was enabled to make a complete consecration and receive an experience
which I had not before attained, I enjoyed and endured the experiences
common to the Christian in his early religious life. Many times I
presented myself to God for cleansing, but as often failed to receive
the Holy Ghost, because I could not believe unless I should have such
manifestations of his incoming as some others had received. At last, in
desperation, being confident that I had yielded all to God, I determined
to believe that he did cleanse my heart and give me the Holy Spirit
whether I ever received any feelings or not; for had not the immutable
God promised, and could his word be broken? After a severe testing of
this decision, the Holy Spirit came into my heart, cleansing it and
filling me with joy unspeakable and full of glory. "Now," I thought,
"surely all my difficulties are past, and I shall walk in glory the rest
of my life." This bubble soon burst, however; for in my very testimony
to the gracious infilling of the Spirit, I was shown a degree of self
and a lack of humility, which, had I understood the truth of the matter,
should have sent me in faith to the throne of grace for a supply of what
I lacked, but which, instead, I allowed to throw me into a state of
doubt and fear from which I did not emerge for some days. The agony
of soul which I suffered through not understanding the fact that I had
an individual self-life with which I must reckon, even though I was
sanctified, can be understood only by those who have become victims to
doubts in a like manner. After a time faith became stronger, the seasons
of depression became fewer, and my soul lived upon the wing. Prayer was
a delight; the reading of the Word filled me with praise; meeting the
people of God was the joy of my life; and every newly revealed truth
made my soul leap for gladness.


GLORYING IN SELF

I came at last to revel in my experiences. Insensibly to myself, I
gloried in MY joy, MY victory, MY trueness to God. Others told of trials
and difficulties; my testimonies were full of victory and praise, and I
rejoiced in the fact. Little by little I began to notice the faults and
failures of others, and having begun to think so much of what I was,
I had but a little step to go to make a comparison of their faults with
my virtues. As I remember, I did this all quite unconsciously; but a
brother at last said to me, "I fear you are losing that burning love
for others which you once had." Thus reproved, I sought the Father in a
very simple prayer that he would fill me again with that sweetness and
tenderness so necessary for a child of God. That he answered no one
could doubt, least of all I myself. A passion for souls took hold upon
me. No labor was too hard, no sacrifice too great, if only I could
influence a soul for Jesus. I felt a tenderness of soul toward those
whom I had formerly criticized, and whereas I had avoided them, now I
felt a drawing toward them, and though I believed (because some in whom
I had confidence warned me of it) that they possessed very serious
faults, someway I could not see them so plainly.

I was young in years, and oh, so ignorant! If only at that time my
wisdom had been equal to my love for God and souls, how much of sorrow
I might have been saved! How hard the Spirit of God tried to keep me
from taking counsel with self and others! but I had yet to develop that
individuality which can stand alone with God in sunshine or tempest
and at the same time hold an attitude of humble, submissive love to
the brethren. I needed that single eye which sees only God and is not
occupied with self or others, except in humbly loving and serving them.
Partly through a lack of understanding, but more especially because
spiritual pride was gaining a foothold in my heart, making it impossible
for me clearly to distinguish the voice of the Spirit of God, I failed
to heed his warnings, and entered an experience of darkness and gloom,
lighted by a very few rays of his divine presence, which continued over
a period of several years.


CRITICIZING OTHERS

Gradually my former experience was repeated. Criticism of others slowly
but surely took the place of fervent charity. Contemplation of self and
self-complacency supplanted meditation on God and the humble realization
of my need of his constant help. Self-sufficiency succeeded humble
dependence upon the Lord. All this was utterly uncomprehended by my
heart, and soon I began vaguely to wonder why I did not love secret
prayer as formerly, why the Word did not seem so good to me as before,
and why my thoughts ran so much upon myself and others, whereas in times
past the Lord had been the Alpha and Omega of my meditations. My zeal
for the truth did not abate. My public devotions were earnest and
apparently spiritual, but deep within my soul I knew that there was a
difference. However, I was so much taken up with helping others do right
that I had not much time to attend to my own needs. God had given me
much light, many things for my personal benefit. These I was very
anxious for others to see; for if they were good for me, why not for
others also? Thus, I endeavored to force my convictions upon all I met.
I loved their souls and my actions were born of a desire for their best
good, but my attitude must have repelled rather than have attracted
them. Anxiety to see every one get as much as possible as quickly as
possible, made me oversolicitous and exacting.

At this time I came in contact with some who were inclined to lower the
standard in some respects and give more room for looseness of walk and
conversation than was expedient. These I looked upon at first with pity,
then with indignation, and at last as wilful deceivers. At this stage,
I think, the last vestige of divine tenderness vanished from my soul,
and I entered the conflict determined to vindicate the truth and see the
standard upheld. When efforts were made to discover to me my faults, I
could see only theirs. If it was suggested to me that I was lacking in
love, I felt that judgments instead of love should be meted out to them.
Instead of feeling free in their presence, I felt like avoiding them and
almost feared to be with them. This I ascribed to the bad spirit which
I felt actuated them. Had I only known how, I might have held to the
true standard in righteousness and also in mercy, but I could see no
middle ground. Either I was right and they wrong or the opposite was
true. And I thought that if I was wrong at all I must be wholly wrong.
I had not at that time seen the truth that God judges us by our
motives, and condemns or excuses us as we have or do not have an earnest
determination to serve him and do his will. So any attempt to recognize
those who were failing in doing some of what I was sure was the will of
God only resulted in terrible confusion to my soul.


WARNED BY A DREAM

At last God in mercy gave a dream to a brother who was trying to help
us. I can not recall it perfectly, but to the best of my recollection,
it was somewhat as follows: He thought that he was in the center of a
beautiful stream of water, clear as crystal. The banks on each side were
perpendicular and very high. On each bank was a large bundle to which
was attached a strap. The brother was trying hard, but without success,
to pull those bundles into the stream. In the midst of his exertions he
awoke. Wondering what was in the bundles, he looked to the Lord and
received this solution: The crystal stream represented God's eternal
truth; the obstinate bundles contained a list of things which he gave
to us somewhat as follows:

                                TRUTH

        Human Reasoning           |          Legality
                                  |
  Zeal for spirituality           |  Great claims to spirituality
  Voluntary humility              |  Harshness
  Independence                    |  Self-sufficiency
  Headiness                       |  Self-will
  Criticism                       |  Criticism
  Loose handling of Word          |  Zeal for written commands
  Exaltation of Spirit above Word |  Exaction
  Undue liberty                   |  Bondage
  Compromise                      |  Fanaticism


INDIFFERENCE OR DOUBTS

Such a revelation of my heart should have helped me, but so blind was
I that the only change it wrought was to turn the weapons of harshness,
criticism, and exaction upon myself. And for three long miserable years,
with a heart like a stone so far as feelings were concerned, I wrestled
with doubts and fears and tried, oh, so hard! to reach the standard of
spirituality which I had formerly held up for others. Labor in prayer as
I would, the light would not dispel the darkness, the stony heart would
not soften, except for a short season. Then, how I gloried in the light
and how I mourned when it was dark again! Worse than all else, there
fell upon my soul a state of seeming indifference to my condition and
carelessness toward both God, the souls of others, and myself. Stir
myself out of it, I could not. Sorrow and joy alike seemed strangers to
me. As there was no blessing, so there was no grief. There was a great
calm, but it was the calm of the grave; it was not peace. When reproved
for causing trials to others, as I often needed to be, I endeavored not
to be guilty of the same offense again; but no matter what I did, I
seemed to experience no great depth of sorrow. Withal there developed a
lightness quite foreign to what I had been by nature or grace. I seemed
to live only upon the surface, and to have no ability to reach any
depth of grace. This I deplored, and longed for the blessing of genuine
sorrow. How often I wished that I had never heard the truth if only
I might have the chance to begin all over again!

I lived in circles, making no progress. Daily I prayed for a return of
the joy, love, peace, and victory I had once known. Sometimes the clouds
rifted a little, and I gloried in it, thinking that surely the Lord
had heard, and I should be delivered; but soon I would feel the same
dulness settle down, leaving in me the same aching void as before.
Again and again I tried to repent, thinking that I surely must be
a sinner; but I could not work up any earnestness, nor could I find
anything in particular of which to repent, only the darkness and general
dissatisfaction which I was experiencing. If only I could have begun
again; but there seemed no place from which to start, no foundation for
my feet, and I felt myself almost entirely swallowed in the quicksand
of despondency and discouragement. I realized then the force of the
Psalmist's words, "If the foundations be removed, what shall the
righteous do?"


DISCOURAGEMENTS

At last my thoughtlessness brought upon me some very severe reproofs.
I knew that I was not feeling the weight of them as I should, and I
knew also that unless I should be able in some way to see why I did
such things I could never get any help. Why should I, who longed to be
a soul-winner, be a source of trial to others? Having at last gotten
it settled that there was something fundamentally wrong, I determined
not to content myself until I should discover what it was. Instead of
praying as I had done for so long, for love, joy, etc., I endeavored
to humble myself before God and entreat him to show me what was wrong
within. I made very slow progress. A day of fasting and prayer revealed
nothing. But I would not cease searching my heart. It was very dry
praying, for I had no ability even to feel sorry that my condition was
so bad; but I had one promise to which I clung desperately: "They that
seek the Lord shall not want any good thing" (Psa. 34:10). I could not
make myself feel, nor change my state, but I could seek. And it was
within my power, as it is within the power of all, to believe that he
would be found of me.

At last, little by little, it dawned upon me that I was selfish. The
reader may smile, as I myself do now, that I did not know it before.
But up to that time I had never stopped to consider why I did things.
If I spoke harshly, I was sorry and begged pardon, but it never occurred
to me to think why I had spoken so, except that something had not
pleased me. If I prayed when I felt inclined and neglected prayer when
I did not feel inclined to pray, I knew that I had neglected duty, but
to consider why I had neglected it never entered my mind. If words not
unto edification escaped my lips, I was ashamed, but my motive for so
speaking was unknown to me. But now the Lord showed me clearly that a
desire for personal pleasure and profit lurked deep at the root of all
those acts of indifference and carelessness. Grateful for one ray of
light, I sought again his presence and cried, "But why, O Lord, should
I, who have tasted thy divine grace, who have felt the sanctifying power
of thy Holy Spirit--why should I be selfish?" My spiritual eye was
regaining its sight now and my ear its keenness, so that through many
days, in the testimonies of others, through reading, and in prayer and
meditation, the answer came by degrees, until at last I understood.


SELF-LOVE AND PURE LOVE

There is, I learned, in every human heart an element called self-love.
This is not sinful in itself, being synonymous with that desire for
happiness which is the medium through which God appeals to the soul.
It is not annihilated in the sanctified soul, else Jesus could not have
said, "Love thy neighbor as thyself," but it is there subordinated to
that pure love which places God first in all circumstances. To love the
Lord with all the heart, might, mind, and strength is to love with pure
love; but the heart that loves thus still contains self-love, and it is
through this property of the soul that the sanctified can be tempted.
Adam was a perfect man, with a perfectly pure heart; but when tempted
to obtain something which promised to improve his state and increase
his happiness, he proved that he loved himself by yielding to the
temptation. It is this part of ourselves which must daily be denied lest
it degenerate into selfishness and cause us trouble. There is a degree
to which this self-love and pure love may become mixed in our service
to God. This had happened in my case.

Pure love serves without any hope of reward. When light and peace and
joy fill the soul, or when grief, sorrow, or loneliness presses the
heart, pure love goes on loving and serving. Pure love desires, not to
be pleased, but to please. It gives all and demands nothing in return.
It loves God, not so much for what he has done for the soul, or for what
the soul expects him to do for it, but for what he IS. It seeks him, not
so much that it may be blessed, as that it may be a pleasure to him.
It desires, not so much satisfaction for its own heart, as that he may
be satisfied with it. It seeks not place nor position nor anything, but
only that HE may find pleasure in it, that HE may be able to rejoice in
the work of his hand. If it pleases him to give good things, the soul
is grateful, but does not forget that the Giver is more than the gift.
If evil comes, pure love can quietly rest, desiring naught for self,
but all for him. Even if his face is hidden, pure love, though feeling
keenly the absence of its beloved, can still say in sweet submission,
"Thy will be done"; for it feels itself unworthy of any blessing and so
is content with whatever its Lord is pleased to do. It yields itself to
the Author of every good, and, trusting his love, receives thankfully
and in deep humility what he pleases to give and as gratefully humbles
itself to go without what he does not please to give. "Willingly to
receive what thou givest, to lack what thou withholdest, to relinquish
what thou takest, to suffer what thou inflictest, to be what thou
requirest"--this is pure love and real consecration.


SEEING MY CONDITION

As God revealed this precious truth, I felt as though some one had
said of me, "Doth Job serve God for naught?" and that God could not have
justified me as he did Job. My own heart showed me self-seeking. I saw
then that I had prayed to be blessed; that I had longed for satisfaction;
that I had sought for joy and peace and love and spirituality, partly
at least, that I might be satisfied and well pleased with myself, and,
furthermore, that I might be considered spiritual among the brethren.
Also, I was honestly anxious to be a blessing to others and in
everything to be an "example of the believers." But to seek the Lord
simply to please him never occurred to me, until I was reminded of his
unselfish love for me. He desired me to be "all for him," not because my
little all could make him any richer, but because it was only then that
he could really be "all for me" and bestow upon me the riches of his
love. A sentence from Fenelon made me more ashamed than ever. It reads
something like this: "Would you serve God only as he gives you pleasure
in serving him?"


LIGHT BREAKS UPON MY SOUL

In the beginning of my Christian experience I had but to see a truth to
feel within a strong drawing to obedience. But now all was different.
The cold facts of my condition were plain to me, but there was no inward
force compelling me to act according to the knowledge I had gained. I
was tossed about and wished more than I can tell for some inward urging
of the Spirit of God toward the performance of my duty. I did not know
the truth that God accepts the decision of the will as the purpose of
the heart. I supposed that no act could be acceptable to God unless
it came from a warm feeling of love. The deadness and the apathy of my
heart were sickening. I saw clearly the wretchedness of my condition,
but there was no breaking up, no feeling of sorrow, no conviction (as
I thought), no love for God. If I could only have shed some tears; if my
soul had only been exercised for its own deliverance! But all within was
as still as a stone; only my mind seemed active.

At last, however, I saw that this apparent lack of sorrow was only
another step toward the utter repudiation of self. In the past, self
had hidden behind my tears, and I had unconsciously trusted in my sorrow
instead of in the Lord, thinking that surely because I felt so sorry,
I should not repeat the offense. But a feeling of sorrow can not save,
as I proved again and again by repeated failures, and so God, wishing
to strip me of anything in which to trust except himself, allowed me
not even the satisfaction of tears or a breaking up of heart. He wished
to teach me that real repentance is an act of the will and not of the
emotions. For a tender heart, one should be grateful, but to trust in
that for victory over sin or faults can only lead to repeated failure.
So at last I was willing to submit this point to him who doeth all
things well and was willing to cast myself, unworthy, undone, without
a vestige of hope in myself, nor a place to set my feet, wholly upon
him and to believe that he took me AS I WAS, whether I was able to do
or be anything or not, and would begin to work in me his divine will.


LEARNING MY MISTAKES

The same trouble arose about my lack of feeling any love for God. How
could I, who had been the recipient of so many favors from the hand of
God, be so hard-hearted as not to love him! Could I dare come to him or
ask anything from him when I did not love him, when I had given so much
place to self-love and had been so indifferent concerning the pleasure
of my King? How difficult it is to come to God empty-handed! If only I
might have brought at least a little love in my hand to offer him! But
no, there seemed to be none; and at last my poor soul came to see and
confess that, after all, it was not because of my love to him that he
loved me and saved me, but because of his great mercy and love for me.
At length my soul, falling down before him, could cry out in truth,

  "Nothing in my hand I bring;
  Simply to thy cross I cling."

Then he taught me that love does not depend upon emotion; that so far as
God is concerned, it is a free gift to us; that in order for us to enjoy
it we must accept it as our own. The acceptance depends upon our will
and decision in the matter, and not upon our feelings. To illustrate: If
a person does much for me that is hard and difficult for him, willingly
makes many sacrifices for me, without any hope of reward, I conclude
that he loves me far better than the one who does much for me for which
he receives or expects remuneration. Nowhere does the Bible command
us to =feel= like obeying the Lord; nowhere is it even suggested that
we should =feel= like loving him. But we do find that God's pleasure
rests upon those who "=will= do his will" (John 7:17), and we do have
this definition of love: "This is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments." Feelings have nothing to do with the keeping of God's
commands. Of course, it is more pleasant to us to do what we feel
inclined to do, but it does not necessarily give more pleasure to God.
If we obey God because he is God and because it is right to obey him,
we act from pure love, and the pleasure God feels toward such service
will in time be poured out upon the soul in streams of love, and there
will be all the feeling desired.

Thus, I saw that if I willed to love God and acted as nearly as possible
as I should act if I felt the glow of his love in my heart, this was
more acceptable to him than the same service would be if rendered
because my feelings prompted me to do it.


VICTORY OVER ACCUSATIONS

In acting upon this truth, I was often accused of being a hypocrite,
because my prayers, my manifestations of love and interest in others,
and whatever I did for the Lord, seemed unreal and strained. Here,
however, faith came to my rescue, enabling me to say to Satan: "No, I am
not a hypocrite. I know that I do not feel like doing what I am doing;
I know that I am not getting any particular pleasure out of it. But I do
not deserve any pleasure, and I shall continue to do the best I can to
prove to God that I do love him and am trying to give him pleasure.
If he never sees fit to give me back again the joy which I formerly had
in his service, that is his business. Mine is to love and serve. Let him
do as he will with his own."

It was all very dry and hard at first, for the old doubts about being
his when I did not feel his presence, knocked hard for admittance; but
I was enabled to meet them always with the same confidence: "I can not
doubt that he loves me now, whether I seem to love him or not; for did
he not 'love me and give himself for me' when I was not trying to serve
him at all? Anyway, my salvation does not depend upon my love for him,
but upon his for me. But I WILL love him and prove it by trusting and
obeying him. This is all I can do; the rest I leave with him." The test
was a long one, and a lesson that I shall not forget.

When, at last, God saw that I would ask only for ability to satisfy
and please him, whether I felt pleased and satisfied or not, there came
into my soul gradually light and joy, and oh! such a sweet sense of his
presence. Praise his name! The love and other graces I then felt in my
soul, I could not boast of, however, for they all came from and belonged
to him; and when I was enabled again to bow before him with a sweet
sense of love and reverence, I felt that in adoring and loving him,
I was not bringing to him something of my own, but only returning to
him that which he had given me. I felt as I had not for years that

  "The graces within are not mine;
    For the love and the power and the glory
  Belong to the Savior divine."


LOCATING MYSELF SPIRITUALLY

One other point of which I must speak in this connection is the
difficulty I experienced in endeavoring to locate myself spiritually
when in the midst of the confusion I have described. Could I be saved
at all when in such a state? Did I need to repent, or only try to do
better? Were my careless actions and thoughtless words sins, or only
mistakes? Fortunately, I was advised not to try to figure out so
carefully what was sin and what was not, but to present to Jesus
anything that troubled me, and to trust him implicitly to work in me
the victory that I needed. By humbly confessing my weakness and claiming
the promise of Phil. 2:13, "For it is God that worketh in you both to
will and to do his good pleasure," I was enabled to gain victory almost
immediately over many faults and failures with which I had wrestled long
and over which I could never have gotten victory if I had spent my time
picking every failure to pieces to find out whether it was something of
which I needed to repent as a sin or only a mistake. I felt that God was
pleased to have me humbly confess and trustingly turn over to him for
correction any and every error whether it seemed to me serious or not.

It would take too much space to tell here of all the changes which were
wrought in me by these experiences. Suffice it to say that life has been
different ever since. Not that I have always felt the Lord just as near,
for he has needed to remind me of the lessons I have recorded and to
teach me others; but whether he seems near or far, Satan has never
succeeded in making me fear and doubt. I have learned that whether God
leads in light or in darkness, he IS leading and I have nothing to fear.
If darkness comes upon me, it is for a purpose, and I can wait patiently
upon him until he makes that purpose known. Submissively to wait and
patiently to trust in him till he reveals his purposes is my part. His
part is to lead and take care of me, and this, I am sure, he will do
unto the end. Therefore I have no responsibility except to go on obeying
and trusting him. Whatever bothers or troubles me in myself or others
I lay at his feet, expecting him to give me victory if the trouble be
in myself, or to bring it out in his own good way if it be in others.
And thus my soul has reached and abides in that "wealthy place" where
no harm can ever come and where the soul is kept in perfect peace.




Liberated from Faultfinding

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 14


For the glory of God and the encouragement of others I wish to testify
against the evil of faultfinding. Soon after the beginning of my
Christian experience, about twelve years ago, I was severely harassed by
this adversary of my soul. So cunningly were my eyes blinded to my real
condition that I was almost overwhelmed at times through the workings of
this dangerous influence.

At times I would be almost free from it, but very much of the time I
seemed to have a peculiar faculty of finding the mote in the eyes of
others and was never aware of the beam in my own eye. I could see so
much to pick at in some brethren that there was no time left for me to
step aside and occasionally take myself into account and see myself as
others saw me. I thought I could conduct some affairs over which others
had charge, so much better than they were being conducted, that I was
at times uncomfortable because I did not have a chance to show what I
could do. It is needless to say that during the time that I was a prey
to this wicked spirit, I had little, if any, spiritual life; but I tried
to convince myself that I was doing quite well. There was, however, a
blank or a real lack in my Christian life, because I had not learned to
be an ideal Christian in humility before God and meekness towards my
fellow men.

As soon as I passed through enough sad experiences to make me the happy
possessor of a willing spirit, I began to realize that I was learning
the necessary lessons and through these trials and tribulations I began
to have a little understanding of the cause and root of my trouble.

There were three happenings that aided in awakening me to my need. The
first one was a few years ago, when I received from a brother a letter
in which he said, "Brother, you need continuity." That reproof found
its place in my heart, and the first seed was sown toward a harvest of
willingness. Although it brought no immediate results, yet it stayed by
me and was very prominent before me many times.

The second lesson was brought to me through a sermon. The sister who
delivered the sermon related the experience of a brother who had years
of difficulty in regard to finding fault with others, and who finally
concluded that the trouble was more with him than with those he
criticized. I began to see my own case a little clearer, but I did not
fully learn the lesson until sometime later.

My third lesson came in the following manner: A brother in whom I had
some confidence came to my home and asked for a position, which I
secured for him. We admitted him into our home for his comfort as well
as for our pleasure spiritually, as we supposed he would be a help to
us. It was not long, however, until it seemed there was nothing that
escaped his faultfinding. He saw mountains of fault with us and our
children. At last I saw in his case a picture of what I myself had done
during the past, but I had banished from my life all thoughts of ever
again being influenced by such a faultfinding spirit. Never before had
I been able to see the picture of my former condition as I saw it when
fully manifested in the life of this brother.

Although it had been my desire and no doubt his full intention to do
what was right, nevertheless this evil habit, if I may call it such,
had gained such a foothold in my life and in his life as to be a
hindrance to our own spiritual progress and a stumbling-block in the
way of others. This habit of faultfinding by those who are claiming
to be children of God has caused them to wander from the true paths of
righteousness into forbidden paths, and also to turn many others from
the path that leads to everlasting life.

It is with much gratitude to God that I undertake to tell of my
deliverance from that great barrier and hindrance to my spiritual
progress. When I came to the point where I humbled my heart before the
Lord and let him turn the searchlight upon me, the faults in others were
not so great, but mine had seemed to climb mountain high. It was with
a determination and positive decision to turn from such things; and the
Lord, understanding my intentions in regard to those things, took note
of my humility of heart and delivered me, for which I give him all the
praise and glory. May the dear Lord help us all to bear with each other,
and forbear complaining, even though it may at times seem necessary.
I am sure it will bring about a great measure of the grace of God.




Help from God in Fiery Trials

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 15


When I think of the great mercy and love of God that follows after a
soul and remember that he knows all about the thoughts and intents of
the heart, truly I stand in awe before him. Since he knows all and has
all power, can we not trust him when we give ourselves into his hands
to be molded into his image to shine for him?

"Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father." Every
one who will give all into his hands will be brought through the fire,
according to Zech. 13:9--"And I will bring a third part through the
fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them
as gold is tried: they shall call on my name, and I will hear them:
I will say, It is my people: and they shall say, The Lord is my God."
In telling some experiences in the furnace-flames, I wish to lose sight
of everything except to be a help and encouragement to those who are
in trial.

In writing my experience, I shall find it necessary to make mention
of some of the sad things concerning my husband, a fact which I very
much regret. But I trust that dear souls will take warning and realize
that there is no limit to the work of the enemy when once he gains
possession. I shall never cease to be thankful for the first copies of
a paper called the Gospel Trumpet I ever saw. Through my reading them,
conviction was sent to my soul by the Spirit of God; but being unwilling
to meet the necessary conditions, I resisted the convictions and put the
papers aside.

Some months afterwards while searching for something, I came across
those papers, and immediately that same conviction returned, but again
I resisted it. My health failed, and I continued to decline until I was
almost in the jaws of death. Physicians could do nothing for me. During
this time God was doing his best to get me to understand that if I would
give up he would save and heal me. At last I yielded, and he saved my
soul and healed me, and from that day until this, which has been more
than eighteen years, I have been fascinated by the charms of a Christian
life.


THE BEGINNING OF PERSECUTIONS

For a long time I did not meet with any persecution in my home, as my
husband saw the light of the gospel and believed it to be the truth,
but was not willing to walk in it. God followed after him with love and
long-suffering. Time after time he resisted the conviction, but finally
the Spirit succeeded in breaking up his heart and showed him what he
must do to make his wrongs right. He began making a profession of
religion, but refused to make all his wrongs right, and in a short time
the enemy took possession of him, whereupon he turned against God and
against me, and grew worse and worse.

Now the furnace-flames became hot. He was restless and could not be
content to stay anywhere very long at a time, and everywhere we went
he set about to turn the people against me by telling untruths to gain
sympathy. He was very cruel to the children and me.

After we moved to a small town in northern Kansas, these words came
vividly to my mind: "Fear none of those things which shall come upon
thee." With the cruelty and persecution came a severe affliction. Two
doctors pronounced it tuberculosis in the knee-joint. It was so serious
that I could not bear to be moved, and when I sat in a rocking-chair I
was obliged to have something under the rocker to keep the chair from
moving. The thoughts of any one's coming near my knee made the pains go
through my limb. At times I was able to walk some on crutches by being
careful. My leg was swollen from above the knee down. At night I had to
lie upon my back with pillows under my knee, and I could move neither to
the right nor to the left, and sometimes just to cough a little caused
almost unendurable pain.

All this happened during the months before a baby girl was born. My
family and neighbors did not expect me to live, but God stood by me and
gave me this assurance: that as the children of Israel faced the Red Sea
with no possible way of crossing, and he divided the waters and let them
pass through, so he would in like manner help me. Oh, it was precious to
trust him!

Just about a week before the child was born, the excruciating pain left
my knee, but upon my recovery it came back seemingly worse than ever.
About three months later the Lord healed the disease, which has never
returned. However, I was left a cripple, and have had to use crutches
ever since that time.

At this time I had eight children. Two grown boys had gone from home,
leaving me to care for the other six. I had a great desire to rear them
for God. Thus far I had spent most of my Christian life in isolated
places, where I was deprived of church privileges. It seemed that all
the hosts of darkness were united against my determination to rear my
children under Christian influence. Although I had many things to learn
regarding how to do this, yet God was patient in teaching me.

Once when an awful discouragement tried to settle down over me, and it
seemed there was no material to work on, I was comforted through the
impression that came to me in the words, "God can take a worm and thresh
a mountain," and I have never forgotten these words, the thought of
which is expressed by the prophet in Isa. 41:14, 15. I felt that some
who opposed me would be glad for me to die so that they could get the
children from my influence. Once my husband was threatened with arrest
for cruelty, and I feared that my children would be taken from me and
placed among my opposers, as one woman had said there were plenty of
homes for them. Then the scene of Christ before Pilate came before me
and this scripture: "Thou couldest have no power at all against me,
except it were given thee from above." At the same time one of the
organ-keys was down, and we were unable to repair it; so I said, "We
will trust the Lord to fix it." When the above-mentioned scripture came
to me, the organ-key raised of its own accord, and I said, "Is there
anything like that in the Bible?" and quickly came the answer: "The gate
opened of its own accord when Peter went out." Joy filled my soul as
I realized that the mighty God of heaven was my helper.

At another time I made a carpet which required five years to make by
working whenever I could find time to do so. After it was finished and
before I had cut it, the Spirit said to me, while I was praying one day,
"Send that carpet to Kansas City to help furnish the Missionary Home."
My heart said amen, and God made my husband willing, blessed my soul in
sending it, and later gave me a carpet larger than the one I had given.
My husband had ceased to allow me to have a way to make money of my
own. I was not permitted to have either chickens or eggs. Once I made
a hot-bed, as plants found a ready sale, and thought I would make a
little money in that way, but he found it just as the plants were coming
up and destroyed it. God never failed to bless me when I said amen.

At one time when I was in need of a pair of shoes, I went in earnest
prayer to the Lord like a child and asked him for a pair. Soon
afterwards I received a letter from a sister in Kansas City whom I had
never seen. She was giving her entire time to the gospel work and had
a little money in her possession. In her letter she said, "My mind was
directed to you last Sunday during the services, and I was impressed to
send this money to you." At another time after praying for some money, I
received a dollar. I was in need of so many things that I asked the Lord
how I should spend it. This answer came: "Send it to the missionaries in
India." I did so, and in a short time received three pair of shoes for
the children, of which they were very much in need. I had many similar
experiences.

When our baby girl was about three months old, a dear sister whom I had
met and who was living in an isolated place, came to pay me a visit. She
remained in that community. After about a year she was eager to grow in
grace, and while she was anxiously waiting before the Lord and wishing
that she might grow like Sister ----, the question came to her, "Are you
willing to pass through what she has had to pass through?" She had a
desire to do whatever was necessary, but did not feel that she could
very well pass through such severe ordeals. In order to be spiritual
and grow in grace, it is not always necessary for people to pass through
such severe trials, nevertheless their consecration must be to pass
through anything that would be most to the glory of God.

About this time I had an attack of sickness, and for sometime it seemed
that I might die. My husband went to visit his sister and left me alone
with the children. The sister who had been staying in the community,
felt that she must come and stay with me, and when my husband returned,
the Lord put it into his heart to hire her for a while. The Lord healed
me and made my husband willing for my oldest daughter and I to go to a
meeting at Kansas City. This was my last opportunity to enjoy a meeting
before entering a much darker vale of trial. Our daughter was saved,
for which I praised the Lord. My husband refused to hire the sister any
longer, but in answer to prayer consented for her to stay as long as she
desired without pay for her services.

In December of that year a dear baby boy was born. The Lord gave me this
assurance: "I will be with thee in six troubles, yea, in seven there
shall no evil befall thee." My husband began planning to go to Arkansas.
We had been here three years and were getting our home comfortably
furnished, but we learned to take joyfully the spoiling of our goods and
to see them sold at a great sacrifice.

One day while I was communing with the Lord, this scripture was vividly
impressed upon my mind: "In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall
direct thy paths." At that time there was suggested to my mind the name
of a town in Kansas near where I lived during my childhood. I did not
understand what it meant, as we did not go there, but I understood
later. I had always had an aversion to living in the backwoods, for I
knew that the welfare and education of the children would be neglected,
but I acknowledged God's way.

The sister who was with us was willing to stay or go with us.
We asked the Lord to open the way if he wanted her to go, and my
husband told her that if she wanted to go he would pay her way. There
are many experiences through which I passed that I should like to
relate--experiences showing the mysterious ways in which the Lord helped
us in time of need. I learned that obedience and trueness to God will
bring us into a wealthy place.

My husband went about six weeks before we did and secured a location.
Upon our arrival we found that our home for the present was sixteen
miles from a railroad, back in the mountains, and that the roads were
very rough and rocky. Our house was a very small one built of rough,
unhewn logs. There were no windows, only some small shutters which
could be opened when the weather was not cold. There were plenty of
cracks and the fireplace was a smoky one. Most of the people in that
community had lived there from the time of their birth and were poor.
The women used tobacco. Some could not read, and morality was at a
low ebb.

Soon after being introduced to our new surroundings, I was asked these
three questions in succession:

"Are you willing to stay here and work?"

"Yes," I answered.

"Unseen and unknown?"

"Yes."

"Not even an obituary when you die?"

"Yes."

There were only twenty acres in cultivation, which required more hard
work than eighty acres of ordinary farm-land. That fall my husband
purchased a hewed log house of three rooms and moved it down between the
mountains. It had four whole windows and two half windows, and we never
knew before what luxuries they were.

We continued to have Sunday-school, as husband had not yet forbidden
us to have it. He succeeded in turning most of the people against us
by telling the usual stories, only he changed them to suit the people.
He often used the same whip for the children and me that he used for
the horses. His condition grew worse and worse all the time. The second
summer three of the children had typhoid fever. After the first one had
been ill for nine days, we sent for a doctor according to the law. He
said, "Your little girl has a straight case of typhoid well developed,
and it will take twenty-one days for the fever to break, with the best
of care, if she lives at all." I told him that my trust was in God,
but he ignored what I said. My husband told him to leave medicine and
ordered me to give it, not because he had no confidence in divine
healing, but for fear of the law, and to please the people. She had
never taken a dose of medicine in her life and wanted to trust the Lord.
I submitted and gave a few doses. God had given me witness that he
would heal her, and in three days she was sitting up and was soon up.
My husband was very angry because she was healed. About two weeks later
she took a relapse and was seemingly worse than ever, but we trusted in
the promise, and she was soon all right again. Then two of the others
contracted the disease, but they were both healed in answer to prayer.

One day during the summer while I was in the timber praying, a vivid
impression came to me that God was going to deliver us out of that
place, and the name of the town where we should live was given me. This
was the same town previously mentioned, near where I had lived during my
childhood. Oh, such rapture filled my soul! I told my daughter, and she
said the Lord had been showing her the same thing. This scripture was
given to me: "I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the
Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.
And I will be found of you, saith the Lord; and I will turn away your
captivity" (Jer. 29:11, 14).

We had never sent the children to school here, as the people were so
poor and of such a low grade morally. I taught our children during the
winter. At the end of the second summer we began praying for shoes.
One day the children came from the mail-box with a pair for my oldest
daughter, and then in a few days a letter came from an unsaved woman
whom I had never met. She said: "I have some money from the Lord and
feel impressed to send it to you. Please write and tell me how to send
it." Then we received from a sister a letter containing five dollars.
We had already begun to get ready to go to our future home. We had a
catalog, from which we ordered as God gave us the means, and seldom my
husband knew anything about it, for he would not have wanted us to have
the money had he known it. He seldom noticed how much sewing was going
on.

The Lord in many ways encouraged our hearts, for there were fiery trials
awaiting us. A neighbor had moved away and hired my husband to dig his
potatoes and sweet potatoes. The enemy had such control of my husband
that he could not be honest. My daughter helped to dig them, and he
told her not to take any pains to get them all, but she did her best.
He brought nearly half a bushel of sweet potatoes home and told me to
cook them. I prayed to know what to do and received these words, "He
that sweareth to his own hurt and changeth not." I told my husband that
it was not right to keep the potatoes and that I could not cook them.
He flew into a rage and threatened to kill me, and would not allow me to
come into the room where the rest were until the light was out and they
had gone to bed. It seemed the enemy and all his hosts wanted to take my
life. I cried earnestly unto the Lord to give me something to comfort my
soul, and he brought to my mind the three Hebrew children.

A week passed and the man returned for some of his belongings. It was
dark when he passed, and he was drunk. My husband went out and talked,
and no doubt smoothed it over about the sweet potatoes. When he came
back, he said to me, "I told you it was all right about those potatoes."
I did not say anything, but did not feel right about it. The next
morning before daylight, he wanted me to cook those potatoes. I refused
and told him I could not cook them. Then the battle was on worse than
ever. He struck me and wanted me to leave the house, and followed me
with a club until I was outside the yard, and then told me to move on. I
went out into the timber and remained there, and the children brought me
some wraps and something to eat. Then he ordered the sister who was with
us to leave, and she packed a few clothes in a suit-case and came down
the timber to see me. We parted in good courage. This sister had, before
this happened, received many calls to go elsewhere. One call was from
her brother, who offered her a good home and support during the rest of
her life.

She went to a neighbor who had given her an invitation and stayed two
days, and from there to another place, where she stayed a few days and
worked for her board. While she was on the way, the Lord gave her this
assurance: "Trust in the Lord, and thou shalt be fed." While she was
there, not knowing what to do next, and being taunted by the enemy
because she had not accepted her brother's offer, the Lord seemed
sweetly to whisper to her, these words: "This is the way; walk ye
in it."

She heard of a place where they might need some one. It was very muddy
and there was a drizzling rain, but she went. When she arrived at that
place, she found they did not need her, but the telephone rang, and a
lady who had been one of our opposers asked that she come and stay with
her for a while. The scripture had come to her, "Inasmuch as ye have
done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto
me." The woman turned friend, opened the way for her to communicate with
us and to get mail from the people of God. She remained there about a
week, when an old lady desired some one to stay with her and gave her
a home until the Lord was through with her in Arkansas.

But returning to my experience in the timber, I did not know whether I
should be allowed to return home or not; but trusting God, I returned in
the afternoon and was not molested, excepting a tongue-lashing. Not long
after this our two grown sons came home on a visit, and my husband told
them awful things about me, which they believed, and turned against me
and doubled the persecution. They searched the house for books, Bibles,
and papers, and burned them before us, also pictures of our friends.
Then they tortured the little girls, trying to make them promise that
they would not be Christians like their mother. Those dear boys who had
stood by me in the past! How I thanked God for grace sufficient in time
of trial and for the privilege of loving and praying for them.

In July of our last summer there, my eldest daughter said, "I just feel
like packing my trunk to go to ----." It was the town God had shown us
should be our home. The next time she went for the mail, there was a
letter from a sister in the town, saying that God had taken sleep from
two sisters and told them to send for her, and enclosed a check for her
fare. She soon afterward went to that town.

Sometime after this, while the second daughter was driving for her
father while husking corn, she ran into a stump and broke the
wagon-tongue. Such an occurrence endangered their lives, but two men
coming along just at that time spared her somewhat, and her father sent
her to the house. I prayed until my faith rested on the promise for
protection. That night after I had gone to bed, God inspired me with
beautiful thoughts of heaven, and I got up so softly and took a pencil
and paper and wrote this poem in the dark. I can not refrain from saying
here, Praise the Lord for these precious things in time of trial!


  MY BEAUTIFUL HOME

  Though poets may sing of the streets of pure gold
    And talk of its mansions so fair,
  After all it is naught; the half is not told
    Of my beautiful home over there.

  Man's eye has ne'er seen nor his ear ever heard,
    Nor can he e'er picture the scene;
  The music's so rare no one can record
    The strains of the faithful, I ween.

  Though art has portrayed fair angels of light
    In tints that enrapture the mind;
  'Tis grander by far in my home ever bright,
    Where the glory of God is enshrined.

  No; ear hath not heard, and eye hath not seen,
    Any thing that will ever compare
  With the grandeur and beauty of that heavenly scene,
    Of my beautiful home over there.

  'Tis only by faith that gleams from the land,
    Where they need not the light of the sun,
  Can brighten the life or lighten the pain
    Of those who will hear the "Well done."

  Some day when my toiling and trials are o'er,
    I shall see the fair angels of light;
  On their wings they will bear me across to that shore
    Where my faith will be lost in the sight.


On the night of November 22 the children and I were alone, and I was
wonderfully impressed with the scripture in Isa. 45:2, 3. It came to
me three times during the day. The next morning, being Sunday, we were
still alone. The children were singing "What a Mighty God We Serve,"
when I heard a crackling noise and, looking up, saw the house was on
fire. I looked to the Lord for presence of mind, and we went to work
getting things out. One of the children said, "This is what your
scripture was for. Perhaps this is for our deliverance." I realized the
presence of the Lord in the whole affair, and he wonderfully helped us
to save all the things of importance, and just as the fire was getting
so hot that it seemed we could do no more, a man came along and helped
us. There was an empty house nearby, into which we moved.

The people decided to help my husband build another house, and they
began work. Thus, it appeared that we should have to remain there
always; but the children and I took no notice of it. I told the Lord he
knew there was more clothing we needed yet, and asked him, to give me,
when it was time, the money to get the goods. In a short time I received
it, and we were busy sewing until late at night, and the Lord gave me
such a glorious assurance of deliverance.

I had two trunks packed full, mostly with clothing. Husband said one
day, "I believe I will trade the place." I did not know what to say,
as I knew God was doing the managing. In a few days he traded it and
decided to go about twenty miles north and rent some land. This was
about the first of February, and he wanted to start in March. The man
who owned the house where we were living, came and wanted it, and so we
put up a small tent to live in the rest of the time. It began raining
and rained hard the most of the time for two or three weeks. Everything
was so damp, but God's hallowed presence made all things bearable.

My husband planned to take two teams and have me drive one. I knew
almost nothing about driving, and the roads were as bad as they could
be, up and down mountains, over rocks, and through mud, and I could
scarcely make a move of any kind to please my husband. He also decided
to take twenty-nine goats, which he intended having the children drive.
The morning we started I had been sick all night, and it began raining
and the wagon sheet began to leak; but I kept trusting, and it stopped
raining. Our first interesting experience was the horses balking in
the river. It took about an hour before we got out. No damage was done,
however, except that Husband found a roll of papers which I had intended
for distribution, and threw them into the river.

We camped near a house that night. The next morning Husband said,
"Unpack that box and leave the dishes here, for we are too heavily
loaded." The box had been packed with care and contained some of my best
things, and about two sets of dishes which had scarcely been used. He
left them with some other things. One of the girls who had walked the
day before became ill. We started on our way up a mountain slope, which
was a distance of three miles. After we had gone a short distance, my
husband said, "I am going back and unload some of these things." He
proceeded to throw out the bedding and other things on the wet ground
and, leaving us, went back and left the trunks with the dishes. Both
trunks were unlocked and there were so many people who could not be
trusted. I had taken the address of the people with whom I left the
dishes. We had no clothing left except what we had on our persons, and
a few things I had felt impressed to keep out before we left home. The
trunks contained all the clothing for our future home, so I believed
that God would take care of them.

The roads could not have been worse nor more dangerous. Some places were
so steep and one-sided that it seemed the wagon might fall over, and the
mud-holes were terrible. The team which I was driving gave much trouble,
as one mule pulled ahead and the other was slow. Husband expected me
to keep them even and drive with one hand, and he quite often gave me
a lick with the same club with which he whipped the mules. Two of the
children were sick, and the jolts of the wagon were very hard on them.
While passing through some of these experiences, the words of Paul came
to me, "In perils often; a night and a day have I been in the deep," and
the song, "Anywhere with Jesus I Can Safely Go." I must say, Praise the
Lord, for he helped my faith to rise above the situation and healed the
children and protected our lives.

My husband failed to find any land to rent or work, so we kept going.
Two of the children were still walking and driving the goats. On account
of the limited space I can tell but very little of their experiences
along the way. One circumstance, however, that gave us much concern
was that there were many streams to cross, and at one place by driving
the goats along on the mountain-side the children would miss having to
cross the stream several times, and they were required to take the
mountain-side. It was steep and above the river. Sometimes they would
slide and have considerable difficulty in stopping, and the goats would
run up the mountains, jump on rocks, and cause trouble. My husband drove
on and would not wait for them at the bridge, which was about a mile
from where they started, and it was some time before I saw them again,
a time of great anxiety. It was one of the times when I had to trust
the Lord to take care of them.

After the children had driven the goats about two weeks, my husband
sold them. One day about four weeks after we left our home, I heard my
husband tell a man that he was going to ----. This was the town the
Lord had shown me would be our future home. You will remember that our
clothing was left behind, so that our appearance was not presentable;
but I deepened my consecration and told the Lord that if he wanted us
to go in such a plight, I could say amen. Before we arrived, he opened
the way for us so that we looked quite presentable, considering the
fact that we were traveling. A week before our arrival, I wrote for the
trunks to be sent to the town. We arrived in safety. Three weeks after
I wrote for our goods, they had not arrived, and so I wrote again. We
received a letter from the people saying that they had moved and left
the trunks in the house, which was not locked. We gave them the dishes
and other things in order to get them to take the goods to the railroad,
and upon the arrival of the trunks we found them just as I had packed
them.

We were now glad to be with the dear people of God and to know that the
captivity was turned. My husband began telling the usual stories, but
they were not received even by his own people. He became very miserable
and alarmed about his own safety on account of the people. He left the
town, and has never been heard from. During these years of trial, many
hours of deep concern have been spent with a hope and trust that the
dark shades which cover his life may be swept away and that even yet his
future life here on earth may be crowned with the blessings of the Lord
and the presence of the Almighty. I do not know what the future holds in
store, but I am expecting some good things from God, whether or not my
pathway is strewn with trials.

In relating this experience, I have been obliged to omit many things
that could have been told and that might have been helpful to others who
are passing through similar trials, as there are so many experiences
that would not be advisable to publish. I believe that the good part may
be a help and encouragement to many who have like trials and that the
sad experiences may be a warning to those who trifle with the mercy of
God. My dear husband might have been with us and happy today instead
of suffering an awful foretaste of the regions of the lost, had he
only been obedient to the Lord and walked in the light of his Word.
The sister who was in Arkansas is with us, and we are working together
for the Lord.

I have humbly submitted everything into the hands of the Lord and have
been better able to understand the words of the Psalmist, wherein he
said, "Teach me thy way, 0 Lord, and lead me in a plain path, because
of mine enemies. Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies:
for false witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breathe out
cruelty. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living. Wait on the Lord: be of good courage,
and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord."




Experience of a School-Teacher in India

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 16


The message of the cross is the same in every clime. The Spirit of the
Lord will enlighten all darkened hearts that are receptive to the truth.

In the year 1904 there was a striking occurrence in one of our meetings
in the Punjab district in northwestern India. An intelligent young lady,
a native school-teacher, offered her services as interpreter one Sunday
while I preached on the subject of the ordinances of the Bible.

She became very much interested in the story of the cross, and as the
prophecy was read from the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, she was much
affected. After interpreting sentence by sentence a vivid description of
the crucifixion-scene and the story of how the Savior gave his life for
the salvation of those who are lost in sin, she suddenly stopped, began
wringing her hands, and fell upon her knees. In the bitter anguish of
her soul she cried, "O Lord! I am a sinner! I am a sinner! Have mercy
upon my soul!"

For a few minutes the services changed to a prayer-meeting. Her efforts
were with such earnestness and sincerity of heart that she was soon able
to realize a fulfilment of the promises by faith, and received a witness
to her soul that the Lord Jesus was now her Savior.

She arose rejoicing and continued to interpret with much fervency of
spirit, realizing the truthfulness of the words of the apostle when he
said that the gospel of Christ "is the power of God unto salvation to
every one that believeth."




Unconquered Will Won by Love

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 17


  "Some feet there be which walk life's track unwounded,
  Which find but pleasant ways,
  But they are few. Far more there are who wander
  Without a hope or friends;
  Who find their journey full of pains and losses,
  And long to reach the end."

Yet if, like Elisha's servant, we could open our blind spiritual
eyes, how often we might discover myriads of angels waiting only for
a submissive spirit and a surrendered will to plant such feet upon
substantial ways of blessings and courage instead of the ways of the
wounds and thorns and crosses. If I had but the power to tell of some
such experiences of my own, I feel it might encourage some other soul
to surrender fully to God a life that otherwise has been a failure.
There is no doubt that God has ministering servants ever ready to wait
on the soul that surrenders to his will. The difficulty is always the
unsurrendered will.

When I was about fourteen years old, an evangelist came to our town to
preach a full salvation, one that saves from sin and sanctifies the
soul. The Holy Spirit was working in many hearts. One evening as I was
riding home facing the west at sunset, I beheld, in the shifting of
the clouds, a huge black cross. It stood there between me and the sun.
I thought of Jesus dying on the cross, and that seemed very fitting,
though of course very sad. As this cross remained there, it impressed me
more solemnly, until I began to realize that there might be a cross for
me also. But I said: "Life is what we make it. I do not want crosses; I
choose other things." At last a gorgeous crown of the sunset enveloped
the cross, and in my heart I knew that without the cross there would be
no crown. The difficulty had arisen between me and God. His ministering
servants were ready to spare me the "pains and losses," but my will was
not surrendered. I would not bear the cross.

Another warning came to me a few nights later, when I was invited to the
home of a friend to attend a dance. I thought of the meeting and its
solemn significance, and felt uneasy about going. I wanted to please
Jesus, who had borne the cross for me, but I justified myself in going
because the crowd was select. I went to my room thus battling with my
conscience. I knelt as in prayer and soon felt what seemed unmistakably
to be the presence of some one in my room. I looked up, and it seemed
that I could see the smiling face of Jesus. Sweetness filled my soul,
and the room was full of joy. All earthly pleasures faded away. I had
no desire for anything now but this captivating Jesus. My heart was
enraptured. Christ, I realized then, was sufficient.

This, you see, was given that I might understand how Christ might
make all crosses easy to bear. To be sure, this impression sank deep,
and I have never forgotten it, but my will was yet unsurrendered and
unconquered. I would not come when called in sweetest tones. In a
"journey full of pains and losses," "without hope or friends," I walked
life's track. God did not have his way, but I had mine. Often, so often
in the years that followed I remembered the last night of the revival
that had brought to my mind such serious thoughts. At the close of the
last sermon a gospel worker came directly to me. I was confused. I had
not decided what to do. I did not want to cast my lot with these people;
I wanted to join a more fashionable church. As she approached me,
I whispered to her, "I am going to join the other church." She said,
"Be sure your heart is right," but I was not sure.

Perhaps if I had had more teaching about surrendering my will to God,
I would have yielded and in this way avoided the powers of hell that
laid hold upon me from that time. I was powerless in the hands of these
unseen foes. Everything went against me. My life was ruined. There was
no hope. Despair was my companion for years. Sickness and disease
possessed my body, and sin became my hated master.

  "Could we but draw back the curtains
  That surround each other's lives,
  See the naked heart and spirit--ah, if we only could!

  "If we knew--alas! and do we
    Ever care to know
  Whether bitter herbs or roses
    In our neighbor's garden grow?"

I attended many churches, heard many noted preachers, my soul suffering
the while from awful convictions and desires for a higher life, but
without a ray of light. After years of suffering I finally discerned
that what was necessary was to make a complete surrender of myself to
God. This I did with all my heart, hesitating no longer to bear any
cross he saw fit to send. I made a full surrender, and God gave me
salvation. At this time I had great need of spiritual advice; for I was
so ignorant of the laws of salvation that I did not know that when God
had taken away my burden of sin and washed me clean and made my heart
feel so new and light and happy, he had made me his child. I knew about
as much concerning spiritual things as a heathen. At last, a very dear,
good woman became a mother to me. She was the first person who ever
asked me about my soul. She taught me to talk about spiritual things
and to understand them. She taught me the lessons of truth from God's
own Word. She showed me by God's Word how I might live entirely free
from the blight of sin, how I might dress and eat and live to his glory.
It was all very new, but it was all more pleasant than the choicest food
I had ever tasted. She taught me that by his Word and promises he was
able and willing to heal my mortal body. Physicians said my case was
hopeless and that I could live but a short time. I did not care to live
until God showed me I might live for others. Then I was ready to bear my
cross and God was ready to plant my feet on solid ground away from the
"pains and losses" that brought grief and misery to my life. Blessings
now fell upon my pathway. When fever fastened itself upon me and my body
was being rapidly consumed by its fires, God instantly raised me up. He
caused me to "forget the things of the past and press on."

  "Whilst thou wouldst only weep and bow,
  He said, 'Arise and shine!'"

He has given me a life victorious. He gave me a companion and little
children and over every adversity, sickness, and misunderstanding he
makes me victor. When my little girl lost her eyesight and became blind,
the Lord healed her in answer to prayer and restored her sight in an
instant. Time and space fail me to tell of the victorious incidents of
this blessed life that comes from surrendering a will to God. Ah, that
he might have fulfilled his purpose in the beginning! It was not his
will that I should suffer.

  "Can we think that it pleases his loving heart
    To cause us a moment's pain?
  Ah no, but he saw through the present cross
    The bliss of eternal gain."




An Experience a Hundred Years Ago

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 18


I have often thought of recording some of the mercies of my God--the
experience of his goodness to my soul. I was fond of the gaieties and
follies of the world until about fifteen years of age, when I became
awakened to the needs of my soul. In all former seasons when God called
me, I was unwilling to part with the vanities of the world or to bear
the reproach of the cross. I wanted the Christian's safety without his
duties and crosses, but I now fell at the Savior's feet and inquired
with trembling, anxious words: "Lord, what shall I do? I will part with
everything or do anything for an interest in Jesus."

I do not recollect deep conviction for any particular sin, but sorrow
that I had lived so long in neglect of God, not being willing to
acquaint myself with him who is the fountain of all blessedness. I did
not obtain an evidence of pardon and acceptance for about three weeks,
though I sought it with prayer and tears. My burden had become exceeding
heavy, too heavy for my strength, and I sank to the floor. While
kneeling there I was absorbed in contemplation of the glories of the
heavenly world. In an instant darkness, sorrow, and mourning fled away,
and peace unspeakable and full of glory took their place. I rose to my
feet to sing and rejoice in the name of my dear Redeemer.

I was away from home with a family who were not Christians, though
amiable, kind friends. I said nothing to them, but they had noticed my
distress and now observed the happy change. Among my private writings
I find the transaction thus recorded:

"January 13, 1805.--I have this day publicly devoted myself to the
service of God and entered into a solemn covenant with the eternal King
of heaven to renounce the sinful pleasures of the world, with whatever
is displeasing in his pure and holy eyes; to walk in his commandments
and ordinances; to seek his glory and the best interests of his church
here below; and in confidence of well-doing, to look forward to a happy
inheritance with the saints in light."

For a season I thought I was dead to the world, but did not persevere
in that course of consecration, which alone secures unwavering hope.
As I was the only young person in the neighborhood who professed
religion amid a large society, naturally amiable and loved, I had many
temptations to return to folly, which I mainly resisted; but sometimes
I went with them instead of endeavoring to bring them all to Christ.
Here I first experienced a diminution of my happiness. I could not go
from the circle of my folly to my closet and find my Savior and hold
sweet communion with him, but with adoring wonder, I remember that
when I repented, he forgave me. When I returned to him, he healed my
backslidings and loved me freely.

After I was married, I was anxious to train my children in the ways of
the Lord, but through many cares and on account of having to work very
hard, I neglected their early religious instruction. I found that I
needed a deeper work of grace in my heart, and when for the time I ought
to be a teacher, I had need that one teach me again the first principles
of the oracles of God. My prayer was, "Create in me a clean heart, O
God, and renew a right spirit within me." I wanted to be freed from sin
and thoroughly cleansed from all iniquity, so that I should never vex or
grieve him more.

For something more than a year I suffered much from the buffetings
and temptations of Satan. I knew that Jesus was near and sustained me
in those conflicts, although it seemed that he had left me alone to
contend with the powers of darkness. In the midst of these trials I had
temptations of rebellion against God to call him unjust, to reproach him
for creating me. The temptations came to "contradict him." I did it,
but oh, the horror of that moment! Until then I had resisted every
temptation, as I thought, but now a worm crushed to the earth beneath
the mountain weight of its sins had dared to rise in the face of
infinite wisdom and excellence and contradict him. This, I thought, must
be the sin for which there is no forgiveness. But I could weep tears of
penitence; could sink at his feet and own it just. What less could his
insulted majesty and purity do than crush the rebel worm! But he did not
do it. Not even a frown was upon his gracious brow. It seemed that there
was salvation for every sinner who had not, like me, contradicted him
and thereby made him a liar. I contemplated the glorious character of
God and concluded that unless I could find evidence that my sin was
against the Holy Ghost, I should only be repeating that dreadful sin
while I refused to believe the promises intended for me when penitent.

I retired with my Bible spread open before me and, kneeling down, read
and prayed over the chapters in Hebrews which represent the blessed
Savior as our sacrifice and high priest. In the twenty-fifth verse of
the seventh chapter I found this assurance: "He is able to save them to
the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make
intercession for them." Here was something to meet my case. "To the
uttermost" I had insulted him, but "to the uttermost" he could save.
I believed and here my soul entered into rest. I embraced the promises,
rich and boundless, as my own. In Christ Jesus they are all there for
me. I felt and said with heaven-born confidence, "This is firm footing;
this is solid rock. My feet are placed upon it to remove no more." The
view was not transporting or rapturous like my first conversion (if so
it may be called), but calm, delightful, "strong consolation," firmer
than the everlasting hills because founded on the immutable Word and
oath of God in Christ. It was "hope as an anchor to the soul, both sure
and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil."

Eleven years have passed since, and my peace has been like a river. In
the world, to be sure, I have had tribulation and expect to have, for
Jesus told me I should; but, blessed be his name! in him I have peace.
I love the subject of Christian perfection, or entire sanctification
in this life; but I have not been fully able to reach the point to
obtain that deeper experience. Yet I believe I perfectly desire to do
the will of God. May God bless the efforts of all dear brethren who are
laboring to promote the sanctification of believers.




An Indian Mother's Submission

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 19


To show that God works the same in the hearts of his people wherever
they are, I wish to mention the experience of one of my Indian sisters.
Her little son contracted enteric fever. Every possible aid was given
him, but he continued to grow worse. The fever caused him to become
unconscious at intervals. The parents then decided to remove him to a
hospital, that he might have skilled attention. Soon after being taken
to the hospital, he became entirely unconscious, in which condition he
remained for weeks, yes, for months. He was unable to take nourishment
in the natural way and became a wonder to all who came to see him, as he
was at the point of death yet did not die. Many who were not acquainted
with the parents, but heard of the case, went to the hospital to see
him.

The father and mother spent as much time as possible at the hospital,
but when weeks and months had passed, they gave up hope for his recovery.
All the Christians who knew of this child's sickness were praying for
him and felt that God only could restore him to health. The parents knew
a man who believed in divine healing and called him, and he anointed the
child and prayed for him. He became so sick that the doctor thought he
would not live until morning, and asked the parents to remain at the
hospital that night.

The next day the father and mother went for a walk together, and while
out walking he said to her, "We must become reconciled to losing our
child, for it seems God is going to take him." At first the mother-heart
could not yield to giving up the child, but at last she became resigned.
Soon after this the child regained consciousness, but was weak, and his
mind was almost a blank. He was like a new-born babe and had to learn to
speak, although he was about nine years of age. Some thought he would
never be normal again, and others thought he would be crippled. Since
he has been restored to health, when that mother sees him enjoying the
right use of his faculties and limbs, her heart is filled with
thankfulness and praise to God.

She told me that the affliction of their child was a means of drawing
their hearts closer to the Lord, and of enabling her to experience the
sweet rest of being fully submitted to God, whereby she was afterwards
able to teach others the way.

Just before this she had been urging a bereaved friend, who was grieving
too much over the loss of her father, to become resigned to the will of
God. Her friend said, "You can not appreciate my loss, for you have
never suffered such a loss." She saw the force of her friend's remark
and said no more. But when the affliction came upon her child and she
was called upon to become resigned to the will of God, she came to know
not only that it is possible to be resigned but that there is a great
consolation in being submissive. When her friend afterwards came to know
of her submission, she was very much affected.

Both my friend and her husband feel that God has given them their child
from the grave, and their testimony is that through this severe ordeal
they have come to love their Savior more.




The Conversion of My Father

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 20


The most precious experience in my life, I believe, next to my own
conversion, was the salvation of my own dear father, for whom I had
prayed a year and a half. He joined the Baptist denomination when only
a young man, but, not having the real witness of sins forgiven, never
felt satisfied with his Christian experience, or rather his profession.
A few years later, feeling that he would be acting a hypocrite to go on
in that condition, he even dropped his profession.

Eighteen or twenty years ago he attended a revival held by the United
Brethren people and began to seek God. Night after night he went forward
for prayer, but for lack of proper instruction, failed to find the peace
he so earnestly sought.


A DISCOURAGEMENT

One day in this great soul-struggle, he called at the home of one of the
ministers to know just how to get rid of the great load of sins he was
carrying. He was completely baffled and disappointed. The minister said:
"It is like this: A man might be carrying a heavy sack of sand upon his
shoulders, and if for some reason there should come a little hole in the
bottom of the sack and the sand begin to escape, it would leak out so
slowly that it would be sometime before the burdened man would realize
any difference in the weight of his load, and only in the end, after it
had all slipped through a little hole, would he awaken to the fact that
the entire load was gone. Now, just so it is with your burden of sins.
As you begin to seek God, they begin to run out, but you will not
realize any change at first, and it will take some time for you to
realize that your load of guilt is really gone after you are fully
forgiven."

Poor father! He turned away sick at heart, for he longed for an
instantaneous work to be done in his soul. Through this discouragement
he gave up trying to find God and for many years continued in that
unhappy, dissatisfied state of soul and mind, although he often desired
to be a true Christian for the sake of his family as well as for his own
peace of mind, and yearned to be able to "read his title clear to
mansions in the sky."

In the spring of 1906 his brother and family came to make us a short
visit before their departure from the homeland as missionaries to a
foreign country. For some months they had been especially burdened
that at least one of our relatives should be saved before they crossed
the ocean to their mission field. Their pure, holy lives made a deep
impression upon me, and through their earnest prayers and fastings for
my poor soul, I was constrained to forsake sin and yield myself to the
Lord. I was glad to embrace the privilege of being with the humble
people of God who worship him in spirit and in truth, and to become one
of them. I had a feeling, however, that my father might be displeased
with me for making such a decision; but when I met him a few weeks
later, my soul leaped with joy, for he expressed himself as being glad
that I had given my heart to God, and even made a favorable expression
concerning my decision to associate with the people of the church of God.

From this time I was much encouraged and determined to do what I could
to help win my father and other loved ones to the Lord. I often read to
him from the Bible and explained passages of Scripture as best I could,
especially those that clearly taught a life of freedom from sin. Being
a school-teacher, my work called me away from home much of the time,
but the burden continued for the salvation of my father.


EFFORTS BY MAIL

A year after the Lord saved me, I went to a distant city to engage in
the work of the Lord. One day I wrote a few words of exhortation to my
father on the blank space of a little tract entitled Prepare for Heaven,
and sent it with an earnest prayer that the Spirit of the Lord would
apply the little message to my father's heart. In answer to this letter,
he wrote me thus: "My Dear Daughter: I would give this whole world, were
it mine to give, for this great salvation which you possess and are
writing about." Then he opened his heart and frankly told me of his
miserable condition and of how very hard it was for him to get right
with God. He closed by asking me to pray God to send heavy conviction
upon him.

It is needless to say that I became more earnest in praying and fasting
for his soul. I felt much impressed to write him a helpful letter. Not
only did I feel my inability to do so, but for lack of time deferred
writing until I met with an accident that sprained my ankle badly, and
then one day when I was unable to go about my work, I was reminded of my
opportunity of writing to father. As I began writing and pouring out
my heart to him, the blessings of the Lord rested upon me insomuch that
it seemed I could write scarcely without effort; and as I mailed the
letter, it was with an earnest prayer that the Lord would prepare my
father for all that was written.

Some time later my father told me that he received this letter one
morning before breakfast, and that although the letter was very lengthy,
he sat down by the cook-stove and read it through. He said he marveled
at it, for he had not believed that I was capable of writing the things
that it contained. I do not remember what all I wrote, but I do praise
God that the letter had the desired effect. Strange to say, though
tobacco was not mentioned in the letter, yet when he had finished
reading it, he thrust his hand into his pocket and seizing the thing
that had almost become his constant companion, and holding it up before
throwing it into the fire, said to my mother, with the tears streaming
down his face, "I'll never touch it again if it kills me." Thank God,
who had enabled him to make that determined decision. It meant much to
him and was indeed a good beginning of his complete surrender to God.
I had seen him try many times to quit using this thing that had so
enslaved him. He had even gone as long as six months without it in his
earnest efforts to break loose; but, sad to say, at the end of that time
he had come to the end of his strength, and, not having God to help him,
he was compelled, it seemed, to fully surrender again to the enemy and
thus become more deeply enslaved. Now his decision was very definite,
and in response to his earnest entreaties to the Lord, the abnormal
appetite was removed.

The tone of his letter received a few days later indicated to me that he
was under a weight of conviction and was ready and willing to humble his
heart before the Lord. As there was soon to be a meeting, he said in his
letter, "Daughter, will you please have those good brethren and sisters
pray for me? The Bible tells us that the effectual fervent prayer of the
righteous man availeth much." Portions of his letter were read to the
congregation, and earnest, fervent prayer was offered in his behalf.

At the close of the meeting the minister and his wife accompanied me
home for the purpose of imparting spiritual help to my father. Upon our
arrival we found Father anxious to know the will of God, that he might
find real rest to his soul, if possible. He listened attentively to the
conversation and instruction, but it seemed that he was bound. He had
a desire to pray, but said it seemed that he could not do so. He also
said: "The Bible tells us that we shall know that we have passed from
death unto life because we love the brethren, and now I must know it."
We assured him that it was possible for him to have such knowledge, but
that it must come through faith.

After spending much time in prayer and earnest efforts to help him, we
had to let the case rest, and retired for the night heavily burdened for
the deliverance of his soul. The next morning at breakfast I could see
that my poor father was suffering, and his expression and pallor showed
that he had spent a hard, restless night. Surely the Lord was granting
the request made to me previously by letter, that he might have a deep
conviction. His appetite being gone, he soon left the table.


THE SURRENDER

Arrangements had been made for him to take the minister and his wife to
the city, a distance of fifteen miles, where they were to begin a series
of meetings. He went to the barn to prepare for the trip, and while
doing his chores, he started with a pitchfork of hay to the hack, but
his heart was so heavy and the burden of sin so great that in the
blackness of despair he cried out, "O Lord! if I drop into hell the next
moment, let me go. I can't stand this any longer"; and, dropping his
fork, he sank to the ground on his face pleading for help. The Friend
that "sticketh closer than a brother" was right at his side. He heard
that cry, for almost immediately my father was up rejoicing and
laughing. "You are mocking God," was his first thought, and quite
dumbfounded he dropped on his face again and tried to cry and plead as
he had just been doing, but it was impossible. His heart was so light
and the burden so completely gone that he could not remain prostrate
longer.

Now, strange to say, this great change was all so simple and so sudden
that the dear man could not comprehend at the time the glorious fact
that he had just been "born again," had just "passed from death unto
life." Still wondering over his changed condition, he finished his
morning chores. He led two frisky colts out to water and afterward
remarked how unusually well they behaved on this eventful morning. While
they drank, he stood looking up into the heavens, then out upon the
meadows and general surroundings. How beautiful everything appeared in
the beginning of this new day! Suddenly there came into his heart such
a love for the brethren that he wanted to rush into the house at once;
but, having those colts, he had first to return to the barn. Then he
came hastily to the house.

Instead of being so borne down and dejected, he came rushing through
the front door laughing heartily. As he caught sight of me, the reality
of the situation dawned upon him, and he rejoiced in this new-found
life--real Bible salvation. He stretched out his arms to me over a rocker
that stood between us and exclaimed as he embraced me, "O daughter,
I believe!" Before he could say anything more on account of his great
rejoicing, with a feeling of deep love and fellowship he reached one
hand to Brother B. on the couch and the other to Sister B. in a rocker
near the stove. Then he said, "Let us pray." As we knelt in real
thanksgiving and praise, he began to pour out his heart in gratitude
to God for salvation. Indeed, he was no longer bound by Satan but was
free--yes, a new creature in Christ Jesus. When we arose rejoicing,
even the unsaved members of the family felt the mighty power of God and
gathered around weeping as we rejoiced and praised the Lord for this
great victory.


MY OWN STRUGGLES AND VICTORIES

Now I wish to add just a few thoughts more in conclusion. All people do
not receive this glorious experience in just the same way, or always
manifest it as did my father. It was not my privilege at the time of my
conversion to have the great flood of good feelings that he enjoyed; but
instead I let my faith waver, and shortly after being saved I became
seriously troubled with doubts and accusations. Just after my father had
been rejoicing so happily, the devil almost crushed me with the thought
that perhaps, after all, I had never been saved, as I had never realized
such an experience as he had realized.

Could it be possible, I thought, that even though I have been so burdened
for my father and have prayed so earnestly for him that I am not saved
and never have been? The very thought almost made me faint-hearted.
Then I remembered that the minister and others had confidence in me,
and I knew that my life was completely changed, as I had really lost
the desire for worldly pleasure, which I once so much enjoyed, and had
become interested in the things of God. In reading my Bible, I saw that
my life measured to its teachings so far as I understood. Therefore I
took courage and tried to banish these accusations and leave my case
with God.

But the enemy did not forget me, and it seemed that I should be drawn
back into his whirlpool of doubts in spite of myself, more especially
as I listened to my father in the next few weeks telling others about
salvation. It was evident that he thought every one must obtain an
experience of salvation in the same manner that he obtained it. My case
was so different that finally I could suppress my feelings no longer,
and boldly confessed to him one day that my experience was not like his
and that if it ought to be I was not saved. Never shall I forget that
moment. It meant so much to me. I wondered if he would lose confidence
in my profession and if it was really true, and if it could possibly
be true, that I was yet unsaved. These serious questionings were soon
banished from my mind, for he looked at me and said, "Daughter, I know
you are saved. Your life has proved it." Thank God, he did not doubt it;
so I took courage and with a mighty effort put the accuser to flight
again.

This experience was good for my father, as it had a tendency to balance
him so that he would not be too exacting with others. Since that time
other members of our family have sought God for the pardon of their
sins, and with some of them the new life came in a calm, peaceful way,
rather than with such emotional manifestations. The leadings of the Lord
are wonderful, and the riches of his grace in the Christian life are
inexhaustible.




My Spiritual Struggles and Victories

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 21


I was reared on one of the hilliest, stumpiest, and stoniest Canadian
farms I have ever seen. How vividly there come to my mind my boyhood
experiences of chopping cord-wood to pay my high-school expenses; of
stumping, logging, and picking stones until the skin was worn off my
fingers and the stones were stained with my blood. I then thought that
mine was a very hard life, but I have long since looked back to those
boyhood experiences as God's way of providing me with a physique that
has enabled me to serve three years as a missionary in British North
America, where the winds were intensely cold and where I was once for
twenty-four hours lost in a blizzard at forty-five degrees below zero.
In sharp contrast, I have been twenty-eight years in India's tropical
heat. This was a preparation for my life-work and in my judgment is
God's general method with all his people.

When I was a boy of ten summers, a boyhood friend of my father's visited
him. They were taking a walk, and, unnoticed, I followed them. Then I
overheard my father's friend praise my brothers and sisters, but say of
me, "Frank will never amount to much." My father vigorously protested
and sang my praises until I made this resolution: "I must not disappoint
my father. I will do something worthy of consideration." That hour I was
intellectually awakened.

Parents, let your young people know that you believe in them. About the
same time our pastor preached a missionary sermon, at the end of which
he circulated a subscription. When the paper came to me, I said to my
father, "May I subscribe?" He replied, "If you earn and pay your own
money, you may." I subscribed one dollar. I had it earned long before
the collectors came around, and wished either that I had subscribed
more or that the collectors might come soon. That subscription was the
beginning which ended in my giving myself. Parents, give your children
a chance to link themselves definitely with Jesus in saving a lost world.


MY CONVERSION

When I was a boy of about thirteen, my father said to me one evening at
the setting of the sun, "Water the stock." Soon some boys arrived, and,
being a real boy, I forgot my work and played.

A little later my father asked, "Have you done what I told you?"

"Yes, father," I replied.

He knew I had not, and I even now recall that he said not a word but
walked away in the twilight so burdened and bowed because of hearing a
falsehood from his own boy that it suddenly gave him the appearance of
an old man. The boys left, and I watered the stock. Then, boy like, I
forgot, went to bed and slept. During the next forenoon Mother called
me to her and said:

"Do you know your father neither went to bed nor slept all last night?"

I replied, "No, Mother, I do not know. Why didn't he sleep?"

Mother's answer was, "Your father spent all last night praying for you."

My saintly mother's words and tears went through my heart like an arrow
and rang like a bell in my ears, and I became powerfully convicted of
sin. Just following that a series of revival meetings were held which
continued for several weeks. I became a seeker and had no rest until
I found it in penitence and a consciousness of pardoned sin. I was the
only convert during the meetings, and critics said, "He will backslide
in a few weeks. The revival is a failure." But I am here to tell the
story that I am still saved by grace.

I could never reward my father for that night of prevailing prayer, but
he lived to see me become a minister, a missionary, and to hold the
highest position on the mission field, and then the Lord called him to
his eternal reward. My mother entered into rest about two years previous
to that time.

It is my hope and prayer that the story of my father's night of
prevailing prayer may encourage other parents to pray as he did. Parents
may not always through prayer be able to break the wills of their
children and compel them to surrender to Jesus, but I do believe that
my father prayed until God sent such conviction through the Holy Spirit
that sin became such an unbearable burden that I gladly yielded my will
to the will of my God; prayed until my sins were pardoned, the burden
removed, and I was genuinely converted. I firmly believe that the same
heavenly Father will hear the cry of other parents, and for their
encouragement I leave this testimony concerning God's answer to my
father's fervent prayers.

After my conversion I rejoiced many days in the delight of that
precious experience. For months I had a real and precious joy in the
consciousness of pardoned sin, but after a time I found that I did not
have a continuous, abiding peace and rest. There was a longing for
something more than it seemed I now possessed. As a boy I tried very
hard to be good, and as I look back I believe that I lived a very
correct outward life. I lived among a very godly people, who set a high
ideal before me, one to which I felt I could not live. I observed my
daily prayers, but suffered many an inward defeat.


MY SPIRITUAL STRUGGLES

I can not now recall that I ever heard a sermon on heart-purity or
victory over the power of sin. No person in the congregation where our
family attended meetings professed holiness, nor do I remember that the
experience was talked about. The people did speak of "having religion"
and "more religion." There were people in the congregation whom I still
believe lived holy lives, and the testimony of their lives convicted me,
for I knew that they had an abiding joy and peace in their religion that
I had not. I therefore became very much dissatisfied with my inner life
and was struggling all the time for an experience such as I knew others
enjoyed.

The weekly testimony of a man who attended our prayer-meetings was,
"I have just enough religion to make me miserable." That is, he had too
much religion to get his pleasure out of the world and not enough to get
it out of his religion. I always felt that that man told the experience
I then had. For three years I endured that exceedingly unsatisfactory
religious experience. I then attended a revival and went forward for
prayer night after night, but no relief came to my poor burdened heart.
As my case became more desperate, I recalled the story of Jacob. He
prayed until the morning, and at the rising of the sun the angel
appeared and blessed him. I spent several nights in prayer, but found no
relief.


GAINING THE VICTORY

On Saturday morning about sunrise I was on a straw stack in the barnyard
with a long hay-knife cutting across the stack to loosen the straw to
feed the cattle. While thus working and in a despondent, meditative
mood, wondering what I could do, there seemed suddenly to float out
before me in the air in illuminated letters, "John three sixteen." I
began to read, "God so loved the world." I reasoned then that God so
loved me that "he gave his only begotten Son." All was clear thus
far. Then I came to that all-inclusive word, "whosoever." I stopped at
"whosoever" and recalled the story I heard of Richard Baxter, who said,
"I would rather have the word 'whosoever' in John three sixteen than
have Richard Baxter, for then I should at once be tempted to believe
it was for some other Richard Baxter."

I reasoned, "I know that my name is in that 'whosoever.'" I then
read on--"believeth on him." "Do I believe on him?" This was the next
question to be settled. During several years I had, in competition for
a Sunday-school prize, recited the whole four Gospels. In thought I ran
over what the New Testament said about Jesus and cried out, "I believe
every word of the gospel; Lord, I do believe."

Then I read on--"should not perish." Quick as a flash I saw the weak
place in my faith. I had been believing on Jesus, but feeling that I
should perish. At that point I sprang to my feet on the straw stack and
read it over again--"Should not perish, but have everlasting life." Then
I saw that through doubt I had treated the promise as though it read
"should perish and not have everlasting life." I cried out, "Lord, I
will reverse it no longer. I will believe it as it reads."

Then I seemed to have another inspiration. I had long been troubled
about understanding what it meant to believe. I had worked out a theory
that if I could for a moment forget everything else in the world and see
Jesus on the cross, that would be "exercising saving faith"; and when
praying, I would find myself trying to do that. I now asked myself this
question: "How do you believe your mother's promise?" The answer was
at once, "I believe because I believe in my mother, the promiser." The
next moment I realized that believing Mother's promises was not a mental
effort and struggle such as I had been going through for years, but a
mental rest. I just believed that her promise was true without any effort
whatever, not because I felt it, but because Mother made it. Then I
cried, "Jesus made this promise, and I believe it."

Then I waited and looked again into my heart for the feeling, but no
feeling came. I then saw clearly for the first time that I was trusting
partly in Jesus and partly to my feelings. Presently the Spirit showed
me that feeling never saves any one, that only Jesus saves. I remember
that, standing on the straw stack, I cried out, "O Jesus! I put my
all on thy promise, and I will leave all with thee." But alas! again
I waited for the feeling as a witness, and was sure it would come, but
it did not come. I was still trusting partly in Christ and partly to
feeling. At last I turned away from looking for feeling and cried aloud:
"My Jesus, I stake my all on John three sixteen. If I never have any
feeling and if I am lost, I will quote this promise before thee at the
judgment and say, 'I cast my little all upon it and trusted it, but it
failed me. It is not my fault; it is thine.'"

I had finally, after years of struggling, come where I trusted wholly
"in the word of the Lord." Then suddenly I received a definite assurance
and great heart-warming peace and joy. At last the witness of the Spirit
was mine. Leaping from the straw stack, I ran to my mother, threw my
arms around her neck, and shouted, "Mother, I am fully saved! I am fully
saved!"

Up to that time I had not had any teaching concerning an experience
of sanctification or holiness and had heard no testimonies concerning
such an experience, except the testimony of the life of Christians who
were living it and professing it under another name. There was in the
congregation where I worshiped a sweet-faced, white-haired saint whom
we called Mother Robinson. She had prayed a drunkard husband into
the kingdom, and my memory even to this day recalls her high type of
Christian experience, and I want to bear my strongest possible testimony
to the power there is in the testimony of a pure, sweet, and kind life.

Now after years of study and hearing the testimony of many, it is clear
to me that during those years as a boy I prayed myself through to the
abiding life and what I now believe to be the experience of Scriptural
holiness, which, as I understand it, is such a freedom from sin,
self-will, and selfishness, and such a passionate love for Jesus,
that the heart longs above all things for his approval, companionship,
guidance, and blessing, and that gratefully and joyfully gives Jesus
"in all things the preeminence."




Thought He Had Sinned Away His Day of Grace

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 22


The enemy of souls has laid many plans and has many devices to
deceive people and harass their minds and thereby cause them to
bring unnecessarily heavy burdens upon themselves. One of his common
impositions is to make a person think that he has committed the
unpardonable sin and that all hope of ever obtaining favor with God
again is forever gone. When such persons are told that they are laboring
under a delusion, and that there is hope for them; that others have felt
the same way and formed the same conclusion, but afterwards learned
that it was only a deception of the enemy, and were able to renounce
the delusion and obtain a good experience and keep it, the answer in
most cases is, "My case is different." "Had I taken advantage of past
opportunities when I had a chance to do so, I might have been saved,
but now it is too late."

Time after time I have labored with those who were sure that their cases
were "different" from that of any one else, and that hope was beyond
their reach. The situation and feelings seemed so real that no amount
of reasoning or evidence to the contrary could change their minds until
they became submissive enough to submit themselves to the mercy of God
and accept advice and counsel and act upon it. Then they were very soon
liberated from the oppressions of the enemy and set free by the grace
of God.

One laboring under a deception frequently undergoes as deep suffering of
mind and soul as if the situation and conditions were real. A lady once
received what was supposed to be an authentic report that her son had
been killed in a railway wreck. Circumstances were such that she could
receive no communication from him, which apparently added evidence to
the truthfulness of the story. Her mother-heart was grief-stricken. In
the anguish of her bereavement she refused to be comforted. Later she
was told that there was a possibility of his having escaped death, that
he was probably yet alive, and that evidence had been received to that
effect. No, her feelings were too real, her grief was too great, for
her to be deceived, she declared. One day her son arrived home sound
and well, and did not even know that there had been a train-wreck at the
place whence the report came. The mother then found that her sorrow and
grief had been groundless. She accepted the status of affairs, cast
aside the false report and her bad feelings, and was happy.

Not long ago I met an old acquaintance, a man above seventy years of
age, whom I had not seen for many years. At the time of our former
meeting he was enjoying the blessings of a Christian experience and
was happy in the service of the Lord. Through devotional neglect, and
perhaps for other reasons, he began to entertain doubts concerning his
spiritual experience, and he questioned whether or not he had any right,
under the circumstances, to lay claim to Christian fellowship with those
whom he knew to be spiritual. He knew of nothing sinful that he had
done, and he needed not to waver in faith. But the tempter was there
to suggest that he had lost his experience and might just as well give
up the struggle. He then concluded that the brethren did not have
confidence in him, and therefore he dropped his profession.

His heart was still tender, and he did not feel disposed to indulge
in sin. In a short time he made "another start" to serve the Lord and
tried to repent; but, having so little to repent over, and finding it
difficult to have the same earnestness as before, he claimed the victory
"by faith," but was soon in "doubting castle" again. These up-and-down
experiences continued for many months, during which his spiritual realm
was more down than up. Discouragement laid hold upon him, despair
followed hard on his track, and the enemy whispered that it was of
no use to try any more. The way began to be more and more dreary.
Occasionally, however, he was seized with a feeling of desperation to
break loose from the state of lethargy into which he had fallen, but
alas! his victories were of short duration. These experiences were
followed by the accusations of the enemy that he was possessed with
devils. Brethren who prayed with him declared that such was not the
case.

The darkest scriptures of judgment and everlasting destruction seemed to
have been written for him, and, as he viewed the matter, they exactly
fitted his case. He had doubted so often when it seemed the Lord was
offering a helping hand, that now it was too late; the last cord was
severed, the last ray of hope had vanished. It was no difficult matter
to believe that he had committed the unpardonable sin, and that God had
forever hid his face from him. He resigned himself to the hopelessness
of the situation, to meet his fate at the end of his life here upon
earth and spend eternity in the regions of the lost. He spent a number
of years in this condition.

At the time of our recent visit in a private home, I felt much concerned
about his deliverance from such a state and condition. Upon my approaching
him on the subject, he immediately informed me that it was useless to
waste any of my efforts on him, for his was a hopeless case, as he
had sinned against the Holy Ghost. Having met similar cases before, I
assured him that there was hope for him, and told him that I could prove
by the Word of God and by his own testimony that he had not committed
the crime that would cause him to be forever lost, as he had supposed.

Taking my Bible, I turned to Heb. 10:29, which reads as follows: "Of how
much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath
trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the
covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done
despite unto the Spirit of grace?"

"Have you trodden under foot the Son of God as herein mentioned?" he was
then asked. "No," he replied; "I have never doubted that there is a God
nor that Jesus Christ is his Son."

"Have you counted the 'blood of the covenant an unholy thing,' that is,
that there is no more virtue in the blood of Jesus Christ than there is
in the blood of a cow or some other unholy thing?"

"No, sir. I have never denied the power of the blood of Jesus nor 'done
despite to the Spirit of grace,'" he replied.

"Then, according to the Bible and your own testimony, you have not
blasphemed against the Holy Ghost, nor, as you say, committed the
unpardonable sin by sinning against the Holy Ghost. You must forever
cease to entertain the idea that you have committed such a sin."

He reluctantly admitted the truth in regard to that point, but said,
"There is such a thing as a man's going too far, of trifling so with God
that the Spirit of God will no longer strive with him." It was clearly
pointed out to him that he had never reached such an experience and that
he should cast aside his doubts and fears and call upon God, and was
assured that the Lord would save him. He then declared that he had no
will of his own, no power to exercise his will if he had any, and was
helpless. I told him that any one who could read human nature would at
once conclude that he was a man of strong will-power, and that no doubt
he frequently made others aware of that fact. His wife said, "That is
true; he knows very well how to exercise his will-power."

He was then told to assert his manhood and take a decided stand, to
which he replied:

"I have no manhood; I have no power to assert myself in any way."

"But," I replied, "you have been in this town for the past few days, and
have asserted your manhood during your entire visit by acting the part
of a perfect gentleman. What you need to do now is to kneel with us here
in prayer and yield yourself to God, and he will save you the same as he
has saved others who thought they were beyond the reach of mercy."

"But my case is different; my heart is hardened like stone; I can not
pray; I have no feeling."

"Almost every one in your condition thinks his case is different. If you
act according to the instructions given, you will soon be different.
Your heart will be changed. Do your part in making the effort, and the
Lord will help you to pray, and you will have all the feeling
necessary."

We knelt in prayer, laid our hands upon his head, and with a fervent
prayer rebuked the deceptive and binding power of Satan, and asked the
Lord to save him. He made an effort to pray, but his few words were soon
mingled with his sobs and feelings of deepest contrition. A few minutes
later he arose praising God for salvation. His doubts and fears had
vanished, and his burden was gone. He was once more a free man and had
no more fears of death and the judgment. The next day he returned home
with a joyful heart. I have frequently heard from him since that time,
and he has always sent a message concerning his victorious life.

There are many others who have been harassed by the enemy in like
manner; who have lost all hope of recovering their favor with God; who
think that they are "different," "hard-hearted," "hopeless," "have
sinned away the day of grace," "are under the control of Satan," or in
some such like condition. Yet God in his love is extending mercy and
only waiting for them to discard their deceptive ideas and accept his
grace.




Spiritual Tests

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 23


It is not always concerning temporal things and business affairs and
such like that we are tested. But it is the business of the enemy of
souls to contest every step on the way to victory. He will contest our
salvation and, if possible, get a person to reason with him; and when
you reason with the devil, you find him a good reasoner, if you allow
him to follow his own line of thought. He will quote Scripture, and give
plausible illustrations and logical reasonings. But when he is met as
Christ met him, with a "Thus saith the Lord," "It is written," and then
told what is written and where it is written, and such like, he is not
very long in taking his departure. But just begin to reason, and he
will entangle you in argument until you find yourself badly perplexed,
unless, like the Master, you give him a sharp rebuke and command him to
take his departure.

Perhaps it would be a benefit to some one for me to give a little of my
own personal experience in this respect. At the age of fifteen I was
converted, receiving a real change of heart. The enemy of my soul was
never able to deny that fact, neither did he undertake it. For about ten
years I lived to what light I had, and after that began to obtain more
light in regard to entering into a deeper experience of divine life, or
entire sanctification. I was away from home and had no one to teach me
the way of holiness, but the Lord began to instruct me in his Word, and
after a few months I was enabled to see just what the Lord required of
me in order to obtain the experience desired.

I had felt a hungering and thirsting for something more, for a deeper
experience. I had been taught, however, that this satisfying experience
could not be obtained until just before the time of death; but as
I read in the Word that without holiness no man should see the Lord
(Heb. 12:14), that we were to live in righteousness and holiness all
the days of our life (Luke 1:75), and that Jesus in his last prayer
(John 17:17-20) prayed that we might have that experience, I began to
see very clearly what my privilege was. His Word told me, "As he is, so
are we in this world," and, "We ought to walk even as he walked"; and
this was a closer walk with God than I had been accustomed to enjoy.

It was not long until I reached the point where I made a full
consecration, and died the death to the world, and then, like the
apostles for whom Jesus prayed, I was in the world, but not of the
world, having had that worldly disposition taken out of my heart. When
I reached the point where I positively knew that everything was laid
upon the altar Christ Jesus, then I realized of a truth that the altar
sanctified the gift, and my heart was cleansed from all unrighteousness.
The Bible began to open up to me as a new book, and as I went about my
Master's business, doing his will as far as he made it known, I had many
rich experiences. Although, being of a very quiet disposition naturally,
I could not leap and shout as some, yet it was my privilege to be filled
with all the fulness of God.

A few months later I was called by the Lord to accept a responsible
position in his work. For some months everything went so smoothly that
I had perfect victory all the way along and nothing that I could call a
severe trial or battle, because my eyes were stayed upon the Lord. But
there came a time for advancing further against the enemy, and the Lord
saw it was necessary for me to know more about a perfect faith and trust
in him in order to deal with other souls. So he permitted me to be
tested, to fit me for the work he had for me to do.

Although my soul had been abounding in the riches of his glory for these
months as I was busily engaged in my work, one day a suggestion was made
to me by a silent voice that I had not had any overflowing blessings for
a few days. This did not disturb me, for I felt at perfect peace with
God. But soon the same suggestion was presented again and again. Finally
the silent voice or impression came on this wise: "Now you have been
in this condition almost a week." I felt that my soul during that time
had been at peace with God, and I was trusting my case in his hands.
I began, however, to search my consecration, as the accuser suggested
that there must surely be something wrong.

I began to search my heart, and said, "If there is anything wrong, Lord,
I will make it all right," and I asked the Lord to search me. Feeling
that all was fully in the hands of the Lord, I was about to dismiss the
matter from my mind; but this suggestion came: "If you were sanctified,
you would not have a lack of that great joy." Then I said, "Lord, if
I am not sanctified, I am willing to get sanctified." So I began to
reconsecrate myself to the Lord, and presently I realized that I was
fully consecrated to God. Again I was ready to dismiss the matter, but
the voice said, "When a person falls from sanctification, he loses his
justification also, because he must commit sin in order to fall." Yes,
I realized that was so, and then came the words, "You are not saved."
I saw at once that it was the enemy, instead of the Lord, talking to me,
and like a flash from heaven I rebuked him. I said, "I know I am saved
through the grace of God; yes, and sanctified, too." And I boldly
declared it, whereupon the enemy took his departure. He saw that he was
the one defeated, instead of me.

The enemy had thought that because I was young in the Lord's work I was
unable to know his devices. But the Lord was a match for him, and lifted
up a standard against him, instead of allowing me to be defeated and
overthrown. The Lord knew just how far to permit me to be tried and
tempted. This experience has been a source of much help to me since that
time; not only for myself, but in dealing with others. The devil is sure
to overstep the mark, and we can have the victory over him as long as we
keep our eyes stayed upon the Lord. And we can say like Paul, "I can do
all things through Christ, which strengtheneth me."

There are some who worry and fret and have an abundance of trouble when
it is their own fault; and if they would put forth as great an effort
to gain a victory and keep it as they do to pet their troubles, there
would be a wonderful change and the enemy of souls would be defeated.

A few years ago I met a brother who was weighted down with trouble and
sorrows much more than with the glory of God, and was much of the time
mourning over his trials and temptations, until his lot did really
seem to be a sad one. During my Christian experience I had been having
sweeping victory over the powers of the enemy, even through the severe
trials and temptations, because I had kept my eyes upon the Lord, and
had looked for victories instead of trials. In considering the case of
the brother, although I was young in the gospel work, I concluded that
if people were in such a condition it was their own fault, and that I
could feel as bad as any one if I desired. So I concluded to experiment,
but first asked the Lord not to permit me to fall into the hands of the
devil.

Accordingly, though I had nothing whatever to feel bad about, I threw
myself on a couch and began to sigh and try to feel bad over something.
It was but a few minutes until I really did begin to feel miserable.
Some one came and desired to know if I was in trouble, but I turned away
and would not answer. In a short time I was feeling miserable enough to
weep and moan, and even bewail my condition. I then went to my room,
fastened the door, and began to call mightily upon God for deliverance
from such a condition. I had to put forth no little effort and take God
at his word and gain the victory over the powers of Satan. I there
learned the lesson that any one can feel bad and have a sorrowful time
whether or not he really has anything to feel bad about; but I never
desired to repeat the experiment. I have also found that God has power
not only to deliver from such a condition, but to keep the soul filled
with glory even through the severest testings.




The Confession of a Murderer

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 24


While traveling in evangelistic and missionary work a few years ago
another minister and I met with a congregation in a Western city. When
I entered the place of worship, my eyes fell upon a woman sitting near
the altar. She was an object of pity because of her affliction, which
was of a very peculiar nature and noticeable at a glance. Although she
was a stranger to me and began uttering such expressions as "Praise the
Lord!" and "Halleluiah!" yet I felt that I discerned a false spirit
and was strongly impressed that she was possessed with a murderous and
deceptive spirit. At the close of the service we were asked to pray for
her healing. It was evident that she received no help, and although she
made a loud profession of religion, my conviction was deepened that my
former impressions were correct, and furthermore that she was guilty of
murdering an unborn child.

After the next service this woman and her husband invited me to their
home. I went with a prayer that God would send conviction upon them and
save them from their deception and lost condition. After spending some
time in social conversation, I began to talk with them about their
spiritual condition. At first there was some resentment; for the enemy
of souls had made them believe that it was no great crime, in fact, no
crime at all; that she was really justified in committing the deed;
that as no one else knew of it and was not likely to know, she could
cover her sin and go on with a profession as a Christian and receive the
fellowship of other Christian people. She was kindly told that she had
a false spirit, one foreign to the Spirit of God.

She broke down and, with tears streaming down her cheeks, confessed that
she had destroyed her unborn child, and said that the affliction soon
fastened upon her as leprosy did upon Miriam. Not until the time of our
visit did she fully realize the heinousness of her sin nor feel the
weight of her guilt. By justifying herself in the act and professing
religion without repentance, she had opened the door of her heart to
deception.

But now as she became awakened to her real condition, the enemy
whispered, as he has done to many others under similar circumstances:
"It is too late now; there is no hope; for 'they which do such things
shall not inherit the kingdom of God'" (Gal. 5:21). She was told that
those who do such things and cover their sins or continue to do them
without forsaking them and without repenting are the ones who will
not inherit the kingdom of God. "He that covereth his sins shall not
prosper; but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy"
(Prov. 28:13).

Prayer was offered in her behalf, the evil spirits were rebuked, and
she realized a gleam of hope for her deliverance, not only from the
deception into which she had fallen, but also from her sin. She began
to realize that God was ready to forgive her and set her burdened,
repentant heart free, and accept her as his child. Oh, how unworthy
she felt!

Now came the question, "Must I confess this deed to the church, to my
neighbors, and to the world?" "No, the sin you committed was against
yourself and against God," I answered, "and it will do the church and
the world no good to know of it. In fact, a knowledge of it might be
an injury to some weaker ones. You have confessed it to God and he has
forgiven you, and as no one else is injured, there is no one else to
whom it need be confessed."

When she had been made free from her guilt by the grace of God, she
could then come to him with faith for the healing of her body, and she
was delivered from her affliction.

Another case was that of a gambler in one of the Western States who had
often been warned against the evils of gambling, but who would not heed
the admonitions of friends. He continued his life of folly until the
time came when, in the midst of his revelry, a contention arose between
him and a fellow gambler. The provocation was so great that both drew
deadly weapons, and to save his own life and at the same time to wreak
vengeance upon the other man, he fired the fatal shot, and his
antagonist fell dead at his feet.

Immediately sorrow filled his heart because he had shed human blood,
thus making himself a murderer. In a short time he was behind
prison-bars to await trial, and the following message was flashed over
the wires to his brother: "I am in trouble; killed a man today; come."
Brothers, parents, and friends came with their sympathy and tears, money
and influence. Court after court convened, and from year to year the
case was continued or sentence was rendered and suspended. For a long
time he was under sentence of death. Money and influence prolonged the
case, and the indications were that it might be deferred many more years
if sufficient money was available.

It was while in that dungeon awaiting the fulfilment of the
death-sentence that he felt the wooings of the Spirit of the Lord. He
read the New Testament and wrote to us to pray for him. He finally
confessed his sins to the Lord and found peace to his soul. He then
began to appropriate the promises to his own case for deliverance from
prison. God honored his faith and the faith of His servants who were
offering earnest prayers that he might be delivered. Contrary to the
advice of relatives and friends, he dismissed all legal counsel and
decided to place his case entirely in the hands of the God of heaven,
who delivered Daniel out of the lions' den and Peter out of prison. In
a short time his faith was rewarded by a message being flashed over the
wires for the authorities to open the prison-doors and let him go free.
Since then he has spent much time visiting prisoners and encouraging
them to put their trust in the Lord, who is mighty to save.




Making a Complete Surrender

EXPERIENCE NUMBER 25


From the time of my conversion in early life I longed to be useful in
helping others to find the way of salvation. But my inability and lack
of talent was an apparent barrier, and caused me to almost despair of
ever being able to accomplish the desire of my heart.

Though I felt that I was a Christian, yet I had a longing in my soul for
a closer walk with God. There were times when I had spiritual struggles
within and without, and I did not know how to be an "overcomer," as
mentioned in the Bible.

A few years later, while living in Ohio, I was awakened to the fact
that the Lord had promised the gift of the Holy Spirit to his believing
children and that it was my privilege to obtain that experience wherein
I could enjoy that "great grace" which was upon them all who were
assembled at one place after Pentecost. My heart yearned for the
experience that the people of those apostolic days enjoyed; and as I
read about how willing the Lord was to "give the Holy Ghost to them that
believe," and read that we were promised the "Comforter," who would
abide in our hearts, I decided to have the experience.

My religious instructors gave me no encouragement; for they had not
attained to such an experience themselves and did not think it
attainable in this life. But undaunted, and determined to have relief
for my burdened soul, I sought the Lord earnestly to reveal to me the
secret of obtaining that abundant grace which I was convinced was within
my reach if I could only learn how to obtain it.

The time came when my prayers were answered, and I was enabled to make
a complete consecration to the will of God. But before reaching that
point, I many times fell upon my knees or prostrated myself before the
Lord in earnest supplication for that grace. In the meantime I met
others who had received it, and I realized more than ever that what they
possessed was just the thing for which I had been seeking. There were
yet two points that seemed to hinder me in my final efforts. My desire
was to have such an outpouring of the Spirit as would cause me to leap
and shout the same as some others did when they received the Holy
Spirit. The second was that there was one thing which I had not fully
yielded to the will of God. Regarding that thing I made a conditional
surrender--that if God would give me the experience and then show me
that I held a wrong attitude, I would then yield the point. I thought
the Lord ought to accept my consecration and give me the experience I
had so long sought. But he would not do so.

I began to submit myself to the Lord more fully, and he more clearly
opened my understanding to his Word and more definitely shed rays of
light upon my pathway concerning the point in question; then came the
words of Jesus, "Walk in the light while ye have the light, lest ye go
into darkness." My duty was now as clear to me as the morning sun. There
was no rebellion in my heart, the surrender was complete, and I could
with confidence say that my consecration reached the will of God on
every point, regarding all the things I could call to my mind and also
everything that might present itself in the future. There was no doubt
concerning my having made what we sometimes call a Bible consecration.

Then I realized that I had a right to claim the promise and receive
its fulfilment. As I did so, laying claim to the promise as mine and
declaring the work was done because the Word of God said so, that
whatever touched the altar was made holy, I knew that by faith I had
touched the altar, Jesus Christ, and was made holy. I had become willing
to receive the blessing in any way that the Lord saw fit to bestow it.
Just at the time that I claimed the blessing as mine, quietness reigned.
It did not cause me to leap and shout as I had been expecting, but in
a quiet manner the Holy Spirit witnessed the work wrought in my soul.
I learned that the grace and glory or spiritual power that one possesses
is not dependent upon outward demonstrations of the body. While one may
leap and shout, another person of a different temperament may remain
quiet and yet be drinking just as deeply from the fountain of life.

Although many years have passed, yet I have never once doubted the work
wrought in my soul at that time. Amidst the deepest trials of life,
sorrow, sickness, and adversity, I have found a sweet solace by trusting
all away with Him who understands our every need.

Dark days and shadows of life may come, trials and temptations may
present themselves on every hand, the soul may be weighted down with
burdens that are heavy to bear, and accusations of the enemy and hours
of severe testing may come like a flood; yet for the trusting soul the
Spirit of the Lord will lift up a standard against the enemy and lead
onward to victory. To me the Lord has been "a very present help in
trouble" and a friend in time of need.

When I see others struggling along and yearning for that experience
wherein their souls can be satisfied, my wishes are that they make an
unconditional surrender, know without a doubt that their consecration is
complete and that they are in all points consecrated to the will of God.
It is then that the promise can be claimed and the fulfilment realized.

The greatest sinner on the face of the earth can find pardon through
the atonement of Jesus Christ by forsaking his sins, confessing them to
the Lord, and believing on him for deliverance. In like manner every
believer can be filled with the Holy Spirit and abound in the riches of
the grace of God.




Interesting Narratives and Helpful Instruction


Success and happiness in the Christian life do not always depend upon
favorable surroundings; under the most adverse and trying circumstances
men and women have made the greatest strides in spiritual advancement
and power. There may be occasional sorrows and suffering along the way,
but shall these things cast a gloom over our lives, even though at times
they be prolonged and severe? By no means should we allow opposition,
persecution, sorrow, suffering, mistakes, blunders, failures, and such
like to cause defeat and a giving way to discouragement. The discouraged
person is "no good," no matter where you find him. We must rise in the
midst of our trials and in the name and strength of the Lord shake off
discouragements.

Trials will come, but what of it? Others have had just as severe trials,
and have surmounted them, and you and I can do the same. There will be
times when oppressions will be felt that seem grievous to bear; when even
the humble followers of Christ will feel that the lines of communication
between them and the Lord have been severed; when prayers will seem to
fall to the earth and the heavens seem as brass, and the burdened soul
will cry out for help when there seems to be no help. At such times
there needs to be a patient waiting upon the Lord, heart-searching, and
humble submission to his will. Under such circumstances it is well to
heed the advice of the Psalmist: "Wait patiently upon the Lord, and he
shall bring it to pass." Then is the time to trust and not be afraid.

It was at such a time that Jesus felt that his burden was more than he
could bear and asked that, if possible, the cup of suffering be removed,
that he might not have to pass through the severe ordeal that was facing
him. His humanity weakened and shuddered at the approach of the greatest
trial of his life. But he humbly submitted and said, "Father, not my
will, but thy will, be done." It was then that angels came and ministered
unto him; the gates of glory were thrown open, the burden was gone, and
he could go forth as a captive set free.

As he left that place of prayer, that place of victory, it was to
face the foe in the hottest of the fight. Although he was upheld by
the unseen presence of the Father and strengthened by the angels,
nevertheless in the darkest hour of the conflict he cried out, "My God,
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" But even in this final test he said,
"Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit." This was followed by the
unprecedented glories of the resurrection. What a wonderful lesson to
us of submission and trust!


FAILED TO FORGIVE THOSE WHO HAD WRONGED HIM

An unforgiving disposition will hinder one from being humble or from
reaching the necessary point of submission. When Stephen was being
stoned by his persecutors, his dying prayer was, "Lord, lay not this sin
to their charge." One Sunday when I was conducting an inquiry-service
in a State prison, after I had commented on these words of Jesus, "If ye
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
trespasses," a prisoner arose and said, "For years I have sought the
Lord, but never before have I known what hindered me from obtaining
peace to my soul. But now I see it is because I have held a grudge
against those who have wronged me. I forgive them." Peace came into his
soul as he yielded this point.


DESPONDENCY AND DISCOURAGEMENT

Instead of counting your trials and indulging in dark forebodings, throw
away such feelings by counting your past blessings if you can think of
no present blessings. When Paul and Silas were in prison with their feet
fastened in the stocks, the pain in their lacerated backs no doubt often
reminded them of the cruel treatment they had received at the hands of
their enemies; but they looked away from their trials, and, "counting
all things joy," at the midnight hour they were rejoicing, singing songs,
and praising God. The result was marvelous. Had they set themselves to
complaining, they would have spent a miserable night.

A sister was once just at the point of throwing down her shield of faith
and ceasing her efforts in serving the Lord, because of some difficulty
which had arisen between her husband and one of the brethren, and in
which in a sense she also was involved. She had always entertained
implicit confidence in the brother, but now said she could never have
confidence in him again. Had it been some worldly person, she could
have overlooked the matter, but to have one of the brethren make such
statements was more than she could endure. However, she relented, and
before she could gain the necessary victory, she had to make a decision
to stand true to God regardless of the source of the trial.

At this point is where many fail, not because the trial is greater than
some other through which they have passed, but because it comes from an
entirely unexpected source.


UNNECESSARY SELF-ACCUSATIONS

A woman and her husband who were ministers were once drawn into a
difficulty with others and had to call for aid in making an adjustment.
When the time came for a consideration of the matter, she humbly and
nobly did her part, to the satisfaction of all concerned. Although there
was nothing demoralizing about the case, yet she felt very humiliated to
think that she, a minister, should have thus become involved in such a
contention, and thought that the brother who was called to help in the
adjustment would never have confidence in her again. For four years she
worried over the matter, often losing sleep at night, and felt herself
gradually weakening in spirituality and courage.

One day she met the brother, and he expressed himself as having had
implicit confidence in her during the entire period of the four years.
Immediately she took courage, but she had needlessly undergone untold
sufferings through accusations that were all imaginary. Worrying does no
one any good. It is useless to worry before a thing happens, much less
after it happens. Most people worry over imaginary things, over things
that never have nor never will come to pass.

A sister who had lived a godly life and had prayed for her family
for years, became much troubled because none of them would become
Christians. She began to accuse herself of not being right in the sight
of God, but she was reminded that even Jesus himself, although he was
the Son of God, was not able to have all his kinsmen and townsmen to
follow him. She then learned to leave the responsibility with her family
and the Lord after she had done all she could, realizing that her soul
was clear.


TROUBLED ABOUT MAKING CONFESSIONS

One woman was troubled over her past life, feeling that she should make
a public confession, which would endanger the lives of others. She said
it seemed that God was far away from her. Upon investigation it was
learned that her trouble was of such a nature that it would do her or
nobody else any good to make such a confession, but was a matter that
could be settled only between herself and God. Not until she learned
this could she have peace of mind and reach the place where she could
find deliverance.

An actress was married to a respectable young man in Ohio. Their home
was an ideal one in the country. Three children graced their domestic
circle, and there was apparently nothing to mar the happiness of their
Christian home. One day the wife and eldest daughter went to visit the
pastor who had for years been their spiritual advisor. He expressed
his congratulations to her for her attainments in life, pleasant
surroundings, and the extraordinary abilities of her children.

Just before leaving the house of the pastor, she requested a private
interview with him. When alone with him she said: "Judging from outward
appearances, you have believed me to be a very happy woman. But for
many years my heart has been sad, and I have constantly carried a heavy
burden. Sometimes it seemed to be more than I could bear. Before my
marriage I was allured into sin of a disgraceful nature, but my husband
believed me to have always maintained an irreproachable character, and
I have never told him otherwise. Since our marriage I have always been
true to him. Many times during these years I have been just at the point
of unburdening my heart by revealing to him this secret and placing
myself at his mercy; but somehow I have always been checked or prevented
from doing so. I have carried the heavy burden until I can carry it no
longer. Please tell me what to do."

The wise old pastor, with deep feelings of compassion, said: "Good
woman, you have carried an unnecessary burden all these years. Your
husband knew nothing of your sin; it will do him no good to know of
it now, but, on the other hand, a knowledge of it might bring an
unnecessary burden upon him, and cause his implicit confidence to give
place to suspicion. Why should you thus bring feelings of reproach upon
yourself and family? They are a thousand times better off without a
knowledge of it. Go bury it in oblivion; cast it from your mind forever.
God has forgiven you long ago. Such matters are to be settled between
you and him alone; go and sin no more." She obeyed and went forth a
happy woman. Her burden was gone.

If all spiritual advisors were as wise as this pastor in giving
instruction to those in need of help, much suffering would be averted.
There are thousands of people today carrying heavy burdens that God
has not placed upon them, but has long ago forgiven because of their
repentance. Such persons have allowed the enemy of their souls to
unnecessarily burden them with accusations and false impressions.
These they should have cast aside, declaring their freedom in the name
of Jesus.


ACCUSED GOD OF NOT BEING JUST

There are others who accuse God of not being just, or blame him for
not answering their prayers, when the fact is, their lives have not
been such as would give them an assurance that God would answer their
prayers. A young sister who had for some time been drifting into
worldliness was called to the bedside of her dying father. She was much
concerned about him and asked a special favor of the Lord concerning
him, and because her request was not granted in just the manner
requested, she permitted her mind to be filled with doubts and
infidelity. She blamed God for not answering, and then she began to have
struggles with hardness of heart, which she had never known before. This
caused her to become alarmed, and she sought the counsel of a minister.
He cited her to 1 John 3:22--"And whatsoever we ask we receive of him,
because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing
in his sight." She acknowledged that she had not been living right, and
therefore had no right to blame God for not answering her prayers.


WHEN THE TEMPTER COMES OFTENEST

The tempter comes oftenest where the temptation has not been completely
put away and where there is lack of decision against it. Many people
are like the drunkard. He desires to cease drinking, but says, "Just
one more drink; then I am done." When that has been taken he says,
"One more, only one; then I am forever done with strong drink." Such
a determination will never loose him from the binding fetters.

The one who is bound by an evil habit or has yielded to the fascinations
of an alluring spirit must make a positive, definite decision, in every
way possible turn from the temptation, and call upon God for help with a
faith that will not waver; then deliverance is sure to come, and grace
to be an overcomer.


TRIALS MADE STEPPING-STONES TO GREATER VICTORIES

The beautiful roses are protected by thorns, many of which are hidden
away beneath the presentation of beauty. Roses are not often plucked
without the one who would enjoy their fragrance realizing a pain by
being pricked in an attempt to secure the sweet-scented flower as his
own. Just why the thorns are there we do not know. Many a young recruit
looks with admiration upon the veteran skill of the soldier who has been
through fierce battles and has come forth as a hero. But his fame was
not obtained without hardships and wounds, as the scars which he carries
give testimony. About us on every side are veterans of the cross of
Christ, those whose lives we admire, whose experiences we covet, but
back of them no doubt are the pricking thorns in the form of trials,
which have proved to be stepping-stones to the beautiful life of faith
and devotion and which have graced their spiritual pathway. The roses
are none the less fragrant and beautiful because of the hidden thorns
beneath them. Neither is the life of a Christian less brilliant and
radiant because of the trials and temptations along the way.

The enjoyment of a Christian life is what we make it. The darkest,
saddest life ever known, the most dejected person in existence, the one
who is surrounded constantly by infamy, blasphemy, and dark forebodings,
or that one whose life has been a failure and who through adversity is
doomed to spend his days behind prison-walls, can find a haven of rest
in this life and in the life to come. It is through the grace of God
that such can be accomplished.

No matter what your sin is or has been, you can have deliverance and
peace that the world can not understand. A firm decision and trust in
God will take you through by his grace. When trials come, tell the Lord
about them, "casting all your cares upon him, for he careth for you."
Oh the riches of his grace, the power of his love! There is an abundance
in the great storehouse of our heavenly Father subject to our petitions,
and he offers his heavenly riches freely and his blessings to be poured
out without measure.

"Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that
we ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us, unto him be
glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without
end" (Eph. 3:20, 21). "Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of
grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need"
(Heb. 4:16).




Zion's Bank


The following quaint verses are supposed to have been written by Roland
Hill at a time when public credit in Great Britain was shaken by the
failure of several banks.


  I have a never-failing bank,
    A more than golden store;
  No earthly bank is half so rich;
    How, then, can I be poor?

  'Tis when my stock is spent and gone
    And I without a groat,
  I'm glad to hasten to my bank
    And beg a little note.

  Sometimes my Banker, smiling, says:
    "Why don't you oftener come?
  And when you draw a little note,
    Why not a larger sum?

  "Why live so niggardly and poor?
    Your bank contains a plenty.
  Why come and take a one-pound note,
    When you might have a twenty?

  "Yea, twenty thousand ten times told
    Is but a trifling sum
  To what your Father has laid up
    Secure in Christ, his Son."

  Since, then, my Banker is so rich,
    I have no cause to borrow;
  I'll live upon my cash today,
    And draw again tomorrow.

  I've been a thousand times before,
    And never was rejected;
  Sometimes my Banker gives me more
    Than asked for or expected.

  Sometimes I've felt a little proud
    I've managed things so clever;
  But ah! before the day is gone
    I've felt as poor as ever.

  Should all the banks in Britain break,
    And that of England smash,
  Bring in your notes to Zion's bank;
    You'll surely have your cash.

  And if you have but one small note,
    Fear not to bring it in;
  Come boldly to the bank of Grace;
    The Banker is within.

  All forged notes will be refused;
    Man-merits are rejected;
  There not a single note will pass
    That God has not accepted.

  This bank is full of precious notes,
    All signed and sealed and free,
  Though many a doubting soul may say,
    "There is not one for me."

  The leper had a little note--
    "Lord, if you will you can";
  The Banker cashed this little note,
    And healed the sickly man.

  We read of one young man, indeed,
    Whose riches did abound;
  But in this Banker's book of grace
    This man was never found.

  But see the wretched dying thief
    Hang by the Banker's side;
  He cried, "Dear Lord, remember me";
    He got his cash and died.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Riches of Grace, by E. E. Byrum

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RICHES OF GRACE ***

***** This file should be named 36476.txt or 36476.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/4/7/36476/

Produced by David Garcia, Joel Erickson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
