The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Day with Robert Schumann, by May Byron

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Day with Robert Schumann

Author: May Byron

Release Date: June 19, 2011 [EBook #36472]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY WITH ROBERT SCHUMANN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, paksenarrion and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






    [Illustration]




    THE HIDALGO.

    My days I spend in courting,
    With songs and hearts a-sporting,
        Or weaponed for a fight!

                              (_Der Hidalgo_).

    [Illustration]


     A DAY WITH
       ROBERT
      SCHUMANN
    BY MAY BYRON

    [Illustration]

    LONDON
    HODDER & STOUGHTON


    _In the same Series._
        _Mozart._
        _Beethoven._
        _Mendelssohn._
        _Schubert._
        _Chopin._
        _Wagner._
        _Gounod._
        _Tschaikovsky._




A DAY WITH SCHUMANN.


It is an April morning in 1844, in the town of Leipzig,--calm, cool, and
fraught with exquisite promise of a prolific spring,--when the Herr
Professor Doctor Robert Schumann, rising before six o'clock as is his
wont, very quietly and noiselessly in his soft felt slippers, dresses
and goes downstairs. For he does not wish to disturb or incommode his
sleeping wife, whose dark eyes are still closed, or to awaken any of his
three little children.

The tall, dignified, well-built man, with his pleasant, kindly
expression, and his air of mingled intellect and reverie, bears his
whole character written large upon him,--his transparent honesty,
unflagging industry, and generous, enthusiastic altruism. No touch of
self-seeking about him, no hint of ostentation or conceit: he is still
that same reticent and silent person, of whom it was said some years ago
by his friends,

    "Herr Schumann is a right good man,
    He smokes tobacco as no one can:
    A man of thirty, I suppose,
    And short his hair, and short his nose."

That, indeed, is the sum total of his outward appearance: as for the
inward man, it is not to be known save through his writings. Literature
and music are the only means of expression, of communication with
others, which are possessed by this modest, pensive, reserved maestro,
upon whom the sounding titles of Doctor and Professor sit so strangely.

In the unparalleled fervour and romance of his compositions,--in the
passionate heart-opening of his letters,--in the sane, wholesome, racy
colloquialism of his critiques,--the real Robert Schumann is unfolded.
Otherwise he might remain a perennial enigma to his nearest and dearest:
for even in his own family circle, tenderly and dearly as he adores his
wife and children, his lips remain sealed of all that they might say:
and the fixed, unvarying quietude of his face but rarely reveals the
least suggestion of his deeper feelings.

Yet, at the present time, were you to search the world around, you
should hardly find a happier man than this, in his own serene and
thoughtful way. For, in his own words, "I have an incomparable wife.
There is no happiness equal to that. If you could only take a peep at us
in our snug little artist home!" Clara Wieck, whom he has known from her
childhood, whom he struggled, and agonised, and fought for against fate,
for five long years of frustration and disappointment, is not only his
beloved wife and the mother of his little ones,--she is his
fellow-worker and co-artist, and literal helpmate in every department of
life. She has "filled his life with sunshine of love,"--and, "as a
woman," he declares, "she is a gift from heaven.... Think of perfection,
and I will agree to it!" But, beyond that, she has poured her beautiful
soul into every hungry cranny of his artistic sense. "For Clara's
untiring zeal and energy in her art, she really deserves love and
encouragement.... I will say no more of my happiness in possessing a
girl with whom I have grown to be one through art, intellectual
affinities, the regular intercourse of years, and the deepest and
holiest affection. My whole life is one joyous activity."

The annals of art, indeed, hold no more lovely record of a union between
natural affinities. That of Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning perhaps
approximates most closely to that of Robert and Clara Schumann. But
whereas in the former case both husband and wife were alike engaged upon
the same branch of literature,--poetry,--and a certain sense of sadness
was apt to embitter the success of the wife, because of the unpopularity
(in those days) of the husband,--Schumann is solely and pre-eminently a
composer, and Clara solely and absorbingly a pianist. No shadow of
artistic rivalry can fall upon their delight, nor darken their pleasure
in each other's achievements. Schumann's most impassioned and
characteristic productions have been definitely inspired by Clara, ever
since the days when, as a child of nine, she listened to his fantastic
fairy-tales, and her exquisite playing thrilled him with a desire to
think in music. And Clara, who has never made a mere show of her
marvellous executive skill, but has "consecrated it to the service of
true art alone,"--is never happier than when interpreting her husband's
works.

It is, in short, necessary to deal with Schumann as a whole,--as a man
who has fulfilled the triple destiny for which Nature intended him,--as
individual, husband, and father,--before one can even approximately
understand this silent, studious dreamer, whose one ideal of happiness
is to sit at home and compose.

Schumann considers this early morning hour the most precious of his day,
from a working standpoint. He seats himself at his desk, and places his
two treasures where they shall catch his eye conspicuously; for he
regards them more or less as charms and talismans to bring out the best
that is in him. They are, a steel pen which he found lying on
Beethoven's grave at Vienna, and the MS. score of Schubert's C-major
Symphony, which he obtained by a lucky chance. He regards these with a
mixture of sentiment and humorous toleration of his own mysticism: but
he cherishes them none the less, and often casts a reassuring glance in
their direction, as he covers sheet after sheet of paper with his
shockingly illegible handwriting. "Poets and pianists," says he with
resignation, "almost always write with a dog's paw. The printers will
make it out somehow." He is engaged upon his work in connection with the
_Neue Zeitschrift fuer Musik_ (New Musical Times), which he originally
founded, and of which he has been some nine years Editor. During all
these years he has contributed to its pages those admirable reviews and
appreciations which are so utterly unlike anything heretofore attempted
in the realm of musical criticism. "There is no quality to be desired in
a musical critic that Schumann does not possess:" and in addition to
technical equipments of every kind, keen insight and an almost prophetic
quality in his predictions, he has the priceless gift too often denied
to the critic,--that of superabundant sympathy. His hands are ever
thrown out to welcome the young and timid genius, even as they are
clenched, so to speak, with threatening fists towards Philistinism,
charlatanism and mediocrity. He loves to praise rather than to blame,
and to detect the germs of coming greatness in some obscure, unsuspected
artist. He takes into his regard the personal equation wherever
possible, and does not separate the musician from the man: for, he says,
"the man and the musician in myself have always struggled to manifest
themselves simultaneously.... I speak with a certain diffidence of
works, of the precursors of which I know nothing. I like to know
something of the composer's school, his youthful aspirations, his
exemplars and even of the actions and circumstances of his life, and
what he has done hitherto."

As his pen travels rapidly over the pages, the reason of his cramped and
crabbed handwriting is only too evident. Schumann's right hand is
crippled. In an evil hour of his youth, while yet he was consumed with
the ambition of a would-be virtuoso, he experimented, with artificial
restrictions, upon one of his right-hand fingers, intending thus to
strengthen the rest by assiduous practice ... with the result that he
lamed his hand for ever. This disastrous attempt deprived the world of a
good pianist, but conferred upon it a great composer: for it is possible
that the executive would have superseded the creative ability within
him. Nevertheless, he confesses that, "My lame hand makes me wretched
sometimes ... it would mean so much if I were able to play. What a
relief to give utterance to all the music surging within me! As it is, I
can barely play at all, but stumble along with my fingers all mixed up
together in a terrible way. It causes me great distress."

Thus, you perceive, he is considerably debarred from expressing himself
in sounds, no less than in words: he must perforce retire more and more
within himself. The ease with which he writes is balanced by the
difficulty with which he speaks: and bitterly he has complained, "People
are often at a loss to understand me, and no wonder! I meet affectionate
advances with icy reserve, and often wound and repel those who wish to
help me.... It is not that I fail to appreciate the very smallest
attention, or to distinguish every subtle change in expression and
attitude: it is a fatal something in my words and manner which belies
me."

He is, indeed, only paralleled by the _Lotus Flower_ of his own
delicious song,--shrinking from the daylight of publicity, and softly
unfolding to the gentle rays of love.

    The Lotus flower is pining
        Under the sun's red light:
    Slowly her head inclining,
        She dreams and waits for the night.

    The moon, who is her lover,
        Awakes her with his rays,
    And bids her softly uncover
        Her veiled and gentle gaze.

    Now glowing, gleaming, throbbing,
        She looks all mutely above,--
    She is trembling, and sighing, and sobbing,
        For love and the pangs of love.

                                                (_Heine._)

And here she enters the room, this woman who is literally his _alter
ego_, and the small prattle of children is audible in the awakening
house. Madame Schumann is, in her husband's words, a "pale, not pretty,
but attractive" young woman of twenty-six, "with black eyes that speak
volumes,"--slender, vivacious, affectionate: the exact complement of
Robert in all respects. It is easy to perceive in them, at the first
glance, "two noble souls distinguished by fastidious purity of
character--two buoyant minds concentrated to the service of the same
art." The heavily-thoughtful face of the composer lights up with sudden
sunshine.

"Come and sit beside me, my dear, sweet girl!" says he. "Hold your head
a little to the right, in the charming way you have, and let me talk to
you a little. Upon my word, Claerchen, you look younger than ever this
morning. You cannot be the mother of three. You cannot be the celebrated
pianist. You are just the queer, quaint little girl you were ten years
ago, with strong views of your own, beautiful eyes, and a weakness for
cherries!" This is a very long speech for Schumann, and his wife looks
at him with a shade of anxiety--such anxiety as she is never wholly
free from. For the words which she wrote in her diary on her wedding day
were more prophetic than even she may yet recognise: "My
responsibilities are heavy--very heavy; give me strength to fulfil them
as a good wife should. God has always been and will continue to be my
helper. I have always had perfect trust in Him, which I will ever
preserve." She, and she alone, is aware of all those mysterious clouds
of melancholia, those strange sounds of inexplicable music, which brood
at times above her darling husband--friend, comrade and lover in one.
She, and she only, can banish, as David did from Saul, the terrible
phases of irrational depression, and exorcise the evil power which is
always lurking ambushed in Schumann's outwardly happy life.

    [Illustration: THE LOTUS-FLOWER.

    The Lotus flower is pining
        Under the sun's red light:
    Slowly her head inclining,
        She dreams and waits for the night.

                                          (_Die Lotos-Blume_).]

"See," says he, with modest pride, "what a vast amount of work I have
completed this morning!"

"You are a most diligent creature, Robert!" she tells him, "and yet I
cannot but wish sometimes, that this literary work were off your
mind--that you had more time to devote towards composing, which is your
true _metier_. I want all the world to understand how great a master
you are--I am jealous of every minute spent upon the _Neue
Zeitschrift_!"

"Don't be too ambitious for me, Claerchen: I desire no better place than
a seat at the piano with you close by."

"That does not satisfy me," says the impetuous little lady, "I want you
to be recognised and applauded by all men. When I am rendering your
divine compositions, I feel as though all the while I were declaring:
'Just hear this!--Just listen to that!--This is by Robert Schumann, the
greatest genius in Germany: it is an honour to me to be allowed to
perform such works.'"

"My dear, those compositions are my poor, weak way of expressing my
thoughts about you! The battles which you have cost me, the joy you have
given me, are all reflected by my music. You are almost the sole
inspiration of my best--the Concerto, the Sonata, the _Davidsbuendler_
dances, the _Kreisleriana_, the _Novelletten_. Why, dearest, in the
_Novelletten_ are my thoughts of you in every possible position and
circumstance and all your irresistibleness!... No one could have written
the _Novelletten_, unless he had gazed into such eyes and touched such
lips as yours. In short, another may do better work, but nothing just
like these."

"That, indeed, I feel," replies Clara with a little sigh, "and the very
significance of their meaning, I believe, forbids my doing full justice
to their amazing difficulties. You need a pianist like Liszt, my Robert,
to interpret you to the best advantage."

"I have every admiration for Liszt's wonderful playing, with its
diapason of all the moods between the extremes of fiery frenzy, and
utmost delicacy. But his world is not mine--not ours, Claerchen. Art, as
we know it--you when you play, I when I compose--has an intimate charm
that is worth far more to us than all Liszt's splendour and tinsel."

They embrace with the warmth and sweetness of perfect mutual
comprehension: and she prevails upon him to descend from cloudy Olympian
editorial heights, so far as to refresh himself with a modest
_Fruehstueck_ or breakfast, and a brief gambol with the little ones--for
he has that devotion to tiny children characteristic of all great men.
Never, perhaps, has any composer so thoroughly entered into childish
griefs and fears and pleasures--the April shower and shine of
babyhood--than Schumann in his _Kinderscenen_. The consummate musician
who has surmounted every difficulty, acquainted himself with every
method of his art--the man who has mastered the forms of symphony,
chamber-music, pianoforte and vocal music to their farthest present
limits--here stands forth as the exponent of little innocent every-day
emotions. _By the Fireside_, _Bogeys_, _A Child's Petition_, _From
Foreign Lands_, _Blindman's Buff_, and so on, the simple titles run.
"They are descriptive enough, you see, and as easy as winking!" he has
told his wife. And they are the very breath of childhood,--they "dally
with the innocence of love, like the old age." Nobody could have
imagined them but a man who had eternal youth in his heart. "The
dissonances are as softly blended as if a child had actually poured
forth its pure soul."

It may readily be imagined with what looks askance the composer of the
_Kinderscenen_ is favoured by his academic and hide-bound
contemporaries. "Romanticism run mad"--"modernism gone
crazy;"--"discordant innovations;"--"new-fangled nonsense"--there are
few terms too harsh for Herr Schumann; and sometimes he is
contemptuously ignored as beyond all possibility of classification.
Already sufficiently _outre_, in the opinion of all conventional
musicians, by his adoption of the cyclical form, rather than the
orthodox classical, for his abstract pianoforte music--"the whole
becoming organic by means of the intimate connection between the various
parts;"--already sufficiently outlandish, in the estimation of the
average conservative critic, by what is condemned as his _grotesquerie_
and _bizarrerie_ of treatment: Schumann is not careful to answer his
opponents, or to defend himself from any charges of _lese-majeste_
against the imperial art which he serves. That wide and genial tolerance
which he extends towards all new composers, he does not demand or even
expect for himself. Nevertheless, as he allows, "I used to be quite
indifferent to the amount of notice I received, but a wife and children
put a different complexion upon everything. It becomes imperative to
think of the future." And he is aware that his own personal
idiosyncrasies are the strongest obstacle in his way; for he is unable
to push or praise himself in the least, and the lordly egotism by dint
of which other composers win, or command, a hearing, has been entirely
omitted from the making of this dumb genius. He knows no professional
jealousy, he never speaks ill of a soul;--but then, one might say that
he hardly ever spoke at all. He is almost unknown in society,--partly
because he really has no interest whatever apart from music, partly
owing to his silent manner and retiring disposition. It is on record
that one day after Madame Schumann had been playing with tremendous
success at one of the smaller German courts, the Serene Highness who was
ruler there enquired of her with great affability, "whether her husband
were also musical?" And with his fellow-musicians he is so invincibly
taciturn that conversation is almost a farce. Even Wagner, whose powers
of loquacity are almost illimitable, resents being reduced to the
utterance of an absolute monologue. "When I came to see Schumann," he
grumbles, "I related to him my Parisian experiences, spoke of the state
of music in France, then of that in Germany, spoke of literature
and politics,--but he remained as good as dumb for nearly an hour. Now,
one cannot go on talking _quite_ alone. An impossible man!"

    [Illustration: THE KNIGHT AND THE LORELEI.

    The hour is late, the night is cold,--
    Who through the forest rides so bold?
    The wood is wide,--thou art alone,--
    O lovely maid, be thou my own!

                                      (_Waldesgesprach_).]

The fact is, that the "impossible man" dwells apart in a world of his
own, a world peopled by the best folk he has ever encountered either in
the flesh or the spirit, and a world where the austerest canons and
noblest aspirations of his great art are upheld on a very different
plane from that of Leipzig. He has the highest possible view of his
vocation and what it should entail. "To send light into the depths of
the human heart, that is the artistic calling," he has declared.... "The
artist is to choose for his companions those who can do something beyond
playing passably on one or two instruments--those who are whole men and
can understand Shakespeare and Jean Paul.... People say, 'It pleased,'
or 'It did not please,'--as if there were nothing higher than pleasing
the public!" ... A man with such notions as these, in the first half of
the nineteenth century, must of necessity live and move to a great
extent in an ideal atmosphere of his own: and Schumann, to do so the
more literally, has created his own company in that "spiritual and
romantic league," the _Davidsbund_, which exists only in his
imagination, but exercises considerable vigour none the less.

The _Davidsbund_ is a mystical community of kindred souls, each
enlisted, with or without his knowledge, under the banner of "a resolve
to do battle in the cause of musical progress, against Philistinism in
every form." One can only vaguely compare it to the Pre-Raphaelite
Brotherhood in England. "Mozart was as much a member of it as Berlioz
now is," so declares its founder. Chopin, Julius Knorr, Schuncke, Carl
Banck and others, without any form of enrolment, are members of the
Davidite fraternity. New names and old are added from time to time, in
the friendly columns of the _Neue Zeitschrift fuer Musik_, which is the
organ of the league: and especially Schumann himself appears under a
number of _noms de guerre_, representing the manifold facets of his
identity. As _Florestan_, he speaks for "the turbulent and impulsive
side of his nature, full of imaginative activity;" as _Eusebius_, he
expresses those gentle, thoughtful, sensitive qualities which sit so
lovably upon him. As _Meister Raro_, calmly logical, he stands between
both the above, and, "acting as arbitrator, sums up their opposing
criticisms," much as his father-in-law Friedrich Wieck the great
professor might do. To light-hearted, humorous, almost frivolous
critiques he signs himself _Jeanquirit_: and last, not least of the
"Davidites," he introduces Mendelssohn as _Meritis_, and embodies
varying traits of his beloved Clara as _Zilia_, _Chiarina_, and
_Cecilia_.... Call it feather-brained, fantastic, ridiculous, if you
will, the _Davidsbund_ has a very definite meaning, and fulfils a very
noble purpose. For, to use its inventor's own phrase, "In every age
there is a secret band of kindred spirits. Ye who are of this
fellowship, see that ye weld the circle firmly, that so the truth of Art
may shine ever more and more clearly, shedding joy and blessing far and
near."

That remarkable power of expressing the personalities of his friends in
music, which has been Schumann's from youth, stands him in good stead
for the depicting of various "Davidites": he could show the peculiar
characteristics of any one of them in a few moments, on the pianoforte,
whereas years would not suffice him to give a verbal explanation. This
power of portrayal is noticeable in the very construction of his
songs,--such as, for instance, _The Two Grenadiers_, or _Freedom_, or
_The Hidalgo_, with its essentially Spanish arrogance.

    My days I spend in courting,
    With songs and hearts a-sporting,
        Or weaponed for a fight!
    The fragrant darkness daring,
    I gaily forth am faring,
        To roam the streets by night,
    For love or war preparing,
        With bearing proud and light....
    The moon her light is flinging,
    The powers of Love are springing,
        And sombre passions burn ...
    Or wounds or blossoms bringing,
        To-morrow I'll return!
    While o'er the horizon darkling,
    The first faint star is sparkling,
        All prudence cold I spurn,--
    Or wounds or blossoms bringing,
        To-morrow I'll return!

In the course of the morning Schumann, reluctantly leaving a mass of
unfinished MSS. upon his desk and pianoforte, betakes himself to his
duties at the Conservatorium, where he has been professor for about a
year. Conscientious and painstaking in tuition as in all else, he is not
naturally a good teacher. He seems to be devoid of the priceless power
of imparting verbal instruction, or of imparting the secret of the
system whereby a desired effect shall be attained. His habitual and
increasing melancholy reserve rises up like a barrier between himself
and his pupils: his reticence chills and bewilders them. His own musical
education has been an entirely personal matter, and not wrought out upon
the accepted scholastic lines. Moreover, intercourse with musical people
has always "appealed to Schumann far more, and with greater success,
than dry lessons in thorough bass and counterpoint." Hence, whilst he
appears almost unable to assist the novice in the beginning, or tadpole
stage, he is able to afford invaluable help and stimulating criticism to
those young artists with whom he may come in contact, and who adore him
for his sympathetic kindness. The violinist Joachim never forgot how,
as a boy of thirteen, he played the _Kreutzer_ sonata with his host at
the house of Mendelssohn. Lonely and silent all the while, Schumann
remained in a corner of the room; but subsequently, while Joachim was
sitting near him, he leaned forward and pointed to the stars, shining
down into the room through the open window. He patted the lad's knee
with gentle, friendly encouragement. "Do you think they know up
there," he queried, "that a little boy has been playing down here
with Mendelssohn?"--This question was the very essence of
Schumann,--romantic, mystical, full of tender dreams.

His composition-lessons over, he conducts a part-singing class.
Orchestral conducting is abhorrent to him; it is "too defiant and
conspicuous a task." He cannot make his meaning clear by word of mouth:
and in gesture he is singularly deficient. But in part-singing he is an
excellent instructor, because he is seated at the piano and can indicate
there the suggestion which he fails to convey _viva-voce_. Even now, in
the wreck of his abilities as a pianist, it is possible to imagine what
he might have been: he can produce an extraordinary depth and
richness of tone, seeming to obtain some of his effects by unusual and
almost illegitimate means. His accentuation is very slight, and he uses
both pedals too frequently and too freely. Notwithstanding these
peculiarities, however, the same indefinable magic pervades his
piano-playing as his compositions.

    [Illustration: I WILL NOT CHIDE.

    I will not chide, although my heart should break,
    Though all my hopes have died, lost Love, for thy dear sake--
          I will not chide.

                                    (_Ich grolle nicht_).]

Nervous, excitable, uneasy, the master draws a breath of relief when the
class is dismissed. The pleasant Hebraic face of Mendelssohn nods in at
his door in passing. The two musicians are so busily engaged, that often
they hardly exchange a word for weeks together. Mendelssohn, the
recipient of many a generous and whole-hearted encomium from his devotee
Schumann, does not return this fraternal enthusiasm. To his
well-balanced mind, the silent moody man and his productions are too
wild, too eccentric, too uncanny. He regards them, at times, with a
species of grudging admiration: at others, he sides in heart, if not in
speech, with the current opinion of the town. "Opposition to all
artistic progress has always been a distinctive characteristic of
Leipzig musical society," and therefore horror-stricken hands are
uplifted at the editor of the _Neue Zeitschrift fuer Musik_, his
heretical doctrines, and still more heretical deeds. The good people of
the Thomas-School Choral Society, the audience at the Gewandhaus
concerts, the subscribers to opposition musical papers, regard Herr
Schumann very much as the knight regarded the lady at the close of his
own magnificent _Waldesgesprach_.

    "The hour is late, the night is cold,--
    Who through the forest rides so bold?
    The wood is wide,--thou art alone,--
    O lovely maid, be thou my own!"

    "Great is the craft and guile of men,
    With grief my heart is rent in twain;
    Far sounds the bugle to and fro,--
    Away! my name thou dost not know!"

    "Thy steed and thou so bright array'd,
    So wondrous fair, thou lovely maid,--
    --I know thee now! God! let me fly!
    Thou art the fairy Lorelei!"

    "Thou know'st me now--my towers do shine
    Deep mirror'd in the dark blue Rhine,--
    The wind blows cold, the day is o'er,--
    Thou shalt escape me never more!"

In the afternoon, Schumann, back at home, is occupied with creative
work. This, perhaps, is the most congenial part of his day: for, as it
has been said of him, he sees life musically, and whatever happens to
impress him takes the form of music. Steadily, deliberately, of set
purpose, and yet with the authentic fire of divine inspiration infusing
his smallest effort, he has conquered, one by one, in every field of
creative art. His finest pianoforte works were composed during the
wretched years of strain and stress whilst he was waiting to marry
Clara, held apart from her by her jealous and inexorable father, until
(again like the Brownings) the lovers took matters into their own hands
and were married in sudden and in secret. Three of his four great
symphonies saw the light in one year, 1841,--an achievement truly
colossal. Last year, 1843, he was studying and perfecting himself in
chamber music. His life, outwardly so uneventful, has been abnormally
prolific in brain-work: and that of no fatal fluency or shallow
meretriciousness, but conceived upon the highest possible plane. "The
more clearly we examine Schumann's ideas," says Liszt, "the more power
and life do we discover in them: and the more we study them, the more
are we amazed at the wealth and fertility which had before escaped us."
And his own theories of art are bound to evolve themselves thus:--for
"Only think," he has written, "what circumstances must be combined to
produce the beautiful in all its dignity and splendour. We need,--1st,
lofty deep purposes and ideality in a composition; 2nd, enthusiasm in
description; 3rd, masterly execution and harmony of action, closely
combined; 4th, innate desire for giving and receiving, a momentarily
favourable mood (on both sides, that of listener and performer); 5th,
the most fortunate conjunction of the relatives of time, as well as of
the more especial question of place and other accessories; 6th, sympathy
of impression, feelings and ideas--a reflection of artistic pleasure in
the eyes of others."

And these definitions apply in all their detail to the outcome of
Schumann's happiest year of all,--the year after his union with
Clara,--the time when like a bird he burst into infinite ecstasy of
melody, and eclipsed himself with the number, variety and bewildering
beauty of his vocal compositions. That perfect balance between words and
music, that power of identifying himself with the poet whose words he
"sets," which pre-eminently differentiates Schumann from all other
musicians, was born of "hopes fulfilled and mutual love." There are no
songs which can compare with his, in passionate intensity and depth of
emotion. It may be that only the skilled and sympathetic musician can
interpret them with full effect: but the least expert auditor can be
poignantly affected by them. Especially is this the case with his
treatments of Heine,--the one poet _par excellence_ in whom he discovers
all he can desire of power, of pathos and of passion. "The lyrics _Die
Lotos-blume_ (The Lotus-flower) and _Du bist wie eine Blume_ (Thou art
like unto a flower) are among the most perfect things found in the
realms of song, in their enchanting truth and delicacy of sentiment";
and "not one of all those subtle touches ... which make Heine's poetry
what it is, has been lost upon Schumann." _Ich grolle nicht_ (I will
not chide) is unapproachable in its white-heat of uttermost despair.

    I will not chide, although my heart should break,
    Though all my hopes have died, lost Love, for thy dear sake--
        I will not chide.

    Though thou be bright bedeck'd with diamond-shine,
    No ray of joy illumines that heart of thine,
        I know full well!

    I will not chide, although my heart should break,--
        I saw it all in dreaming,
    I saw the night that thro' thy soul is streaming,
    I saw the snake that on thy heart doth feed,
    I saw, my love, how sad thou art indeed,--
        I will not chide!

_Die Beiden Grenadieren_ (The Two Grenadiers), with Schumann's favourite
_Marseillaise_ introduced in such masterly fashion at the end,
remains an unrivalled utterance of manly and patriotic grief.

    To France were returning two Grenadiers,
        In Russia they long did languish,
    And as they came to the German frontier,
        They hung down their heads with anguish.
    'Twas then that they heard the story of woe,
        That France was forlorn and forsaken,
    Besieged and defeated, and crushed by the foe,
        And the Emp'ror, their Emp'ror was taken!

        *       *       *       *       *

    "My cross of honour and crimson band
        Lay on my heart right surely;
    My musket place within my hand,
        And gird my sword securely:
    So will I lie there and harken, dumb,--
        Like sentry when hosts are camping,--
    Till I hear the roar of the cannon come,
        And the chargers above are tramping!

    "Above me shall ride then my Emp'ror so brave,
        While swords are flashing and clashing,
        While sabres are fiercely contending,--
    In that hour of his need I will rise from the grave,
        The cause of my Emp'ror defending!"

And in his song-cycle _Frauen-lieben und Leben_ (Woman's Life and Love)
he has evinced "extraordinary depths of penetration into a side of human
character which men are generally supposed incapable of
understanding--the intensity and endurance of a pure woman's love." ...
Yet who should know it if he does not?...

Towards evening, various folk drop in by ones and twos,--musical
acquaintances, it need hardly be said, for there is no other topic than
that of their art which they can discuss with Robert Schumann. The
discussion may possibly be on their part only, with a man like this, of
whom it is told that one day he went into a friend's house, whistling
softly _sotto voce_,--and, with nothing but a cheery nod, walked to the
piano and opened it,--played a few chords,--made a modulation, and
returned to the original key,--shut the piano, gave another courteous
nod, and--exit, in utter silence! He is, indeed, capable of sitting for
hours in the midst of a merry chattering company, completely lost in
thought, employed upon the evolution of some musical thought. But when
he _does_ speak, his words are all altruistically ardent, full of eager
praise and joyful appreciation for the great names of music, whose
excellencies he loves to point out. "The great masters, it is to them I
go," he avows with the humility of a child,--"to Gluck the simple, to
Haendel the complicated, and to Bach the most complicated of all." His
admiration of "John Sebastian" is boundless. "I always flee to Bach, and
he gives me fresh strength and desire for life and work.... The profound
combinations, the poetry and humour of the new school of music
principally emanate from Bach."


    [Illustration: THE TWO GRENADIERS.

    To France were returning two Grenadiers,
        In Russia they long did languish,
    And as they came to the German frontier,
        They hung down their heads with anguish.

                                          (_Die Beiden Grenadieren_).]

Mozart is to him, as to all great artists, a veritable divinity. "Do not
put Beethoven," says he, "too soon into the hands of the young: steep
and strengthen them in the fresh animation of Mozart.... The music of
the first act of _Figaro_ I consider the most heavenly that Mozart ever
wrote." And with his customary absolute freedom from professional envy,
he terms Mendelssohn "the Mozart of the nineteenth century," and will
not even sit in the same room with anyone who disparages him. He has
upheld with noble enthusiasm the merits of such rising stars as Chopin,
Heller, Gade, Sterndale-Bennett, Berlioz, Franz, and Brahms. He has, it
may be said, only one _bete noir_, the blatant and flamboyant Meyerbeer.
Regarding Wagner, his opinion is in abeyance. "Wagner is a man of
education and spirit ... certainly a clever fellow, full of crazy ideas,
and audacious to a degree.... Yet he cannot write or think of four
consecutive lines of beautiful, hardly of good, music." So Schumann has
delivered himself at one time; but he is ready to revoke this judgment,
and to declare, "I must take back one or two things I said after reading
the score of _Tannhaeuser_; it makes quite a different effect on the
stage. Much of it impressed me deeply."

When his guests depart, Schumann accompanies them a little way, that he
may, according to his invariable custom, spend an hour or so of the
evening at Popper's Restaurant. There, should his friend Verhulst
be present, he enjoys what is for him a free and animated
conversation--otherwise, among the chink of glasses and clank of plates,
he remains aloof and meditative.

Evening darkens slowly into the calm spring night,--that
_Fruehlingsnacht_ which he has set forth in such exquisite music--as he
regains his home and rejoins his wife. She is practising softly lest the
children awaken, but rises with a smile of joy, and receives her husband
as though he had been a year away. Side by side, holding each others'
hands, they sit by the window and inhale the sweet April air. A sense of
beatitude encompasses them.

"Hast thou done well to-day, Robert?" she enquires.

"Well? Yes--very well: better than I hoped or expected. A soft voice
seemed to whisper to me whilst I worked, 'It is not in vain that thou
art writing.' ... But in such an hour as this, my Clara, I long more
deeply to give expression to my holiest thoughts. To apply his powers to
sacred music must always be the loftiest aim of an artist. In youth we
are all too firmly rooted to earth with its joys and sorrows: but with
advancing age, our branches extend higher. And so I hope the time for my
efforts in this direction is not far distant."

"It is, then, at present, eluding you--the study of sacred music?"

"It demands a power of treating the chorus--a knowledge of superb
_ensemble_ and massive effects to which I have not yet attained." And he
heaves a sigh as of one faced with mighty problems. For to this man,
"from whom the knowledge of no emotion in the individual heart is
withheld, it is a matter of extreme difficulty to give expression to ...
those feelings which affect the whole of mankind in common."

"For you, who can realize human love so devoutly, there should be no
eventual hindrance to the expression of love towards God," says the
little dark-eyed woman, pressing his hand with warm devotion.

"You yourself are the concrete expression of love towards God," the
composer murmurs, gazing down at her in the twilight--"you and your
music together. If I once said I loved you because of your goodness, it
is only half true. Everything is so harmoniously combined in your
nature, that I cannot think of you apart from your music--and so I love
you one with the other." A sudden spasm contracts his face as he
speaks--he turns his head wildly to and fro.

"Robert!" she exclaims, "what is the matter? You shuddered--your hand
has gone cold and clammy. What ails you?"

"What are those distant wind-instruments?" he asks in awestruck tones.
"What are they playing? Don't you hear? Such harmonies are too beautiful
for earth...."

Clara strains her ears into the stillness. "There is nothing--nothing
audible whatever," she asseverates. "Robert, you are ill--you have
overworked your head--"

"I have heard them before ... beautiful, beautiful!--Ah! now they are
silent!" and he passes his hand over his brow with a bewildered air.

"Come, dearest, you are overwearied--come and sleep sweetly." Schumann
permits himself to be led away from the window by his anxious wife:
slowly he regains his composure.

"My little treasure!" he whispers, clasping her tenderly, "what should I
be without your loving care of me? Claerchen ... Schumann ... I wonder
whether an angel imagined the names together?"

"May that angel guard thee, Robert," says she, "and all that is thine
and mine, for ever."

The open piano glistens whitely in the darkness: she closes it as they
leave the room.

    [Illustration]


    _Printed by Percy Lund, Humphries & Co., Ltd.
    Bradford and London._       _4880_

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's notes:

    Punctuation has been normalized.
    Page 10: "Barret" changed to "Barrett."
      "Elizabeth Barrett Browning".
    Page 21: "pevote" changed to "devote."
      "... more time to devote towards composing".
    Page 23: "fruehstueck" changed to "Fruehstueck."
      "... a modest _Fruehstueck_ or breakfast".
    Page 45: "blume" changed to "Blume."
      "The lyrics _Die Lotos-blume_".





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Day with Robert Schumann, by May Byron

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY WITH ROBERT SCHUMANN ***

***** This file should be named 36472.txt or 36472.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/4/7/36472/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, paksenarrion and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
