The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Happy Hypocrite, by Max Beerbohm

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Happy Hypocrite
       A Fairy Tale For Tired Men

Author: Max Beerbohm

Release Date: June 22, 2011 [EBook #36497]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAPPY HYPOCRITE ***




Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










                      THE HAPPY HYPOCRITE

                   A FAIRY TALE FOR TIRED MEN

                        BY MAX BEERBOHM

                 JOHN LANE THE BODLEY HEAD LTD.


    _Published Sq. 16mo                        April     1897_
    _Reprinted                                 December  1897_
    _Reprinted                                 February  1904_
    _Reprinted                                 May       1908_
    _Reprinted                                 May       1913_
    _Cr. 4to Illus. Edition                    October   1918_
    _Cr. 8vo Edition                           December  1919_
    _Reprinted                                 February  1922_
    _Reprinted                                 August    1924_
    _Reprinted                                 July      1928_

    _Made and Printed in Great Britain_
    _by Turnbull & Spears, Edinburgh_




[Illustration]




The Happy Hypocrite




I


None, it is said, of all who revelled with the Regent, was half so
wicked as Lord George Hell. I will not trouble my little readers with a
long recital of his great naughtiness. But it were well they should know
that he was greedy, destructive, and disobedient. I am afraid there is
no doubt that he often sat up at Carlton House until long after bedtime,
playing at games, and that he generally ate and drank far more than was
good for him. His fondness for fine clothes was such that he used to
dress on week-days quite as gorgeously as good people dress on Sundays.
He was thirty-five years old and a great grief to his parents.

And the worst of it was that he set such a bad example to others. Never,
never did he try to conceal his wrong-doing; so that, in time, every
one knew how horrid he was. In fact, I think he was proud of being
horrid. Captain Tarleton, in his account of _Contemporary Bucks_,
suggested that his Lordship's great Candour was a virtue and should
incline us to forgive some of his abominable faults. But, painful as it
is to me to dissent from any opinion expressed by one who is now dead, I
hold that Candour is good only when it reveals good actions or good
sentiments, and that when it reveals evil, itself is evil, even also.

Lord George Hell did, at last, atone for all his faults, in a way that
was never revealed to the world during his life-time. The reason of his
strange and sudden disappearance from that social sphere in which he had
so long moved, and never moved again, I will unfold. My little readers
will then, I think, acknowledge that any angry judgment they may have
passed upon him must be reconsidered and, maybe, withdrawn. I will leave
his Lordship in their hands. But my plea for him will not be based upon
that Candour of his, which some of his friends so much admired. There
were, yes! some so weak and so wayward as to think it a fine thing to
have an historic title and no scruples. "Here comes George Hell," they
would say. "How wicked my Lord is looking!" _Noblesse oblige_, you see,
and so an aristocrat should be very careful of his good name. Anonymous
naughtiness does little harm.

It is pleasant to record that many persons were inobnoxious to the magic
of his title and disapproved of him so strongly that, whenever he
entered a room where they happened to be, they would make straight for
the door and watch him very severely through the key-hole. Every
morning, when he strolled up Piccadilly, they crossed over to the other
side in a compact body, leaving him to the companionship of his bad
companions on that which is still called the "shady" side. Lord
George--[Greek: schetlios]--was quite indifferent to this demonstration.
Indeed, he seemed wholly hardened, and when ladies gathered up their
skirts as they passed him, he would lightly appraise their ankles.

I am glad I never saw his Lordship. They say he was rather like
Caligula, with a dash of Sir John Falstaff, and that sometimes on wintry
mornings in St. James's Street young children would hush their prattle
and cling in disconsolate terror to their nurses' skirts, as they saw
him come (that vast and fearful gentleman!) with the east wind ruffling
the rotund surface of his beaver, ruffling the fur about his neck and
wrists, and striking the purple complexion of his cheeks to a still
deeper purple. "King Bogey" they called him in the nurseries. In the
hours when they too were naughty, their nurses would predict his advent
down the chimney or from the linen-press, and then they always
"behaved." So that, you see, even the unrighteous are a power for good,
in the hands of nurses.

It is true that his Lordship was a non-smoker--a negative virtue,
certainly, and due, even that, I fear, to the fashion of the day--but
there the list of his good qualities comes to an abrupt conclusion. He
loved with an insatiable love the town and the pleasures of the town,
whilst the ennobling influences of our English lakes were quite unknown
to him. He used to boast that he had not seen a buttercup for twenty
years, and once he called the country "a Fool's Paradise." London was
the only place marked on the map of his mind. London gave him all he
wished for. Is it not extraordinary to think that he had never spent a
happy day nor a day of any kind in Follard Chase, that desirable mansion
in Herts, which he had won from Sir Follard Follard, by a chuck of the
dice, at Boodle's, on his seventeenth birthday? Always cynical and
unkind, he had refused to give the broken baronet his "revenge." Always
unkind and insolent, he had offered to instal him in the lodge--an offer
which was, after a little hesitation, accepted. "On my soul, the man's
place is a sinecure," Lord George would say; "he never has to open the
gate to me."[1] So rust has covered the great iron gates of Follard
Chase, and moss had covered its paths. The deer browsed upon its
terraces. There were only wild flowers anywhere. Deep down among the
weeds and water-lilies of the little stone-rimmed pond he had looked
down upon, lay the marble faun, as he had fallen.

[Footnote 1: _Lord Coleraine's Correspondence_, page 101.]

Of all the sins of his Lordship's life surely not one was more wanton
than his neglect of Follard Chase. Some whispered (nor did he ever
trouble to deny) that he had won it by foul means, by loaded dice.
Indeed no card-player in St. James's cheated more persistently than he.
As he was rich and had no wife and family to support, and as his luck
was always capital, I can offer no excuse for his conduct. At Carlton
House, in the presence of many bishops and cabinet ministers, he once
dunned the Regent most arrogantly for 5000 guineas out of which he had
cheated him some months before, and went so far as to declare that he
would not leave the house till he got it; whereupon His Royal Highness,
with that unfailing tact for which he was ever famous, invited him to
stay there as a guest; which, in fact, Lord George did, for several
months. After this, we can hardly be surprised when we read that he
"seldom sat down to the fashionable game of Limbo with less than four,
and sometimes with _as many as seven_ aces up his sleeve."[2] We can
only wonder that he was tolerated at all.

[Footnote 2: _Contemporary Bucks_, vol. i, page 73.]

At Garble's, that nightly resort of titled rips and roysterers, he
usually spent the early hours of his evenings. Round the illuminated
garden, with La Gambogi, the dancer, on his arm, and a Bacchic retinue
at his heels, he would amble leisurely, clad in Georgian costume, which
was not then, of course, fancy dress, as it is now.[3] Now and again,
in the midst of his noisy talk, he would crack a joke of the period, or
break into a sentimental ballad, dance a little, or pick a quarrel. When
he tired of such fooling, he would proceed to his box in the tiny _al
fresco_ theatre and patronize the jugglers, pugilists, play-actors and
whatever eccentric persons happened to be performing there.

[Footnote 3: It would seem, however, that, on special occasions, his
Lordship indulged in odd costumes. "I have seen him," says Captain
Tarleton (vol. i, p. 69), "attired as a French clown, as a sailor, or in
the crimson hose of a Sicilian grandee--_peu beau spectacle_. He never
disguised his face, whatever his costume, however."]

       *       *       *       *       *

The stars were splendid and the moon as beautiful as a great camelia,
one night in May, as his Lordship laid his arms upon the cushioned ledge
of his box and watched the antics of the Merry Dwarf, a little,
curly-headed creature, whose _debut_ it was. Certainly Garble had found
a novelty. Lord George led the applause, and the Dwarf finished his
frisking with a pretty song about lovers. Nor was this all. Feats of
archery were to follow. In a moment the Dwarf reappeared with a small,
gilded bow in his hand and a quiverful of arrows slung at his shoulder.
Hither and thither he shot these vibrant arrows, very precisely, several
into the bark of the acacias that grew about the overt stage, several
into the fluted columns of the boxes, two or three to the stars. The
audience was delighted. "_Bravo! Bravo Sagittaro!_" murmured Lord
George, in the language of La Gambogi, who was at his side. Finally, the
waxen figure of a man was carried on by an assistant and propped against
the trunk of a tree. A scarf was tied across the eyes of the Merry
Dwarf, who stood in a remote corner of the stage. _Bravo_ indeed! For
the shaft had pierced the waxen figure through the heart, or just where
the heart would have been if the figure had been human and not waxen.

Lord George called for port and champagne and beckoned the bowing
homuncule to his box, that he might compliment him on his skill and
pledge him in a bumper of the grape.

"On my soul, you have a genius for the bow," his Lordship cried with
florid condescension. "Come and sit by me; but first let me present you
to my divine companion the Signora Gambogi--Virgo and Sagittarius, egad!
You may have met on the Zodiac."

"Indeed, I met the Signora many years ago," the Dwarf replied, with a
low bow. "But not on the Zodiac, and the Signora perhaps forgets me."

At this speech the Signora flushed angrily, for she was indeed no longer
young, and the Dwarf had a childish face. She thought he mocked her; her
eyes flashed. Lord George's twinkled rather maliciously.

"Great is the experience of youth," he laughed. "Pray, are you stricken
with more than twenty summers?"

"With more than I can count," said the Dwarf. "To the health of your
Lordship!" and he drained his long glass of wine. Lord George
replenished it, and asked by what means or miracle he had acquired his
mastery of the bow.

"By long practice," the little thing rejoined; "long practice on human
creatures." And he nodded his curls mysteriously.

"On my heart, you are a dangerous box-mate."

"Your Lordship were certainly a good target."

Little liking this joke at his bulk, which really rivalled the Regent's,
Lord George turned brusquely in his chair and fixed his eyes upon the
stage. This time it was the Gambogi who laughed.

A new operette, _The Fair Captive of Samarcand_, was being enacted, and
the frequenters of Garble's were all curious to behold the _debutante_,
Jenny Mere, who was said to be both pretty and talented. These
predictions were surely fulfilled, when the captive peeped from the
window of her wooden turret. She looked so pale under her blue turban.
Her eyes were dark with fear; her parted lips did not seem capable of
speech. "Is it that she is frightened of us?" the audience wondered. "Or
of the flashing scimitar of Aphoschaz, the cruel father who holds her
captive?" So they gave her loud applause, and when at length she jumped
down, to be caught in the arms of her gallant lover, Nissarah, and,
throwing aside her Eastern draperies, did a simple dance in the
convention of Columbine, their delight was quite unbounded. She was very
young and did not dance very well, it is true, but they forgave her
that. And when she turned in the dance and saw her father with his
scimitar, their hearts beat swiftly for her. Nor were all eyes tearless
when she pleaded with him for her life.

Strangely absorbed, quite callous of his two companions, Lord George
gazed over the footlights. He seemed as one who is in a trance. Of a
sudden, something shot sharp into his heart. In pain he sprang to his
feet and, as he turned, he seemed to see a winged and laughing child, in
whose hand was a bow, fly swiftly away into the darkness. At his side,
was the Dwarf's chair. It was empty. Only La Gambogi was with him, and
her dark face was like the face of a fury.

Presently he sank back into his chair, holding one hand to his heart,
that still throbbed from the strange transfixion. He breathed very
painfully and seemed scarce conscious of his surroundings. But La
Gambogi knew he would pay no more homage to her now, for that the love
of Jenny Mere had come into his heart.

When the operette was over, his lovesick Lordship snatched up his cloak
and went away without one word to the lady at his side. Rudely he
brushed aside Count Karoloff and Mr. FitzClarence, with whom he had
arranged to play hazard. Of his comrades, his cynicism, his reckless
scorn--of all the material of his existence--he was oblivious now. He
had no time for penitence or diffident delay. He only knew that he must
kneel at the feet of Jenny Mere and ask her to be his wife.

"Miss Mere," said Garble, "is in her room, resuming her ordinary attire.
If your Lordship deign to await the conclusion of her humble toilet, it
shall be my privilege to present her to your Lordship. Even now,
indeed, I hear her footfall on the stair."

Lord George uncovered his head and with one hand nervously smoothed his
rebellious wig.

"Miss Mere, come hither," said Garble. "This is my Lord George Hell,
that you have pleased whom by your poor efforts this night will ever be
the prime gratification of your passage through the roseate realms of
art."

Little Miss Mere, who had never seen a lord, except in fancy or in
dreams, curtseyed shyly and hung her head. With a loud crash, Lord
George fell on his knees. The manager was greatly surprised, the girl
greatly embarrassed. Yet neither of them laughed, for sincerity
dignified his posture and sent eloquence from its lips.

"Miss Mere," he cried, "give ear, I pray you, to my poor words, nor
spurn me in misprision from the pedestal of your Beauty, Genius, and
Virtue. All too conscious, alas! of my presumption in the same, I yet
abase myself before you as a suitor for your adorable Hand. I grope
under the shadow of your raven Locks. I am dazzled in the light of those
translucent Orbs, your Eyes. In the intolerable Whirlwind of your Fame I
faint and am afraid."

"Sir----" the girl began, simply.

"Say 'My Lord,'" said Garble, solemnly.

"My Lord, I thank you for your words. They are beautiful. But indeed,
indeed, I can never be your bride."

Lord George hid his face in his hands.

"Child," said Mr. Garble, "let not the sun rise ere you have retracted
those wicked words."

"My wealth, my rank, my irremeable love for you, I throw them at your
feet," Lord George cried piteously. "I would wait an hour, a week, a
lustre, even a decade, did you but bid me hope!"

"I can never be your wife," she said, slowly. "I can never be the wife
of any man whose face is not saintly. Your face, my Lord, mirrors, it
may be, true love for me, but it is even as a mirror long tarnished by
the reflexion of this world's vanity. It is even as a tarnished mirror.
Do not kneel to me, for I am poor and humble. I was not made for such
impetuous wooing. Kneel, if you please, to some greater, gayer lady. As
for my love, it is my own, nor can it be ever torn from me, but given,
as true love must needs be given, freely. Ah, rise from your knees. That
man, whose face is wonderful as are the faces of the saints, to him I
will give my true love."

Miss Mere, though visibly affected, had spoken this speech with a
gesture and elocution so superb, that Mr. Garble could not help
applauding, deeply though he regretted her attitude towards his honoured
patron. As for Lord George, he was immobile as a stricken oak. With a
sweet look of pity, Miss Mere went her way, and Mr. Garble, with some
solicitude, helped his Lordship to rise from his knees. Out into the
night, without a word, his Lordship went. Above him the stars were still
splendid. They seemed to mock the festoons of little lamps, dim now and
guttering, in the garden of Garble's. What should he do? No thoughts
came; only his heart burnt hotly. He stood on the brim of Garble's lake,
shallow and artificial as his past life had been. Two swans slept on its
surface. The moon shone strangely upon their white, twisted necks.
Should he drown himself? There was no one in the garden to prevent him,
and in the morning they would find him floating there, one of the
noblest of love's victims. The garden would be closed in the evening.
There would be no performance in the little theatre. It might be that
Jenny Mere would mourn him. "Life is a prison, without bars," he
murmured, as he walked away.

All night long he strode, knowing not whither, through the mysterious
streets and squares of London. The watchmen, to whom his figure was
familiar, gripped their staves at his approach, for they had old reason
to fear his wild and riotous habits. He did not heed them. Through that
dim conflict between darkness and day, which is ever waged silently over
our sleep, Lord George strode on in the deep absorption of his love and
of his despair. At dawn he found himself on the outskirts of a little
wood in Kensington. A rabbit rushed past him through the dew. Birds were
fluttering in the branches. The leaves were tremulous with the presage
of day, and the air was full of the sweet scent of hyacinths.

How cool the country was! It seemed to cool the feverish maladies of his
soul and consecrate his love. In the fair light of the dawn he began to
shape the means of winning Jenny Mere, that he had conceived in the
desperate hours of the night. Soon an old woodman passed by, and, with
rough courtesy, showed him the path that would lead him quickest to the
town. He was loth to leave the wood. With Jenny, he thought, he would
live always in the country. And he picked a posy of wild flowers for
her.

His _rentree_ into the still silent town strengthened his Arcadian
resolves. He, who had seen the town so often in its hours of sleep, had
never noticed how sinister its whole aspect was. In its narrow streets
the white houses rose on either side of him like cliffs of chalk. He
hurried swiftly along the unswept pavement. How had he loved this city
of evil secrets?

At last he came to St. James's Square, to the hateful door of his own
house. Shadows lay like memories in every corner of the dim hall.
Through the window of his room, a sunbeam slanted across his smooth
white bed, and fell ghastly on the ashen grate.




II


It was a bright morning in Old Bond Street, and fat little Mr. Aeneas,
the fashionable mask-maker, was sunning himself at the door of his shop.
His window was lined as usual with all kinds of masks--beautiful masks
with pink cheeks, and absurd masks with protuberant chins; curious
Trpocrctiira [Greek: prosopa] copied from old tragic models; masks of
paper for children, of fine silk for ladies, and of leather for working
men; bearded or beardless, gilded or waxen (most of them, indeed, were
waxen), big or little masks. And in the middle of this vain galaxy hung
the presentment of a Cyclops' face, carved cunningly of gold, with a
great sapphire in its brow.

The sun gleamed brightly on the window and on the bald head and
varnished shoes of fat little Mr. Aeneas. It was too early for any
customers to come, and Mr. Aeneas seemed to be greatly enjoying his
leisure in the fresh air. He smiled complacently as he stood there, and
well he might, for he was a great artist and was patronized by several
crowned heads and not a few of the nobility. Only the evening before,
Mr. Brummell had come into his shop and ordered a light summer mask,
wishing to evade for a time the jealous vigilance of Lady Otterton. It
pleased Mr. Aeneas to think that his art made him the recipient of so
many high secrets. He smiled as he thought of the titled spendthrifts
who, at this moment, _perdus_ behind his masterpieces, passed unscathed
among their creditors. He was the secular confessor of his day, always
able to give absolution. A unique position!

The street was as quiet as a village street. At an open window over the
way, a handsome lady, wrapped in a muslin _peignoir_, sat sipping her
cup of chocolate. It was La Signora Gambogi, and Mr. Aeneas made her
many elaborate bows. This morning, however, her thoughts seemed far
away, and she did not notice the little man's polite efforts. Nettled at
her negligence, Mr. Aeneas was on the point of retiring into his shop,
when he saw Lord George Hell hastening up the street, with a posy of
wild flowers in his hand.

"His Lordship is up betimes!" he said to himself. "An early visit to La
Signora, I suppose."

Not so, however. His Lordship came straight towards the mask-shop. Once
he glanced up at Signora's window and looked deeply annoyed when he saw
her sitting there. He came quickly into the shop.

"I want the mask of a saint," he said.

"Mask of a saint, my Lord? Certainly!" said Mr. Aeneas, briskly. "With
or without halo? His Grace the Bishop of St. Aldred's always wears his
with a halo? Your Lordship does not wish for a halo? Certainly! If your
Lordship will allow me to take his measurement----"

"I must have the mask to-day," Lord George said. "Have you none
ready-made?"

"Ah, I see. Required for immediate wear," murmured Mr. Aeneas,
dubiously. "You see, your Lordship takes a rather large size." And he
looked at the floor.

"Julius!" he cried suddenly to his assistant, who was putting the
finishing touches to a mask of Barbarossa which the young king of
Zuerremburg was to wear at his coronation the following week. "Julius! Do
you remember the saint's mask we made for Mr. Ripsby, a couple of years
ago?"

"Yes, sir," said the boy. "It's stored upstairs."

"I thought so," replied Mr. Aeneas. "Mr. Ripsby only had it on hire.
Step upstairs, Julius, and bring it down. I fancy it is just what your
Lordship would wish. Spiritual, yet handsome."

"Is it a mask that is even as a mirror of true love?" Lord George asked,
gravely.

"It was made precisely as such," the mask-maker answered. "In fact it
was made for Mr. Ripsby to wear at his silver wedding, and was very
highly praised by the relatives of Mrs. Ripsby. Will your Lordship step
into my little room?"

So Mr. Aeneas led the way to his parlour behind the shop. He was elated
by the distinguished acquisition to his _clientele_, for hitherto Lord
George had never patronized his business. He bustled round his parlour
and insisted that his Lordship should take a chair and a pinch from his
snuff-box, while the saint's mask was being found.

Lord George's eye travelled along the rows of framed letters from great
personages, which lined the walls. He did not see them though, for he
was calculating the chances that La Gambogi had not observed him as he
entered the mask-shop. He had come down so early that he had thought she
would still be abed. That sinister old proverb, _La jalouse se leve de
bonne heure_, rose in his memory. His eye fell unconsciously on a large,
round mask made of dull silver, with the features of a human face traced
over its surface in faint filigree.

"Your Lordship wonders what mask that is?" chirped Mr. Aeneas, tapping
the thing with one of his little finger nails.

"What is that mask?" Lord George murmured, absently.

"I ought not to divulge, my Lord," said the mask-maker. "But I know your
Lordship would respect a professional secret, a secret of which I am
pardonable proud. This," he said, "is a mask for the sun-god, Apollo,
whom heaven bless!"

"You astound me," said Lord George.

"Of no less a person, I do assure you. When Jupiter, his father, made
him lord of the day, Apollo craved that he might sometimes see the
doings of mankind in the hours of night time. Jupiter granted so
reasonable a request, and when next Apollo had passed over the sky and
hidden in the sea, and darkness had fallen on all the world, he raised
his head above the waters that he might watch the doings of mankind in
the hours of night time. But," Mr. Aeneas added, with a smile, "his
bright countenance made light all the darkness. Men rose from their
couches or from their revels, wondering that day was so soon come, and
went to their work. And Apollo sank weeping into the sea. 'Surely,' he
cried, 'it is a bitter thing that I alone, of all the gods, may not
watch the world in the hours of night time. For in those hours, as I am
told, men are even as gods are. They spill the wine and are wreathed
with roses. Their daughters dance in the light of torches. They laugh to
the sound of flutes. On their long couches they lie down at last, and
sleep comes to kiss their eyelids. None of these things may I see.
Wherefore the brightness of my beauty is even as a curse to me, and I
would put it from me.' And as he wept, Vulcan said to him, 'I am not the
least cunning of the gods, nor the least pitiful. Do not weep, for I
will give you that which shall end your sorrow. Nor need you put from
you the brightness of your beauty.' And Vulcan made a mask of dull
silver and fastened it across his brother's face. And that night, thus
masked, the sun-god rose from the sea and watched the doings of mankind
in the night time. Nor any longer were men abashed by his bright beauty,
for it was hidden by the mask of silver. Those whom he had so often seen
haggard over their daily tasks, he saw feasting now and wreathed with
red roses. He heard them laugh to the sound of flutes, as their
daughters danced in the red light of torches. And when at length they
lay down upon their soft couches and sleep kissed their eyelids, he sank
back into the sea and hid his mask under a little rock in the bed of the
sea. Nor have men ever known that Apollo watches them often in the night
time, but fancied it to be some pale goddess."

"I myself have always thought it was Diana," said Lord George Hell.

"An error, my Lord!" said Mr. Aeneas, with a smile. "_Ecce signum!_" And
he tapped the mask of dull silver.

"Strange!" said his Lordship. "And pray how comes it that Apollo has
ordered of _you_ this new mask?"

"He has always worn twelve new masks every year, inasmuch as no mask can
endure for many nights the near brightness of his face, before which
even a mask of the best and purest silver soon tarnishes and wears away.
Centuries ago, Vulcan tired of making so very many masks. And so Apollo
sent Mercury down to Athens, to the shop of Phoron, a Phoenician
mask-maker of great skill. Phoron made Apollo's masks for many years,
and every month Mercury came to his shop for a new one. When Phoron
died, another artist was chosen, and, when _he_ died, another, and so on
through all the ages of the world. Conceive, my Lord, my pride and
pleasure when Mercury flew into my shop, one night last year, and made
me Apollo's warrant-holder. It is the highest privilege that any
mask-maker can desire. And when I die," said Mr. Aeneas, with some
emotion, "Mercury will confer my post upon another."

"And do they pay you for your labour?" Lord George asked.

Mr. Aeneas drew himself up to his full height, such as it was. "In
Olympus, my Lord," he said, "they have no currency. For any mask-maker,
so high a privilege is its own reward. Yet the sun-god is generous. He
shines more brightly into my shop than into any other. Nor does he
suffer his rays to melt any waxen mask made by me, until its wearer doff
it and it be done with."

At this moment Julius came in with the Ripsby mask. "I must ask your
Lordship's pardon, for having kept you so long," pleaded Mr. Aeneas.
"But I have a large store of old masks and they are imperfectly
catalogued."

It certainly was a beautiful mask, with its smooth pink cheeks and
devotional brows. It was made of the finest wax. Lord George took it
gingerly in his hands and tried it on his face. It fitted _a merveille_.

"Is the expression exactly as your Lordship would wish?" asked Mr.
Aeneas.

Lord George laid it on the table and studied it intently. "I wish it
were more as a perfect mirror of true love," he said at length. "It is
too calm, too contemplative."

"Easily remedied!" said Mr. Aeneas. Selecting a fine pencil, he deftly
drew the eyebrows closer to each other. With a brush steeped in some
scarlet pigment, he put a fuller curve upon the lips. And behold! it
was the mask of a saint who loves dearly. Lord George's heart throbbed
with pleasure.

"And for how long does your Lordship wish to wear it?" asked Mr. Aeneas.

"I must wear it until I die," replied Lord George.

"Kindly be seated then, I pray," rejoined the little man. "For I must
apply the mask with great care. Julius, you will assist me!"

So, while Julius heated the inner side of the waxen mask over a little
lamp, Mr. Aeneas stood over Lord George gently smearing his features
with some sweet-scented pomade. Then he took the mask and powdered its
inner side, quite soft and warm now, with a fluffy puff. "Keep quite
still, for one instant," he said, and clapped the mask firmly on his
Lordship's upturned face. So soon as he was sure of its perfect
adhesion, he took from his assistant's hand a silver file and a little
wooden spatula, with which he proceeded to pare down the edge of the
mask, where it joined the neck and ears. At length, all traces of the
"join" were obliterated. It remained only to arrange the curls of the
lordly wig over the waxen brow.

The disguise was done. When Lord George looked through the eyelets of
his mask into the mirror that was placed in his hand, he saw a face that
was saintly, itself a mirror of true love. How wonderful it was! He felt
his past was a dream. He felt he was a new man indeed. His voice went
strangely through the mask's parted lips, as he thanked Mr. Aeneas.

"Proud to have served your Lordship," said that little worthy, pocketing
his fee of fifty guineas, while he bowed his customer out.

When he reached the street, Lord George nearly uttered a curse through
those sainted lips of his. For there, right in his way, stood La
Gambogi, with a small pink parasol. She laid her hand upon his sleeve
and called him softly by his name. He passed her by without a word.
Again she confronted him.

"I cannot let go so handsome a lover," she laughed, "even though he
spurn me! Do not spurn me, George. Give me your posy of wild flowers.
Why, you never looked so lovingly at me in all your life!"

"Madam," said Lord George, sternly, "I have not the honour to know you."
And he passed on.

The lady gazed after her lost lover with the blackest hatred in her
eyes. Presently she beckoned across the road to a certain spy.

And the spy followed him.




III


Lord George, greatly agitated, had turned into Piccadilly. It was
horrible to have met this garish embodiment of his past on the very
threshold of his fair future. The mask-maker's elevating talk about the
gods, followed by the initiative ceremony of his saintly mask, had
driven all discordant memories from his love-thoughts of Jenny Mere. And
then to be met by La Gambogi! It might be that, after his stern words,
she would not seek to cross his path again. Surely she would not seek to
mar his sacred love. Yet, he knew her dark Italian nature, her passion
of revenge. What was the line in Virgil? _Spretaeque_--something. Who
knew but that somehow, sooner or later, she might come between him and
his love?

He was about to pass Lord Barrymore's mansion. Count Karoloff and Mr.
FitzClarence were lounging in one of the lower windows. Would they know
him behind his mask? Thank God! they did not. They merely laughed as he
went by, and Mr. FitzClarence cried in a mocking voice, "Sing us a hymn,
Mr. Whatever-your-saint's-name is!" The mask, then, at least, was
perfect. Jenny Mere would not know him. He need fear no one but La
Gambogi. But would not she betray his secret? He sighed.

That night he was going to visit Garble's and to declare his love to the
little actress. He never doubted that she would love him for his saintly
face. Had she not said, "That man whose face is wonderful as are the
faces of the saints, to him I will give my true love"? She could not
say now that his face was as a tarnished mirror of love. She would smile
on him. She would be his bride. But would La Gambogi be at Garble's?

The operette would not be over before ten that night. The clock in Hyde
Park Gate told him it was not yet ten--ten of the morning. Twelve whole
hours to wait before he could fall at Jenny's feet! "I cannot spend that
time in this place of memories," he thought. So he hailed a yellow
cabriolet and bade the jarvey drive him out to the village of
Kensington.

When they came to the little wood where he had been but a few hours ago,
Lord George dismissed the jarvey. The sun, that had risen as he stood
there thinking of Jenny, shone down on his altered face, but, though it
shone very fiercely, it did not melt his waxen features. The old
woodman, who had shown him his way, passed by under a load of faggots
and did not know him. He wandered among the trees. It was a lovely wood.

Presently he came to the bank of that tiny stream, the Ken, which still
flowed there in those days. On the moss of its bank he lay down and let
its water ripple over his hand. Some bright pebble glistened under the
surface, and, as he peered down at it, he saw in the stream the
reflection of his mask. A great shame filled him that he should so cheat
the girl he loved. Behind that fair mask there would still be the evil
face that had repelled her. Could he be so base as to decoy her into
love of that most ingenious deception? He was filled with a great pity
for her, with a hatred of himself. And yet, he argued, was the mask
indeed a mean trick? Surely it was a secret symbol of his true
repentance and of his true love. His face was evil, because his life had
been evil. He had seen a gracious girl, and of a sudden his very soul
had changed. His face alone was the same as it had been. It was not just
that his face should be evil still.

There was the faint sound of some one sighing, Lord George looked up,
and there, on the further bank, stood Jenny Mere, watching him. As their
eyes met, she blushed and hung her head. She looked like nothing but a
tall child as she stood there, with her straight limp frock of lilac
cotton and her sunburnt straw bonnet. He dared not speak; he could only
gaze at her.

Suddenly there perched astride the bough of a tree, at her side, that
winged and laughing child in whose hand was a bow. Before Lord George
could warn her, an arrow had flashed down and vanished in her heart, and
Cupid had flown away.

No cry of pain did she utter, but stretched out her arms to her lover,
with a glad smile. He leapt quite lightly over the little stream and
knelt at her feet. It seemed more fitting that he should kneel before
the gracious thing he was unworthy of. But she, knowing only that his
face was as the face of a great saint, bent over him and touched him
with her hand.

"Surely," she said, "you are that good man for whom I have waited.
Therefore do not kneel to me, but rise and suffer me to kiss your hand.
For my love of you is lowly, and my heart is all yours."

But he answered, looking up into her fond eyes, "Nay, you are a queen,
and I must needs kneel in your presence."

But she shook her head wistfully, and she knelt down, also, in her
tremulous ecstasy, before him. And as they knelt, the one to the other,
the tears came into her eyes, and he kissed her. Though the lips that
he pressed to her lips were only waxen, he thrilled with happiness, in
that mimic kiss. He held her close to him in his arms, and they were
silent in the sacredness of their love.

From his breast he took the posy of wild flowers that he had gathered.

"They are for you," he whispered. "I gathered them for you hours ago, in
this wood. See! They are not withered."

But she was perplexed by his words and said to him, blushing, "How was
it for me that you gathered them, though you had never seen me?"

"I gathered them for you," he answered, "knowing I should soon see you.
How was it that you, who had never seen me, yet waited for me?"

"I waited, knowing I should see you at last." And she kissed the posy
and put it at her breast.

And they rose from their knees and went into the wood, walking hand in
hand. As they went, he asked the names of the flowers that grew under
their feet. "These are primroses," she would say. "Did you not know? And
these are ladies'-feet, and these forget-me-nots. And that white flower,
climbing up the trunks of the trees and trailing down so prettily from
the branches, is called Astyanax. These little yellow things are
buttercups. Did you not know?" And she laughed.

"I know the names of none of the flowers," he said.

She looked up into his face and said timidly, "Is it worldly and wrong
of me to have loved the flowers? Ought I to have thought more of those
higher things that are unseen?"

His heart smote him. He could not answer her simplicity.

"Surely the flowers are good, and did you not gather this posy for me?"
she pleaded. "But if you do not love them, I must not. And I will try to
forget their names. For I must try to be like you in all things."

"Love the flowers always," he said. "And teach me to love them."

So she told him all about the flowers, how some grew very slowly and
others bloomed in a night; how clever the convolvulus was at climbing,
and how shy violets were, and why honeycups had folded petals. She told
him of the birds, too, that sang in the wood, how she knew them all by
their voices. "That is a chaffinch singing. Listen!" she said. And she
tried to imitate its note, that her lover might remember. All the birds,
according to her, were good, except the cuckoo, and whenever she heard
him sing she would stop her ears, lest she should forgive him for
robbing the nests. "Every day," she said, "I have come to the wood,
because I was lonely, and it seemed to pity me. But now I have you. And
it is glad!"

She clung closer to his arm, and he kissed her. She pushed back her
straw bonnet, so that it dangled from her neck by its ribands, and laid
her little head against his shoulder. For a while he forgot his
treachery to her, thinking only of his love and her love. Suddenly she
said to him, "Will you try not to be angry with me, if I tell you
something? It is something that will seem dreadful to you."

"_Pauvrette_," he answered, "you cannot have anything very dreadful to
tell."

"I am very poor," she said, "and every night I dance in a theatre. It is
the only thing I can do to earn my bread. Do you despise me because I
dance?" She looked up shyly at him and saw that his face was full of
love for her and not angry.

"Do you like dancing?" he asked.

"I hate it," she answered, quickly. "I hate it indeed. Yet--to-night,
alas! I must dance again in the theatre."

"You need never dance again," said her lover. "I am rich and I will pay
them to release you. You shall dance only for me. Sweetheart, it cannot
be much more than noon. Let us go into the town, while there is time,
and you shall be made my bride, and I your bridegroom, this very day.
Why should you and I be lonely?"

"I do not know," she said.

So they walked back through the wood, taking a narrow path which Jenny
said would lead them quickest to the village. And, as they went, they
came to a tiny cottage, with a garden that was full of flowers. The old
woodman was leaning over its paling, and he nodded to them as they
passed.

"I often used to envy the woodman," said Jenny, "living in that dear
little cottage."

"Let us live there, then," said Lord George. And he went back and asked
the old man if he were not unhappy, living there alone.

"'Tis a poor life here for me," the old man answered. "No folk come to
the wood, except little children, now and again, to play, or lovers like
you. But they seldom notice me. And in winter I am alone with Jack
Frost! Old men love merrier company than that. Oh! I shall die in the
snow with my faggots on my back. A poor life here!"

"I will give you gold for your cottage and whatever is in it, and then
you can go and live happily in the town," Lord George said. And he took
from his coat a note for two hundred guineas, and held it across the
palings.

"Lovers are poor foolish derry-docks," the old man muttered. "But I
thank you kindly, Sir. This little sum will keep me cosy, as long as I
last. Come into the cottage as soon as can be. It's a lonely place and
does my heart good to depart from it."

"We are going to be married this afternoon, in the town," said Lord
George. "We will come straight back to our home."

"May you be happy!" replied the woodman. "You'll find me gone when you
come."

And the lovers thanked him and went their way.

"Are you very rich?" Jenny asked. "Ought you to have bought the cottage
for that great price?"

"Would you love me as much if I were quite poor, little Jenny?" he asked
her after a pause.

"I did not know you were rich when I saw you across the stream," she
said.

And in his heart Lord George made a good resolve. He would put away from
him all his worldly possessions. All the money that he had won at the
clubs, fairly or foully, all that hideous accretion of gold guineas, he
would distribute among the comrades he had impoverished. As he walked,
with the sweet and trustful girl at his side, the vague record of his
infamy assailed him, and a look of pain shot behind his smooth mask. He
would atone. He would shun no sacrifice that might cleanse his soul. All
his fortune he would put from him. Follard Chase he would give back to
Sir Follard. He would sell his house in St. James's Square. He would
keep some little part of his patrimony, enough for him in the wood with
Jenny, but no more.

"I shall be quite poor, Jenny!" he said.

And they talked of the things that lovers love to talk of, how happy
they would be together and how economical. As they were passing
Herbert's pastry shop, which as my little readers know, still stands in
Kensington, Jenny looked up rather wistfully into her lover's ascetic
face.

"Should you think me greedy," she asked him, "if I wanted a bun? They
have beautiful buns here!"

Buns! The simple word started latent memories of his childhood. Jenny
was only a child after all. Buns! He had forgotten what they were like.
And as they looked at the piles of variegated cakes in the window, he
said to her, "Which are buns, Jenny? I should like to have one, too."

"I am almost afraid of you," she said. "You must despise me so. Are you
so good that you deny yourself all the vanity and pleasure that most
people love? It is wonderful not to know what buns are! The round,
brown, shiny cakes, with little raisins in them, are buns."

So he bought two beautiful buns, and they sat together in the shop,
eating them. Jenny bit hers rather diffidently, but was reassured when
he said that they must have buns very often in the cottage. Yes! he, the
famous toper and _gourmet_ of St. James's, relished this homely fare, as
it passed through the insensible lips of his mask to the palate. He
seemed to rise, from the consumption of his bun, a better man.

But there was no time to lose now. It was already past two o'clock. So
he got a chaise from the inn opposite the pastry-shop, and they were
swiftly driven to Doctors' Commons. There he purchased a special
licence. When the clerk asked him to write his name upon it, he
hesitated. What name should he assume? Under a mask he had wooed this
girl, under an unreal name he must make her his bride. He loathed
himself for a trickster. He had vilely stolen from her the love she
would not give him. Even now, should he not confess himself the man
whose face had frightened her, and go his way? And yet, surely, it was
not just that he, whose soul was transfigured, should bear his old name.
Surely George Hell was dead, and his name had died with him. So he
dipped a pen in the ink and wrote "George Heaven," for want of a better
name. And Jenny wrote "Jenny Mere" beneath it.

An hour later they were married according to the simple rites of a dear
little registry-office in Covent Garden.

And in the cool evening they went home.




IV


In the cottage that had been the woodman's they had a wonderful
honeymoon. No king and queen in any palace of gold were happier than
they. For them their tiny cottage was a palace, and the flowers that
filled the garden were their courtiers. Long and careless and full of
kisses were the days of their reign.

Sometimes, indeed, strange dreams troubled Lord George's sleep. Once he
dreamed that he stood knocking and knocking at the great door of a
castle. It was a bitter night. The frost enveloped him. No one came.
Presently he heard a footstep in the hall beyond, and a pair of
frightened eyes peered at him through the grill. Jenny was scanning his
face. She would not open to him. With tears and wild words he besought
her, but she would not open to him. Then, very stealthily he crept round
the castle and found a small casement in the wall. It was open. He
climbed swiftly, quietly, through it. In the darkness of the room some
one ran to him and kissed him gladly. It was Jenny. With a cry of joy
and shame he awoke. By his side lay Jenny, sleeping like a little child.

After all, what was a dream to him? It could not mar the reality of his
daily happiness. He cherished his true penitence for the evil he had
done in the past. The past! That was indeed the only unreal thing that
lingered in his life. Every day its substance dwindled, grew fainter
yet, as he lived his rustic honeymoon. Had he not utterly put it from
him? Had he not, a few hours after his marriage, written to his lawyer,
declaring solemnly that he, Lord George Hell, had forsworn the world,
that he was where no man would find him, that he desired all his
worldly goods to be distributed, thus and thus, among these and those of
his companions? By this testament he had verily atoned for the wrong he
had done, had made himself dead indeed to the world.

No address had he written upon this document. Though its injunctions
were final and binding, it could betray no clue of his hiding-place. For
the rest, no one would care to seek him out. He, who had done no good to
human creature, would pass unmourned out of memory. The clubs,
doubtless, would laugh and puzzle over his strange recantations, envious
of whomever he had enriched. They would say 'twas a good riddance of a
rogue, and soon forget him.[4] But she, whose prime patron he had been,
who had loved him in her vile fashion, La Gambogi, would she forget him
easily, like the rest? As the sweet days went by, her spectre, also,
grew fainter and less formidable. She knew his mask indeed, but how
should she find him in the cottage near Kensington? _Devia dulcedo
latebrarum!_ He was safe-hidden with his bride. As for the Italian, she
might search and search--or had forgotten him, in the arms of another
lover.

[Footnote 4: I would refer my little readers once more to the pages of
_Contemporary Bucks_, where Captain Tarleton speculates upon the sudden
disappearance of Lord George Hell and describes its effect on the town.
"Not even the shrewdest," says he, "even gave a guess that would throw a
ray of revealing light on the _disparition_ of this profligate man. It
was supposed that he carried off with him a little dancer from Garble's,
at which _haunt of pleasantry_ he was certainly on the night he
vanished, and whither the young lady never returned again. Garble
declared he had been compensated for her perfidy, but that he was sure
she had not succumbed to his Lordship, having in fact rejected him
soundly. Did his Lordship, say the cronies, take his life--and hers? _Il
n'y a pas d'epreuve._ The _most astonishing_ matter is that the runaway
should have written out a complete will, restoring all money he had won
at cards, etc. etc. This certainly corroborates the opinion that he was
seized with a sudden repentance and fled over the seas to a foreign
monastery, where he died at last in _religious silence_. That's as it
may, but many a spendthrift found his pocket clinking with guineas, a
not unpleasant sound, I declare. The Regent himself was benefited by the
odd will, and old Sir Follard Follard found himself once more in the
ancestral home he had forfeited. As for Lord George's mansion in St.
James's Square, that was sold with all its appurtenances, and the money
fetched by the sale, no bagatelle, was given to various good objects,
according to my Lord's stated wishes. Well, many of us blessed his
name--we had cursed it often enough. Peace to his ashes, in whatever urn
they may be resting, on the billows of whatever ocean they float!"]

Yes! Few and faint became the blemishes of his honeymoon. At first he
had felt that his waxen mask, though it had been the means of his
happiness, was rather a barrier 'twixt him and his bride. Though it was
sweet to kiss her through it, to look at her through it with loving
eyes, yet there were times when it incommoded him with its mockery.
Could he put it from him! Yet that, of course, could not be. He must
wear it all his life. And so, as days went by, he grew reconciled to his
mask. No longer did he feel it jarring on his face. It seemed to become
a very part of him, and, for all its rigid material, it did forsooth
express the one emotion that filled him, true love. The face for whose
sake Jenny gave him her heart could not but be dear to this George
Heaven, also.

Every day chastened him with its joy. They lived a very simple life, he
and Jenny. They rose betimes, like the birds, for whose goodness they
both had so sincere a love. Bread and honey and little strawberries were
their morning fare, and in the evening they had seed-cake and dewberry
wine. Jenny herself made the wine, and her husband drank it, in strict
moderation, never more than two glasses. He thought it tasted far better
than the Regent's cherry brandy, or the Tokay at Brooks's. Of these
treasured topes he had indeed, nearly forgotten the taste. The wine made
from wild berries by his little bride was august enough for his palate.
Sometimes, after they had dined thus, he would play the flute to her
upon the moonlit lawn, or tell her of the great daisy-chain he was going
to make for her on the morrow, or sit silently by her side, listening to
the nightingale, till bedtime. So admirably simple were their days.




V


One morning, as he was helping Jenny to water the flowers, he said to
her suddenly, "Sweetheart, we had forgotten!"

"What was there we should forget?" asked Jenny, looking up from her
task.

"'Tis the mensiversary of our wedding," her husband answered gravely.
"We must not let it pass without some celebration."

"No indeed," she said, "we must not. What shall we do?"

Between them they decided upon an unusual feast. They would go into the
village and buy a bag of beautiful buns and eat them in the afternoon.
So soon, then, as all the flowers were watered, they set forth to
Herbert's shop, bought the buns and returned home in very high spirits,
George bearing a paper bag that held no less than twelve of the
wholesome delicacies. Under the plane-tree on the lawn Jenny sat her
down, and George stretched himself at her feet. They were loth to enjoy
their feast too soon. They dallied in childish anticipation. On the
little rustic table Jenny built up the buns, one above another, till
they looked like a tall pagoda. When, very gingerly, she had crowned the
structure with the twelfth bun, her husband looking on with admiration,
she clapped her hands and danced about it. She laughed so loudly (for,
though she was only sixteen years old, she had a great sense of humour)
that the table shook, and alas! the pagoda tottered and fell to the
lawn. Swift as a kitten, Jenny chased the buns, as they rolled, hither
and thither, over the grass, catching them deftly with her hand. Then
she came back, flushed and merry under her tumbled hair, with her arm
full of buns. She began to put them back in the paper bag.

"Dear husband," she said, looking down to him, "Why do not you too smile
at my folly? Your grave face rebukes me. Smile, or I shall think I vex
you. Please smile a little."

But the mask could not smile, of course. It was made for a mirror of
true love, and it was grave and immobile. "I am very much amused, dear,"
he said, "at the fall of the buns, but my lips will not curve to a
smile. Love of you has bound them in spell."

"But I can laugh, though I love you. I do not understand." And she
wondered. He took her hand in his and stroked it gently, wishing it were
possible to smile. Some day, perhaps, she would tire of this monotonous
gravity, this rigid sweetness. It was not strange that she should long
for a little facial expression. They sat silently.

"Jenny, what is it?" he whispered suddenly. For Jenny, with wide-open
eyes, was gazing over his head, across the lawn. "Why do you look
frightened?"

"There is a strange woman smiling at me across the palings," she said.
"I do not know her."

Her husband's heart sank. Somehow, he dared not turn his head to the
intruder.

"She is nodding to me," said Jenny. "I think she is foreign, for she has
an evil face."

"Do not notice her," he whispered. "Does she look evil?"

"Very evil and very dark. She has a pink parasol. Her teeth are like
ivory."

"Do not notice her. Think! It is the mensiversary of our wedding,
dear!"

"I wish she would not smile at me. Her eyes are like bright blots of
ink."

"Let us eat our beautiful buns!"

"Oh, she is coming in!" George heard the latch of the gate jar. "Forbid
her to come in!" whispered Jenny, "I am afraid!" He heard the jar of
heels on the gravel path. Yet he dared not turn. Only he clasped Jenny's
hand more tightly, as he waited for the voice. It was La Gambogi's.

"Pray, pray, pardon me! I could not mistake the back of so old a
friend."

With the courage of despair, George turned and faced the woman.

"Even," she smiled, "though his face has changed marvellously."

"Madam," he said, rising to his full height and stepping between her and
his bride, "begone, I command you, from this garden. I do not see what
good is to be served by the renewal of our acquaintance."

"Acquaintance!" murmured La Gambogi, with an arch of her beetle-brows.
"Surely we were friends, rather, nor is my esteem for you so dead that I
would crave estrangement."

"Madam," rejoined Lord George, with a tremor in his voice, "you see me
happy, living very peacefully with my bride----"

"To whom, I beseech you, old friend, present me."

"I would not," he said hotly, "desecrate her sweet name by speaking it
with so infamous a name as yours."

"Your choler hurts me, old friend," said La Gambogi, sinking composedly
upon the garden-seat and smoothing the silk of her skirts.

"Jenny," said George, "then do you retire, pending this lady's
departure, to the cottage." But Jenny clung to his arm. "I were less
frightened at your side," she whispered. "Do not send me away!"

"Suffer her pretty presence," said La Gambogi. "Indeed I am come this
long way from the heart of the town, that I may see her, no less than
you, George. My wish is only to befriend her. Why should she not set you
a mannerly example, giving me welcome? Come and sit by me, little bride,
for I have things to tell you. Though you reject my friendship, give me,
at least, the slight courtesy of audience. I will not detain you
overlong, will be gone very soon. Are you expecting guests, George? _On
dirait une masque champetre!_" She eyed the couple critically. "Your
wife's mask," she said, "is even better than yours."

"What does she mean?" whispered Jenny. "Oh, send her away!"

"Serpent," was all George could say, "crawl from our Eden, ere you
poison with your venom its fairest denizen."

La Gambogi rose. "Even _my_ pride," she cried passionately, "knows
certain bounds. I have been forbearing, but even in _my_ zeal for
friendship I will not be called 'serpent.' I will indeed be gone from
this rude place. Yet, ere I go, there is a boon I will deign to beg.
Show me, oh, show me but once again, the dear face I have so often
caressed, the lips that were dear to me!"

George started back.

"What does she mean?" whispered Jenny.

"In memory of our old friendship," continued La Gambogi, "grant me this
piteous favour. Show me your own face but for one instant, and I vow
that I will never again remind you that I live. Intercede for me, little
bride. Bid him unmask for me. You have more authority over him than I.
Doff his mask with your own uxorious fingers."

"What does she mean?" was the refrain of poor Jenny.

"If," said George, gazing sternly at his traitress, "you do not go now,
of your own will, I must drive you, man though I am, violently from the
garden."

"Doff your mask and I am gone."

George made a step of menace towards her.

"False saint!" she shrieked, "then _I_ will unmask you."

Like a panther she sprang upon him and clawed at his waxen cheeks. Jenny
fell back, mute with terror. Vainly did George try to free himself from
his assailant, who writhed round and round him, clawing, clawing at what
Jenny fancied to be his face. With a wild cry, Jenny fell upon the
furious creature and tried, with all her childish strength, to release
her dear one. The combatives swayed to and fro, a revulsive trinity.
There was a loud pop, as though some great cork had been withdrawn, and
La Gambogi recoiled. She had torn away the mask. It lay before her upon
the lawn, upturned to the sky.

George stood motionless. La Gambogi stared up into his face, and her
dark flush died swiftly away. For there, staring back at her, was the
man she had unmasked, but lo! his face was even as his mask had been.
Line for line, feature for feature, it was the same. 'Twas a saint's
face.

"Madam," he said, in the calm voice of despair, "your cheek may well
blanch, when you regard the ruin you have brought upon me. Nevertheless
do I pardon you. The gods have avenged, through you, the imposture I
wrought upon one who was dear to me. For that unpardonable sin I am
punished. As for my poor bride, whose love I stole by the means of that
waxen semblance, of her I cannot ask pardon. Ah, Jenny, Jenny, do not
look at me. Turn your eyes from the foul reality that I dissembled." He
shuddered and hid his face in his hands. "Do not look at me. I will go
from the garden. Nor will I ever curse you with the odious spectacle of
my face. Forget me, forget me."

But, as he turned to go, Jenny laid her hands upon his wrists and
besought him that he would look at her. "For indeed," she said, "I am
bewildered by your strange words. Why did you woo me under a mask? And
why do you imagine I could love you less dearly, seeing your own face?"

He looked into her eyes. On their violet surface he saw the tiny
reflection of his own face. He was filled with joy and wonder.

"Surely," said Jenny, "your face is even dearer to me, even fairer, than
the semblance that hid it and deceived me. I am not angry. 'Twas well
that you veiled from me the full glory of your face, for indeed I was
not worthy to behold it too soon. But I am your wife now. Let me look
always at your own face. Let the time of my probation be over. Kiss me
with your own lips."

So he took her in his arms, as though she had been a little child, and
kissed her with his own lips. She put her arms round his neck, and he
was happier than he had ever been. They were alone in the garden now.
Nor lay the mask any longer upon the lawn, for the sun had melted it.




_BY THE SAME AUTHOR_

A BEAUTIFUL EDITION OF

THE HAPPY HYPOCRITE

Illustrated in Colour by GEORGE SHERINGHAM

     _Daily Graphic._--"A superb edition of a modern classic."

     _Scotsman._--"Gracefully illustrated in colour, 'The Happy
     Hypocrite' makes an exquisite gift book.... For old or young
     the book is full of a fanciful beauty."

     _Country Life._--"Mr Sheringham's delightful drawings printed
     in colour make this volume as fascinating a 'colour book' as
     has been seen for some time."

     _Times._--"Illustrated by Mr George Sheringham, this edition is
     one which any parent who duly respects himself will steal from
     the schoolroom shelves and keep upon his own.... The variety of
     Mr Sheringham's illustrations is wide.... Delicious ornament,
     subtle appreciation of the author's spirit, gracious fantasy, a
     fruitful joy in the coxcombry and style of the period--these
     help to produce a work which gives in an unusual degree the
     impression that the artist liked doing it."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WORKS OF MAX BEERBOHM WITH A BIBLIOGRAPHY BY JOHN LANE


    MORE

    YET AGAIN

    A CHRISTMAS GARLAND

    ZULEIKA DOBSON

    CARICATURES OF TWENTY-FIVE GENTLEMEN

    THE POET'S CORNER

    A BOOK OF CARICATURES

    FIFTY CARICATURES


     _Daily Telegraph._--"It is very seldom that a writer can treat
     with such wit and humour, blended with the most delicate fancy,
     such unpromising subjects as are included in this collection.
     In the ordinary events of the moment, in the most prosaic
     institutions, he finds something wonderful or something
     bizarre: from the dreariest of subjects he draws matter for
     quiet laughter."

     _Pall Mall._--"A pretty wit.... Mr Beerbohm has clear vision,
     discrimination, and like the best of paradox makers, always a
     fund of good sense."

     _Illustrated London News._--"He is altogether delightful in his
     whimsical moods.... 'More' is a book to buy and to turn to at
     odd moments."

     _Scotsman._--"Readers who have grappled with 'The Works of Max
     Beerbohm' will stagger beneath the announcement that 'More' has
     come from the same hand.... It is not so much what he is
     talking about that matters in the case of this author, as what
     he says. He writes oddly, but is always amusing: a pleasant and
     readable exposition of the London way of looking at life."

     _Referee._--"Not long ago 'The Works of Max Beerbohm' were
     published in one slim volume. Polite literature has now been
     enriched by the same author's 'More.' ... _Maximum Superbus_."

     _Daily Telegraph._--"When some three years ago the public were
     informed that they could buy 'The Works of Max Beerbohm' for a
     small sum, those who had not followed contemporary letters very
     closely imagined that the long-forgotten volumes of some bygone
     author were offered for sale in the lump, and scented a bargain
     with which to fill the gaps in their bookshelves. In the small
     book which comprised 'the works' they got their bargain. They
     have now a chance of acquiring 'More.'"

     _Academy._--"Mr Beerbohm can think and observe and write. He
     has the uncommon gift of seeing clearly the other side of
     things. He can stand aside impartially and watch contemporary
     life with the eye of the historian: his fastidiousness, when
     disciplined, is exquisite; his appreciation of the best is
     sound."

       *       *       *       *       *

_BOOKS BY RICHARD KING_


OVER THE FIRESIDE (WITH SILENT FRIENDS)

With an Introduction by Sir ARTHUR PEARSON.


WITH SILENT FRIENDS

Essay in Everyday Philosophy. Seventeenth Edition.

SECOND BOOK OF SILENT FRIENDS

Third Edition.

PASSION AND POT-POURRI

Third Edition.

BELOW THE SURFACE

Footnotes to the Everyday.

SOME CONFESSIONS OF AN AVERAGE MAN

     _The Times._--"Mr King is one of the Masters of the causerie,
     as those who have read his books well know."

     _Evening Standard._--"You will enjoy many pleasant hours with
     one of our most intimate essayists."

     _Daily Express._--"Mr King's easy, intimate, sympathetic style
     has made for him thousands of friends."

     C. K. SHORTER in _The Sphere_.--"Richard King is a man of
     genius."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Happy Hypocrite, by Max Beerbohm

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAPPY HYPOCRITE ***

***** This file should be named 36497.txt or 36497.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/4/9/36497/

Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
