The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Man's Hearth, by Eleanor M. Ingram

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Man's Hearth

Author: Eleanor M. Ingram

Illustrator: Edmund Frederick

Release Date: June 23, 2011 [EBook #36503]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MAN'S HEARTH ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Susan Skinner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)








A MAN'S HEARTH

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ELSIE FELT THE GLANCE PASS ACROSS HER AND REST ON ANTHONY

_Page 223_]

       *       *       *       *       *

A MAN'S HEARTH

BY

ELEANOR M. INGRAM

AUTHOR OF
"FROM THE CAB BEHIND," "THE UNAFRAID," ETC.

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS IN COLOR BY
EDMUND FREDERICK

[Illustration]

PHILADELPHIA & LONDON
J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY
1915


COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY


PUBLISHED OCTOBER 1915


PRINTED BY J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY
AT THE WASHINGTON SQUARE PRESS
PHILADELPHIA, U. S. A.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                             PAGE

    I. TONY ADRIANCE----"MILLIONS, YOU KNOW!"                          9

   II. HIS NEIGHBOR'S WIFE                                            27

  III. THE GIRL OUTSIDE                                               45

   IV. THE WOMAN WHO GRASPED                                          55

    V. THE LITTLE RED HOUSE                                           77

   VI. THE WOMAN WHO GAVE                                             96

  VII. THE DARING ADVENTURE                                          109

 VIII. ANDY OF THE MOTOR-TRUCKS                                      110

   IX. THE LUCK IN THE HOUSE                                         144

    X. MRS. MASTERSON TAKES TEA                                      155

   XI. THE GLOWING HEARTH                                            173

  XII. THE UPPER TRAIL                                               184

 XIII. WHAT TONY BUILT                                               203

  XIV. THE CABARET DANCER                                            215

   XV. THE OTHER MAN'S ROAD                                          229

  XVI. THE GUITAR OF ALENYA OF THE SEA                               243

 XVII. RUSSIAN MIKE AND MAITRE RAOUL GALVEZ                          261

XVIII. THE CHALLENGE                                                 271

  XIX. THE ADRIANCES                                                 283

   XX. THE CORNERSTONE                                               308




ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                                    PAGE

Elsie felt the Glance pass across Her and Rest on Anthony _Frontispiece_

There Would Have Been no more Bedtime Romps for Masterson and His Son 71

The Winter was Hard and Long, but Never Dull to Them                 173




A MAN'S HEARTH




CHAPTER I

TONY ADRIANCE--"MILLIONS, YOU KNOW!"


The man who had taken shelter in the stone pavilion hesitated before
taking a place on the curved bench before him. He had the air of
awaiting some sign of welcome or dismissal from the seat's occupant;
receiving none, he sat down and turned his gaze toward the broad Drive,
where people were scattering before the sudden flurry of rain. It
suggested spring rather than autumn, this shower that had swept out of a
wind-blown cloud and was already passing.

After a moment he drew a cigar-case from his pocket, then paused.
Obviously, he was not familiar with the etiquette of the public parks,
with their freedom and lack of formalities. He was beside a woman--a
girl. He had no wish to be inconsiderate, yet, to speak--in suspicious,
sardonic New York--that was to invite misconstruction, or a flirtation.
Still----

"May I smoke?" he suddenly and brusquely shot his question.

The girl turned towards him. Her eyes were as gray as the rain; heavily
shadowed by their lashes, their expression had a misted aloofness
suggesting thoughts hastily recalled from remote distances. He realized
that he might have come, smoked, and gone without drawing her notice any
more than a blowing leaf. She was not a beauty, but he liked the
clearing frankness of the glance with which she judged him, and judged
aright. He liked it, too, that she did not smile, and that her steadfast
regard showed neither invitation nor hostility.

"Thank you," she answered. "Please do."

The form of her reply seemed to him peculiarly gracious and unexpected,
as if she gave with both hands instead of doling out the merely
necessary. He never had known a woman who gave; they always took, in his
experience. Unconsciously he lifted his hat in acknowledgment of the
tone rather than the permission. That was all, of course. She returned
to her study of river and sky, while he drew out his cigar. But
afterward he looked at her, unobtrusively.

She was dressed altogether in black, but not the black of mourning, he
judged. The costume, plain but not shabby, conventional without being
up-to-date, touched him with a vague sense of familiarity, yet escaped
recognition. It should have told him something of her, but it did not,
except that she had not much money for frocks. He was only slightly
interested; he might not have glanced her way again if he had not been
struck by her rapt absorption in the sunset panorama before them. She
had gone back to that place of thought from which his speech had called
her; withdrawn from all around her as one who goes into a secret room
and closes a door against the world. And she looked happy, or at least
serenely at peace with her dreams. The man sighed with envious
impatience, striving to follow her gaze and share the enchantment.

The enchantment was not for him. The brief storm had left tumbled masses
of purple cloud hanging in the deep-rose tinted sky, in airy mockery and
imitation of the purplish wall of the Palisades standing knee-deep in
the rosy waters of the Hudson. Along the crest of the great rock walls
lights blossomed like flowers through the violet mist, at the walls'
base half-seen buildings flashed with lighted windows. He saw that it
was all very pretty, but he had seen it so a hundred times without
especial emotion.

His cigar was finished, yet the girl had not once moved. Abruptly, as
before, he spoke to her, as he moved to leave.

"What are you looking at?" he demanded. "Oh, I'm not trying to be
impertinent--I would like to know what you see worth while? You have not
moved for half an hour. I wish you could show me something worth that."

Again she turned and considered him with grave attention. His tired
young face bore the scrutiny; she answered him.

"I am seeing all the things I have not got."

"Over there?"

She yielded his lack of imagination.

"Well, yes; over there. Don't you know it is always Faeryland--the place
over there?"

"It is only Jersey--?"

She corrected him.

"The place out of reach. The place between which and ourselves flows a
river, or rises a cliff. One can imagine anything to be there. See that
grim, unreal castle, there in the shadows, its windows all gleaming with
light from within. Well, it is a factory where they make soap-powder,
but from here I can see Fair Rosamond leaning from its arched windows,
if I choose, or armored and plumed knights riding into its gates."

"Oh!" Disappointment made the exclamation listless. "Story-making, you
were? I am afraid I can't see that way, thank you; I haven't the head
for it."

For the first time she smiled, with a warm lighting of her rain-gray
eyes and a Madonna-like protectiveness of expression. He felt as
distinct an impression as if she had laid her hand on his arm with an
actual touch of sympathy.

"But I do not see that way, either," she explained. "That was an
illustration. I mean that one can make pictures there of all the _real_
things that are not real for one's self; at least, not yet real. It is a
game to play, I suppose, while one waits."

"I do not understand."

She made a gesture of resignation, and was mute. He comprehended that
confidence would go no farther.

"Thank you," he accepted the rebuke. "It was good of you to put up with
my curiosity and--not to misunderstand my speaking."

"Oh, no! I hate to misunderstand, ever; it is so stupid."

Although he had risen, he did not go at once. The evening colors faded,
first from river, then from sky. With autumn's suddenness, dusk swept
down. Playing children, groups of young people and promenaders passed by
the little pavilion in a gay current; automobiles multiplied with the
homing hour of the city. New York thought of dining, simply or superbly,
as might be.

The silent tete-a-tete in the pavilion was broken by the softest sound
in the world--a baby's drowsy, gurgling chuckle of awakening. Instantly
the girl in black started from revery, and then the man first noticed
that a white-and-gold baby carriage stood at her end of the curved seat.
Astonished, incredulous, he saw her throw back miniature coverlets of
frost-white eiderdown and bend over the little face, pink as a
hollyhock, nestled there. For the first time in his life he witnessed
the pretty byplay of the nursery--dropped kisses, the answering pats of
chubby, useless hands, love-words and replying baby speech,
inarticulate, adorable.

The scene struck deeply into inner places of thought he had never known
lay at the back of consciousness. He never had thought very profoundly,
until the last few weeks. And even yet he was struggling, turning in a
mental circle of doubt, rather than thinking. The girl and the child
flung open a door through which he glimpsed strange vistas, startling in
their forbidden possibilities. He stood watching, dumb, until she turned
to him. Her face was kindled and laughing; she looked infinitely candid
and good. But--she looked maid, not mother. Somehow he felt that.

"You are married?" he questioned, almost roughly. "I did not suppose----
You are married, then?"

Into her expression swept scorn for his dulness, compassion for his
ignorance, fused by the flaring fire of some intense feeling far beyond
his ken.

"Married? No. Or I would not be here!"

"Why? Where would you be?"

The baby was standing upright in its coach. The girl passed an arm about
the tottering form to steady the fat little feet, and retorted on her
questioner.

"Where? Home, of course, making ready for my man! If I lived
there,"--with a gesture toward the tall, luxurious apartment houses on
the Drive, behind them, "I would be choosing my prettiest frock and
coiling my hair the way he liked best. If I lived there, across the
river in one of those little houses, I would be making the house bright
with lamps; wearing my whitest apron and making the supper hot--very
hot, for there is frost in the air and he would be cold and tired and
hungry. And I would have his chair ready and draw the curtains because
he was inside and no one else mattered." She paused, drawing a deep
breath. "That is where I would be," she concluded, as one patiently
lessoning a dull pupil, and reseated the baby in its coach in obvious
preparation for departure.

The man had stood quite still, dazed. But when she turned away, with a
bend of her dark little head by way of farewell, he roused himself and
overtook her in a stride.

"Thank you," he said, "I mean for letting me know anyone could feel like
that. I suppose a great many people do, only I have not met that kind?
No, never mind answering; how should you know? But, thank you. May I--if
I see you again--may I speak to you?"

She surveyed him gravely, as if with clairvoyant ability to read a
history from his face, a face open-browed and planned for strength, by
its square outlines, but that somehow only succeeded in being pleasant
and passively agreeable. It was the face of a man who never had been
brought against conflict or any need for stern decision, whose true
character was a sword never yet drawn from the sheath. And now, he was
in trouble; so much lay plain to see. He was in bitter trouble and, she
guessed, alone with the trouble.

He stood in mute acceptance of her scrutiny, recognizing her right,
since he had asked so much. Before she spoke, he knew her answer, seeing
it foreshadowed in the gray eyes.

"If you wish to very much. But--not too soon again."

She stepped from the curb, allowing no reply, but without apparent
haste, pushing the carriage in which the baby chuckled and twisted to
peep back at her. He watched her thread her way through the rushing
lines of pleasure traffic; saw her reach the other side and disappear
behind a knoll clothed with turf and evergreens that rose between them.
The woman from whose presence he had come to this chance encounter once
had told him that any human being looked absurd propelling a baby-coach.
He recalled that statement now, and did not find it true. It was such a
sane thing to do, so natural and good. At least, it seemed so when this
girl did it. He envied the man, whoever he might be, who did, or would
love her; envied him the clean simplicity she would make of life and the
absence of hateful complications.

People were glancing curiously at his motionless figure; he aroused
himself and walked on. He had chosen his own way of living, he angrily
told himself; there was no excuse for whining if he did not like the
place where free-will had led him. Yet--had he? Or had he, instead,
been trapped? The doubt was ugly. He walked faster to escape it, but it
ran at his heels like one of those sinister demon-animals of medieval
legend.

Across the blackening river electric signs were flashing into view;
gigantic affairs insolently shouldering themselves into the unwilling
attention, as indeed they were designed to do by Jersey's desire for the
greater city's patronage. Looking toward one of these, the man read it
with a sullen distaste: "Adriance's Paper." That simple announcement
marked an industry, even a monopoly, great enough to have been subjected
more than once to the futile investigations of an uneasy government.

The family name was sufficiently unusual, the family fortune
sufficiently well known to have been bracketted together for him
wherever he had gone. In school, in college, and later, always he had
found a courier whisper running officiously before him, "Young
Adriance--paper, you know. Millions!" And always it had led him into
trouble; at twenty-six he was just commencing to realize that fact. The
trouble never had been very serious until now. He never had committed
anything his mother's church would have called a mortal sin. Even yet he
stood only on the verge of commission. But he could not draw back; he
was like a man being inexorably pushed into a dark place.

The house toward which he turned did not arrest the eye by any
ostentatious display. In fact, it was remarkable only for being one of
the very few houses on lower Riverside Drive which possessed lawns and
verandas. Set in a small town, or a suburb, the gray stone villa would
have been merely "very handsome." Here, it gained the value of an
exotic. To Anthony Adriance, junior, as he climbed the steps that night,
it seemed to stare arrogantly from its score of blinking windows at the
glittering sign on the opposite shore. Cause and effect, they duly
acknowledge each other. The man paused to glance at them both, then let
his gaze fall to the avenue below the terraced lawn. That way the
black-gowned girl had gone. Probably she had turned across into the
city; her dress was hardly that of a resident of the neighborhood.

The man who took his hat and coat deferentially breathed a message. Mr.
Adriance was in the library and desired to know if his son was dining at
home.

"Yes," was the prompt, even eager reply. "Certainly, if he wishes it.
Or--never mind; I will go in, myself."

The inquiry was unusual. It was not Mr. Adriance's habit to question his
son's movements. One might have said they did not interest him. He and
"Tony" were very good acquaintances and lived quite without friction. He
was too busy, too self-centred and ultra-modern to desire any warmer
relation. Affection was a sentimentality never mentioned in that
household; a mutilated household, for Mrs. Adriance had died twenty
years before Tony's majority.

But it was not curiosity, rather an odd, faintly flickering hope that
lighted the younger man's eyes as he entered the room and returned his
father's nod of greeting. The two were not unlike, at a first glance;
definitely good features: eyes so dark that they were frequently
mistaken for black instead of blue, upright figures that made the most
of their moderate height,--these they had in common. The great
difference between them was in expression; the difference between
untempered and tempered metal. No one would ever have nicknamed the
elder Anthony "Tony."

"I shall be glad to dine with you," the younger Anthony opened, at once.
"I'll go change, and be back. Were you going to try the new Trot
tonight--I think you said so?"

"No. I had an hour this afternoon," Mr. Adriance stated, picking up a
pen from the table and turning it in his fingers. He had a habit of
playing with small articles at times--to distract his listener's
attention rather than his own, said those who knew him well. Neither to
his son nor to himself did it occur as incongruous that he should
discuss a lesson in dancing with the matter-of-fact decision that made
his speech cold and sharp as the crackle of a step on a frost-bound
road. "It is not so difficult as the tango, though more fatiguing. Where
had you intended to dine, tonight? At the Mastersons'?"

Tony Adriance colored a slow, painful red that burned over face and neck
like a flame scar.

"Fred asked me," he made difficult work of the reply. "I couldn't get
out of it very well, but I am glad of an excuse to stay away. It is
early enough to 'phone."

Mr. Adriance turned the pen around.

"If Masterson was to be there, you might safely have gone," he
pronounced.

"If----"

"Exactly. Dining with Mrs. Masterson will no longer do. Am I speaking to
a full-grown man or a boy? If Mrs. Masterson chooses to get a divorce,
and you afterward marry her, very good. It is done; divorce is accepted
among us. But there must be no gossip concerning the lady."

"There is no cause for any," retorted the other, but the defense lacked
fire. He looked suddenly haggard, and the shamed red scorched still
deeper. "She--isn't that kind."

"No. She is very clever." He laid down the pen and took up a book. "I
was cautioning you. Will you hurry your dressing a little? I have an
early engagement down-town this evening."

The dry retort was not resented. The younger man did not retreat,
although way was shown to him. Since the subject had been dragged into
the open ground of speech, he had more to say, with whatever reluctance.

"You don't seem to consider Fred," he finally said.

"Why should I?" Mr. Adriance looked up perfunctorily. "Masterson is
nothing to me. You have not considered him."

"I have! At least, I tried to stop this--after I understood. I never
meant----"

There was a pause, during which Mr. Adriance turned a page. The sentence
was not completed, but Tony Adriance lingered as if in expectation of
some reply to it; an expectation half eager, half defiant. No reply was
made; finally it became evident there was to be none.

"I thought you might object." He forced a laugh with the avowal, but his
eyes denied the lightness. "Parents do in books and plays, you know. I
thought you might tell me---- Oh, well, to pull out of this and bring
home a woman of my own instead of some other man's woman. It isn't very
pretty!"

Mr. Adriance looked up with a certain curiosity.

"You have a sentimental streak, Tony? I never suspected it. Why should I
object to an affair so suitable? You have been following Mrs. Masterson
about for a year; she is altogether charming and will make a good
hostess here--a great lack in our household. I admire her myself, more
than any debutante I ever saw. I am very well satisfied. Suppose you had
brought home some milkmaid romance, a wife to stumble over the rugs and
defer to the servants? No, no; manage this properly, that is all my
advice. Meanwhile, do you know it is after seven o'clock? Unless you
hurry----"

"Oh, I'll hurry," was the dry promise. "And I am much obliged for the
advice. But I fancy a good many of us may defer to the milkmaids, after
we are dead."

He swung the door shut with unnecessary force, as he went out. While he
climbed the broad, darkly-lustrous stairs, he was aware that his father
was turning another page of the book; and as a pendant to that picture
had a mental glimpse of Lucille Masterson, lovely, perfect in every line
of costume and tint of color, waiting for a man who was not her husband.
What would the girl in black think of that, he wondered? Yet Lucille
was altogether beyond reproach. She had every right to contemplate a
divorce, in view of Fred Masterson's undoubted wildness and
extravagance. If only she had not discussed it with him, Tony Adriance,
he thought impatiently. If only she had announced her intention to her
husband and the world, instead of broaching it secretly to the admirer
she had chosen for her second husband! It was horrible to meet Masterson
with this knowledge thrust like a stone blocking the way of intercourse.
Certainly she lacked delicacy.

Of course he must go on gracefully. It was very like climbing these
stairs; one step taken implied taking the next. But he wished that he
had not met the girl in the pavilion.




CHAPTER II

HIS NEIGHBOR'S WIFE


During the next few days, Tony Adriance several times saw the girl in
black. But he did not venture to approach or speak to her. It was too
soon; moreover, he was not altogether certain that he wished to be with
her. She was too disturbing, too concrete an evidence of other
possibilities in life than those he had been taught. He remembered the
story of the Grecian lake that was only muddy when stirred. Probably
those who lived within view of its waters seldom "disturbed Comarina."

Nevertheless, he always regarded the girl with a keen interest he could
not have explained even to himself. He would glimpse her from his
automobile in passing, or observe her from the opposite sidewalk as he
went in or out of his father's house. She always had the child with her,
and always wore the same frock. Usually, she was to be found in the
white stone pavilion, established on the curved stone bench with a bit
of sewing or a book. He never had imagined so quietly monotonous a life
as hers seemed to be.

It was at the end of the first week after their meeting that Adriance,
riding slowly along the bridle-path through the park, saw an itinerant
vendor of toy balloons and pinwheels wander into the pavilion where girl
and baby were ensconced.

The sunlight glittered bravely on the gaudy colors of fluted paper
wheels, the plump striped sides of bobbing globes, and the sleepy, brown
face of the Syrian pedler who mutely presented his wares. The girl
lifted her smiling eyes to meet the man's questioning glance, and shook
her head with a pretty gesture that somehow implied admiration and a gay
friendliness which made her refusal more gracious than another's
purchase. The pedler smiled, also, and lingered to hoist the straps
supporting his tray into a new position upon his bent, velveteen-clad
shoulders, before moving on his way.

The baby had not been consulted. But his attention had been none the
less enchained. Those pink and yellow things set spinning by the fresh
morning breeze, those red balloons tugging at their cords like unwilling
captives hungry for the clear upper spaces of blue--to see all this
radiance departing was too much! He spread wide both chubby arms and
plunged in pursuit.

"Holly!" the girl cried, arresting his flight from the coach. "Why,
Holly?"

Holly hurled himself into magnificent rage. Halted by the outburst, the
Syrian turned back with an air of experienced victory.

"_Now_ you buy?" he interrogated.

The girl shook her head, struggling to appease the young
insurrectionist.

"No, no. Please go away, and he will forget."

The man took a step away. The baby's screams redoubled; he stamped with
small, fat feet and brandished small, fat fists.

"You buy?" the pedler blandly insisted.

"No!" the girl panted. "Please do go. I cannot; I have no money with me.
Holly, dear----!"

Adriance had found a boy to hold his horse, and came up in time to
overhear the last statement. He halted the Syrian with a gesture.

"I have," he made his presence known to the combatants. "Won't you let
me gratify a fellowman? Here, bring those things nearer. Which shall it
be, young chap--or both?"

The girl turned to him with candid relief warming her surprise.

"Oh!" she exclaimed her recognition. "You are very good. I am afraid,
really afraid it will have to be both. _Oh_----!"

Holly had deliberately lunged forward and clutched a double handful of
the alluring wares.

By the time calm was re-established and the amused Adriance had paid, it
seemed altogether natural that he should take his place on the seat
beside the girl; as natural as the pedler's placid departure. Holly lay
back on his cushions in vast content, two balloons floating from their
tethers at the foot of his coach and a pinwheel clasped in his hand.

"I should like to say that he is not often like this," remarked the
girl, gathering together her scattered sewing, "But he likes having his
own way as much as Mait' Raoul Galvez; and everyone knows what _he_
raised."

"I don't," Adriance confessed. He noticed for the first time a softening
of her words, not enough to be called an accent, far less a lisp, but
yet a trick of speech, unfamiliar to him. "What did he raise?"

"Satan," she gravely told him. "Mait' Raoul knew more about voodooism
and black magic than any white man ever should. It is said he vowed that
he would have the devil up in person to play cards with him, or never be
content on earth or under it. And he did, although he knew well enough
Satan never gambles except for souls."

"Who won?"

"Satan did. Yet he lost again, for Mait' Raoul tricked him in the
contract so cleverly that it did not bind and the soul was free. There
is a great split rock near Galvez Bayou where they say the demon stamped
in his rage so fiercely the stone burst."

"Then Maitre Raoul escaped Hades, after all?"

"Oh, no! He went there, but merely as a point of honor. He was a
gambler, but he always paid his losses."

Adriance laughed, yet winced a little, too. A baffled, helpless
bitterness darkened across his expression, as it had done on the
evening of their first meeting. He looked down at the pavement as if in
fear of accidentally encountering his companion's clear glance.

"I never read that story," he acknowledged. "Thank you."

"I fancy it never was written," she returned. "There is a song about it;
a sleepy, creepy song which should never be sung between midnight and
dawn."

He watched her draw the thread in and out, for a space. She was
embroidering an intricate monogram in the centre of a square of fine
linen, working with nice exactitude and daintiness.

"What is it?" he wondered, finally.

Her glance traced the direction of his.

"A net for goldfish," she replied.

It was not until long afterward he understood she had told him that she
sold her work.

The river glittered, breaking into creamy furrows of foam under the
ploughing traffic. The sunshine was warm and sank through Adriance with
a lulling sense of physical pleasure and tranquil laziness. How bright
and clean a world he seemed to view, seated here! He felt a pang of
longing, keen as pain, when he thought that he might have had such
content as this as an abiding state, instead of a brief respite. How had
he come to shut himself away from peace, all unaware? How was it that he
never had valued the colorless blessing, until it was lost?

After a while he fell to envying Maitre Raoul, who had gone to the devil
honorably.

A long sigh from Holly, slumbering amid his trophies, awoke Adriance to
realization that his companion possessed the gift of being silent
gracefully. He had not spoken to her for quite half an hour, yet she
appeared neither bored nor offended, but as if she had been engaged in
following out some pleasant theme of meditation. A sparrow tilted and
preened itself on the rail, not a yard from her bent, dark head. Over at
the curbstone, the boy who guarded Adriance's horse had slipped the
bridle over one arm and was playing marbles with two cheerful comrades
who made calculated allowances for his handicap, based on his coming
reward from the rider.

"I am afraid I am very dull," Adriance presently offered vague apology.

"Are you?"

"I mean, I am not entertaining."

She lifted her eyes from her sewing to regard him with delicate
raillery.

"No. If you had been the entertaining sort of person, I could never have
let you talk to me," she said. "But I think you had better go, please,
now. Two imported nursemaids in bat-wing cloaks have been glowering at
us for some time as it is. Holly and I shall be grateful to you a
thousand years for this morning's rescue."

He rose reluctantly, with a feeling of being ejected from the only
serene spot on earth.

"Thank you for letting me stay," he answered. "You are very kind. I----"

His lowered glance had encountered her little feet, demurely crossed
under the edge of her sober skirt. They were very small, serious shoes
indeed; not a touch of the day's capricious fancy in decoration relieved
them. But what struck to the man's heart was their brave blackness, the
blackness of polish that could not quite conceal that they had been
mended. Of course, he at once looked away, but the impression remained.

"I hope Holly will not imitate Mait' Raoul any more," he finished
lamely.

The girl frankly turned to watch him ride away. Her natural interest
seemed to the man more modest than any pose of indifference.

But it seemed that she was appointed by Chance to make Tony Adriance
dissatisfied and restive. It was altogether absurd, but the fanciful
legend she had told him taunted and hunted his sullen thoughts. He took
it with him to his home, when he changed into suitable attire to keep a
luncheon engagement with Mrs. Masterson. It still accompanied him when
he entered the great apartment house where the Mastersons lived.

He had not wanted to act as Lucille Masterson's escort on this occasion.
His attendance had been skilfully compelled. But now he hated the duty
so much that he was dangerously near rebellion. He hesitated on the
threshold of the building, half inclined not to enter; to go, instead,
to a telephone and excuse himself for desertion on some pretext.

It was too late. Already the door was held open for him by a footman
whose discreetly familiar smile Adriance saw, and resented. He winced
again when the elevator boy stopped at the Mastersons' floor without
being told, implying the impossibility of Mr. Adriance's call being
intended for any other household. He never had noticed these things
before; now, he felt himself disgracefully exposed before these black
men.

He was altogether in a mood of bitter exasperation, when he was ushered
into Mrs. Masterson's little drawing-room. He recognized this condition
with a vague sense of surprise at himself underlying the dominant
emotion. All his life he had been singularly even-tempered. Now he
combated a wish to say ugly, caustic things to the woman who had brought
him here. He did not want to see her.

Yet she was very pleasant to see. Indeed, both the scene and his hostess
were charming, as they met his view. Mrs. Masterson was standing before
a long mirror, surveying herself, so that Adriance saw her twice; once
in fact, and once as a reflection. Sunlight filled the room, which was
furnished and draped in a curious shade of deep blue with a shimmering
richness of color, so that the lady's gray-clad figure stood out in
clear and precise detail. But Mrs. Masterson could bear that strong
light, and knew it. Without turning, she smiled into the mirror toward
the man whose image she saw there.

"How do you like the last Viennese fancy, Tony?" she composedly greeted
him.

Her voice was not one of her good points. It was naturally too
high-pitched and harsh, and although by careful training she had
accustomed herself to speak with a suppressed evenness of tone that
smothered the defect to most ears, there resulted a lack of expression
or modulation perilously near monotony. Adriance listened now, with a
fresh sense of irritation, to the fault he only had observed recently.
Before answering, he surveyed critically the decided lines of the
costume offered for his approval; its audacious little waistcoat of
cerise-and-black checked velvet, the diminutive hat that seemed to have
alighted like a butterfly on the shining yellow hair brushed smoothly
back from Mrs. Masterson's pink ears, and the high-buttoned gray boots
with a silk tassel pendant at each ankle. Those exquisite and costly
boots taunted him with their sharp contrast to those he had studied an
hour before; they spurred him on to rudeness as if actual rowels were
affixed to their little French heels.

"The skirt is too extreme," he stated perversely.

"They are going to be so; this is quite a bit in advance," she returned.
"Do you like it?"

"Not so well! It makes a woman look like a child; except for her face."

Lucille Masterson's tact was often at fault from her lack of humor.
Instead of retorting with laughter or silence, she opposed offence to
his wilfulness.

"Thank you," she answered freezingly. "I seem to have aged rather
suddenly."

"You know well enough how handsome you are," he said, a trifle ashamed.
"Of course I did not mean what you imply. But, after all, we are not
children, Lucille, either of us. We are a man and a woman who are
going----"

"Well?"

"To gather a rather nasty apple!" He forced a smile to temper the
statement.

She slowly turned around and regarded him.

"What do you mean?" she demanded, lifting her narrow, arched eyebrows.
"My _costume trottoir_, and apples----? Aren't you considerably
confused, Tony?"

"Can't we at least face what we are doing?" he countered. "If we are
able to do a thing, we ought to be able to look at it, surely. We can
put through this thing, and our friends will think none the less of us;
they are that kind. But they are not all the people on earth, you know.
What the maid who brushes your gown or the man who opens the door for me
says of us downstairs may come nearer the general opinion. Perhaps we
would better have considered that. For I am afraid the majority of the
white man's world cannot be altogether wrong."

There was a quality in his voice that alarmed her. He had flung himself
into a chair beside her desk, and sat nervously moving back and forth
the trinkets nearest his hand. She stood quite still, studying him
before committing herself by a reply. This was a Tony Adriance strange
to her.

"It seems very cowardly, to me, to be afraid of what people will say,"
she slowly answered. "And I will not have you speak to me as if I were a
wicked woman, Tony. You know that I am not. You know I have borne with
Fred's neglect and extravagance much longer than other women would."

He flushed dark-red at the taunt of cowardice, but he spoke doggedly,
tenacious of his purpose.

"You could not give Fred another chance? You remember, he and I were
friends, once. He has played too much with the stock market. Well, I
might get my father to help him there; we might fix it so that he won
sometimes, instead of lost. You do not know how hard it is for me to
come into Fred's house this way."

A flash of blended anger and fear crossed Mrs. Masterson's large,
light-colored eyes.

"Is it?" she doubted, cuttingly. "You have been coming here for a whole
year, Tony."

She had found the one retort he could not answer. Adriance opened his
lips, then closed them with a grim recognition of defeat. Who would
believe he had come here innocently? How could he tell this beautiful
and sophisticated woman that he had been vaguely, romantically charmed
by her without ever dreaming of any issue to the affair or of letting
her suspect his mild sentimentality? How could he hope she would credit
the tale, if he did tell her?

She had been watching his changing expression; herself paled by a very
genuine dread. Now, suddenly she was beside him, her hands on his
shoulders.

"Don't you love me any more, Tony? You come in here to-day and rage at
me----! Have you taught me for months to need you and count on you for
all the future, only to leave me, now? Oh, I believed _you_ were strong
and true!"

A caress from her was so rare an event, so unfamiliar a concession, that
her mere nearness fired Adriance. Her fragrant face was close to his;
he looked into her eyes, like jewels under water, suffused by her terror
of losing him.

His kiss was her victory. Instantly she was away from him; half across
the room and sending furtive glances toward the curtained doorways, even
toward the windows five stories above the street. The guilt implied in
the action made it to Adriance as if a hand had struck the kiss from his
lips.

"We must be careful," she cautioned. "Suppose someone were coming in?
You didn't mean all that, Tony? You love me as much as ever?"

Adriance moved toward her.

"I won't answer that in Masterson's house," he said, his voice shaken.
"Lucille, you have got to do now what I asked you to do weeks ago: you
must leave here at once and marry me as soon as it can be done. Since we
have begun this thing, we must carry it through as decently as possible.
And it is not decent for you to stay here or for me to come here. If you
come with me now, to-day, I will put you with someone who can act as
chaperon until the divorce is obtained; one of my aunts, perhaps. If
you do this, and help me to keep what honestly is left, I give you my
word that I never will fail you as long as I live, come what may."

She drew back from his vehemence. Assured of herself and him, now, she
permitted a frown to tangle her fair brow in half-amused rebuke.

"My dear boy, what a dramatic tirade! Of course I will come to you the
first moment possible--but, to-day? And just now you were deprecating
gossip! You must let me arrange this affair. I am not ready to leave
Fred, yet. Do you not understand? I must wait until he makes another one
of his scenes; I must have a fresh reason for going, not a past one
already tacitly overlooked."

"You will not come?"

She turned from his darkened face to the mirror.

"You really are very selfish, Tony. Pray think a little of me instead of
yourself. But I will try to do as you wish; next month, perhaps. I could
go to Florida for the winter."

Adriance sat down again beside the desk and took a cigarette from a
small lacquered tray that stood there. He was beaten, but he was not
submissive. He bent his head to the yoke with a bitter, sick reluctance.
Yet he understood that it was too late to draw out. Lucille loved him;
whether intentionally or not, he had won her. No, he must finish what he
had begun.

The cigarette was perfumed, and nauseated him. He dropped it into an
ash-receiver, but it had given him a moment to steady himself. After
all, Masterson did neglect his wife. If he could not keep his own, why
should Tony Adriance turn altruist and try to do it for him? At least,
Lucille might be happy.

Mrs. Masterson had touched her hat into place, surveying her vivid
reflection. She was wise enough to take her triumph casually.

"Shall we go?" she questioned. "Nan Madison hates late arrivals, you
know. Do make your man throw away that cravat you are wearing, Tony.
Gray is not your color. It makes you look too pale; too much----"

"Like Maitre Raoul Galvez?" he dryly supplied, rising.

"Who was he?"

"A man who raised the Devil. I am quite ready if you wish to go."




CHAPTER III

THE GIRL OUTSIDE


Tony Adriance slipped into the habit of pausing for a few words with the
girl in black whenever circumstances set them opposite each other. And
that was quite often, since his home was so near the pavilion she had
adopted as her place of repose. He rather avoided his friends, during
the days following his futile rebellion against Lucille Masterson's
will, yet he was lonely and eager to escape thought. He could talk to
the girl, he admitted to himself, because she did not know him.

They met with a casual frankness, the girl and he, like two men who find
each other congenial, yet whose lives lie far apart. Their brief
conversations were intimate without being inquisitively personal. She
had a trick of saying things that lingered in the memory; at least, in
his memory. Not that she was especially brilliant; her charm was her
earnestness, at once vivid and tranquil, and the odd glamor of
enchantment she threw over plain commonsense, making it no longer
plain, but alluring as folly.

But she continued to wear the shabby little boots, with their optimistic
bravery of blacking. They really were respectable boots, aging, not
aged. The fault lay with Adriance, not them; he was too much accustomed
to women "whose sandals delighted his eyes." If her feet had been less
childishly small, they might have preoccupied him less. As it was, they
preoccupied him more and more.

There is no accepted way of offering a pair of shoes to a feminine
acquaintance. Nevertheless, in the third week of his friendship with the
girl, Adriance bought a pair of pumps for her. He had seen them in a
glass case set out before a shop and stopped to gaze, astonished. They
were so unmistakably hers; the size, the rounded lines, the very arch
and tilt were right! They were of shining black, with Spanish heels and
glinting buckles.

He took them home with him, but of course he dared not give them to her.
He had an idea that he might essay the venture on the last occasion of
their meeting; if she punished him with banishment, then, it would not
matter. For he meant to leave New York when Lucille went to Florida. He
would spend the necessary interval between the divorce and his marriage,
in Canada, alone.

Meanwhile, there was the girl.

It was on the last day of October that he found her knitting instead of
embroidering; a web of gay scarlet across her knees.

"A new suit for Holly's big Teddybear," she explained, as he sat down
opposite to her. "Christmas is coming, you know. I like to have all
ready in advance. Don't you think the color should become a brown-plush
bear?"

"It is not depressing."

"It is the color of holly. And depression is not a sensation to
cultivate, is it?" She paused to gaze across the river, already shadowed
by approaching evening. "I believe in fighting it off with both hands;
driving a spear right through the ugly thing and holding it up like Sir
Sintram with that wriggly monster in the old picture."

"You would be a good one to be in trouble with," he said abruptly.

She disentangled his meaning from the extremely vague speech, and nodded
serious assent.

"Yes, perhaps. I'm used to making the most of things."

"The best of them," he corrected.

"Of course! The most best--why should anyone make more worst?"

They laughed together. But directly the restless unhappiness flowed back
into his eyes.

"They do, though!" he exclaimed.

"Then they are wrong, all wrong," she said decidedly. "They should set
themselves right the moment they find it out."

"But if they can't?" he urged, with a personal heat and protest. "Things
aren't so simple as all that. Suppose they can't set one thing straight
without knocking over a lot of others? You _cannot_ go cutting and
slashing through like that!"

"Oh, yes; you can," she contradicted, sitting very upright, her gray
eyes fired. "You must; anyone must. It is cowardly to let things,
crooked things, grow and grow. And one could not knock down anything
worth while that easily. Good things are strong."

He shook his head. But she had stirred him so that he sat silent for a
while, then rather suddenly rose to take his leave.

"You never told me your name," he remarked, looking down at her. He
noticed again how supple and deft her fingers were, and their capable
swiftness at the work.

"No. Why?" she replied simply.

"I don't know," he accepted the rebuke. "I--beg your pardon."

"Oh, certainly. Holly is trying to shake hands before you go."

Of course he and the baby had become friends. He carefully yielded his
forefinger to the clutching hands, but he did not smile as usual.

"Look here," he spoke out brusquely. "Just as an illustration that
things are not as easily kept straight as you seem to think--I know a
man who somehow got to following one woman around. I don't think he
knows quite how. Of course, he admired her immensely, and liked her.
Well, I suppose he felt more than that! But he never even imagined
making love to her, because she was married. You see, he was a fool. One
day when he called, she told him that she was going to get a divorce
from her husband. She has the right. And the man found she expected to
marry him, afterward; she thought he had meant that all along. What
could he do? What can he do?"

The baby gurgled merrily, dropping the forefinger and yawning. The girl
laid down her work to tuck a coverlet about her charge.

"I do not know," she admitted, her voice low.

Adriance drew a quick breath.

"That isn't all of it. The husband is the man's friend. Why, they used
to sleep together, eat together----! And he doesn't know. Don't you see,
the man has to fail either the husband or wife? How can you straighten
that?"

She looked up, to meet the unconscious self-betrayal of his defiant,
unhappy eyes.

"I am very sorry for him," she answered gravely. And, after a moment.
"She must be very clever."

He started away from the suggestion with sharp resentment. Clever--that
was his father's term for Lucille Masterson; and it was hateful to him.
He would not analyze why he felt that repugnance to hearing Lucille
called clever. He refused to consider what that implied, what ugly
depths of doubt were stirred in him to make him wince in anger and
humiliation. Suddenly he bitterly regretted having told the story to
this girl, even under the concealed identity.

"No doubt," he made a coldly vague rejoinder. "I dare say the matter
will work itself out well enough. It is getting late; I think I must
go."

It was altogether too abrupt, and he knew it. But he could do no better.
He knew the girl's eyes followed him away, and he walked with careful
ease and nonchalance.

Out of her sight, he walked more slowly. Already the autumn twilight was
settling down like a delicate gray veil. At the foot of the Palisades,
opposite, a familiar point of light sprang into view among the myriad
lights there; a point that ran like fire through tow, up, across, around
until the glittering words shone complete: "Adriance's Paper."

The name was reflected in the dark water. Down there, it swayed weakly
and its legend was broken by the river's ripples. "You shine, up there,
but I govern here," the Hudson flung its scorn back to the man-made
arrogance. He was like that reflection, Tony Adriance thought, with a
fancy caught from the girl's trick of imagery; he was the mere
reflection of his father's successes, shifting, worthless, inseparable
from the gold-colored reality above, dancing and broken on the current
of a woman's will. He himself was--nothing. He winced under the
self-applied lash. It was knotted with truth; he, personally, never had
counted. Even Lucille never had said she loved him; she simply had taken
his devotion for granted, and used it. Would she have promised herself
to him if he had been a poor man? Would she ever have contemplated
divorce from Masterson, with all his faults, if Tony Adriance had not
brought himself and his gilded possibilities across her path? The
questions were ugly, and sent the blood into his face. He stopped
walking and stood by the stone wall edging the sidewalk, facing the
river.

He always had resented being merely his father's heir, in a vague,
unanalyzed way. Now resentment threatened to flame into rebellion.

Rebellion against what? His father, who left him absolute freedom from
any restraint? Lucille, whom he was at perfect liberty never to see
again, if he chose to deny her assumption? He was very completely
trapped by circumstance, since the trap was open and yet he could not
leave it.

The delicate dot on the _i_ of irony was that he had loved Lucille, yet
he knew he must be miserable with her all their lives. He thought of her
even now with a certain longing, yet he would always distrust her and
detest himself. His fingers gripped the stone edge; he felt a passionate
envy of men who were strong enough to do insane, desperate things, to
tear their own way ruthlessly through the clinging web of other people's
ways. He fancied the girl in black to be such a person; if she
considered herself right in any course, she would take it.

But after a while he turned away and began to walk home. He had to
dress, for he was dining with the Mastersons. It had been insisted upon,
to make amends for the night he had stayed away to dine with his
father. Lucille was not yet ready for any audible whisper to suggest
divorce to the world or her husband. Tony must come and go as usual for
a few weeks more. She had chosen to forget his appeal, after quelling
his mutiny. Mrs. Masterson was not a generous victor.




CHAPTER IV

THE WOMAN WHO GRASPED


The Mastersons' apartment had, like many such apartments, a charming
little foyer. It was lighted by a jade-green lamp, swung in bronze
chains delicately green from the tinting of time; and the notes of
bronze and dull jade were carried through all the furnishings, through
leather and tapestry and even a great, dragon-clasped Chinese vase. But
those greenish lights were not always becoming to visitors. When Tony
Adriance entered the foyer that evening they were so unbecoming to him
that the maid privately decided he was ill. Her master not infrequently
came home with that worn look about the eyes and mouth. She wondered if
Mr. Adriance gambled.

None of the other guests had arrived. Indeed, it was not yet time. The
clink of glass and bustle of servants in the dining-room alone told of
the coming event in hospitality. Hospitality? Tony Adriance stood still,
arrested in his movement toward the drawing-room; the sick distaste of
all the last weeks finally culminated in paralysis before the prospect
of the farce he was expected to play out, with his unconscious host as
spectator.

"I--am not ready," he found himself temporizing with the maid. His
glance fell upon a desk and prompted him. "I have forgotten an important
letter; I will write it before I go in. Don't wait; I know my way."

She obeyed him. Of course he had nothing to write, but he fumbled for a
sheet of paper and picked up a pen. He was awake at last to the enormity
of his presence here as a guest; before he had glimpsed it, now he saw
it, stripped naked.

He could not go on. There was no reason why the conviction should have
come to him at this moment, but it did so. As he sat there, that
knowledge rose slowly to full stature before his vision like an actual
figure reared in the path he had been following. It was no longer a
question of Lucille's desires or his own; he could not do this thing.

He was not accustomed to intricate windings of thought, or to
self-analysis. He hardly understood, as yet, what was aroused in him, or
why. But he knew that he must act; that his time of passive drifting was
ended. Once Lucille had reproached him with cowardice. To-day, the girl
in the pavilion had innocently brought the charge again. And the girl
was right; it was cowardly to let a wrong grow and grow. Masterson's
friend in Masterson's house! Adriance dropped the pen his clenching
fingers had bent, and stood up.

The maid had gone back to that centre of approaching activities, the
kitchen. Alone, Adriance went down the corridor to the drawing-room.

Mrs. Masterson was alone there, moving some introduced chairs into less
conspicuous situations. The alien chairs were covered in rose-color and
marred the clouded-blue effect of the room. She pushed them about with a
vicious force, as though she hated the inanimate offenders; her
expression was sullen and fretful.

That expression altered too quickly, when she saw Adriance standing on
the threshold. He caught the skilful change that transformed it into
winning plaintiveness.

"You, Tony?" she greeted him, advancing to give him her hand. "I am so
glad it was no one else. _You_ know how I must contrive and make the
best of what little I have. How I loathe this cramped place, and
bringing chairs from bed-chambers to have enough, and all pinching----!"
She glanced about her with a flare of contempt, her smooth scarlet lip
lifting in a sneer.

Adriance slowly looked over the room, not very large, perhaps, yet
scarcely cramped; made lovely by opalescent lamps and fragrant by the
perfume of roses set in high, slender vases of rock-crystal. All one
wall was smothered in the silken warmth of a Chinese rug, against whose
blue was lifted the creamy whiteness of an ivory elephant quaintly
carved and poised on its pedestal. Even to his eyes nothing here
warranted discontent.

"I thought this very pretty," he dissented. "I thought Masterson had
done things very well, here."

"Well enough, for a nook in a house; not for the house," she retorted.
"I hate living in apartments. I always have wanted stairs; wide, shining
stairs down which I would pass to cross broad rooms!"

She drew a thirsty breath. In the gleaming gown which left uncovered as
much of her beauty as an indulgent fashion allowed, her large light eyes
avid, her yellow head thrown slightly forward as she looked up at the
man, she was a vivid and unconscious embodiment of greed. Not the
pitiful greed of necessity, but the greed which, having much, covets
more. As if he shared her mind, Adriance knew that she pictured herself
descending the stairs in his father's house gowned and jewelled as Mrs.
Tony Adriance could be and Lucille Masterson could not.

He was not aware of the change in his own face until he saw its
reflection in the sudden alarm and question clouding hers. He answered
her expression, then, compelling his voice to hold its low evenness of
speech with the inborn distaste of well-bred modern man for betrayed
emotion.

"That is it," he interpreted. "That is why you would marry me and leave
Masterson. You want more than he can give you. If he had as much to give
as I have, it would not matter what he did. You would bear with him.
Perhaps you have been bearing with me."

"Tony!" she stammered.

"It is quite true. I have been a solemn fool. I have been nerving myself
to lay down my self-respect without flinching, because I believed that I
had led you to count upon me; and all the while you were counting upon
what I owned."

She gathered her forces together after the surprise.

"Rather severe, Tony, because I dislike expensive tenement life!" she
commented, with careful irony. Turning aside, she laid her lace scarf
across a table, gaining a respite from his gaze. "Have I ever pretended
not to care for beautiful, luxurious things? And does that argue that I
care for nothing else? I think you should apologize--and pay more heed
to your digestion."

He paused an instant, steadying himself. As usual, she had contrived to
make him feel in the wrong and ashamed.

"I do apologize," he said, less certainly. "I did not come in here to
say all that, Lucille. But I did come to say what reaches the same end.
We cannot finish this thing we have begun. We could not stand it. Think
whatever you may of me as a coward, I am not going on."

"Indeed, I think you have gone far enough," she calmly returned.
"Suppose we sit down and be civilized. Will you smoke before dinner?"

He shook his head, baffled in spite of himself by her elusiveness, but
also angered to resolution. And he knew that he had seen her truly a
moment since; the loveliness that had glamoured his sight for a year
could not hide from memory that glimpse of her mind.

"I am not staying to dinner, thanks," he refused. "And I am not playing.
Our matter looked bad enough as it was, but you showed me a worse thing,
just now. It was bad enough to take my friend's wife for love; I can't
and won't take her by means of my father's money."

She wheeled about, swiftly and hotly aflame, and they stared at each
other as strangers.

"You have forgotten that we are engaged," she said stingingly. "Or
doesn't your conscience heed a broken word?"

"Perhaps it is heeding the tactfulness of being engaged to one man while
you are married to another," he struck back, goaded to a brutality
foreign to his nature.

The faint chime of touching glasses checked them on the brink of a
breach that would have made reconciliation impossible. Mrs. Masterson
dropped into a chair, snatching up a fan to shade her flushed face.
Adriance stood stiffly, where he was, wisely making no attempt at
artificial nonchalance. The servant who entered saw only composure in
his immobility.

Mrs. Masterson eagerly lifted the offered cocktail to her lips, as if
anger had parched them. Adriance took a glass from the tray presented to
him, but at once set it aside upon the table; now that he realized, he
felt that the hospitality of this house was not for him. But the brief
interlude helped both of them.

When the servant had gone, Adriance spoke with restored calmness.

"You see, even now the situation has warped us all awry. If it were
not so, I should like to buy things for you, I suppose. I can
imagine----"

He broke the sentence; quite suddenly he had remembered the little
buckled shoes bought for the girl in the pavilion. He had looked
interestedly at other things in the shop, while he waited for his
parcel. It would have given him delight to purchase certain elaborate
stockings and absurd lace-frilled handkerchiefs.

"I can imagine that I should," he finished lamely. "Lucille, you will
come to agree with me, I hope. But even if you do not, I cannot go on."

She rose and came up to him with a swift movement that brought both her
hands against his shoulders before he grasped her intention. Her warm
face was directly beneath his own.

"Is there someone else, Tony?" she demanded. "Some girl? Of course it
would be a young girl who inspired all this; 'pure as water'--and as
tasteless! Is that it?"

She might have struck him with less effect. Tony Adriance went
absolutely numb with disgusted wrath. What preposterous thing did she
imply? The shining gray eyes of the girl in the pavilion looked at him
across the alert, probing gaze of Lucille Masterson; looked at him with
beautiful candor, with indignation. He felt outraged, as if the young
girl herself had been made present in this nasty scene. And without
cause! He had no thought of loving that sober little figure; he was sick
of love.

"I am sorry you cannot credit me with one disinterested motive," he said
coldly. "As it happens, you are wrong. There is no one except you. I am
going away because you are neither unmarried nor a widow, since you
force me to repeat all this. If you were either----"

"You would stay?" she whispered.

He looked down at her, and as always before her magic his strength grew
weak. He lifted her hands from his shoulders, before replying.

"Yes," he conceded, his voice changed. "But it is over, Lucille. Tell
Masterson I have gone abroad; to stay."

As he moved toward the door, Mrs. Masterson turned to the table and
caught up his untouched glass. Fear and chagrin were swept from her
face; it still glowed from her late rage, but her eyes were lighted
with confidence and ironic relief.

"To your safe voyage and pleasant return!" she exclaimed lightly, facing
him across the room. "For you will come back, Tony. The spasm will pass;
and leave you lonely. I can wait, then. Good-night."

She laughed outright at the consternation in his glance, as he paused.
But he turned and went out, leaving her leaning across the arm of one of
the discordant rose-colored chairs, watching him.

Back in the foyer, Adriance stopped to recover a conventional composure
of bearing before going out. He recalled that he must pass inspection by
the elevator boy and footman; must meet their wonder, no less obvious
because dumb, at his departure before the dinner.

The heavy blankness of his waiting was broken by the gayest sound in the
world. The gurgling laughter of a happy child rippled through the
silence like a brook, cascading down in a cadence of chuckles. As if to
confirm the recognition to which Adriance started, a girl's clear laugh
joined the baby merriment. Opposite him, light showed in a thin line
through a curtained doorway. Without the slightest remembrance of
proprieties or conventions, he sprang that way and swung the door open.

He was on the threshold of a nursery; a room pink as the inside of a
rosebud, gay with all the adorable paraphernalia babyhood demands,
fragrant with violet-powder and warm as a nest. At the foot of a shining
little bed, clutching the brass rail for support while executing a
stamping dance, was the lord of the domain; his silk-fine, frankly red
hair rumpled into glinting ringlets about his moist, rosy face, his blue
eyes crinkled shut by mirth. The girl knelt opposite, steadying the
chubby figure and serenely indifferent to the small, mischievous fingers
that had loosened her dark hair from its braids. Without her hat, she
was younger, even more wholesome and good than he had thought. She
looked as fresh and candid as the damp, open-lipped kisses the baby
lavished upon her.

Perhaps the intruder moved, perhaps she felt his gaze, for as he watched
the girl broke up the picture. She rose abruptly, turned, and saw him
standing there.

At first her startled face told only of surprise; indeed his mere
presence there gave her no reason to feel more. But in his dismay and
bewilderment and complete obsession Tony Adriance betrayed himself.

"I didn't know," he stammered, grasping blindly at justification and
apology. "I didn't know who Holly was--or that you lived here. I am
sorry; I should not have spoken----"

He stopped short. He had forgotten the fiction of a third person with
which he had masked his confidence in the park; forgotten that the girl
knew neither his name nor his purpose in this house. Quite without
necessity he had enlightened her.

For the girl was swift of perception. Perhaps his expression alone would
have told her the truth, if he had been silent. Mechanically she had put
one arm around the baby, now she drew it closer, as if in protection.
Her rain-gray eyes grieved, reproached, rebuked him. Possessed of
Lucille Masterson's plans, holding her son, she faced him in judgment.

Of course he had known Lucille had a child, somewhat as he knew his
father owned the factory behind the electric sign. He never had seen
either of them, except distantly; they meant nothing actual to him. But
now, there seemed nothing in the world so important. The girl had not
spoken, yet she had abruptly brought him face to face with new things.

"You know, I would have taken him, too," he tried to answer all she left
unsaid, hating himself for the unsteady humility he could not keep from
his voice. "I always meant to. I meant to do everything for the boy. I
could--I am Anthony Adriance."

She spoke, then, her smooth voice all roughened.

"You can buy him everything? You cannot buy him his father. And nothing
will make up for that."

"But----"

She struck down the weak protest.

"I _know_. I have a good father. And Holly," the infinite compassion of
her glance embraced the baby, "he has not even a real mother to do her
half. It is not right; you cannot make it right."

"But I have! I am going----!"

He faltered. How was he to explain to her the scene that had just been
enacted? Was it decent to Lucille?

"I've done my best," he stammered. "I told you; you know I've not liked
this."

The exclamation blended defiance and appeal; it was almost a cry wrested
from him. His position had been hard enough before the introduction of
this new element. The girl understood, for the anger died from her eyes
like a blown-out flame.

"There must be a way," she said quite gently. "There is always a right
way, if one can only find it. I think you had better not stay here, now.
Mr. Masterson always comes at this time; it is even late for him."

The warning had been delayed too long. Almost with the last word, a
man's step sounded in the foyer, the curtains rustled apart and the door
swung.

"What, Tony in a nursery!" exclaimed the master of the house, with an
oddly tired gayety. He came forward and gave his hand to Adriance, his
amused scrutiny wholly cordial. If he wondered how the other man came
here, he was both too indifferent and too well-bred to betray the fact.
"You have caught me; here is the only place I am behind the times," he
added. "Hello, son!"

Adriance was spared the necessity of replying. The baby, who had stood
staring round-eyed at the visitor, exploded into a very madness of
chuckles and shouts, twisting out of the girl's hold and plunging toward
the newcomer with fat arms insistently spread. With an apologetic,
half-diffident glance at his guest, Masterson caught and swung Holly
into the game of romps demanded.

It was a good game, evidently the result of practice. The pink room rang
with treble shrieks of glee; and Masterson laughed, too, occasionally
interjecting phrases of caution or comment.

"Jove, what a punch! How's that for muscle, Tony? Easy, son! How do
_you_ like your wig pulled? Steady, now."

[Illustration: THERE WOULD HAVE BEEN NO MORE BEDTIME ROMPS FOR MASTERSON
AND HIS SON]

The two in the background looked on. Adriance's throat was contracting;
he was suffocating with a terrible sense of barely having escaped a
shameful action. He understood the girl even better now. Only, if he
loathed himself so much, yet knew that at least he had ended the wrong,
how much more must her clear sight find him despicable in her ignorance
of his tardy amendment! He dared not look at her. He tried to remember
Lucille Masterson's regretfully murmured plaints of Fred's carelessness
with money, his "wildness" and neglect of her. But he could only think
heavily that if Mrs. Masterson had obtained a divorce, the custody of
the child would surely have been awarded to her, the irreproachable
wife. There would have been no more bedtime romps for Fred Masterson and
his son. How much alike the two looked! He had forgotten how very auburn
Fred's hair was, and how boyish his eyes were when he laughed.

With a final toss and shout the dishevelled, panting baby was replaced
in the bed, one cheek poppy-red from a rough masculine caress. A little
shame-faced over the sentimentality, Masterson turned to his guest.

"All over!" he affected lightness. "Come have a Martini before dinner,
Tony."

"No, thanks. I couldn't." Adriance pulled himself together with a sharp
effort. "I heard your kiddie laughing, and just looked in here. I ought
to apologize; I have not yet met this lady----"

Masterson regarded him curiously.

"Miss Elsie Murray, Mr. Adriance," he obeyed the implied request. "Miss
Murray is good enough to be Holly's guardian, since no one of his family
has time for that--or inclination."

She was a nurse. The simple fact came home to Adriance for the first
time. The severe black dress, the little white cuffs and collar that
made it a uniform, her constant attendance upon the baby--all the
obvious evidence had been overshadowed for him by her face and bearing,
the personality out of all accord with the position in which she was.

There was no change in her face. He comprehended that she never had
imagined him ignorant of her relation to Holly. Through all his
whirling confusion of thought, Adriance contrived to hold outward
composure and acknowledge the introduction as he would that to any
gentlewoman. The quaint word seemed to suit her.

She met him with a poise at least equal to his own. But it was he who
offered his hand, heedless of Masterson's observation. It seemed to him
that he never had desired anything in his life so desperately, with such
passionate eagerness as he desired to be justified before this girl. He
wanted her to know the very thing he could not honorably tell anyone:
that he had broken with Lucille Masterson of his own free will. His eyes
sought hers, unconsciously beseeching her grace of comprehension;
indeed, he had a confused idea that she would comprehend that his
offered handclasp was ventured only because he was not going to do the
wrong they both hated.

Perhaps she did understand. At least, she gave him her hand, for the
first time in their acquaintance. He grasped it with a brightening of
his drawn face, leaning toward her.

"Thank you!" he said. "I congratulate Holly; you will teach him in time
about Maitre Raoul Galvez."

That speech took her by surprise; for an instant she did not withdraw
her hand, her direct gaze meeting his. He saw her gray eyes cloud and
clear, and cloud again; abruptly her dark lashes cloaked them from him.

"Yes," she murmured. "Yes."

Masterson was staring at the two, his lips parted by cynical interest.
But no one perceived the second observer. Mrs. Masterson had come to the
doorway while Masterson was playing with the baby and still stood there,
narrowed, incredulous eyes appraising the amazing tableau offered by her
nursemaid and Tony Adriance. She herself had followed Adriance for a
last word, unaware of her husband's return home. And she had found this
group, in her nursery.

When the others moved, she drew back. The curtains noiselessly fell
shut. The two men came into the foyer almost immediately, but the bronze
lamp lighted an empty room.

Masterson asked no questions of his guest as they paused outside the
nursery, but Adriance had recollected himself enough to shelter the
girl from embarrassment.

"I stopped one day to speak to your boy in the park," he remarked
casually. "Miss Murray was telling him an odd fairy tale that struck my
fancy; Creole, I should think."

Masterson dropped his hand on the other's shoulder with an intimacy long
unused between them, ignoring the explanation.

"We never seem to get together, any more, except at some society
nonsense," he regretted. "We used to be pretty close, Tony. Remember
that night in the Maine camp after the canoe had upset, when there was
only one blanket left and we tossed up for it? I don't remember who won,
but I know we both slept under it----as much as we could get under." He
laughed reminiscently. "Well, it's a far cry from there to here! Shall
we go in to Lucille?"

"Thank you, but I have made my excuses to Mrs. Masterson," Adriance
answered steadily. "I had a telegram----! I am off for the rest of the
year; perhaps longer. I am going to South America."

"Your father's business? I remember you once spoke of some such thing.
I wish I were going with you."

He sighed with impatient fatigue, and the two stood for a silent moment.
Masterson aroused himself to hold out his slender, nervous hand.

"Well, good luck go with you, Tony. It usually does, though! 'To him
who hath----.'"




CHAPTER V.

THE LITTLE RED HOUSE


The next day it stormed. A biting north wind hunted across river and
city; a wind that carried the first ice-particles of the approaching
winter. There were no children on the Drive or in the park, except a few
sturdy urchins neither of the age nor class attended by nurses. No one
uncompelled cared to face the grim, gray, scowling day whose breath was
freezing.

In the Adriances' breakfast-room, an effort had been made to offset the
outside cheerlessness by aid of lamps glowing under gold-colored shades.
But only an optimist could have deluded vision into accepting the
artificial sunshine as satisfactory. Tony Adriance was even irritated by
the feeble sham, and snapped out the lamp nearest to him as he took his
seat.

The action was trifling, but Mr. Adriance, seated on the opposite side
of the round table, glanced keenly at his son and read an interpretation
of it. He believed that Tony wished to shadow the pale exhaustion of
his face. In this he was wrong; Tony Adriance was quite past thoughts of
his appearance. Not having looked in a mirror, he was not even aware of
the traces left by the last night. He did not at all appreciate the
significance with which his father presently inquired, courteously
concerned:

"You are not well, this morning?"

"Quite well, thank you," Tony replied; he glanced up from his plate
somewhat surprised at the question.

Mr. Adriance met the glance with sincere curiosity. His first hazard
failing, he sought for a second. Indeed, he knew very well that Tony had
none of the habits which lead to uncomfortable mornings, although to a
casual regard his present bearing suggested a white night. Fortunately,
he had not perceived the innuendo within the older man's question and
was not offended. Mr. Adriance detested being in the wrong.

Tony was too listless to pursue the subject at all. After vainly waiting
a moment for his father to explain the inquiry, he proceeded with the
business of breakfasting more or less indifferently. He was
conjecturing as to his own ability to set forth his trouble for the calm
inspection of the gentleman across the table. He had come down-stairs
with that intention, born of the night's bitter experience of solitude
in unhappiness. Now he felt that the project was impossible. His father
and he were not on terms of sufficient intimacy. He suffered an access
of discouragement and weariness. His only idea had failed, yet something
must be decided, some course followed.

"You dined at the Mastersons', last night, I believe?" Mr. Adriance had
found his second hazard. Unconsciously his voice sharpened; it would be
intolerable if Tony and Masterson had made some clumsy scene between
them. Occasionally Mr. Adriance wondered what so clever a woman as
Lucille Masterson had seen in either of the two.

"No," Tony denied.

"No? I had understood----?"

"I dined down-town."

That was the first deliberate lie the younger man had told the older in
all their life together. But Tony confronted an utter impossibility; he
could not confess that he had sat until midnight in a park pavilion,
with no more thought of life's common-sense routine than a sentimental
boy. Nevertheless, his voice sounded unconvincing to his own ears, and
humiliation swept over him like a wave of heat. The desire to get away
from everyone and everything familiar made it difficult for him not to
spring up and leave the room and the unfinished breakfast.

But Mr. Adriance was convinced and appeased. In his relief, he felt a
really kind desire to relieve Tony from his evident depression.

"You appear to have something on your mind," he observed. "If it is
anything I might remove, pray call upon me, Tony."

"Financially?" queried his son, drily.

"Certainly, if you wish. You are not in the least extravagant. In fact,
you are a charming contradiction of a great many popular conceptions
concerning those not forcibly employed."

"Thank you. But I wish you would employ me, sir, if not forcibly. I want
to go away for a time; not just--for amusement. Can you not send me
somewhere to take charge of your interests instead of a hired agent? I
could learn to help you, perhaps."

The last expression was unfortunate. Mr. Adriance's brow contracted and
the cordiality left his gaze.

"I am not yet superannuated," he signified. "When I am in need of help,
I will ask it, Tony. Naturally I intend training you to take charge of
your own affairs after my death. You will find that quite enough to
occupy you, some day. I am sorry if you are unable to amuse yourself,
already. Next year, if you like, we will take up the matter of your
business education. This year, I shall be too busy. You are young and I
am not old."

His glance turned toward a mirror set in a buffet opposite. The face
reflected was clear in outline, firm to the verge of hardness; the eyes
full and alert, the carefully brushed hair so abundant that its grayness
gave dignity without the effect of age. Self-appreciation touched Mr.
Adriance's lip with a smile, as he gazed, smoothing away his slight
annoyance. His son, tracing that glance, felt a movement of kindred
admiration and a renewed sense of his own personal inadequacy. Tony
Adriance had accomplished nothing, yet he was already tired. How would
he look when he was thirty years older? Hardly like that, he feared. Nor
would Fred Masterson! Whose was the fault, and what the remedy?

Mr. Adriance, returning to his coffee, surprised the other's observation
of him, and shrugged an unembarrassed acceptance of the verdict.

"We have plenty of time, you see," he remarked. "Moreover, you are
hardly ready for abstract affairs. You are not sufficiently settled.
After you are married that will come. I myself married young. Marriage
makes private life sufficiently monotonous not to interfere with the
conduct of outside matters of importance."

"Does it?" speculated Tony, doubtingly.

"It should. Monotony is closer to content than is agitation, would you
not say?"

"Doesn't that depend on the kind of monotony?"

"Surely. That is why each man should choose his own wife."

"I see. If I ever choose a wife, I shall remember the advice."

This time Mr. Adriance was astonished. He did not miss the significance
of the remark, or the alteration in Tony since the previous day, when he
had last seen him. It was not possible to be explicit in a matter so
delicate, especially with servants present; but his curiosity was not to
be denied.

"You have not--reached that point? I had fancied----"

"I have no such engagement at present," was the steady reply.

Mr. Adriance pushed away his finger bowl and allowed his cigar to be
lighted by the deferential automaton behind his chair.

"I am sorry," he said.

His son did not misunderstand him; in fact, he understood more clearly
than perhaps did the older man himself. Mr. Adriance had chosen the
hostess he wanted for his house, or rather, he had been enchanted by
Tony's supposed choice. Lucille Masterson filled his ideal of his son's
wife. Her loveliness would be a point of pride; her social experience
would make her competent for the position; moreover, she was too clever
not to have courted and won the genuine liking of Tony's father long
ago. Fred Masterson was hardly considered, except as an obstacle readily
removed, when the proper time came. And now, Tony himself was
overturning all the pleasant family life that Mr. Adriance had planned.
He knew that his father never willingly relinquished a perfected plan;
rarely, indeed, was he turned aside from a purpose on which his mind was
fixed.

"Perhaps you will reconsider that statement later," Mr. Adriance
presently suggested.

"I think not, in the sense you mean," he made slow reply.

Mr. Adriance raised himself abruptly.

"I hope so," he said, with a touch of sharpness; "I hope you are not
going to grow irresolute and changeable, Tony. I detest weakness of
character. Perhaps you had better take a trip somewhere and get yourself
in tone."

"Perhaps," Tony agreed; his voice was not yielding, but sullen and
desperate.

Indeed, he was as near illness as a man may be without physical injury
or disease. After his father had left the breakfast-room he sat for a
long time in utter mental incapacity to undertake any line of effort.
Finally he arose, oppressed with a sense of suffocation in the rich,
sombre atmosphere; of imprisonment and helplessness. He wanted air and
solitude, the solitude he had come to the breakfast-room to escape, and
he could think of no place where he could be so well assured of both as
in his motor-car.

In his abstraction he walked bareheaded and without an overcoat across
the frozen stretch of lawn between the house and the garage. He was
quite indifferent to the weather; his chauffeur put him into furs and
passed him his gloves and cap as a matter of course, or he might have
fared forth poorly equipped to meet the wind and storm.

He swung his machine from the cement incline into the street and turned
across Broadway. He did not wish to pass Elsie Murray ensconced in the
park pavilion with Holly Masterson at her knees; yet his thoughts were
so swayed by her that when he reached One Hundred and Thirtieth Street
he turned west again and took the ferry across the Hudson. He had no
better reason for doing so than the tranquillity and content she seemed
to draw from contemplating the opposite shore.

He sped up Fort Lee hill with a crowd of other cars, turned west and
north to escape their companionship and all the landmarks he knew. He
avoided the main highway and chose mere cross and hill roads and lanes.
Always he had before him the vivid, pretty face of Lucille, the tired
young face of Masterson and the gray eyes of Elsie Murray.

A nurse-maid! The girl who had told him the legend of Raoul Galvez, the
girl by whose standard he had come to measure himself and his companions
and who had fixed the sluggish attention of his conscience upon the
mischief being wrought by his yielding good nature--that girl was
Lucille's nurse-maid. That amazement of the night before remained with
him, coloring all other emotions. He had come out to arrange his
thoughts, but the hours passed and they remained in chaotic condition.

Near noon he was running through a narrow woodland track when a bend in
the road suddenly revealed his way blockaded by an enormous wagon that
stood before him. It was a moving van; its canvas sides distended by
bulky furniture and household fittings, its rear doors tied open to
allow a huge old-fashioned cupboard to stand between. Adriance brought
his machine to an abrupt halt.

"Clear the way there," he impatiently shouted to the invisible driver;
"what is the matter--broken down?"

The answer came, not from the concealed front of the van, but from the
bank bordering on the side of the road.

"All right; but ain't it a shame that you blew in at dinner-time!"

The reply was unexpected; Adriance looked towards the complainant's
voice. In the shelter of a big boulder that gave some protection from
the wind, three men were seated, each with a leather lunch-box on his
knee. Two of them wore the striped aprons of moving-men; the third
evidently was the spokesman and the driver. All three held various
portions of food and stared down at the intruder in the attitude in
which his advance had arrested them.

"It ain't as if we could just turn out," the driver pursued, not
resentfully but with an impersonal disgust. He put the apple in his hand
back into his lunch-box and stood up. "We've got to go on a mile before
there's room for you to pass. Come on, boys."

"No," Adriance aroused himself from self-absorption to forbid the
upheaval. "I am in no hurry; finish your lunch, and I will wait."

The three on the bank stared harder.

"You're a sport," complimented the driver; "but it ain't more than five
minutes after twelve."

"What has that to do with it? Oh, I see; you mean that you rest until
one?"

"You're on."

"Well, I said that I was not in a hurry," he accepted the delay he had
not contemplated. "Take your rest and I will smoke."

The three men regarded each other, then the driver slowly sat down. The
munching horses were blanketed against the cold, but the men appeared
careless of temperature. They obviously were constrained by the presence
of the man in the automobile, however.

"This road ain't much used," the driver ventured presently. "We're
taking this load to a farmhouse up here a ways. That's why we thought we
could stop traffic without being noticed."

His round, bright eyes asked a question that Adriance answered with
doubtful truthfulness.

"I lost my way."

"Oh!" The driver paused, then suddenly slid down the bank.

"Ain't we the hogs," he observed deprecatingly, coming up to the side of
the car and offering his lunch-box. "Won't you eat?"

The tired, dark-blue eyes of Tony Adriance met the cheerful, light-blue
eyes of the other man. The two men were about the same age, and one of
them was desperately lonely and sick of his own thoughts. They both
smiled involuntarily.

"Thanks, I will," said Adriance; and took a thick, rye bread sandwich
from the box presented. The driver sat down on the running-board of the
automobile and there ensued a well-employed silence.

The sandwich was excellent. Adriance had eaten little breakfast; yet,
left to himself, he would hardly have thought of food in his bitter
preoccupation; but it did him good. The ham smeared with cheap mustard
had a zest of its own, a little brutal, perhaps, but effective. It was a
generously designed sandwich, too, not a frail wafer. He ate it all,
even the acrid crust.

"'Nother?" invited the host.

"No, thanks; but that one tasted good." Adriance drew out his
cigar-case. "Won't you all have a smoke with me, now?"

The cigars were passed and lighted. Before returning the case, the
driver frankly inspected the fine leather toy with the tiny monogram in
one corner.

"That's all right," he approved, returning it to its owner. "I was
afraid you'd pull out a little gold box of cigarettes."

"Why?" amused.

"Oh, I don't know, my luck, I guess."

"You don't like them?"

"Me? I got a pipe three years old that holds _some_ tobacco--that for
me. But this cigar is all right. Ever try a pipe?"

"Yes."

The driver leaned back comfortably against the spare tire strapped
beside the car, gazing up at the gray, cold sky.

"A pipe, my feet on the kitchen stove, the kids and the missus--me for
that, nights."

Adriance looked at him with startled scrutiny. Almost he could have
imagined that Elsie Murray had come to the man's side and prompted him.
What, was it then real and usual, that homely content she once had
painted so vividly? Did most men have such homes?

"You're married?" he vaguely asked.

"Sure, these five years; we got two kids." The boyish driver chuckled
and shook his head reminiscently. "Darn little tykes! What they ain't up
to I don't know. Dragged a big bull pup in off the street last week,
they did, and scared the missus into fits. Pete--he's four--had it by
the collar bold as brass, and it ugly enough to scare you. Say, I'm
trying one of those schemes for training kids on him; exercising him,
you know. You ought to see the muscles he's got already, arms and legs
hard as nails. Think it will work all right?"

Adriance looked down into the eager face.

"Yes, I do," he said slowly. "You cannot be more than twenty-five or
six----?"

"Twenty-five is right."

"You must have worked pretty hard?"

"Ever since I was fourteen," was the cheerful assent. He pulled out a
watch of the dollar variety and looked at it. "One o'clock it is! We'll
get along again, boys. Yes, I've been busy. But the missus and I are
saving up. Some day I'm going to have a trucking business of my own;
there's good money in it. Well, we're sure obliged to you for waiting
for us."

The other two men were coming down the bank. Adriance drew off his glove
and held out his hand to his acquaintance.

"I am glad I met you. Good luck!"

"Same to you!" He pulled off his mitten to give the clasp. "Are you
going to the ferry?"

"I--I--? Yes."

"Well, turn off when you get to the next road. It's a poor one, but it's
a short cut to the Palisades road."

The horses were unblanketed and the bags which had held their luncheon
removed. The men climbed into their places, and presently Adriance's
lusty machine was rebelliously crawling on behind the moving-van.

At the end of a mile they came to the side road, and parted with
cheerful shouts of farewell.

It was impossible to measure the good that interlude of healthy
companionship had done to Tony Adriance. It had swept aside vapors,
cleared his mind to normality, invigorated him like a pungent tonic. Yet
it had laid a reproach upon him. He contrasted himself with that boyish
husband and father; yes, contrasted Mr. Adriance, senior, with that
driver who was anxiously training his son's body by his own efforts
after the day's work. He could not recollect his father ever playing
with him or seriously advising him. Even Fred Masterson was doing
better.

The road debouched abruptly upon the main highway. A passing automobile
momentarily delayed Adriance, and looking idly across the way, he
perceived a house. After the other car had passed and the way was open,
he sat quite still in his machine, gazing.

There was nothing about the house before him to catch the eye except a
certain air of quaint sturdiness that had survived desertion. It was
rather a cottage than a house, bearing a sign "For Sale," and
unoccupied. It was a red-painted cottage, built in that absurd Gothic
fashion once favored by some insane builders. Its ridiculous roof and
windows were highly peaked; its high, narrow porch had a pointed top
like a caricature of the entrance to _Notre Dame de Paris_. It stood
quite back from the road with an air of abandonment; but it was
unconquerably cheerful, even against the gray sky. It was a house that
wanted to be cosy.

Suddenly Adriance realized that he was very tired. He was not ready to
go home; he even thought with abhorrence of going there. Yet he was
weary of guiding his machine along the highway. He left his seat and
walked up the wood path--two planks in width--leading to the cottage.
The windows gaped, uncurtained; he looked in, then deliberately seated
himself upon the step and lapsed into heavy revery.

There were few passers-by on such a day. Those who were compelled to the
road lingered in the cold to look curiously at the automobile standing
by the gutter and at the young man who sat on the old wooden step.

It was four o'clock when Tony Adriance rose and went back to his
automobile. He did not turn down to the ferry, but looked again at the
signboard on the house; then turned his machine about and drove to an
address which was seven miles inland.




CHAPTER VI

THE WOMAN WHO GAVE


Tony Adriance had not really heeded the weather until he found his way
to the stone pavilion on Riverside Drive at dusk that evening. Cold and
wind had recorded slight impression on his preoccupied mind and his
healthy body. Indeed, his feeling was that of a man passing through a
fever, rather than one chilled. And he was hot with a savage sense of
victory, for he brought decision back with him. He knew, at last, what
he meant to do.

He was brought to heed the weather by his need of seeing the girl who
was Holly's nurse. He stood for a while in the pavilion, after realizing
the absurdity of expecting to find her, and considered. He was
accustomed to having his own way; hardly likely to abandon it when his
necessity loomed urgent. His distrust of himself was deep, if
unconfessed; he dared not wait until the next day. Besides, the storm
might continue. After a brief pause of bafflement, he walked up to
Broadway, found a stationer's shop and a messenger, and dispatched a
note to Miss Elsie Murray. He looked curiously at the name, after it was
written; it seemed so soft, even childish, matched with that
steadfastness of hers to which he held as to the one stable thing in his
knowledge.

Would she come? The doubt bore him company on his way back to the
pavilion. Could she free herself from duties to come, if she wished? He
did not know, but he was obstinately resolved to see her that night. He
was indeed like a man in a fever; one idea consumed him.

A quarter of an hour passed; a half hour. Dusk, their hour of adventure
fixed by chance, had almost darkened to night when Adriance saw the
small figure for which he watched step from the curb. She hurried,
almost ran across the broad avenue, the wind wrapping her garments
around her.

"Thank you," the man greeted her, his gratitude very earnest.

The girl brushed aside his speech with a gesture. She was breathing
rapidly; amid all the shadows her face showed white and small.

"Of course I came," she said. "It was not easy--to come. I cannot stay
long. But I knew you would not have sent unless it was important."

"No," he affirmed, and paused. "I wonder why you are there? I mean, why
are you somebody's nurse, to be ordered about when you could do so much
better things? Of course, I can see how different you are!"

He stopped, with a sense of alarmed clumsiness. Because she was weary,
the girl sat down on the cold stone bench before answering.

"You are quite wrong," she said quietly. "I cannot do clever things at
all. I do not mean that I am stupid, exactly, but that I cannot do
anything so especially well as to make people pay me for it. Neither can
my father. I think he is the best man in the world, and my mother the
dearest woman, but they cannot make money. He is a professor of romance
and history, at a small college in Louisiana. There are a good many of
us--I have four younger sisters--so I came North to support myself."

"But----"

"Not as a nurse, of course. I came with an old lady whose son we knew at
the college. She asked me to be her private secretary. But after a few
months she died. I could not go back to be a burden. After I had tried
to find other things to do, and failed, I came to take care of Holly.
Why are we talking about me? There was something important, you said?"

"I--yes," Adriance said. He could read so much more than she told.
Afterward he was ashamed to remember that he neither felt nor expressed
any pity for her disappointed hopes. His whole attention was fixed on
her steady courage; the fighting spirit that he had divined in her and
toward which his indecision reached weak hands groping in the dark for
support.

The girl shrank behind the stone column nearest her as a blast of
freezing wind rushed past.

"Well?" she spurred his hesitation.

She was successful. He moved nearer her to be heard; the fever of the
last twenty-four hours thickened and hurried his speech.

"I'm not going to tell you about Mrs. Masterson," he told her. "In the
first place, you would not listen, and in the second place, I have
nothing to say. But you must know that last evening she broke her
engagement with me. I mean, before I saw you in the nursery. I was free,
then."

"She dismissed you?"

He had deliberately thought out the falsehood that protected Lucille
Masterson at his own expense. But it was harder than he had anticipated
to play this weak role before Elsie Murray.

"Yes," he forced the difficult acknowledgment.

"You need not have told me that," her slow reply crossed the darkness to
him. "I know it is not true. And I know what is true. It does not matter
how I--learned. But we may as well speak honestly."

He could have cried out in his great relief. Instead, he seized the
offered privilege of speech.

"I will, then! You know what I have done to Fred Masterson. I brought
the glamour of money, of what I could buy, into his household and made
his wife awake to discontent and ambition. I didn't know what mischief I
was working, until too late. I did not understand some of it until last
night. Now, what? Suppose I go away? Where can I go? Abroad, or on a
hunting trip? While I was gone she would get the divorce, when I came
back she and the rest would push me into the marriage. My own father is
pushing me. Everyone pities her and thinks the thing is suitable. You
don't know me! I like her, and I'm easily pushed. I tell you I never did
anything but drift, until last night. I am afraid of myself, yet."

"Then, why have you sent for me?" she asked, after a silence.

There was as much sullenness as resolution in the unconscious gesture
with which he folded his arms.

"Because I mean to stop this thing. Because I am going to take my own
way for the rest of the journey instead of being pushed and pulled. I
quit, to-night."

"How? What do you mean?"

"I am leaving the position where I am not strong enough to stand firm.
And because I know myself, I am fixing it so I cannot go back. You"--he
stumbled over the word--"you are not much better off than I, so far as
getting what you want out of life is concerned. Do you want--will you
try the venture with me? I think, I'm sure I could keep my half of a
home. You once said you would like to be a poor man's wife----"

The last word died away as if its boldness hushed him with a sense of
what he asked so readily. The girl rose to her feet, swaying slightly in
the strong wind; her fingers gripped the stone railing behind her while
she strove to see his face through the dark. A street lamp sent a faint
grayness into the pavilion, but he stood in shadows.

"You--are asking--me----?"

He laughed shortly to cover his own embarrassment.

"To marry a man who isn't much more than a chauffeur out of work!
Driving a car is my only way of earning money, just now. Of course, if
we go away together we will have to live on what I can bring in. It's
not very dazzling, but neither is being a nurse."

Comprehension slowly came to her.

"You would do this so you never could go back," she whispered, half to
herself. "To be cut off from everyone, because of me!"

"Not that!" he offered quick apology. "Why, you are above me by every
count I can make! No, it is because I can't stand alone. And, of
course--if I were married----"

"Mrs. Masterson would give her husband another chance," she finished.

He could not see her expression, but he felt her bitterness, and that he
was losing.

"Don't be offended," he appealed. "I thought we could be good
friends--why, if I did not respect and--and admire you, would I be
asking to spend my life with you? I know I am not offering you much, but
it's my best."

"You do not love me."

He bent his head to the assertion; for it was an assertion, not a
question. After the dazzling companionship of Lucille Masterson, love
was scarcely an emotion he could associate with the grave, quiet little
figure of Elsie Murray. He was surprised and embarrassed anew, and
showed it.

"I am not very sentimental, I'm afraid. Couldn't we start with
friendship? I'll try to make a good comrade for everyday."

The delay was long, so long that he anticipated the refusal and felt his
heart sink with a sense of loss and apprehension. All his plans, he
suddenly realized, were founded upon a strength drawn from her. He felt
the tremor of his structure of resolution, with that support withdrawn.
Unreasonable bitterness surged over him. Even she would not have him,
penniless.

She was shivering. He noticed that, when she spoke.

"You wish us to understand each other?" she said, her voice quite
steady. "Very well. Remember, then, I never knew who you were until last
night. You were just a man who seemed lonely, as I was just a woman
alone. Remember that I am human, too, and imagine things, and how
monotonous it is to be a nurse and do the same things every day. I
thought you talked to me and came so often because you were commencing
to like me. Once you bought violets from a man on the corner, then threw
them away before you crossed to me. I knew you meant them for me, but
feared I would not like you to give them to me. I liked you better for
throwing them away than for buying them. I was--foolish. And I cannot
marry you, because you do not love me, while I--might you."

With the last low word, she passed him and went from the pavilion, not
in running flight, but with the swift, certain step of finality.
Adriance was left standing, struck out of articulate thought. The
astounding blow had fallen among his accumulated ideas and scattered
them like dust. She loved him. Slowly stupefaction gave place to hot
shame for the insult of his proposal to her. He had been coarse, selfish
beyond belief and wrapped in egotism. He had asked her to be his wife
with the grace of one engaging a housemaid. And he might have had the
unbelievable! A slow-rising excitement mounted through him; a tingling,
vivifying interest in the future he had faced with such sullen
indifference.

She was gone from sight. Adriance was not rapid of thought, or
readjustment. But he knew where to look for her, now. He sprang from the
pavilion and ran, throwing his weight against the wind's blustering
opposition. The physical effort, in that stinging air, sent his blood
racing with tonic exhilaration. He felt dulness and morbidity dropping
away from him; zest of life taking their place.

The girl was crossing a dark little strip of park that lay before the
house where the Mastersons lived, when he overtook her.

"Elsie Murray!" he panted. "Elsie Murray!"

His voice had changed, and his accent. He spoke to her possessively; he
no longer depended, he directed. Instantly sensitive to the difference,
the girl stopped.

"Are you running away from me, Elsie Murray?" His hand closed lightly on
her arm, he stood over her with the advantage of his superior height,
and she heard him draw the cold air deeply into his lungs. "I did not
tell you the truth, back there. I meant to, but I did not know it
myself. I want what you might give, and I want to give as much to you.
Why, do you know what started me toward ending all this bad business,
what has given me the will to keep on? It was what you said, the first
night I saw you, about a woman waiting for her husband, with the lamps
lit, and all. I can't say what I mean--I'm clumsy! But, will you come
keep the lamp for me?"

She tried to speak, but to his dismay and her own, instead covered her
face; not weeping, but fiercely struggling not to weep.

"No," she flung refusal at him. "No! No!"

As her firmness lessened, his gained. She looked pitiful and helpless,
she, his tower of strength. Suddenly, protectingly, he caught her from
the assault of a violent swirl of the gale; caught and held her against
him, in the curve of his arm.

"If you may love me, and I want you, we have enough to start with," he
gently insisted. "I promise you I'll do my part. Will you try it with
me?"

She remained still. But the long pause, the contact between them, joined
with the change in the man and helped him.

"Will you marry me to-night?" he pressed.

She drew away from him with a flare of her natural resolution.

"No! Not to-night, if you could!"

"To-morrow, then?"

"Go home," she bade him. "Go home; think of everything--of what you have
and what you would leave, of all you want and must miss. _Think._ And
if, to-morrow----"

"Yes?"

"If you are sure, come back. I----may try it."

He knew better than to force her further.

"To-morrow, then, I will meet you at noon, in the pavilion," he yielded,
quietly, in spite of his leaping excitement. "And there is something
else. Once I bought these, for you. Of course I dared not give them to
you, afterward. But I did not throw them away, and I brought them in my
pocket to-night. Perhaps you will wear them to-morrow, when we go away."

The storm swooped down again. This time he did not hold her from the
gust, and she flitted with it into the darkness. But she took the little
package he had pressed into her hands; she had at last the little pair
of buckled shoes.




CHAPTER VII

THE DARING ADVENTURE


They were married at two o'clock the next day. The wedding was in
church, at Elsie Murray's desire. With a certain defiance expressive of
his attitude toward all the world, Adriance, after obtaining their
license, took her to the rector of that costly and fashion-approved
cathedral which the Adriances graced with their membership and
occasional attendance. Of course the two were met with astonishment, but
there was a decision in the young man's speech and bearing that forbade
interference. The clergyman did not find the familiar, easy,
good-natured Tony Adriance in the man who curtly silenced delicate
allusion to the wedding's unexpectedness and the surprising absence of
Mr. Adriance, senior.

"I am over age, and so is Miss Murray," was the brief statement, whose
finality ended comment. "Will you be good enough not to delay us; we are
leaving town?"

There were no more objections. Of course the bride was not recognized as
Mrs. Masterson's nurse; she simply was an unknown girl. And she did not
in any way suggest that Mr. Adriance was marrying out of his world.
Adriance himself entirely approved of her in this new role. He liked her
dark-blue suit with its relieving white at throat and wrists, and her
small hat with a modest white quill at just the right angle. And she
wore the shining, Spanish-heeled, small shoes of his choosing. He
noticed how large her gray eyes were, when she lifted them to his,
large, and clear as pure water is clear under a still, gray sky. But her
heavy lashes threw shadows across them, as he had once seen lines of
shadow lie across a little lake in Maine on an autumn day. He wondered
if she was happy, or frightened. He could not tell what she was thinking
or feeling.

So they were married before the imposing altar of cream-hued marble, and
the conventional notice went to the newspapers:

    Adriance-Murray. Elsie Galvez Murray to Anthony Adriance, Jr.,
    by the Rev. Dr. Van Huyden, at St. Dunstan's Cathedral.

It was very simply done, for so daring an adventure.

When they stood outside, in the sparkling autumn sunshine, Elsie
Adriance asked her first question.

"Where are we going?" she wondered, in her soft, blurred speech that now
Adriance recognized as of the South. Her middle name had caught his
attention also. There once had been a governor of Louisiana called
Galvez; New Orleans has a street named for him.

But he was not thinking of ancestry now. He looked doubtfully at his
companion. In spite of his repressed bearing, he was suffering a
terrible excitement and a tearing conflict of will and desire. He was
acutely conscious of the finality of what had been done; and one part of
him wished it undone. He thought of his father and Lucille as a man in a
fever thinks; glimpsing them in a confusion of remembered pictures,
conceiving their future attitude with the exaggeration of his
unreasoning sense of guilt and belated regret. He felt himself in bonds,
and the instinct of escape gripped and shook him. But he kept himself in
hand.

"Where do you wish to go?" he temporized, withholding his own wish. It
became him to consider her first, now and hereafter.

She shook her head.

"I follow you," she reminded him, quite simply and gravely. "Where
would--it be easiest for you? You spoke of going out of town; perhaps
that would be best. I think, it seems to me, that we should start as we
mean to go on."

"Yes!" he exclaimed eagerly. She had offered him his inmost desire; in
his gratitude he caught her hand, stammering in the rush of words
released. "Yes. If you will go, I have a house--our house. Let me tell
you. Yesterday, after meeting you at Masterson's the night before, I was
at the limit. I had to keep out of doors and keep moving, or go to
pieces. I kept seeing Fred, and Holly. Well, I took a long drive; across
the river, I went, perhaps because you were always looking over there as
if it were some kind of a fairyland. And on the way back, on the road
along the Palisades, I saw the house. It was--I stopped and went in. It
looked like a place you had made a picture of. I can't explain what I
mean, but I sat down there and thought things out. You won't be angry?
I bought it. Not that I was so sure of you! You see, if you refused to
take me, I knew I had money enough to buy fifty like it for a whim. And
if you would come, it was the house."

There was no anger in her glance, only a heartening comprehension and
cordial willingness.

"Let us go there," she agreed. "I should like that best of all."

Reanimated, he put her into the waiting taxicab, gave the chauffeur his
directions, and closed the door upon their first wedded solitude.

"But this is one of the things we must not do," she told him, bringing
the relief of humor to the situation. "We must not take taxis and let
them wait for us with a price on the head of each moment. It is more
than extravagant; it is reckless."

He laughed out, surprised.

"So it is. I am afraid you will have a lot to teach me."

"Yes," she assumed the burden. "Yes."

They rode down to the ferry, and the taxicab rolled on board the broad,
unsavory-smelling boat. When the craft started, the vibration of the
engine sent a throbbing sense of departure through Adriance such as he
never had felt in starting a European voyage. This time he could not
return. He was humbly grateful for Elsie's silence, which permitted his
own.

On the Jersey side their cab slowly moved through the dark ferry house,
then plunged out into a sun-drenched world and swung blithely up to the
long Edgewater hill. They left the river shipping behind, presently. The
sunlight glittered through the woods that still clothe the long,
rampart-like stretches along the summit of the great cliffs; a forest of
jewels like the subterranean woods of the Twelve Dancing Princesses,
only instead of silver and diamonds these trees displayed the red of
cornelian and brown of topaz all set in copper and bronze. The storm of
the night before had littered the ground with the spoils of Lady
Autumn's jewel-box; the air was spicily sweet and very clear.

The village on the first slope of the hills had been dingy and poor.
Here above, on the heights winding up the river, there were few houses,
with long spaces between. Elsie leaned at the window, her wide eyes
embracing all. Adriance leaned back, seeing nothing.

The taxicab finally stopped, nevertheless, at his signal, before a
little red cottage set far back from the road.

"Here?" the chauffeur queried, with incredulous scorn.

"Here," Adriance affirmed, swinging out their two suit-cases and his
wife. He laughed a little at the man's face. "How much?"

The toll pointed Elsie's warning. She made a grimace at her pupil. His
spirits mounting again, Adriance answered the rebuke by catching her
hand to lead her up the absurd, staggering Gothic porch in miniature.

"I'll come back for the baggage," he promised. "Come look, first."

"Is there anything inside?"

"Oh, yes. I----" he looked askance at her. "I bought things, at a shop
in Fort Lee, early this morning. I suppose they're all wrong."

She met his diffidence with a smile so warm, so enchanting in its sweet,
maternal raillery and indulgence that his heart melted within him. And
then, as he fumbled with the key, she took from her hand-bag a book and
a small glass bottle, and gave them to him.

"What----?" he marvelled.

"Don't you know?" she wondered at him. "'Where was you done raised,
man?' Don't you know there is no luck in the house unless the first
things carried into it are the Bible and the salt?"

He did not know, but he found the superstition of a singular charm.

"Give me the salt, then, and you take the other," he divided the
ceremony.

"No," she denied quietly. "You should carry the Book, because you will
make the laws. I will take the salt, because I shall keep the hearth."

So they went in, he oddly sobered by the dignity she laid upon him.

There were only two rooms on the ground floor. The one into which they
stepped was large and square, with a floor of brick faded to a mellow
Tuscan red, and walls of soft brown plaster. A brick fireplace was built
against the north side; the furnishings comprehended two arm-chairs, a
round Sheraton table and china closet, a tall wooden clock, and four
rag rugs in red and white. In one corner, modestly retired, a plain deal
table supported an oil cook-stove, with an air of decent humility and
shrinking from observation. The open door beyond revealed a bed-chamber,
also rag-rugged, furnished with a noble meagreness, but displaying a
four-posted bed of carved and time-darkened ash. Elsie took a long, full
look, then regarded her husband with widening eyes.

"Anthony, _where_ did you buy them? And what did you pay for them?"

No one within his memory had ever called Adriance by his unabbreviated
name. It came to him as part of this new life where he was full-grown
man and master. And he welcomed the frank comradeship with which she
used it, without a sentimental affectation of shyness.

"At a little place with a sign 'Antiques'," he confessed. "I had passed
it in the car. I thought they might do as well as new things, since we
have got to economize. I never bought any furniture before; if they
won't do----"

"They are perfect." The mirth in her eyes deepened. "But you had better
let me help you, next time we shop economically. Hadn't we better build
a fire, first, to drive away the chill? Oh, and is there anything to
eat?"

"In the cupboard over there; everything the grocer could think of," he
said meekly. "I'll go get anything else you say. First, though, I'll run
down to the gate and bring in our suit-cases."

"Do," she approved. "I want an apron. Do you know, you never asked me if
I could cook."

"Can you?"

"Wait and see. What woman thought of the oil-stove?"

"The antiquarian's wife. She said the fireplace was more bother than it
was use and suggested stuffing it with paper to keep the draughts out."

"Well, we will stuff it with fire," she declared.

They built the fire; or rather, Adriance built it, aided by the girl's
tactful advice. When the flames were roaring and leaping, she sent him
to the nearest shop where lamps could be purchased, the trifling
question of light having been overlooked.

When he hurried back from the village, the need of light was becoming
imminent. Dusky twilight came early here under the edge of the hills.
Climbing the steep road, Anthony Adriance looked across the
violet-tinted river toward the chain of lights marking the street where
Tony Adriance had lived and idled. Already he knew himself removed,
altered; he was interested in keeping on with this thing. Of course, he
must keep on, he had set a barrier blocking retreat; he had taken a
wife.

He opened the brown door of the shabby little cottage, and stopped.

The fire on the hearth had settled to a warm, rosy steadiness, filling
the room with its glow and starting velvet shadows that tapestried the
simple place with an airy brocade of shifting patterns. In the centre of
the room stood the round table, robed in white and gay with the antique
shop's ware of blue-and-white Wedgewood. The perfume of coffee and
fragrance of good food floated on the warm air. The fire snapped at
intervals as if from jovial excess of spirits, and a tea-kettle was
bubbling with the furious enthusiasm of all true tea-kettles. It was the
room of his fancy, the unattainable home that Elsie had pictured on the
first evening he had spoken to her out of his sick heart.

Elsie herself stood beside the hearth. Elsie? He never had seen her like
this. But then, he scarcely had seen her at all except in the severe
black of a nurse's livery.

She had merely taken off her jacket, now, although he did not realize
the fact. Her soft white blouse rolled away from a round, full throat
pure in color and smoothness as cream. She was no sylph-slim beauty, but
a deep-bosomed, young girl-woman, fashioned with that rich fulness of
curve and outline that artists once loved, but which Fashion now
disapproves. Her mouth, too, curved in generous, womanly softness;
neither a thin line nor a round rosebud. Her dark hair rippled of itself
around her forehead and was lustrous in the firelight.

His entrance caught her off guard. He surprised herself in her eyes,
before she masked feeling in gayety. And he saw a wistful, frightened
girl whose trembling excitement matched his own.

The latching of the door behind him ended the brief instant of
revelation. At once she turned to him the cordial comrade's face he
knew.

"Dinner is served," she announced merrily. "At least, it is waiting in
the oven. We have hot biscuits, scrambled eggs, a fifty-eighth variety
of baked beans, and strawberry jam. There is no meat, because you only
shopped at a grocery, sir. Do you really adore canned oysters, Anthony?"

"I never tasted one," he slowly replied, putting down the packages he
had brought, without taking his gaze from her.

"Well, you bought six tins of them," she shrugged.

He made no pretense of replying, this time, moving across the room
toward her. He was remembering that she was a bride, who by her
confession loved him, and that he had given her nothing except the gold
ring compelled by custom; not a caress, not a flower, even, to speak of
tenderness and reassurance. He was astounded at himself, appalled by
his degree of selfish absorption. All day she had given him of her
understanding, her warm companionship, her gracious tact and heartening
cheerfulness, exacting nothing--and he had taken. Oh, yes, he had taken!

Troubled by his silence, her color mounting in a vivid sweep, the girl
tried to turn aside from his approach.

"We must have a little cat," she essayed diversion. "I hope you like
kittens? Purrs should go with crackling logs. Not an Angora or a
Persian; just a pussy."

Her voice died away. Very quietly and firmly Adriance had taken her into
his arms.

"I've made a bad beginning," he made grave avowal. "I am learning how
much I need to learn. And I don't deserve my luck in having you to teach
me."

She rested quietly in his arms, as if conceding his right, but she did
not look at him. She was very supple and soft to hold, he found. There
breathed from her a fresh, faint fragrance like the clean scent of
just-gathered daffodils, but no perfume that he recognized. She was
individual even in little things. He wondered what she was thinking. The
uneven rise and fall of her breast timed curiously with the pulse of his
heart, as she leaned there, and the fact affected him unreasonably. He
did not want her to move; warmth and content were flowing into him.
Content, yet---- Suddenly, he knew; a man confronted with a blaze of
light after long groping.

"Elsie!" he cried, his voice sounding through the room his great
amazement. "Elsie! Elsie!"

She looked at him then, putting her two little hands on his breast and
forcing herself back against his arm that she might read his face. But
he would not have it so, compelling her submission to the marvel that
had mastered him. What the church had essayed to do was done, now.
Anthony Adriance had taken a wife.

"I love you," he repeated, inarticulate still with wonder, his lips
against her cheek. "Why didn't you tell me? I love you."

He never forgot that she met him generously, with no mean reminder of
his tardiness. She took his surrender, and set no price on her own. Her
lips were fresh as a cup lifted to his thirst for good and simple
things; he thought her kiss was to the touch what her eyes were to the
gaze, and tried clumsily to tell her so.

When they finally remembered the delayed supper, that meal was in need
of repairs. And because now Adriance would not suffer the width of the
room between himself and his wife, he insisted in aiding her in the
process, thereby delaying matters still further. Nine o'clock had been
struck by the clock in the corner when they sat down to table, lighted
by the new lamp. It had a garnet shade, that lamp, upon which its
purchaser received the compliments of Mrs. Adriance.

She delivered an impromptu lecture on the subject, as the light glowed
into full radiance and illumined her, seated behind it.

"Red, sir, is the color of life. It was the color of the alchemist's
fabled rose, looked for in their mystic cauldrons, because if the ruddy
image formed on the surface of the brew, the bubbling liquid was indeed
the true elixir of youth and immortality. Red is the color of dawn, of
sunset, of a fireside; of bright blood, poured splendidly for a good
cause or daintily glimpsed in a girl's blush. Red are a cardinal's
robes, a Chinese bride's gown, a Spanish bride's flowers. To be kept in
a red-draped chamber, in Queen Elizabeth's time, was believed to cure
beauty of the smallpox without a scar. Lastly, red is the color of the
heart."

"'Lord, keep our heart's-blood red,'" paraphrased Adriance soberly. "I
am not clever like you, but I know red is the color of your own jewels."

"Mine?"

He caught her hands across the table.

"Have you forgotten what stones were likened to the value of a good
woman? Elsie, Elsie, when I can, I will give you--not diamonds or
pearls, but rubies. Rubies, for to-night."

Neither of the two was given to continued sentimentality of speech. But
the deep happiness, the shining wonder that still dazzled them found
expression in plans for this new future; mere suggestions for the
comfort of the house or the pleasure of their leisure together. She
mentioned a much-discussed book, and he promised to read it aloud to
her.

"I've always wanted to read aloud, but I never found anyone who would
listen," he told her, over the strawberry jam and coffee. "You can't
escape, so----! You can embroider, and listen."

"Embroider!" She heaped scorn on the word. "Let me inform you, sir, that
there will be dish-towels to hem, and napkins. Do you know we have only
one tablecloth, and that has a frightful border, with fringe? Blue
fringe? And there are no curtains at the windows. Embroider? I shall
_sew_, and listen."

"Well, so long as you listen!" He lighted a cigar and leaned back
luxuriously. "What little hands you have!"

She spread them out on the table and seriously contemplated them.

"Most Southerners have. Didn't you ever notice it, even with the men?
Down in Louisiana most of us have some French or Spanish blood. But mine
have not been do-nothing hands, and I think they show it a little bit."

He stopped her, with a sudden distasteful memory of certain wax-white,
wax-smooth and useless hands that almost had laid hold on his life.

"I hope that mine may soon show something. To-morrow I will try to
become a wage-earner, and start a pay envelope to bring you."

"So soon?"

"Right away. Am I one of the idle rich? The fact is, our grocer tells me
chauffeurs are badly needed at a certain factory near the foot of the
hill. I think I should rather drive a motor truck than pilot a private
car, open doors and touch my cap."

She nodded agreement.

"Yes, of course. What factory is it, Anthony?"

He regarded her with a whimsical humor.

"Well, to be exact, it is not a factory unfamiliar to us. It is one
whose sign you often have viewed from the aristocratic side of the
Hudson, and it is the property of Mr. Anthony Adriance, senior."

"Oh!" startled. "Is, is that--safe?"

"Why not?" he wondered. "We haven't broken any laws, have we? The worst
he could do, if he wanted to do something melodramatic, would be to
fire me. But he will not. In the first place, why should he? In the
second, he knows a trifle more about the natives of Patagonia than he
knows about the men who drive his trucks. I don't believe he has been in
this factory for ten years. New York is his end. And I'm giving him a
square deal; he will have a very valuable chauffeur, Mrs. Adriance--one
who can drive a racing-machine, if required!"

She disclosed two dimples he had not previously observed. But her eyes
hid from the challenge of his and she rose hastily to clear away the
dishes.

"Let them stand," he commanded, man-like.

There she was firm in rebellion, however. Finally they compromised on
his assisting her.

"We must have a dog, too," he decided, when all was neat once more. He
glanced about the fire-bright room with a proprietary air. "One that
will not eat your kitten."

"With a nice watch-doggy bark?"

"With anything you want!" He turned abruptly and drew her to him.
"Elsie, suppose I had missed you? What a poor fool I've been! Last
night---- Why don't you take it out of me? Why don't you make me pay as
I deserve?"

She smiled with the delicately-mocking indulgence he was learning to
know and anticipate; it sat upon her youth with so quaint a wisdom.

"Perhaps I am, or will."

"I believe now that I loved you from the first day. I know that I kept
thinking about you and considering everything from the point of view I
fancied you would take. You"--with sudden anxiety--"you do not regret
coming with me, Elsie? What were you thinking of, just now, when your
eyes darkened? You looked----"

"Of Holly," she answered simply. "I hope his new nurse will play with
him, and cuddle him."

"The baby?" Her fidelity touched him with a warm sense of promise for
his own future. "Yes, I have taken you from him. But, we left him his
father."

The allusion brought a constraint. The words spoken, Adriance flushed
like a woman and turned his ashamed eyes away from the girl.

"You did not take me from Holly," Elsie hurriedly corrected. "Mrs.
Masterson discharged me, night before last. I was to go to-day,
anyhow."

"You? Why?"

She hesitated.

"She came to the nursery door while you were speaking to me of telling
Holly the story of Mait' Raoul Galvez. You know, Holly is too much a
baby to hear stories, so she understood that you meant--other things.
And it seems that once you had spoken to her of that story. She--made
connections. She accused me of--of flirting with her guests; of
being--an improper person."

"Elsie!"

"It is all over. It does not matter, now. But that was how I knew she
did not send you away. Of course she said nothing to tell me; she is too
clever. But, you see I knew so much already; and when I saw she was
jealous even of your speaking to me----!"

The silence continued long. Both were thinking of Lucille Masterson. As
if she feared the man's thoughts, Elsie shrank away from her husband's
clasp, the movement unnoticed by him. Her clear eyes clouded with
doubt, a creeping chill extinguished their glow.

Adriance spoke first, breaking at once the pause and the barrier.

"Once they must have been like this--like us. She would have left Fred,
left him down and out, for a new man; and she his wife!"

Disgust was in his voice, wondering contempt. He pressed his own wife
hard against his side. But Elsie dragged her arms from the hold that
bound them, and impulsively clasped them about his neck in her first
offered caress.

"You were thinking _that_?" she cried, fiercely glad in her triumph.
"Anthony, you were thinking that?"

He stooped his head to meet her glance; standing together, they looked
into each other's eyes.




CHAPTER VIII

ANDY OF THE MOTOR-TRUCKS.


The man behind the wicket leaned forward to survey the man outside. The
gate-keeper at the main entrance to Adriance's was the prey of a double
vanity that kept his attention alert: he was vain of his own position,
and of his ability to judge the positions of other men. This was his
seventeenth year in the cage of ornamental iron-work, and he had brought
his hobby into it with his first day there. He delighted in difficult
subjects, now, who baffled a casual inspection.

It was, therefore, with an air of bored certainty that he classified
this morning visitor at a glance, and settled back on his high stool.

"Office door to the right, sir," he directed, briefly, but respectfully.
"Boy there will take in your card, sir."

"I understand chauffeurs are wanted here," said the visitor, his
composed gaze dwelling on a poster to that effect affixed to the nearest
wall.

The gate-keeper stared.

"I guess so----?"

"Is the office the place where I should apply for such work?"

"Trucking department; turn left, down basement, Mr. Ransome," vouchsafed
the chagrined concierge, severely wounded in his self-esteem. So blatant
a mistake had not offended his pride in years. He turned in his seat and
craned his thin neck to watch the stranger swing blithely away in the
direction indicated.

"Chauffeur!" he muttered. "Walks as if Adriance's was his private garage
an' he was buildin' himself a better one around the corner! Hope Ransome
throws him out!"

But Ransome of the motor-trucks was in urgent need of men and disposed
to be more tolerant. Moreover, his sensitive vanity had taken no hurt
that morning. But he looked rather closely at the applicant,
nevertheless.

"Used to chauffing private cars, aren't you?" he shrewdly questioned.

"Yes," admitted Adriance.

"I thought so! Where was your last place?"

"I drove for Mr. Adriance, junior," was the grave response.

The man whistled.

"You did, eh? Why did he fire you?"

"He left New York for the winter, without taking his machines along."

"Did he give you a reference?"

"I can bring one to-morrow, or I can go get it now, if you want me to
start work at once. I haven't it with me."

"Why not?"

"I forgot it would be needed."

This was unusual, and produced a pause. Ransome studied his man, and
liked what he saw.

"Married?" he shot the next routine question.

"Yes."

"Anything against you on the police records? Accidents? Overspeeding?"

"Nothing."

"I can see you don't drink. You know Jersey?"

"Not so well as New York, but well enough to pick up the rest as I go
along."

"Well, it's irregular, but we're short-handed. Give me your license
number so I can verify that. Bring your reference to-morrow, and if it
is all right---- I'll take you on to-day, on trial. Wait; I'll give you
your card."

The inquisition was safely past. Adriance smiled to himself as he
watched the superintendent fill out the card that grudgingly permitted
him to earn his first wage. He was intoxicated, almost bewildered by his
own lightheartedness. His body was still tired and beaten after the
miserable conflict from which his mind had resiliently leaped erect to
stand rejoicing in the sunlight. To-day he could have overcome a hundred
ill chances, where one had yoked him yesterday.

"Name?" came the crisp demand from the man writing.

"Anthony Adriance."

"What!" The superintendent's head came up abruptly. "Why--what
connection----?"

"Poor relation," classified Adriance coolly. He had anticipated this,
but he could not have endured the furtive discomfort and risk of a false
name. "All rich men have them, I suppose."

His indifference was excellently done. The superintendent nodded
acquiescence.

"I suppose so; must have been queer, though! What did young Adriance
call you? Did he know?"

"Oh, yes. 'Andy' is a noncommittal nickname."

"All right; here is your card."

Mr. Ransome watched the new employee cross the floor, with a meditative
consideration of the uselessness of the shadow of the purple without its
comfortable substance; but he was not especially surprised after the
first moment. Few wealthy men trouble themselves about the distant
branches of their families, and babies are frequently named after them
by hopeful kinsmen.

At the other end of the subterranean chamber where trucks rolled in and
out, piloted by weather-beaten chauffeurs and loaded with heavy packages
and bales by perspiring porters, a little man in a derby hat and shirt
sleeves was in command. With him the matter passed still more easily for
the stranger.

"What's your name?" he shrilled in a peculiarly flat treble voice,
across the uproar of thudding weight, rolling wheels and panting
machinery. "Andy? Well, take out number thirty-five. Mike, Mike! Where
is that--that Russian? Here, Mike, you are to go with number
thirty-five. Bring your truck in for its load and get your directions
from the boss there, Andy. Report when you get back."

A huge figure lounged across the electric-lighted space toward Adriance;
a pair of mild brown eyes gazed down at him from under a shock of red
hair.

"I guess you're new," pronounced the heavy accent of Russian Mike; "I
guess I show you?"

"I wish you would," Adriance cordially accepted the patronizing
kindness. He found time to marvel at the readiness of his own smile
since last night, and at the response it evoked from these strangers. "I
don't know where to find thirty-five yet, or who is the boss."

"I know," announced Mike, grandly comprehensive; "you ride with me,
Andy; I'll learn you."

So Andy of the trucks began his education.

A motor-truck is not a high-priced pleasure car. Nor is the trucking
department of a large factory professional in its courtesy. Tony
Adriance learned a great many things in breathless sequence. And he
never had been quite so much interested by anything in his life--except
his newly-made wife. The men were not gentle, but they were merry. They
shouted gaily back and forth at each other with a humor of their own.
When Tony stalled his unfamiliar motor there was much unpolished
witticism at his expense; but also a neighbor jumped down to crank the
machine for him, and another sprang up to the seat beside the new man
and gave him a score of valuable hints in a dozen terse sentences. When
he finally drove up the incline into the street, he found that Russian
Mike appeared to have a complete map of the Jersey City river front
engraved on his otherwise blank intelligence and proved as willingly
efficient a guide on the streets as in the factory. If the difficulties
were more numerous than the novice had anticipated and the work harder,
these things were more than offset by the unexpected comradeship he
encountered.

All day, amid the steady press of events, the thought of his wife lay
warm at the core of his heart. His love was matched only by his deep
wonder at the thing which had befallen him. The exultation of successful
escape was strong upon him; escape from loathsome bonds, from
complicated problems his innately simple mind detested, above all, from
the guidance of other people. He and Elsie were alone as no distance
around the world could have made them. He had come to a place in life
where he was not a boy to be governed, but master in his own right. A
heat of pride had burned his face when he had answered "Yes" to the
superintendent's question: "Married?" Decidedly he meant to stay in the
home and the factory of his first adventure, if possible.

On his first trip he made an excuse to stop at a stationer's, where he
wrote for himself a recommendation signed by Anthony Adriance, Junior.
The ruse amused him; he found himself childishly ready to be amused.
When he brought the truck in from the last journey of the day he
presented this letter to Mr. Ransome, who read and returned it with a
nod of content.

"All right; to-morrow at seven," he said briefly.

He ached in every unaccustomed muscle bent to toil when he strode up the
hill at dusk, his day's work over. But he was no more affected by that
than a boy on his first day of camping--it was part of the sport.
Because he was learning unselfishness he felt more anxiety as to how
Elsie had got through the day. Housework in the rather primitive cottage
was a different thing from caring for Holly Masterson in his luxurious
pink-and-gold nursery. Would he find her discouraged, tired--perhaps
cross? He smiled audacious confidence in his ability to caress her into
good humor, but he wondered rather uneasily whether his wages would
support a maid should Elsie demand one as necessary. He was utterly
unused to the practical apportionment of money.

There were new curtains draped across the lighted windows of the little
red house. As he turned up the ridiculous plank walk he saw a very
diminutive kitten seated on the window-sill inside washing its face. And
then he heard a fresh, smooth voice singing the drollest little air he
ever had heard in his musical experience--a minor grotesquerie
distinctive as the flavor of _bouillabaisse orleanais_. He opened the
door and his wife laughed at him across the bright room, flushed with
fire heat, dainty in her lavender frock and white ruffled apron,
arrested with a steaming tureen uplifted in her little hands.

Perhaps she had doubted how he would come home from that first day of
work. For just a moment they drank full reassurance from each other's
eyes; then Adriance was across the room.

"Put it down or I'll spill it!"

"Sir, this is a soup extraordinary! Would you overturn your supper?"

"Yes, for this," said Adriance, and kissed her soft mouth.

"Anthony, can one be _too_ happy and affront the fates?"

"No."

"We can go on and on, and nothing will happen!"

"Please God!" said Tony Adriance with perfect reverence.

"It is not a wonderful adventure now; it is just life?"

"Of course. I say--I wish that van-driver could see me now--the one I
told you about last night."

"The butcher gave me the kitten, Anthony."

"Of course he did; any man would give you all he had. What were you
singing when I came in?"

"How should I know? I know a thousand bits of song and a thousand
stories, and they march in and out of my head. Our dinner is spoiling,
Mr. Adriance."

"I love you!"

"I dislike you!" she mocked him.

There was no one in New York who would have quite recognized either
Anthony or Elsie Adriance in these two children at play together.

"Next Saturday evening I want you to take me shopping, please," she told
him when they were seated at supper.

"Enchanted; but why Saturday?"

"Because you will have your wages then, naturally. We need more dishes,
and a casserole, and a ribbon for the kitten, and--thousands of
things."

"Shall I have wealth enough?"

"Plenty; we are going to the 5-10-20 cent store."

"I thought those were the prices of melodrama on the East Side."

"Wait. You may find the event even tragic, if I want too many seductive
articles," she cautioned him. "But let us not talk of mere
things--aren't you going to tell me about your day?"

"I am. But it was a day like any other workingman's, I suppose; nothing
happened."

"Did you want anything to happen? I imagined----"

"All I want," said Tony Adriance fervently, "is to be left alone, with
you."




CHAPTER IX

THE LUCK IN THE HOUSE.


Nothing did happen. None of the traditionary usual experiences overtook
the two in the little red house, as November ran out and December
stormed in like a lusty viking from northern seas, attended by
tremendous winds and early snow.

In the first place, the marriage of Anthony Adriance, Junior, somehow
escaped the sensational journals, as a pleasing theme. There were no
headlines announcing: "Son of a millionaire weds a nursemaid." No
reporters discovered the house on the Palisades, to photograph its
diminutive Gothic front for Sunday specials. Adriance had written a
letter of explanation, so far as explanation might be, to his father.
That was on the morning of his marriage, and as he had given no address,
naturally he had received no answer. There were no reproaches and no
pursuit.

Nor was Tony Adriance gnawed by vain regrets. According to every rule
of romance and reason, he should have suffered from at least brief
seasons of repining; at least have been twinged by memories of things
foregone, yet desired. But he felt nothing of the kind. Masculine
independence was aroused in him, and held reign in riotous good spirits.
With a boy's triumphant bravado he faced down cold and hard work,
delighting in the victory. He rose early and built Elsie's fires before
permitting her to rise, while she sat up protesting in the four-posted
bed as he bullied and loved and mastered her. He walked two miles to and
from work morning and evening, and drove his big motor-truck eight hours
a day. Moreover, he gained weight on the regime, and the springing step
of a man in training. He never had suspected it, but his whole body had
craved outdoors and employment of its forces; Nature had built him for
work, not idleness. The atmosphere in which he had been reared was, by a
trick of temperament, foreign to him.

"I'm plain vulgarian," he laughed to his wife one morning as he started
to work. "I would rather drive one of my father's trucks and come home
to your pork-chops, than I would to dawdle around his house and dine
with a strong man standing behind my chair to save me the fatigue of
putting sugar in my own coffee. Are you going to have some of those
jolly little apple-fritters with butter and cinnamon on them for supper
to-night?"

She made a tantalizing face at him. It was two days before Christmas,
and so cold that her lips and cheeks were stung poppy-bright as she
stood in the doorway.

"Of course not; now I know that you want them. We will have cold meat.
What are you going to give me for my stocking, Anthony?"

"A cold-meat fork," he countered promptly. "How did you know I meant to
give you anything?"

"I didn't," she calmly told him. "But I am going to give you something,
so I thought it only kind to remind you."

He swung himself easily over the railing and smothered her in an embrace
made bear-like by his shaggy coat.

"The chauffeur's peerless bride shall not weep," he soothed her. "For
ten days her ruby stomacher has been ordered by her devoted husband.
Now let your Romeo depart, or his pay will get docked next Saturday."

She lingered in his arms an instant, her shining dark hair pressed
against the rough darkness of his cheap fur coat.

"Anthony, don't they ever notice your name, down there? Didn't they ever
ask about it?"

"Surely! The first day I went in, the superintendent asked if I were
related to Mr. Adriance. I told him yes, a poor relation. True, isn't
it? He was satisfied, anyhow. They call me Andy, down there."

"Andy!" she essayed experimentally. "Andy! It goes pretty well."

They laughed together, then he gently pushed her toward the door.

"Go in," he bade, with his commanding manner; the manner Elsie had
taught him. "You will take a royal cold out here, and then what should I
do for my meals? I have to eat if I am to labor; besides, I like my
food. What did you call those cakes we had this morning?"

"'_Belle cala, tout chaud!_'" she intoned the soft street-cry of old
New Orleans' breakfast hours, her voice catching the quaint, enticing
inflections of those dark-skinned vendors who once loitered their sunny
rounds freighted with fragrant baskets. "Some day I will show you what I
call a city, sir; if you'll take me?"

"I'll take you anywhere, but I'll not let you go as far as the next
corner. Now, go in-doors, and good-bye."

She obeyed him so far as to draw back into the warm doorway. There,
sheltered, she stayed to watch him swinging down the hill through the
gray winter morning. It was nearly seven o'clock, but the sun had not
yet warmed or gilded the atmosphere. Bleakness reigned, except in the
hearts of the man and woman.

They had been married two months. Elsie Adriance slowly closed the door
and turned to the uncleared breakfast table. But presently she left the
dishes she had begun to assemble, and walked to one of the rear windows.
There she leaned, gazing where Anthony never gazed: toward the
gray-and-white stateliness of New York, across the ice-dotted river. She
contemplated the city, not with defiance or challenge, but with the
steady-eyed gravity, of one measuring an enemy.

Two months, and the victory was still with her! Yet, she warned herself,
surely some day New York would call. She never quite could forget that.
She herself was not unlike a city preparing for defence, feverishly
grasping at every stone to build her ramparts. How she envied Lucille
Masterson her beauty, the elder Adriance his wealth, since those
possessions might have bound Anthony closer to her! She recalled Mrs.
Masterson's exquisite costumes, colored like flowers and as delightful
to the touch; the costly perfumes that made all her belongings fragrant;
the studied coquetry that kept her like Cleopatra, never customary or
stale. To oppose all this, Anthony's wife had only--her hearth. For she
never would keep her husband against his will; Elsie Adriance never
would claim as a right what she had held as a gift.

The kitten, a black-and-white midget suggestive of a Coles-Phillips
drawing, rubbed insistently against the girl's foot. She picked up the
living toy and nestled its furry warmth beneath her chin, as she turned
in quest of milk. She thrust forebodings from her mind with resolute
will. It was too soon to think of these things; Anthony loved her,
Anthony was content.

She had no conception of how fervently glad Anthony was to be rid of
harassing thoughts and complications, or how gratefully the luxury of
peace enfolded him and dwarfed the mere physical luxuries of idleness
and lavish expenditure. Nor, being a woman, did she sufficiently value
his pride in the possessions he had bought with his own labor. Tony
Adriance never had noticed the table service in his father's house; he
had been known to overturn a whole tray of translucent coffee-cups set
in lace-fine silver work, without a second glance at the destruction.
But he knew every one of the cheap, heavy dishes he and Elsie had added
to their equipment on Saturday evening shopping orgies at a
five-and-ten-cent store. Knew, and admired them! When Elsie would call
from her "kitchen corner;" "Bring me the Niagara platter, honey," he
could locate that ceramic atrocity at a glance. And when he let fall the
Whistler bread-plate--it had a nocturnal, black-lined landscape effect
in its centre--he was truly grieved. Indeed, it was he who selected
their china, Elsie's taste being inclined toward a simplicity he refused
as monotonous. He never had realized the pleasure of purchasing until he
went shopping with his wife, chose with her, overruled her or indulged
her in some fancy, then drew out his newly-received wage and paid,
magnificent.

He could not have explained his emotions to Elsie. But his candid
delight in those expeditions came to her memory, as she poured the
kitten's milk into a saucer enamelled with blue forget-me-nots. She
lifted her head and again glanced toward the distant city; but this time
she smiled with certain triumph. He was her husband; better still, he
was as eagerly her playmate as any lonely boy who first finds a chum.
She knew Lucille Masterson did not possess the art of comradeship among
her talents; it was an art too unselfish.

"When he begins to tire of just playing this way," she
half-unconsciously addressed the kitten, "we will find something else.
There will always be something for us to think of, together. It will
come when it is needed. Perhaps----"

Arrested, her breath failed speech. It was as if her own words had
thrown open a door before which she faltered, her eyes sun-dazzled, yet
glimpsing a wide horizon.

Soothed by her silent neighborhood, the kitten finished lapping its milk
and went to sleep against her skirt. But the girl stood still for a long
time, steadying her heart, which seemed to her to be filling like a cup
held under a clear fountain.

Later in the day a boy brought wreaths and sprays of holly to the door.
Elsie bought recklessly, so Adriance came home that night to a house
Yule-gay with scarlet and green, spicy with the cinnamon fragrance of
the apple-fritters, and holding a mistress who showed him a Christmas
face of merry content.

"I could not wait two days," she explained to him. "We'll begin now and
work up to it gradually."

But after all, Christmas morning came as a surprise, and achieved a
final defeat of doubts and forebodings that drove them out of sight for
many a day. For, kissing his wife awake at dawn, Anthony made his gift
first, forestalling hers.

"You never had an engagement ring," he reminded her. "I'll have to make
a tremendous record as a husband to live down my blunders as a fiance!
Here, let me put it on for you. What clever dimples you've got in your
fingers! I noticed them our first night here, remember?"

She frankly cried in her great surprise and passionate joy in his
thought of her. It really was a spectacular ring, and glittered bravely
in the early light; an oval of dark-red stones like a shield set above
her wedding ring.

"They're only garnets," he stilled her protest of extravagance. "But
they are the color of rubies; and the promise of them. Don't--please
don't! Come, what have you got for me? Give it up."

The diversion succeeded. Laughing before her eyes were dry, she
answered:

"He is in the wood-box. I had to keep him in the house where it was
warm, and I was so afraid you would hear him and spoil the surprise. But
he was as good as possible; he never said one word. Open the lid,
dear."

"He?" echoed her husband. "Him?"

The wood-box yielded him; a small, jovial, bandy-legged puppy.

"He is _almost_ a Boston bull," Elsie explained conscientiously. "If he
had been quite one, I couldn't have afforded to buy him. But he is a
love. Anthony, he is the watch-dog, you know."

Finding both faces within reach, as he hung over Anthony's arm, the
puppy licked them with fond impartiality.




CHAPTER X

MRS. MASTERSON TAKES TEA


It was the day after Christmas that Adriance was sent over to New York
with his motor-truck, for the first time since he had become that
massive vehicle's pilot. His destination was in Brooklyn, so that he had
the entire city to cross, and lights were commencing to twinkle here and
there through the gray of the short winter afternoon when he turned
homeward.

The experience had not been without a novel interest. Holiday traffic
crowded the streets; traffic officers, tired and chilled by a biting
east wind, were not patient. Adriance chose Fifth Avenue for his route
up-town with the naturalness of long custom, without reflecting upon the
greater freedom of travel he would have found on one of the dingy
streets usually followed by such vehicles as his. However, the
difficulties exhilarated him. Andy of the truck could not but wonder how
the policeman who roughly ordered him away from the entrance of the
Park might have phrased that request if he had known that the intruder
was Tony Adriance, "paper, you know!" Perhaps, because of this wonder,
his cheerful grin drew a sour smile from the officer.

"Don't you know you've not got a limousine there? You from the woods?"
came the not ill-natured sarcasm.

"Worse than that: from Jersey," Adriance shot back. "All right; I'm
sorry."

"Plain streets for yours; round the circle," was the direction, which
also implied a release.

"Thanks," Adriance called acknowledgment, as he obeyed.

The bulky figure beside the chauffeur stirred.

"You got a nerve," commented the man, his slow, heavy voice tinged with
admiration. "I seen guys pulled fer less, Andy."

Adriance laughed. He and his big assistant were very good friends, after
weeks of sharing the truck's seat. The chauffeur appeared a stripling by
comparison with the man lounging beside him, huge arms folded across
thick chest. "Mike," as he was known to his fellow-workers, was a
Russian peasant. His upbringing in a Hoboken slum had fixed his
patriotism and language, but had left his physique that of his
inheritance. His reddish-yellow head was set on a massive neck whose
base his open shirt showed to be covered with a red growth of hair
extending down over his chest. His large features and mild, slow-moving
eyes, his heavy, placid manner of speech were absurdly alien to the
colloquial language that he spoke. Adriance knew his helper had been an
employee of the factory for ten years, but he did not know that Mike was
always assigned to a new chauffeur until the stranger proved himself
trustworthy. Mike was dull, but he was stolidly honest. Valuable boxes
or packages were not reported "lost" from trucks under his care.
Adriance had no idea of the truth that "Russian Mike" actually had
determined the permanence of his position in his father's great mill.

"If I cannot go through the Park, I'll go back to the avenue," Adriance
declared, when the turning had been negotiated. "I want gayety, Michael;
boulevard gayety! Four o'clock on Fifth Avenue--shall a poor workingman
be deprived of the sight? It is true that we are too far uptown, but
the principle is the same. You agree with me?"

"It ain't nothin' to me," averred the magnificent guardian, shifting to
a new position with an indolent movement that swelled the muscles under
his flannel shirt until the fabric strained. His glance at his companion
was mildly indulgent.

"Of course not. But it will be, next time; that is, if you do not die of
pneumonia after taking this drive with your coat wide open. Appreciation
will grow on you. What do you think of that girl in gray, in the
limousine? Pretty? I used to go to school with her, Michael; dancing
school."

The Slavic brown eyes became humorous.

"Fact," Adriance met the incredulity. "And now she doesn't recognize me;
and neither of us cares."

The uplifted hand of another traffic officer halted the long lines of
vehicles. Three deep from the curb on either side, so that the street
was solidly filled, automobiles, carriages, green and yellow busses and
ornate delivery-cars stopped in a close, orderly mass. Adriance's truck
was next to the sidewalk, in obedience to the rule for slow-moving
vehicles. As his laughing voice answered Mike, his tone raised to carry
across the roar of sound about them, a woman who had emerged from one of
the shops stopped abruptly. Her glance quested along the rows, to rest
upon Adriance with eager attention. A moment later, the man started at
the sound of his own name, spoken beside him.

"How do you do, Tony. And aren't you--rather out of place?"

Momentarily dumb, he looked down into the large, cool eyes of Lucille
Masterson. She did not smile, but faced his regard with a composure that
made his embarrassment a fault. Against the white fur of her stole was
fastened a knot of pink-and-white sweet peas; beside them her face
showed as softly tinted, and artificially posed, as the flowers. Beside
the wheel of the huge truck, she appeared smaller and more fragile than
Adriance remembered her. Without the slightest cause he felt himself a
culprit surprised by her. He had all the sensations of a deserter
confronted with the heartlessly abandoned.

"Aren't you going to speak to me?" she queried, when he remained
voiceless. "I have missed you, Tony."

He hastily aroused himself.

"Of course! I mean--you are very kind. I--we have been out of town."

Feeling the utter idiocy into which he was stumbling, he checked
himself. The current of traffic was flowing on once more, leaving his
machine stranded against the curb; made fast, as it were, by the
white-gloved hand Mrs. Masterson had laid upon the wheel.

Without heeding his incoherence, she looked at a tiny watch on her
wrist, half-hidden by her wide, furred sleeve. With her movement a drift
of fragrance was set afloat on the thick, city air.

"I want you to take me to tea," she announced, with her accustomed
imperativeness. "I have things to say to you. Let your man take your car
home."

In spite of his exasperation, Adriance laughed. He was aware of the
staring admiration which held the big man beside him intent upon the
beautiful woman; he had heard the greedy intake of breath with which the
other absorbed the perfume shaken from her daintiness, and could guess
the effect of _Essence Enivrante_ upon untutored nostrils. But for all
that, he could not imagine Russian Mike obeying the order proposed.

"You see, he isn't my man," he excused himself from compliance. "Thank
you very much, but it is not possible."

"Then let him wait for you. Really, Tony, I think you owe me a little
courtesy."

Adriance flushed before the rebuke. He never had seen Lucille Masterson
since that rough farewell of their final quarrel. He had left her, to
marry another woman inside of the next thirty-six hours. He always had
been at his weakest with Mrs. Masterson; he slipped now into his old
mistake of temporizing.

"I am not dressed for a tea-room," he deprecated. "Otherwise, I should
be delighted."

Her eyes glinted. Grasping the slight concession, she leaned toward
Adriance's assistant with her brilliant, arrogant smile.

"You will watch the car for Mr. Adriance, just a few moments, will you
not?" she appealed. "I have something of importance to say to him. I
should be much obliged."

The white-gloved hand slipped forward and left a bank note in the hairy
fist. Dazed, Mike vaguely jerked his cap in salute, still staring at the
woman. Neither money nor beauty might have lured him to an actual breach
of duty, but this was the last trip of the day and the truck was empty.
It could not matter if the return were delayed half an hour; a belated
ferryboat might lose so much time. Moreover, he was not only willing,
but anxious, to do Andy a favor, and the bill in his clutch assured a
glorious Saturday night.

"Sure," he mumbled, with a grin of shyness like a colossal child's.

"Come, Tony," directed Mrs. Masterson.

Because he saw nothing else to do, Tony reluctantly swung himself down
to the pavement beside her.

"I can only stay for a word," he essayed revolt. "It is hardly worth
while to go anywhere. We should have to go find some place where these
clothes would pass and where no one knew us."

"On the contrary! We must go where you are so well-known that your dress
does not matter," she contradicted him. "The Elizabeth Tea-room is just
here, and we used to go there often."

He could think of no objection to the proposal. Presently he found
himself following his captor into the pretty, yellow-and-white tea-room.

As the Elizabeth affected an English atmosphere and had not adopted the
_the dansant_, the place was not overfull. The quaintly-gowned waitress
greeted them with a murmur of recognition and led the way to a table
without a glance at the chauffeur's attire. Mrs. Masterson ordered
something; an order which Adriance seconded without having heard it. He
was recovering his poise, and marvelling at himself for coming here no
less than at Lucille for bringing him. What could they have to say to
each other, now? The scented warmth of the room brought to his
realization the cold in which he had left Mike to wait, and he was
nipped by remorse.

It was a consequence of his education among people who never considered
that narrowness of convention which they designated as middle-class,
that Adriance had no sense of disloyalty either to Elsie or Fred
Masterson in being here. On the contrary, the knowledge of his marriage
would have enabled him to welcome frankly either of the two had they
chanced to enter and find him. It was as if his assured position
chaperoned the situation. But, truly masculine, since he no longer loved
Lucille Masterson he detested being with her. He resented the acute
discomfort he felt in her presence.

She was drawing off her gloves with a slowness that irritated him as an
affectation; he thought the artificial perfection of her hands hideous
as a waxwork. They were not really a good shape, nor small, but merely
blanched very white and manicured to a glistening illusion. And he saw
with disgust that she wore a ring he once had given her because she made
it plain to him that the costly gift was expected. He knew she had lied
to her husband as to the giver; "Tony" had been startled and
half-awakened from his hazy content by that discovery at the time. Now
he looked at the bulky pearl set around with diamonds and recalled the
modest garnets he had given Elsie.

"I am sorry, but I haven't long to stay," he said. "You spoke of
something important to discuss."

"Did I?"

"Certainly!"

She studied him with open curiosity.

"You want to go back to that wagon with the gorilla of a man?"

"Yes."

"Are you still very much married, Tony?" she questioned maliciously.

His eyes blazed, then chilled. Her lack of finesse had led her to a
final mistake.

"You forget that my wife is an unfashionable woman. I am still happily
married," he retorted.

"How--romantic!"

"Very."

"Still, two months, or is it three? Even Fred and I lasted that long.
You will not mind my saying that you are a bit fickle, Tony. What will
you do when you grow bored? Or do you believe that you never will? Elsie
must have resources that I never suspected. Does she tell you the story
of--Monsieur Raoul, was it?"

"She has others more pleasant. With Mrs. Adriance boredom is not
possible," he controlled his anger to state. But he felt himself clumsy
and inadequate.

The quaint little waitress was beside him, and proceeded to her duty of
service with exasperating slowness and precision. She was a pretty girl,
in a butter-cup-yellow frock and ruffled white cap and apron. Adriance
became conscious of his work-darkened hands, of a collar that showed a
day's accumulated dust, and other signs that differentiated him from the
usual idle and dainty patrons of this place.

"You _are_ a bit seedy," corroborated Mrs. Masterson, watching him with
furtive acuteness. She permitted herself an ironic smile. "Do you not
think it time you went home, and changed?"

He divined an innuendo, a _double entendre_ in the speech that he did
not comprehend, yet which enraged him. He wondered if she had brought
him here for the purpose of forcing this contrast between his present
life and his past, and so tainting him with discontent or even regret
of his marriage. If so, she had failed. He merely visited his
humiliation on her, and found her beauty spoiled by her spitefulness.

"I shall be home in an hour," he said. "And of course I am anxious to be
there, so you will forgive my reminding you of whatever we have to
discuss."

"Oh, of course." She paused until their attendant fluttered away through
a swinging door. "You are quite cured of me, aren't you, Tony? Don't
trouble about denying politely, please. But it is lucky no one really
knew about us--I suppose you have not told?"

"Mrs. Masterson!"

She hushed the protest, laughing across the spray of sweet-peas she had
lifted against her smooth red lips.

"Very well, very well! But promise you never will. Promise, Tony."

"It is not necessary," he replied stiffly. "But if you think it so, I
give you my word."

"Never to tell that I thought of marrying you, whatever may happen?"

"Yes."

She dropped the sweet-peas and sat in silence for a space, her gaze
dwelling on him. Neither of the two made any pretense of pouring the tea
cooling in the diminutive pots between them, or of tasting the miniature
sandwiches and cakes. Months later, Adriance was to learn something of
Lucille Masterson's thoughts during that interval. He himself thought of
Russian Mike waiting in the motor-truck, and that he would be so late
home that Elsie might be worried. He had wanted to stop at a shop to buy
a toy bull-dog collar for his Christmas puppy, but now that must be
postponed. He was amazed and infinitely angry at himself for yielding so
easily to Lucille's whim to bring him here.

Unconsciously he looked toward her with open impatience in his glance.
She responded at once, with a shrug.

"Go, by all means. Pray go, Tony. Am I keeping you? I am not the kind of
woman who mourns, you know. Just remember that our episode is not only
closed, but locked, when we meet again. Good-bye."

"And the important communication that I was to hear?"

"I have forgotten what I wanted to say. Good-bye, Tony."

Puzzled and angry, he rose, leaving on the table twice the amount of the
check, at which he had not looked. Mrs. Masterson nodded an
acknowledgment of his grim salute. Her eyes had a look of triumph, and
as the girl in yellow ushered him out, Adriance saw the other turn with
appetite to the sandwiches and tea.

The east wind had grown stronger and its current was thick with whirling
particles of snow. Darkness had come with the storm, turning dusk into
night. Adriance shivered and buttoned his cheap fur coat as he hurried
across the wet, shining pavement. Mike aroused himself with a grunt when
the chauffeur swung up into the seat beside him.

"Swell dame, Andy!" he commented, staring with heavy curiosity at the
man pushing throttle and spark. "I guess maybe you're a swell, too, like
a movie show I seen once?"

Adriance stepped down again, to go forward and crank the motor. He began
to glimpse the possible complications if Mike recounted this adventure
among his mates. He wondered, also, if Lucille had noticed the name on
the truck. Altogether, he was in a vicious enough mood to lie, and he
did so.

"No," he asserted flatly, when he had regained his seat. "Don't be an
idiot, Mike. I--used to be employed by that lady."

"Drive her automobile?"

"Yes."

The explanation was accepted as satisfactory. An intimate acquaintance
with the etiquette of intercourse between mistress and chauffeur was not
one of the examiner's accomplishments. But the incident appealed to Mike
as romantic, and for him romance flowed from one source only.

"She looks like one of them actresses from the movies," he averred,
folding his huge arms comfortably across his breast. "I guess she is,
maybe? I seen queens like her, there."

"It is a good way to see them, if they are like her," observed Adriance
ruefully. He laughed in spite of vexation. "Better stick to the movie
girls, Michael; it's safer! Now stop talking to me; if this brute of a
truck swerves an inch in this slush, some pretty car is going to feel as
if an elephant had stepped on it."

But the ill luck of that day was over. They made a fast trip up-town and
just caught a ferry-boat on the point of leaving.

After all, they were not to be noticeably late. And since there would be
no need of explanation, it occurred to Adriance that he might not
recount to Elsie the tale of his discomfiture. He was keenly ashamed of
the poor role Lucille Masterson had made him play. She had whistled him
to heel, and he had come with the meekness of the well-trained. She had
amused herself with him as long as she chose, then dismissed him,
humiliated and helpless. He did not want Elsie to picture her husband in
that situation, nor to find him still unable to say no to Mrs.
Masterson.

By the time he had walked up the long hill through a beating snow-storm,
he was thoroughly chilled and self-disgusted, desirous only of shelter
and peace. Both met him, when he pushed open the door of his house and
stepped into the warm, bright room. When the door closed behind him, he
definitely shut outside the image of Lucille Masterson.

With a little rush Elsie came to meet him, lifting her warm and rosy
face for his kiss. The puppy scrambled across the floor, uttering
staccato yelps of salute.

"I've named our house," the girl announced gleefully. "You know, we have
named everything else. Don't you like Alaric Cottage?"

"I like the inside of it to-night, all right. But why Alaric?"

"Because it is so early-Gothic, of course. You must appreciate our front
porch, Anthony. Oh, you _are_ wet and cold! Hurry and change your
things--I have them all laid out--and I will feed you, sir."

So the matter passed for that time, and was forgotten.




CHAPTER XI

THE GLOWING HEARTH


Christened Noel, in honor of the day of his arrival, the puppy thrived
and grew toward young doghood in a household atmosphere of serene
content. From Christmas to Easter the days flowed by in an untroubled
current of time. Day after day, Anthony and Elsie Adriance grew into
closer and fuller companionship. The winter was a hard and long one, but
never dull to them.

They found so much to do. In return for his reading to her, Elsie
sometimes put out the lamp and in the flickering firelight told him
quaint, grotesque legends of Creole and negro lore. Her soft accents
fell naturally into patois; she was a born mimic, and interspersed
fragments of plaintive songs, old as the tragedy of slavery or the
romance of a pre-Napoleonic France. Her voice could be drowsy as
sunshine on a still lagoon, or instinct with life as the ring of a
marching regiment's tread.

She taught him to play chess, too, with a wonderful set of
jade-and-ivory men produced from among her few belongings.

"Do you know these must be mighty valuable?" Adriance exclaimed, the
first time he saw them.

"I know they are mighty old," she mocked his seriousness. "And I
wouldn't sell them, so the rest doesn't matter."

"Tell me about them."

"There is nothing very definite to tell." She regarded him askance from
the corner of a laughing eye. "Can you bear the shock of hearing that
one of your wife's ancestors was suspected of having secret relations
with the notorious LaFitte?"

"Who was he?"

"LaFitte was a pirate and freebooter, sir, who had a stronghold below
New Orleans, where the mouth of the Mississippi widens into the Gulf.
Many a ship paid toll to him, many curious prizes fell into his greedy
hands; and it was whispered that some of these strange, foreign things
mysteriously appeared in the house of Martin Galvez. Negroes were heard
to tell, with breath hushed and eyes rolling, of a swift-sailing sloop,
black of hull and rigged in black canvas, lines, and all. It slipped up
the river at midnight and down again before dawn, past all defences,
they said--and its point of landing was Colonel Galvez's wharf, ten
miles above the city. No one ever knew more than a rumor that ran
untraced like the black sloop. But it was said the ivory-and-jade
chessmen had travelled by that craft, as had great-great-grandmother's
string of pink pearls which are painted around her neck in her portrait.
Loud and often her husband laughed at the tales, inviting all who chose
to watch his wharf between sunset and sunrise, any night. The chessmen,
he declared, were presented to him by a prince of Cairo, whose enemies
had betrayed him into the hands of a slave-trader. The Egyptian noble's
dark skin and ignorance of Western speech had made him a helpless
victim; he faced the final degradation of the lash when Colonel Galvez
saw and rescued him. His gratitude sent the pretty playthings. As for
the pink pearls, they came from Vienna, by lawful purchase. At least, so
the worthy Colonel was fond of relating, with a convincing detail, over
his incomparable French wines and Havana cigars."

"But, what was truth? Which, I mean?" he questioned.

She shut her eyes in droll disclaimer.

"How should I know? The pink pearls disappeared before Josephine Galvez
married Fairfax Murray, sixty years ago. The chessmen are dumb. But I
know of many an old toy from overseas, around our house still. Nothing
of great value! We are as poor as ecclesiastical mice; the family wealth
long ago fled down the wind on the black sails of ill-luck. Yes, the
Murrays usually held poor hands at cards. Will you move first, or shall
I?"

"You," he invited. He looked at her with curiosity. "Why didn't you tell
me before that you were a princess in disguise? I never knew you had an
ancestor on record, and here you have a procession of them. You're a
funny girl."

    If you don't like me,
    Why do you, why do you,
    _Why_ do you stay around?

She sang the very modern verse to him with a mockery altogether
tantalizing; and he upset all the chessboard in answering her properly.

Little by little he learned a great deal about her home; which, he
discovered, had once been the veritable home of the punctilious Mait'
Raoul Galvez of surprising memory. He made acquaintance with her parents
and her sisters, as Elsie brought before him a living simulacra of each
one with her magician-like arts of description and mimicry. There were
five sisters, it appeared: Lee, Roberta, Virginia, Clotilda and
Nicolette.

"Mother named the first three of us and Daddy the last three," she
explained. "Wasn't he right polite to wait so long? Mother is a rebel
Confederate up to this minute, while Daddy altogether indorses the North
and is a professional delver in romantic history."

"'Elsie' is not historical," he objected, much diverted.

"Oh, my truly name is Elcise; I come before Clotilda and Nicolette. But
my grandfather insisted upon calling me Elsie as long as he lived, so in
deference to him the first intention was abandoned. Poor Daddy lost one
of his turns, after all. It happened very well, though! Elsie is more
practical, and I am the most practical member of the whole family
circle."

"Really?"

"Why, certainly! Lee married a dramatic poet, who is also the editor of
a newspaper," she retorted upon his incredulity. "And one who lets his
two vocations interfere with one another! Roberta has been engaged to an
army officer these five years. He is stationed in the Philippines, where
she is to join him and live in some jungle with him whenever he is
sufficiently promoted to marry. Virginia is a beauty, who has the entire
college full of young men vibrating around our house; and she declares
that she is going into a convent when she is twenty-five. Clotilda and
Nicolette are twin babies of eleven years. They still have plenty of
time to do anything, you see. We were all perfectly happy as we were,
but it became really necessary for someone to relieve Daddy, if only by
supporting herself and leaving more for the others. So I began, and went
as private secretary and companion with the old lady of whom I have told
you. Wasn't that practical? Of course, Lee's husband supports her,
usually.

"But the spring that I came away, Daddy had urged him to resign from the
newspaper and come home for six months in order to write a poetic drama
over which they both were enthusiastic. No one expects it to make much
money, but, as Daddy said, we have always had enough for dignified
simplicity, and it should be our duty as well as our glory to help Lee's
husband to fame."

"Elsie's husband means to support her all the time."

"Oh, I told you Elsie was practical. She married sensibly."

"Should you call it that?" doubtingly.

"Her husband is quite kind to her, you know."

"Well, he is still in love. When that wears off as she grows tired of
feeding him, and ill-tempered----?"

They laughed at one another across the hearth. But presently Adriance
became serious.

"Elsie, I think that I should write to your father. One does not snatch
a man's daughter in this barefaced fashion, without so much as a word to
him, in civilized lands. Why haven't I thought of that before? And I
should like to be welcomed into your family, or at least tolerated
there. Do you suppose we might visit them, some day when our finances
permit? Or perhaps some of my sisters-in-law might come to see us?
George, what a time we could have given those girls with some of the
money that I had, and haven't!"

His wife leaned toward him, her gray eyes quite wet with her
earnestness.

"Anthony, there is nothing in the world that would make me so happy as
for you to write home and tell them that I belong to you. I have so
_hoped_ you would think of it!"

"Why didn't you tell me to do so, long ago?" he asked reproachfully.

"Now, how could I tell you a thing like that?"

"Why not?" he wondered, densely.

She made an expressive gesture with her little hands, resigning the
hopeless task of explanation.

"Never mind. But I shall be so glad! You see, they do not know that I am
married at all. I have not dared tell them, because they have such
stately, quaint ideas that they would be profoundly offended if you did
not write yourself. They would consider it a great slight to me. So I
have just waited."

He gazed at her in utter marvel at such patience.

"Never do it again," he requested. "Please remember that you have
deigned to wed a poor, dull animal who needs your constant guidance.
Even yet, I have failed to grasp the delicate point of your not setting
me to work at this weeks ago. But bring the writing things and sit
beside me as expert critic; we will attend to this before we sleep."

They did so; and were drawn still closer together by the fulfillment of
that act of courtesy and consideration which they unwittingly had
neglected so long.

The warm, gay intimacy of their life together sank deeper into the fibre
of both, as the days went by. They found a comradeship of minds as well
as hearts, never failing in novelty and delight to the man.

"I never before had an intimate friend," he said, one morning, with a
wondering realization of the fact. "I knew so many people that I never
guessed it, Elsie, but I've been lonely all my life. I can't see how I
could be any happier than I am now."

They had just risen from the breakfast-table.

Across it Elsie met her husband's eyes; her own infinitely wise,
splendidly happy as his, yet touched with that delicate raillery which
caressed and laughed at him.

"Oh, yes!" she dissented. "Yes, Anthony."

Puzzled, he searched her meaning in her shining gaze.

"I could be happier?"

"Yes. _We_ could be."

"But----?"

She came around the table and told him the answer, putting her hands
into his. She did not speak shyly, but proudly, with frank courage and
comradeship.

An hour later, when Adriance went down the long hill to his day's work,
he carried himself with a dignity new as the blended exaltation and
dread that paled his face. Once he stopped in the snapping March wind to
bare his head and draw a full, deep breath, looking up at the
bright-blue sky where tufts of white cloud sailed. Although the season
was so far advanced, new-fallen snow overlay road and hills, so that
Adriance seemed to himself as standing between two surfaces of pure,
glinting brightness. His thoughts were only now becoming articulate, yet
a sense of final change had settled through him. His manhood had come to
full dignity. Now he knew what he had done when he snatched Elsie Murray
out of her cross-current of life and took her for himself. He had found
love like a jewel on the road; content had reared a shelter for his
inexperience. Now, he stood as protector and shelter as long as he
should live for the weaker ones who were his. And with responsibility,
ambition sprang fully grown to life and challenged him. Was his wife to
rank as a chauffeur's wife, and nothing more? Was their child to be
reared in that place, and he to give the two nothing better? Anthony
Adriance passed his glance, with his father's cold accuracy of
appraisal, over the great factory lying far down at the foot of the
cliffs, where he himself was awaited to drive a truck.

Presently he went on, down the road. But he went differently.




CHAPTER XII

THE UPPER TRAIL


Adriance had not spent half a year in the mill, even in the limited
capacity of chauffeur, without observing many things. He had come to
recognize flaws in that smooth-running mechanism of which he was a part.
Might he not find in this fact an opportunity? He saw much that he
himself, given authority, might do to promote efficiency. He did not
delude himself with the idea that he could go into any factory as an
efficiency expert; he did see that here he might fairly earn and ask for
a salary that would give Elsie more luxuries than she had even known in
her own home and more than he himself had learned to desire. After all,
there had been no quarrel between his father and himself. When the young
man had chosen a course that he knew to be disagreeable to the older, he
simply had withdrawn from their life together as a matter of courtesy
and self-respect. Since he no longer gave what was expected of Tony
Adriance, he could not take Tony's privileges; now however, knowledge
of Elsie had changed the situation. His father had only to meet his
wife, Anthony felt assured, for his marriage to explain itself. Even if
Mr. Adriance were disappointed by the simplicity of his son's choice and
ambitions, even if he preferred the brilliant Mrs. Masterson to the
serene young gentlewoman as a daughter-in-law, why should there be
rancor between the two men? For the first time it occurred to Adriance
that his father might be lonely and welcome a reconciliation. They never
had been intimate, but they had been companions, or at least pleasant
acquaintances. The house on the Drive had not contained only servants,
as now it must--servants who were merely servants, too, not the
faithful, devoted, tactful servitors of romance, but the average modern
hireling. The house-keeper engaged and dismissed them and was herself a
shadowy automaton, who appeared only to receive special orders and
render monthly accounts. For any atmosphere of home created in the
house, the Adriances might as well have been established in a hotel.
Anthony wondered if even Elsie could leaven that dense mass of
formality, or if her art was too delicate, too subtle a combination of
heart and mind and personality to affect such conditions. He could not
be certain. He could well imagine her, daintily gowned and demurely
self-possessed, as mistress of that household; but he could not imagine
the household itself as altered very much or made less stupidly
ponderous by her presence. He had not thought of this before, but now he
could not think his pleasure would be quite the same if they sat
together in state in that drawing-room he knew so well, while she told
him the tales he had learned to delight in. It could not be quite the
same as a hearth of their own, and his pipe, burning with a coarse,
outrageous energy, expressed in volumes of smoke, while Elsie leaned
forward, little hands animated, gray eyes sparkling, and mimicked or
drolled or sang as the mood swayed them or the tale demanded. He knew
that he himself could never read aloud with enthusiasm and verve if Mr.
Adriance listened with amused criticism. No, Anthony realized with some
astonishment that he did not want to take his wife home.

Nevertheless, the thing must be done. It was a duty. He could not
selfishly continue in the way he liked so well. He must consider Elsie
and the third who was to join their circle. He must pick up for them
what he had thrown aside for himself.

But he refused to go back to his father like a defeated incompetent to
plead for his inheritance. His pride recoiled from the certainty that
his father would so regard his return; there must be a middle course. At
the great gate to the factory yard he paused to survey again the
enormous buildings with their teeming life. In more than one sense this
was his workshop.

There was more than the usual hubbub and confusion in the shipping-room
when he went down the stone incline to that vast subterranean apartment.
The little wizened man in horn-rimmed spectacles, who vibrated around
his long platform, checking rolls and bales and boxes as they were
loaded into the trucks, had already the appearance of wearied
distraction. His thin hair was flattened by perspiration across his
knobby forehead, although it was not yet eight o'clock and freezing
draughts of air swept the place as the doors swung unceasingly open and
shut. Groups of grinning chauffeurs and porters loitered in corners or
behind pillars, eying with enjoyment or indifference, as the case might
be, the little man's bustling energy and anxiety.

This condition had already lasted two days, like a veritable festival of
confusion. Adriance had watched it with the utter indifference of his
mates, merely attending to the duties assigned him and leaving Mr. Cook
to solve his own perplexities; but this morning he hesitated beside the
fiery, streaming little man. The little man caught sight of his not
unsympathetic face and hailed him, calling through the tumult of cars,
rattling hand-trucks, pushed by blue-shirted porters, and the complex
din of the place.

"Here, Andy--you know New York, how long should I allow this man to go
to the Valparaiso dock, unload and get back? Three hours?"

"Two," responded Adriance, mounting the long platform beside his chief.

"Can't be done," the chauffeur of the waiting truck sullenly
contradicted.

"Why not?"

"You ain't allowing for the ferry running across here only every half
hour, nor for the traffic over on the other side."

The tone was insolent, and Adriance answered sharply, unconsciously
speaking as Tony rather than as Andy:

"You don't know your business when you propose going that way. Go down
the Jersey side here where the way is open, and take the down-town
ferry, that runs every ten minutes. And come back by the same route."

"Who are you----" the chauffeur began, but was curtly checked by Mr.
Cook:

"Do as you're told, Pedersen, and if I catch you at more tricks like
that you're fired. You've got two hours. Next! Herman, get your truck
loaded and take the same route and time; do you hear?"

"Yes, sir; but----"

"Get out, and the two of you come in together."

"Excuse me, Mr. Cook;" said Adriance, his glance taking appraisal of the
second truck; "Herman has a cargo of heavy stuff, he can hardly get it
unloaded in as short a time as Pedersen."

The little man turned on him wrathfully.

"Can't? Can't? They've got to get back for second trips."

"Then give him two extra helpers."

Mr. Cook stared at him through his spectacles, then turned and shouted
the order. When he turned back he dried his forehead and relieved
himself by a burst of confidence.

"There's a lot of stuff to go to South America by the boat sailing at
three o'clock. A rush order, and just when we are rushed with other
deliveries; and Ransome is home sick. _I_ never send out the trucks; _I_
don't know when they should come in or how they should go. I've got all
my own work checking over every shipment that goes out, too. It's too
much, it can't be done. The chauffeurs are playing me, I know they are.
Look at the stuff left over that ought to have been got out yesterday,
not moved yet! They tell me lies about the motors breaking down; I know
they are lies; why should half the trucks in the place break down just
when Ransome is away? But I can't prove it."

"Why not put a mechanic in a light machine to go out to any truck that
breaks down, and then give orders that any man whose truck stops is to
'phone in here at once?" suggested Adriance.

This time Mr. Cook regarded him steadily for a full minute. Seizing the
advantage of the other man's attention, Adriance struck again:

"Would you like me to take Mr. Ransome's place for the day? I know both
cities pretty well and I know your men. One of the other men can take
out my truck; Russian Mike, for instance."

"He can't drive."

"I beg your pardon, he drives very well; I taught him myself this
winter."

The little man jerked a telephone receiver from the wall beside him.

"Mr. Goodwin! Cook, sir. I've got a man here to fill Ransome's place for
the present; one of our chauffeurs, sir. Oh, yes! Andy--I forget his
last name. He's all right, yes. I've got to have help; can't handle the
men, Mr. Goodwin. All right; thank you, sir."

He whirled about to Andy. In the brief moments of their talk the
congestion had thickened appallingly, and Mr. Cook looked at the
disorder aghast.

"Go over to Ransome's box," he snapped; "you're appointed; and I wish
you luck! Fire them if they kick, and, you may count on it, I'll back
you up."

Ransome's box was on a small pier run out upon the main floor, in such a
situation that every vehicle leaving or entering must pass it and
report. It was railed around and contained a desk, a telephone and a
chair. Adriance slipped off his overcoat and cap as he walked out on the
little elevation and took his place. The men lounging about the rooms
straightened themselves and stared up at this new arrival. A little
improvement in calmness came over the horde at the mere sight of a
figure in the post of authority.

The invalided Ransome was missed no more. Opportunity had visited
Adriance on the day when he was inspired to seize it and attuned to
accord with it. He and his fellow chauffeurs had been very good friends,
but only as their work for the same employer brought them together. None
of them had been so intimate with him as to feel his present position a
slight upon themselves. Indeed, they were a good-natured, hard-working
set, whose heckling of Mr. Cook had been as much mischief as any desire
to take a mean advantage of the present situation.

There was an authority in Adriance himself of which he was quite
conscious, a personal force that grew with exercise. He stood on his
elevation, sending out man after man with clear, reasonable orders,
noting the distance, the time of departure and the time allowed for the
errand of each. He acquainted each man with the new rule concerning
machines broken down or temporarily disabled, wisely giving this as an
order of Mr. Cook's. When Russian Mike came by with Andy's truck, the
big man smiled up at the man on the pier.

"I ain't going to bust her," he assured him; "I guess I'm a pretty good
driver?"

"Of course you are," laughed Adriance, leaning down to give him his slip
and a hand-clasp by way of encouragement. "You're all right, Michael;
take care of yourself and remember what I told you about going slow."

"Sure!" A smile widened the broad lips. "Say, I guess it's a pretty good
thing we wasn't being checked up this way when we met that actor lady,
yes?"

"Never mind her." Adriance's color rose a trifle. "I am not holding any
one down to too close time, either; but this is a rush morning. Go along
now."

And Michael placidly went.

The room began to clear before the efforts of the excitable, nervous Mr.
Cook at one end and the quiet management of the young man at the other
extremity of the place. This was far more exacting work than driving one
of those motor-trucks he dispatched in such imperious fashion, Adriance
soon discovered. For he did not merely hand each driver a slip stating
his destination, as was the custom of Ransome. Under that system
Adriance knew from his own observation that hours a day were wasted by
the men. Only if a chauffeur outrageously over-staid the reasonable time
for his journey did he receive a sarcastic rebuke, which was
sufficiently answered by the allegation of engine trouble. The new
method was received with astonishment and some scowls, but without
revolt. Instead of each truck sent out failing to return until the noon
hour, two, and even three trips were completed during the morning. There
were some complaints, of course. Adriance cut them off in their
incipience. He was enjoying himself in spite of the strain.

In the middle of the morning, when the trucks first sent out began to
come in again, Cook left his post for a few moments. Adriance did not
see him leave, nor did he note that two other men returned with his
temporary colleague and remained standing for some time in the shadow of
the pillared arcade around the wall, watching the proceedings on the
floor. During a lull in the coming and going, when Adriance was sorting
his piles of slips, one of these men walked out to his raised enclosure.

"Good morning," the stranger opened.

"Good morning," Adriance absently replied; turning his head and
perceiving his visitor to be a frail little old gentleman, he offered
him the solitary chair. Of course he knew that his visitor must be
connected with the factory, if only from the air of tranquil assurance
with which he settled his _pince-nez_ and surveyed the younger man.

"How do you keep all those apart?" he questioned, motioning toward the
slips.

"Put them in order on a file as the men go out, then turn the heap over.
The first one out should be the first one in," explained Adriance,
smiling. "Of course, I have to keep together those who have
approximately the same distance to cover. It is a very rough and ready
method, I know; but it was devised under the stress of the moment. A row
of boxes with a compartment for each truck numbered to correspond would
be one better way that occurs to me; but, of course, I am merely a
temporary interloper."

"My name is Goodwin; Mr. Cook did not tell me yours----?"

The manager of the factory and his father's associate! It was the purest
chance that Tony and he never had met at the Adriance house. But Mr.
Goodwin belonged to an older generation than the senior Adriance, his
home was in Englewood and he rarely came to New York unless upon
business--the great city was distasteful to him. Something of this
Adriance recollected after his first dismay, and drew such reassurance
from it as he might, as he answered:

"My name is Adriance, Mr. Goodwin."

"Adriance?"

"Yes, sir. It is not so odd; I am a distant connection of the New York
family, I believe." He had a cloudy recollection of a witty Frenchman
who alluded to an estranged member of his family as his "distant
brother."

"I see, I see; after all, even somewhat unusual names are constantly
repeated." Mr. Goodwin scrutinized the other in the glare of artificial
light that rather confused vision. "But, excuse me, you hardly speak
like a chauffeur."

"Does not that depend on the chauffeur?" Adriance parried pleasantly. "I
hope not to remain one all my life, anyhow."

"Ah--certainly. Mr. Cook asked me to come down and observe the
improvement in the conditions here this morning. I am pleased, much
pleased. I should have regulated the system in this department before;
but these modern innovations press upon me rather fast. I looked forward
to retiring, I do indeed," he coughed impatiently and glanced vaguely
over the great room. "However, that is not the point. I should like you
to keep this position, Adriance; at least until Mr. Ransome recovers. I
hear he is threatened with pneumonia."

"I should be glad to do so, Mr. Goodwin."

"We might use him in the office to better advantage. Well, we will try
your system first. Write an order for any filing cabinets or apparatus
you deem necessary. Give it to Mr. Cook and I will see personally that
all is supplied. This is a critical moment on which may depend a
considerable trade with South America. Cook tells me that more goods
have been moved this morning than in any entire day recently. We had
thought of buying more trucks."

"I think that is not required, sir; I wish you would try my way for a
week before doing so, at least. It is only a question of using to the
full extent the materials on hand. I fancy new troubles grow up with new
institutions, and an outsider may more easily see the remedy."

"Yes? Young blood in the business, you think? Perhaps, perhaps."

Two trucks roared into the place and up to Adriance's post. When he had
finished with them and sent them on to Cook's end of the room, he turned
back to Mr. Goodwin; but that gentleman, satisfied as to the improved
conditions, was already stepping into the elevator to return to his own
offices above.

"Seventy-three, the old top is," remarked Cook, running over to pass his
fellow-worker a mass of memoranda. "Keen as ever, but not up-to-date,
that is all. Here--these to the dock, these to the Erie yards; this
straight to the decorator on Fifth Avenue, who is waiting for it--it's a
special design landscape-paper for a club grill-room on Long Island.
Rush the one to the steamer--Long Island and Buffalo can wait."

"You were mighty good to help me that way," said Adriance. He took the
slip, regarding the little man with a glance in which many thoughts met.
He smiled at one of these, and his face became warmly kind for an
instant and rather startled Cook.

"You helped me out of a scrape by volunteering this morning," Cook
answered, a trifle abruptly. "I only asked him to come see how things
were going. You are to keep on here?"

"Yes, for the present."

"Glad of it! Ever do this kind of work before?"

"Handling trucks?"

"No; handling men."

Adriance considered.

"Only on a yacht, I think."

A group of four trucks came in. Outside a whistle began to blow; others
joined the clamor and a gong clanged heavily through the intermittent
shudder of the machinery-crowded building. Twelve o'clock! Cook hurried
away to his own men, who had fallen idle with the surprising promptness
of the true workmen; and the examination was ended. Adriance foresaw
that it would recommence, but he was indifferent. He cared very little
how soon his father discovered him, now that he had resolved to seek his
father as soon as he saw his way a little more clearly.

He was profoundly gratified and excited by this morning's success. It
gave him self-confidence, and it enabled him to ask a share in the
factory's management with something more tangible to offer his father
than the mere assertion that he saw improvements to be made. He actually
had accomplished something. He would save many thousands of dollars by
utilizing the machines on hand instead of purchasing more of the costly
motor-trucks, with their expenses of upkeep, additional chauffeurs, and
inevitable deterioration from use.

He walked out into the cold, fresh air to glimpse the sunshine and cool
his hot flush of satisfaction. He thought of Elsie with a passion of
tenderness and triumph. He resolved that he would not tell her of his
plans until they were better assured. He must begin to shelter her from
excitement or possible disappointment. No, he would not speak of the
reconciliation he hoped to effect with his father; not yet. But of
course he would tell her of his new position in the factory, and they
would exult over it together. Adriance decided he would wait until their
dinner was over and cleared away, then he would draw her down beside him
in the firelight and astonish her.

There was a little lunch cart across the way, much frequented by
chauffeurs, car-conductors and ferry-men. He went there for his lunch,
as he usually did when noon found him near the factory. It seemed to him
that there was already a little difference in the way the fellow-workers
whom he found there treated him. Already they seemed to feel that he was
moving away from them--had taken the upper trail, as it were. Indeed, he
felt a change in himself not to be denied. It was not arrogance, merely
the assurance of a man who sees a definite path before him and follows
it to his own end; he had ceased to live from day to day.

But he was quite sure that he would never forget this day. If he had a
son he would tell him about this when he reached manhood. And he would
be his son's guide to this satisfaction of work accomplished, lest he
miss it altogether, as Tony himself so nearly had done. There were to be
no worthless Adriances.




CHAPTER XIII

WHAT TONY BUILT


By a caprice of chance, it was that day Masterson came; almost at the
hour when Adriance, tired and exultant, was rearing a structure of good
dreams as he ate his cheap food at the counter of the lunch-cart under
the shadow of the huge electric sign bearing his name.

Morning had arrived at noon, when Elsie was called to her front door by
a clang of the bell; one of those small gongs favored years ago, that
snap with a pulled handle. Down at the end of the straight path she
heard laughter and the high-pitched voices of women above the soft roll
of an automobile's motor. Surprised, she opened the door.

Before her, on the high, absurd little porch, a man in motoring furs
stood and steadied himself by grasping the snow-powdered railing.
Confronted by a woman, he lifted his cap, and a sunbeam piercing the old
roof gleamed across his close-clipped auburn curls.

"I was told at the little shop that a chauffeur lived here," he
explained, pleasantly enough. The glare of the sun on snow dazzled his
first vision. "Our compressed air system is out of order, and my man
forgot to put in a hand-pump. I----"

His voice trailed away into silence. He had seen her face.

"Elsie?" he doubted. "Elsie?"

She smiled at him with her serene composure, although deep color swept
over her face with the startled movement of her blood.

"Mrs. Adriance," she corrected. "Will you not come in? I am sorry Mr.
Adriance is not at home."

He crossed the threshold mechanically, his gaze not leaving her.

"I did not believe it," he exclaimed, under his breath. "I thought
Lucille--lied."

"Mr. Masterson!"

He shook his head in deprecation of offense, continuing his scrutiny of
her. He had the appearance of a man fevered by drink or illness; his
eyes were bright behind a surface glaze, his face was haggard, yet
flushed. His features, always of a fineness almost suggesting
effeminacy, had sharpened to an extreme delicacy that promised little
for health or endurance.

"They told me a chauffeur lived here," he said, presently.

"Anthony is a chauffeur," she answered, compassion for the change in him
making her voice very gentle. "But I am afraid we have no automobile
tools to lend. All such things are kept at the factory or in the machine
he drives."

He swept aside the subject of automobiles with an impatient movement of
his hand, and slowly turned to look over the room.

It had gathered much of comfort during those last months, that room; and
something more. Scarlet-flowered curtains hung at the windows, echoing
the vivid note of scarlet salvia in bloom on the sills. A shelf of books
had been put up; beneath, a small table held the jade-and-ivory chessmen
drawn up in battle array on their field. As always, the fire glowed, and
on the hearth the cat stretched drowsily. Cheer dwelt in the place, the
atmosphere of comradeship and assured love; and the pulse of it all was
the girl who stood, tranquil of regard, rich in life and beautiful with
health, princess in her own domain.

At her Masterson looked longest, his handsome, bitter mouth oddly
twisted out of shape.

"You're different," he pronounced, finally.

"I am very happy."

"Happy? Here? You married a millionaire's son to live here?"

"I married to live with my husband," she proudly corrected him.

Again he looked around, and suddenly laughed out with an over-loud lack
of control that in a woman would have been called hysterical.

"Tony Adriance's house!" he cried, striking his gloved hands together.
"Tony--idle Tony, easy Tony, Tony of teas and tangos--Tony has built
this! Why----," he bent toward her. "You have been matching work with
God, Elsie Adriance; you have made a man!"

She drew back, aghast at the bold irreverence. He laughed again at her
expression.

"You think I meant that wrongly? I did not. I know well enough the way
Tony is going, and the way I am. That is if he sticks to this! Are you
never afraid he will not! Never afraid he will drift back to the easier
ways?"

"No," she affirmed. A shining radiance lighted her confident eyes. She
carried beneath her heart that which made Anthony and her forever one.
Fear was done with; it no longer, wolf-like, hunted down her happiness.

"No? Do you think he will be content to be a chauffeur on a honeymoon
all his life? I'm going to do something decent, Elsie; I'm going to help
you clinch Tony Adriance. No, don't protest. I'm going to force my help
on you both, wanted or not. Why, you can't keep him out of New York
forever! Send him there to-night, to me, and I'll finish what you have
begun."

Amazed and dismayed, she retreated from his urgency.

"Excuse me," she began a stiff refusal.

He cut her short with impatience.

"Then I'll leave a message for him. Don't look like that; I only want
him to meet me in a public restaurant. Can't you trust me?"

"You do not understand."

"I understand more than you do," he retorted bluntly. "But if I am
wrong, no harm will be done. I want to see him, anyhow. Are you afraid
of me?"

"No."

"Well, then----?"

He pulled off his gloves and took a card and fountain pen from his
pocket. Elsie watched him helplessly as he wrote, chilled in spite of
herself by a return of the old dread. What, was she not able to hold
Anthony certainly, even now? She tried to look around her, fortifying
her spirit with all the prosaic evidences of their united life. After
all, Masterson knew "Tony"; he knew nothing of the man Anthony was.

She was able to meet her visitor's glance with her usual calm, when he
put the message he had written into her hand.

"Tell him to come," he pressed. "Have you forgotten he and I were
friends? And I'll always be grateful to you for loving Holly. Did you
know I had lost Holly?"

She paled, the baby face rising before her.

"Lost him! Not----?"

"Dead? No. I'm the one who is dead, to borrow a bit of slang."

His laugh was bitter as quassia; he turned his head toward the sound of
the automobile horn that summoned him.

"A dead one!" he repeated. "I have to go, Mrs. Adriance. But send Tony
over, to-night."

The door closed on the last word. Elsie heard the high, rather strident
voices of the women calling salute and impatience; then Masterson's
reply set in a key of strained merriment. The motor roared under the
chauffeur's hand. They were departing; evidently a means of inflating
the tire had been found.

The peace of Elsie's day had departed with them. The alteration in
Masterson frightened her; the strangeness of his manner and of his
invitation filled her with anxiety. Something was wrong; something she
could not guess or understand. Why should he have spoken so of Holly?
Why, too, did he want Anthony this night?

Was Mrs. Masterson to be one of the party at the restaurant? That idea
came later. The mere possibility of such an event fixed Elsie's
decision; she would not send Anthony to the meeting desired. She would
let Masterson's accidental visit pass unnoticed.

But when evening came, and with it Adriance, ruddy with the March wind,
boyishly hungry and gay; when he took his wife in his arms and kissed
her with the deep tenderness that the morning had added to their first
love, Elsie knew better. Better any misfortune than the barrier of
deceit between them. And she remembered in time that it was not for her
to deprive him of his right of decision and free-will.

She waited until supper was eaten and the blue-and-white dishes shining
in their rack again beside the ten-cent-shop china.

"Shall we go on with our book?" Adriance proposed, when his pipe was
lit. Now that the moment had come, it pleased him to dally with the
surprise he held for her, to prolong his secret content. He stretched
luxuriously in his arm-chair. "Lord, it's good to get home! Funny I
never cared much about books until we took to reading aloud, isn't it?
Come over and settle down. I think we'll turn in early to-night, if you
don't mind, girl. I want to do some extra work, to-morrow."

She came to him rather slowly.

"Mr. Masterson was here to-day," she said reluctantly. "He came by
chance, to borrow something for his automobile. I think it was a
tire-pump. Of course he was surprised to find me. And he left this for
you."

Astonished, he took the card, pulling her down beside him; and they read
the message together. It was very brief, yet somehow carried a force of
compulsion. Masterson urged his friend to go that night to the ball-room
of a certain restaurant known to every New Yorker, and there wait until
he, Masterson, joined him.

There was a pause after the reading. Adriance stared at the card with
the knitted brow of perplexity, while Elsie watched his face in tense
suspense.

"It would be too late, now, anyway," she murmured, tentatively. "It is
eight o'clock."

Adriance aroused himself and laughed.

"Oh, innocence! That ball-room does not open until eleven, fair
outlander. But you had better get ready, for we have a quite
respectable distance to go. Here vanishes our quiet evening!"

"We? You would take me?"

He regarded her curiously.

"Did you suppose I would go without you? We will have to go, because
Fred means this; I know him well enough to tell. I'm afraid he is in
some kind of trouble."

Elsie shut her eyes for a moment, mastering her passionate relief. She
opened them to a new thought.

"Anthony, I haven't any clothes, for such a place."

"Neither have I," he calmly dismissed the matter. "We will go in street
costume. It doesn't matter, since we do not want to dance. By the way,
can you dance?"

"Certainly."

"The new dances?"

"Some of them," a dimple disturbed her smooth cheek. "Not the very new
one."

"Well, I'll teach you. But you will only dance with me," he stated with
finality.

Absurdly happy in the jealous prohibition, she went to make ready.

Elsie Murray had possessed one dress that Elsie Adriance never had worn.
It was a year old, one brought from her distant home, but so simply made
that its fashion would still pass. It was an afternoon, not evening
gown; a clinging, black sheath of chiffon and net, covering her arms,
but leaving bare the creamy pillar of her throat. The cloudy darkness
echoed the dark softness of her hair and threw into relief her clear,
health-tinted beauty of complexion. When she wore it into the room where
her husband waited, he greeted her with a whistle of surprise and
pleasure.

"Some lady!" he approved. "What did you mean--no clothes? Have I seen
that before?"

"No. Do you like me this way?"

He put his hands on her shoulders, looking down into her eyes.

"Of course. But don't you know it doesn't matter what you wear or have?"
he asked. "We have got away beyond that, you and I."

They walked to the ferry; two miles through the cold darkness. But they
found the journey a pleasure, not a hardship. Elsie had taught Anthony
her art of extracting amusement from each experience. On the ferryboat,
they had sole possession of the deck. "Mollycoddles," Elsie called the
passengers who huddled into the cabins. The wind painted her cheeks and
lips scarlet, as she leaned over the rail to hear the crunch of drift
ice under the boat's sides. The two evoked quite a sense of arctic
voyage, between them. Anthony gravely insisted he had seen a polar bear
on one tossing floe. They were happy enough to relish nonsense; and more
excited by the coming meeting and place of meeting than either would
have admitted.




CHAPTER XIV

THE CABARET DANCER


It was eleven o'clock when they entered the revolving door of the
restaurant appointed, and faced a group of lounging attendants in the
lobby; cynical-eyed servitors, all. Tony Adriance was recognized by
these with a vivifying promptness; at once he was surrounded, addressed
by name, had officious service pressed upon him. It was strange to the
girl to see him so familiar in this place where she never had been;
strange, and a little disquieting. But her grave poise was undisturbed.
She left her simple hat and coat with a maid, aware of their
unsuitability for the place and hour.

They did not enter the crowded room to their right, where an orchestra
was overwhelming all other and lesser din with a crashing one-step.
Instead, Anthony turned up a shining marble stair with a plush-cushioned
balustrade and too much gilding. Elsie viewed herself beside him in
mirrors set in the wall at regular intervals.

The stairs ended at an arcaded hall, beyond which lay a long, brilliant
room, comfortably filled with people at supper. Filled, that is,
according to its arrangement: the entire central space of gleaming,
ice-smooth floor was empty, the tables were ranged around the four
walls. The guests here wore evening dress, for the most part, so that
the room glowed with color, delicate, vivid or glaring, as the taste of
the owner dictated. Here there was comparative quiet; the voices and
laughter were lower in pitch than down-stairs.

"Is Mr. Masterson here?" Anthony questioned the head waiter, who
hastened to meet the arriving couple.

"Not yet, Mr. Adriance," the man answered deferentially. "At twelve, he
comes. May I show you a table, sir?"

"Yes. Not too near the music--Mrs. Adriance and I want to hear each
other speak."

"Certainly, sir. The drum _will_ be loud, sir; but the dancers like it."

Elsie caught the man's side glance of respectful curiosity and interest
directed toward herself, and understood why Anthony deliberately had
fixed her identity as his wife. Pride warmed her, and love of his
consideration for her; suddenly she was able to enjoy the scene around
her. She felt no self-consciousness, even when the elaborately gowned
and coifed women glanced over her appraisingly as she passed by their
tables. She looked back at them, serenely sure of herself. She was not
at all aware that many of the men stared at her with startled admiration
of a visitor alien to this atmosphere. Adriance saw well enough,
however. Elsie had an innocent dignity of carriage that, joined with her
gravely candid gaze, was not a little imposing. Moreover her pure,
bright color and clear eyes were disconcertingly natural beside the
artificial beauties. Pride of possession tingled agreeably through him;
he had not thought of this or expected the emotion.

When the two were seated opposite one another, the regard they exchanged
was of glowing content. Adriance ordered supper with the interest of
appetite and with a fine knowledge of her tastes and his own. Then, at
ease, they smiled at each other. The extravagance of the feast was of no
moment. The utter simplicity of their daily life made Anthony's salary
more than sufficient; they already possessed the resource of a bank
account.

So far, there had been no music, except faint echoes from the room
below. Now a tinkle of strings sounded delicately, swelling from a
single note into a full, minor waltz melody. Turning, Elsie saw the
musicians. They were negroes; not a band or an orchestra, merely a
pianist, two men with mandolins and as many with banjoes, and one who
handled with amazing dexterity a whole set of sound producers; a drum,
cymbals, bells, a gong, even an automobile horn. From one to another
instrument, as the character of the piece demanded, this performer's
hands and feet flew with accuracy and ludicrous speed. But the music was
more than good, it was unique, inspired; it snared the feet and the
senses. All round sounded the scraping of chairs pushed back, as men and
women rose to answer the call. In one short moment the place changed
from a restaurant to a ball-room.

It was such a ball-room as Elsie Adriance never had glimpsed in either
her Louisiana or restricted New York experiences. The women were
costumed in the extreme fashions of a year when all fashion was extreme.
As the dancers swayed past in the graceful, hesitating steps of the last
new waltz, there were revelations;--of low-cut draperies, of skirts
transparent to the knees, with ribbon-laced slippers jewelled at heel
and buckle glancing through the thin veil of tinted chiffon or lace. The
scene had an Oriental frankness without being blatant or coarse. At the
tables there was much drinking of wine and liqueurs, but as yet no
apparent intoxication. Some of the women who were not dancing smoked
cigarettes as they chatted with their companions; not a few of these had
white hair and were obviously matrons, respected and self-respecting.

"What do you think of it?" Adriance inquired, after watching his wife
with mischief in his eyes.

"I don't know," she slowly confessed. "You know, I am an outlander. But
I am not so stupid as to misunderstand too badly. These people are--all
right?"

"Yes; most of them. This is the after-theatre crowd. Some are from the
stage, some from the audience. That lady in green chiffon who looks as
if she had forgotten to put on most of her clothes is the wife of one of
my father's business associates. Did you see her husband bow to us as we
came in? The little black-eyed girl in the black velvet walking-suit, at
the next table, is La Tanagra, who does classic dances in a yard of pink
veil. She is a very nice girl, too. Of course, some of them----" He
shrugged.

The music stopped. Through a press of laughing, flushed people returning
to their tables, a waiter wound a difficult passage with the first
course of the supper Adriance had ordered.

Guests entered the room in a thin, constant stream, as the hour
advanced. But there was no sign of Masterson. Elsie wondered what he
would say on finding her with Anthony. Would he be angry, indifferent,
disconcerted? Perhaps he would not come alone.

A sharp, imperious clang of cymbals rang out abruptly, hushing the
murmur of voices and laughter. Elsie started from her abstraction, and
saw all eyes turned toward the centre of the room.

"Demonstration dance," smiled Adriance. "Now you'll see something!"

A short, dark man and a woman in yellow gauze through which showed her
bare, dimpled knees, stood alone on the floor. At a second clang of
cymbals they floated with the music into a strange, half-Spanish,
half-savage dance; a dance vigorously, even crudely alive and swift as a
flight. The woman was not beautiful, but she was incredibly graceful.
Her small, arched, flashing feet in their gilded slippers recalled a
half-forgotten line to Elsie.

"'And her sandals delighted his eyes----'" she quoted aloud. "Do you
remember that, Anthony?"

But Adriance was laughing at her.

"Infant!" he mocked. "Wait until you've seen it as often as I have, and
then you will not let your supper grow cold. There, it's over!"

It was. The dance ended with the dancers in each other's arms, glances
knit, lips almost touching. The applause was courteous. The audience,
like Adriance, was too sophisticated to be readily excited. It really
preferred to do its own dancing.

The preference was gratified during the next half hour. One-step,
fox-trot and a Lulu Fado followed in smooth succession. The room was
very full, now. One or two parties began to show too much exhilaration.

"I wish Fred would come," Adriance remarked, with a restive glance at
the noisiest group. "I don't want you to be here much after midnight. I
wonder----"

He was interrupted by a second crash of brazen cymbals that struck down
the chatter and movement of the crowd. With the harsh, resonant clang,
and continuing after it had ceased, came the soft chime of a clock
striking twelve.

This time a more decided interest greeted the announcement. In fact, a
distinct thrill ran through the room. Men and women abandoned forks and
glasses, turning eagerly toward the entrance. A marked hush continued in
the place.

"Some celebrity," Adriance interpreted, impatiently. "Confound
Masterson's whims--why couldn't he have seen me at home? Now he can't
get in until this is over."

The music had commenced--a tripping languorous ballet suite from a
famous opera. Into the large, square arch of the doorway a girl drifted
and stood.

She was a sullen, magnificent creature, as she faced the audience. Her
full, red mouth was straight-lipped, returning no smile to the welcoming
applause. It was not possible to imagine a dimple breaking the firm
curve of her rouged cheek. Elsie thought she never had seen a woman so
indisputably handsome, or so utterly lacking in feminine allure. Heaps
of satin-black hair framed her face and were held by jewelled bandeaux;
her corsage was dangerously low, retained in place by narrow strings of
brilliants over her strong, smooth, white shoulders. Her skirts were
those of the conventional ballet: billows of spangled rose-colored
tulle. As she began to dance, her eyes, very large and dark behind their
darkened lashes, swept the spectators with a sombre alertness. Elsie
felt the glance pass across her and rest on Anthony. Yes, rest there,
for an instant of fixed attention! But Adriance showed no change of
expression to his wife's questioning regard; he watched the dancer with
a placid interest, without evincing any sign of recognition.

It was a curious dance, as singularly stripped of womanly allure as the
girl's beauty. Yet it was graceful and clever. She bent and swayed
through the measures, circling the room with a studied coquetry cold as
indifference; posing now and then with a rose she lifted to touch lips
or cheek. The audience looked on with a sustained tension of interest
that the performance did not seem to warrant. Elsie noticed that the men
laughed or evinced faint embarrassment if the dancer leaned toward them,
but the women clapped enthusiastically and sent smiling glances. What
was it that these people knew, but which she and Anthony did not? There
was something----

Just opposite the Adriances the dancer had slipped in executing an
intricate and difficult step. She staggered, catching herself, but not
before she had reeled heavily against Elsie's chair.

"Pardon!" she panted, her voice low. "The floor is too polished!"

For a moment her eyes looked full into Elsie's, and they were not dark,
but a very bright blue. The brush of her naked arm and shoulder left a
streak of white powder on the other's sleeve; a heavy fragrance of
heliotrope shook from her garments. Before Adriance could rise she was
gone.

"Confounded clumsiness!" he exclaimed, with suppressed anger. "Did she
hurt you, Elsie?"

"No. Oh, no! Anthony, I know her--I knew her eyes."

He stared at his wife.

"You know her!"

"I recognized her eyes. I do not know who she is, I cannot think; yet I
know her. She knew me, too; I saw it in her face. And I believe she
knows you."

"Elsie!"

"She looked---- Wait; she is finishing!"

The music was indeed rising to a finale. The dancer glided to the
central arch through which she had entered, poised on the verge of
taking flight, then raised both hands to her head.

The black wig came off with the sweeping gesture. The dancer was a man,
whose short-clipped auburn hair tumbled in boyish disorder about his
powdered forehead. But there was no look of boyhood in his face, as he
turned it toward Adriance's table; the familiar, reckless face of Fred
Masterson.

The room was in an uproar of laughter and applause. But the dancer
disappeared without acknowledging or pausing to enjoy his success;
indeed, as if escaping from it.

When Elsie ventured to look at her husband, he had one hand across his
eyes. He dropped it at once, but avoided her gaze as if the humiliation
were his own.

"Finish your coffee," he bade, his voice roughened by a dry hoarseness.
"I want to get out of this--to get home."

"We have not spoken to Mr. Masterson," she hesitatingly reminded him.
"He asked us to meet him."

"I suppose I have seen what he wanted me to see."

The waiter was beside them again, checking her answer. It seemed to
Elsie that the man eyed Anthony with a furtive and malicious
comprehension. Had he ever seen Tony Adriance with Mrs. Masterson, she
wondered? Did he imagine--she thrust away the thought.

"After all, dear, aren't we prejudiced?" she essayed, unconvinced and
unconvincing reason. "Isn't it really as if he were an actor?"

"No, it isn't! You know it's not. It isn't what he does that these
people applaud; they applaud because he does it. He succeeds by making a
show of himself, his name, his position. The grotesqueness of his being
here succeeds, not his work. Well--are you ready?"

"Yes," she answered, submissive to his mood.

He paid the check, and they passed out. Elsie recovered her hat and coat
from the maid, in the dressing-room below. She was too preoccupied to
notice the attendant's inquisitive scrutiny, or the frank stare of a
fair-haired girl who was making up her complexion with elaborate care
before one of the mirrors. It would not have occurred to her, if she
had, that word had passed down the staff of servants that the quiet
girl in black was Mrs. Tony Adriance. But without knowing her own plain
attire had the reflected lustre of cloth-of-gold, she was too feminine
not to embrace with a glance of faintly wistful admiration the furs,
velvets and shining satins of the wraps left in this place by the other
women. No preoccupation could quite ignore that array. There was one
coat of gray velvet that matched her own eyes, lined with poppy-hued
silk that matched her lips. A trifle dismayed by her own frivolity, she
hastened out from the place of temptation. Anthony was waiting for her.




CHAPTER XV

THE OTHER MAN'S ROAD


The damp cold of a March night closed chillingly around the two, as they
passed through the revolving door into the street. The restaurant did
not face on Broadway, the street of a million lights; for a moment they
seemed to have stepped into darkness, after the dazzle of light just
left. Adriance turned away from the vociferous proffers of taxicabs,
with an economy prompted by Elsie's guiding hand rather than his own
prudence. Indeed, his great amazement and vicarious shame for Masterson
left him with slight attention for ordinary matters.

But they were not allowed to reach the subway, and return as they had
come. As they neared the station entrance, a limousine rolled up to the
curb and halted across their path. The car's occupant threw open the
door before the chauffeur could do so, and leaned out.

"Come in," commanded, rather than invited Masterson's voice. "You
didn't wait for me, so I had a chase to catch you. Put Mrs. Adriance in,
Tony, and tell the man where you want to go. The ferry, is it? All
right; tell him so."

He spoke with an abrupt impatience and strain that excused much by its
account of his sick nerves. Adriance complied without objection. Before
she quite realized the situation, Elsie found herself seated beside him,
opposite Masterson in the warmed interior of the car.

The air of the limousine was not only warm, but perfumed. Without
analyzing their reason, it struck both the Adriances as peculiarly
shocking that this should be so. Elsie identified the white heliotrope
scent worn by the dancer. The globe set in the ceiling was not lighted,
but the street lamps shone in, showing the thinness of Masterson's
flushed face and its haggardness, accentuated by smudges of make-up
imperfectly removed. Elsie felt a quivering embarrassment for him, and a
desperate hopelessness of finding anything possible to say. She divined
that Anthony was experiencing the same feelings, but intensified.

The car rolled smoothly around Columbus Circle and settled into a steady
pace up Broadway. The rush of after-theatre traffic was long since over,
the streets comparatively clear. Masterson spoke first, with a defiance
that attempted to be light.

"Well, haven't you any compliments for me? I've been told I do it pretty
well. That's the only thing I learned at college of any use to me!"

"How did you come----?" Adriance began, brusquely. "I mean--what sent
you there, to that? Why, Fred----?"

"I thought it was you, Tony, until to-day," was the dry retort. "I've
thought so ever since I found out who was financing the case. Until this
morning, I believed Lucille lied when she told me you were married. I
suppose I should apologize to you; consider it done, if you like."

"Don't!" Adriance begged. His hand closed sharply over his wife's.

"We have been married since last November," she gravely came to his aid.
"I am sure Mrs. Masterson told you only the truth in that. Indeed, the
announcement was published in the newspapers! Since then, we have been
living where you saw me this morning; on a honeymoon quite out of the
world."

"I don't read more of any newspaper than the first pages," Masterson
returned. "I see you two do not read even so much, or you would hardly
have been taken by surprise, to-night. Shocked, were you, Tony? I
suppose I would have been, myself, once. Now----"

"Now----?" Adriance prompted, after waiting.

Masterson faced his friend with a sudden blaze in his hollow eyes.

"Now, I am through with being shocked at myself, through with thinking
of myself or sparing myself and other people. Can't you see, can't you
guess for whom alone I would do this--or anything else? Have you
forgotten Holly? I may not have a wife, but I have a son. And I will not
have my son reared as I was, married as I was, and ruined as I am. I am
going to have money, if I fish it out of the gutter, to take him away to
some clean, far-off place. There I shall rear him myself, understand! He
shall never know this Fred Masterson. Roughing it outdoors will put me
in fit condition long before he is old enough to criticise. He's got a
fine little body, Tony! I'll have him as hard and straight as a pine
tree. I'll teach him to work. What will I care for the squalls of this
corner of the world, when I have done that? Since Lucille divorced me,
I've stripped my mind of a good deal of hampering romance."

He was interrupted by the exclamation of both his listeners.

"Divorced you?" Adriance echoed, stifled by the pressure of warring
emotions. "Divorced you, after all?"

"You don't mean to say you didn't know?" He studied the two faces with
incredulous astonishment; then, convinced by their patent honesty,
shrugged derision of himself. "Conceited lot, all of us! We think if our
tea-cups drop, the crash is heard around the world. Yes, I have been a
single man for three months. You have been away for six, remember. But
it went through very quietly. Lucille is strong for propriety and
conventions. She even," his face darkened with an angry flood of
bitterness startling as a self-betrayal, "she even is willing to pay
pretty highly for them. Holly----"

The sentence remained unfinished. Elsie's memory returned to that
morning, when Masterson told her that he had lost Holly. She glimpsed
his meaning now.

The automobile had long since left behind the flash and glitter of
theatrical Broadway. When the gliding silence of the progress was
suddenly broken by a blast of the car's electric horn sounding warning
to some late pedestrian, the three within started as if at an unnatural
happening.

"It went through quietly," Masterson sullenly picked up the broken
thread, "because she bargained with me. She said that if I made no
defence, she would let me take Holly. Well, I kept my word; I stayed
away from the whole business and didn't even get a lawyer--like a fool.
I don't even know what they said about me. I didn't care, since she
wanted it. And then she asked the court for the custody of Holly; and
got him. It was only for the boy's good, she says; I was not fit to have
charge of him."

"Oh!" Elsie gasped.

Masterson lighted a cigarette with an attempt at unconcern. He had a
singular difficulty in bringing the burning match in contact with the
end of the little paper tube--a lack of coordination between the nerves
and muscles that held a sinister meaning for one able to interpret the
signs.

"Thanks," he acknowledged the unworded sympathy. "Maybe you know I was
fit, then; or, at least, would have been fit if I had had him. Not
having him, I went to--I beg your pardon, Mrs. Adriance."

"Fred----" Adriance essayed.

The other man hushed him with a gesture.

"I know what you are going to say, Tony. Don't! My wife, my _late_ wife
and I have managed this business. Keep out of what doesn't concern you.
Here, I'll give her due to her, too! If I had not been weak, all this
would never have happened. But if she had played the game, it would
never have happened, either. Well, I lose. But Holly shall not pay for
the game he had no share in. I am telling you two what I have told no
one else. When I have enough money, I shall buy Holly from his mother
and take him to Oregon. Lucille always needs money. Phillips is out
there, Tony. Do you remember my Cousin Phil? Well, I started him out
there ten years ago; sold my first automobile to help him out of a bad
scrape. He says there is room for me; work that will support any man who
doesn't want too much. They raise square miles of fruit. I only wish it
was the other side of the world!"

The limousine swung to the left, jarring across a network of car tracks.
They were turning down to the ferry. Elsie nestled her hand into her
husband's, divining his pain.

"Nice machine, this," Masterson observed, casually. "One thing, I'm not
making a gutter exit! You wouldn't believe what they pay me for my bit
of college theatrical work. I did it at first on a bet, after a supper
party I gave to celebrate my freedom. I think it must annoy Lucille
considerably. It suits me; and there isn't any other way I could earn so
quickly what I need. Here we are."

The automobile had stopped, and the chauffeur threw open the door.

"The ferry-boat is just coming across, sir," he stated.

"Very well," his employer dismissed him. "Mrs. Adriance, you had better
stay in here until the boat docks; it is cold, to-night. Tony and I will
go buy the tickets."

"You might say Elsie, still," she answered gently. "You know we were
always good friends."

"You are good to say so now," he returned. "Thank you."

The two men did not buy the tickets; instead, they walked side by side
across the rough, cobblestone square in front of the ferry-house.
Adriance was pale, but steadily set of face and determination to have
done, here and now with all deceit.

"Fred, I've got to clear things between us," he forced the distasteful
speech. "Before I met my wife, I did see a great deal of Mrs. Masterson.
You spoke a while ago of believing me responsible for her wanting a
divorce. Once I might have done such a thing, I do not know. But, I did
not. I went away, in order that I should not."

The other nodded, almost equally embarrassed by the difficult avowal.

"That's all right, Tony. I understand. But don't blame me too much for
my mistake. Do you know who paid all the expenses of the case, whose
influence kept it out of the newspapers as much as possible--in short,
who managed the whole campaign? Except about Holly; that was a woman's
trick! Do you know?"

"Why, no. How should I?"

The boat was in the slip; across the clank of unwinding chains, the fall
of gangways and tread of men and horses, Masterson's reply came:

"Your father."

The amazing statement stunned Adriance beyond the possibility of reply.
No outcry, no denial of complicity could have been so convincing as the
utter stupefaction of the regard he fixed upon his friend. What had the
senior Adriance to do with this affair? What had he to do with Lucille
Masterson?

"It is true," Masterson answered his doubt. "Now you know why I did not
believe you were married, until I met your wife, this morning. And," he
hesitated, "that is why, when I did understand, I brought you to see me,
to-night. I could not say so before Mrs. Adriance, but evidently your
father is not pleased with your marriage, since you're living like a
laborer, across the river. Make no mistake, Tony; your father never in
his life did anything without reason. If he got Lucille her divorce,
why, he knows you admired her, once. And he always liked her, himself.
Suppose he figured that if she were free, you might wish to become so?
Why not? We all know couples where both parties have been divorced and
married several times, and no one says a word against them."

The recoil that shook Adriance was strong as physical sickness. Like a
woman, he was glad of the darkness.

Divorce between Elsie and himself? He could have laughed at the coarse
absurdity of the idea, if it had not been for his disgust and desire to
get away from the subject.

"We shall miss the boat," he said curtly. "Thank you, Fred, but that is
all nonsense. The truth of the matter is that you are sick--and no
wonder! Come, man, pull yourself up and you'll get past all this. Why,
you are only twenty-eight; start over again here! Drop everything and
come home with Elsie and me for a while. You saw how we live; it isn't
much, perhaps, but you would get back your health. And we can force Mrs.
Masterson to let you have Holly part of the time, at least."

"I saw the way you live," Masterson repeated. "Yes. And you see the way
I live. I'm no preacher, but measure them up and choose if ever you feel
discontented, Tony. As for taking me home, neither of us could stand it.
I drink all day to keep myself merry enough to stand that restaurant,
and take morphine at night to keep myself asleep. No, we will not talk
about it. I must put this through in my own way, and then leave this
part of the earth. I can drop all this at once when I am ready. I am no
weakling physically."

The two wanted back to the car. Just before they reached it, Masterson
closed the discussion.

"Think over what I've told you. You can't love your wife any more than I
did Lucille." He shivered in the damp air, drawing his fur-lined coat
closer about him. "I couldn't keep her, though I tried hard, at first.
Wish you better luck."

It was three o'clock in the morning when Adriance slipped his key into
the clumsy old lock of his house-door, while Elsie perched herself on
the railing of the porch. Within they heard his dog barking boisterous
welcome.

"Up to work at seven," he commented, as the clock struck simultaneously
with the opening of the door. But there was no complaint in his tone. He
threw his arm around Elsie and drew her across the threshold with a deep
breath of relief.

"Let me light the lamp," she offered.

"I'll light it." He held her closer. "Wait a moment; the hearth gives
glow enough. I have been thinking--if it should be a boy, I would like
to call our son after that jolly old ancestor of yours: the black-sloop
man, Martin Galvez."

"Not Anthony?"

"No."

The brevity of the answer silenced her. She gave her consent more
delicately than in words. But still Adriance did not move toward the
lamp, or release his companion.

"Elsie, you are happy, aren't you?"

"More than happy, dear."

"If ever you are not, if you want anything you have not got, tell me.
You know I am not going to keep you in this poor place always, or let
you work for me; I am working towards better things for you, now. I have
not told you, yet--I was promoted to a new position to-day. I have work
inside the factory, and some individuality. I am no longer just one of a
troup of chauffeurs. And, of course, this is only a beginning. It is all
for you, everything, will you remember? If ever--I'm often stupid and,
well, a man!--if ever you find me lacking, you will tell me, won't you?"

She clasped her hands over the hand that held her. This ending to the
day of doubt and anxiety closed her round with a hush of deep content.
She wanted to cry out her love and happiness and gratitude for his
tenderness, to exalt him above herself. But with a new wisdom, she did
not. Where he had placed her, she stood.

"Yes," she assented. "Yes."




CHAPTER XVI

THE GUITAR OF ALENYA OF THE SEA


That one day, in a mood of fierce impatience, had seized upon Anthony
Adriance and hurried him through a range of feeling and experience such
as Time usually brings in leisurely sequence, spaced apart. From Elsie's
confidence in the morning, with its moving love and pride and awe he in
nowise was afraid to name holy, he had gone to the spectacle of his
friend's degradation in the tawdry restaurant. And as a completion, he
had been confronted with the new and ugly vision of a father he could
not honor.

He always had respected his father very sincerely, and felt more
affection for him than either of them ever had realized. He had admired
the success of the elder Adriance, and secretly regretted that he was
not allowed to work with him or share it except by spending its
proceeds. His hope of a reconciliation had not been all mercenary. Now
all that was thrown down, an image overturned and shattered. He saw
only a selfish, narrow-minded man, scheming to divorce a pretty woman
from her husband in order that she might be free to come between his son
and the unwelcome wife he had taken. For of course Elsie was judged by
the servant's position she had held; there was no one to tell of her
gentle birth and breeding. Anthony had understood this, and had looked
forward with eager anticipation to enlightening his father, some day
when his other plans were quite ready.

He had meant that day to be soon; now he knew that it would never come
in the way he had fancied. And the loss of an ideal hurt. Masterson had
told him the truth; there was no escaping the logical inference to be
drawn from it. Anthony wasted no energy in trying, instead addressing
himself still more closely to the work in hand.

He worked harder than ever, at the mill, but the buoyant enthusiasm was
gone. Now he dreaded the possibility that Mr. Goodwin might speak to Mr.
Adriance of the young man who bore his name and who was making such
changes in the shipping department. For Anthony did not content himself
with regulating the trucking system. He had inherited his father's
ability, although the unused tool had lain undiscovered. His attention
aroused, he found other slack lines, and indicated how to tighten them
to taut efficiency. Mr. Goodwin visited the underground room more than
once, observed and approved. Cook, won by the new man's tact that never
slighted or criticised injuriously his former chief and present
associate, aided him with warm co-operation. Anthony found his salary
increased. When Ransome returned, after his illness, he was given a new
position, upstairs.

The evenings in the little red house were no longer entirely devoted to
play, after that night spent abroad. Adriance took to keeping a book of
records, in the form of cryptic notes and columns of figures.
"Chauffeur's accounts," he called them, when Elsie questioned; and she
laughed acceptance of the evasion, forbearing to tease him with
curiosity.

Long before, there had arrived the replies to the letters of
announcement he and Elsie had written to her parents, and Adriance had
been touched home by the serious, graciously cordial welcome extended
to the unknown son-in-law. He had promised himself, and Elsie, that some
time a visit to Louisiana should be paid. Since that, she had described
the neighborhood, the countryside and people, with her knack of vivid
word-sketching, until all lay as clearly before him as a place seen. Now
he recalled this with a new consideration.

"Do you remember the old house and plantation that you once told me
about?" he asked her, one Sunday morning. "The deserted place, that had
been for sale so long. Do you suppose it is still for sale?"

"It was, the last time Virginia wrote," she replied, regarding him
questioningly. "She spoke of a picnic held under the old trees."

"If I--well, was crowded out of here, would you be content to try life
down there? I remembered yesterday that I own some rather valuable stuff
left me by my mother; nothing very much, just jewelry she had as a girl.
I do not like the idea of selling it, but if I am forced into a corner,
it would buy such a place for us. I have some ideas I would like to try
out."

Elsie set down the salad-bowl with which she was busied; her rain-gray
eyes grave, she considered her husband.

"Of what are you thinking, Anthony?"

Adriance looked away. Even to her, he could not bring himself to speak
of his lost confidence in his father or to say whom he now feared as an
enemy. Mr. Adriance could not divide Anthony and his wife without their
consent, but he could make it bitterly hard for them to live together.
Anthony had known of men who had incurred his father's enmity, and the
memory was not reassuring. Before his interview with Masterson, he would
have ridiculed the idea of such a situation between his father and
himself; now, he was uncertain.

"Put on your hat and coat," he evaded the question. "Come for a walk; I
want to show you something."

"And our dinner?" she demurred.

"Never mind it. We will eat scrambled eggs."

Laughing, she complied.

"What am I going to see, Anthony?"

"A house," briefly.

The walk took them quite away from the neighborhood of such small
cottages as their own. In fact, the house before which Anthony finally
halted was standing so much away from any others as scarcely to be
called in a neighborhood, at all. It stood out on a little spur of the
Palisades, delightfully nestled in a bit of woodland and lawns of its
own.

"There!" he indicated it. "Pretty?"

Elsie looked, with a satisfying seriousness. The house was so new that
the builder's self-advertisement still jostled the sign offering for
sale: "this modern residence, all improvements."

"I love it," she pronounced. "Those white cement houses are adorable; it
looks as if it were made of cream-candy. What deep porches, like caves
of white coral; and how deliciously the light gleams in those cunning,
stained-glass windows! I suppose they are set up the stairs? It is a
nice size, too; large enough to be quite luxurious, but not so large as
to be appalling. How did you happen to notice it, dear?"

"I took this road for a short cut, one day. Look what a view you have up
here. One must see twenty miles up and down the river, and over half
New York. But it is open to inspection; let us go in."

"As if we were considering buying it," she fell in with the sport. "Yes,
and we will be very critical indeed; find flaws and finally reject it.
Really, Anthony, it does not at all compare with our present residence."

"You'll do," he approved, drawing her up the broad, lazily-low steps.

It really was an enchanting house; a house that developed unexpected
charms to the pair who wandered through its empty, echoing rooms and
halls. It indulged in nooks, and inconsequential little balconies; it
displayed a most inviting window-seat halfway up the stairs that could
only have been designed for lovers.

"But none have been there, yet," Elsie observed, lingering on the stairs
to contemplate this last allurement. "Just think, Anthony, that it is a
mere debutante of a house with its ball-book all unfilled. No one has
sat before its hearth, or nestled in its window-seat, or opened its door
to let in love or give out charity. It is an Undine house whose soul has
not yet entered its cool whiteness. Oh, I hope the people who buy it
are both fair and good, and respect its innocence!"

"Coral caves and Undines--your sentiment is all deep-sea, to-day," he
teased her. "Elsie, doesn't all this make you want something?"

"Yes," she promptly returned looking over her shoulder at him as she
descended. "I want something that I saw in the Antique Shop, yesterday.
Will you buy it for me?"

"That depends. What is it?"

"A guitar. A guitar that might have been made to go with our ivory and
jade chessmen, for some heavy-lidded slave-girl to touch while her
master and his favored guest moved the pieces on the board. It is _El
Aud_ of Arabia; all opalescent inlay of mother-of-pearl, pegs and frets
marked with dull color. I am quite sure it belonged to some Eastern
princess; perhaps Zaraya the Fair or Alenya of the Sea. It will sing of
court-yards in Fez where fountains splash all the hot, still days, of
midnight, in the Alhambra gardens, and the nightingales of lost Zahara.
And the antiquarian person will sell it for five dollars!"

Adriance threw back his head and laughed, beguiled from serious
thoughts.

"What a peroration! We will buy the thing on our way home, Sunday or no
Sunday. That is, if you can play it for me, and if it will come West
enough for the sleepy, creepy song about Maitre Raoul Galvez that should
never be sung between midnight and dawn? I have never heard that one,
yet."

"You shall," she promised. "And also the song with which Alenya of the
Sea charmed the king from his sadness."

"Tell me first who Alenya was."

"To-night----"

"No, now." Lightly, but with determination he drew her across the
threshold of the room that opened beside them. Opposite its rawly new,
rose-tiled fireplace he pushed a tool-chest, forgotten by some careless
workman, and spread over it his own coat, making a fairly comfortable
seat. "Sit here," he bade. "You're tired, anyhow; and I have a fancy to
see you here."

Surprised, but yielding to his whim with that cordial readiness he loved
in her, Elsie obeyed. Adriance established himself opposite, on the
comparatively clean tiles of the hearth.

"Shoot," he commanded, lazily and colloquially imperious. "Your sultan
listens."

She made a mutinous face at him and slowly removed her hat, laying it
beside her upon the chest. Her gaze dwelt meditatively upon the broad
ray of sunlight that streamed across from the nearest window and
glittered between them like a golden sword. Watching, Adriance saw her
gray eyes grow reminiscent.

"Very well, I will try to tell the story as my father once told it to
me. But whether he drew it from those strange histories in which he is
so learned, or whether he drew it from his own fancy, I do not know. For
he is more poet than professor, and more antiquarian than either--and
more dear than you can know until you meet him, Anthony. Now imagine
yourself in our neglected old garden, and listen.

"Long, long ago, before the beauty of Cava brought the Moors across
Gibraltar into Spain, there lived in the East a king named Selim the
Sorrowful. The name was his alone. His kingdom was as rich as vast; his
people were content; it seemed that all the country laughed except its
ruler. Upon him lay a vague, sinister spell, and had so lain from the
hour of his birth.

"For always he grieved for a thing unknown, a want undefined and
unsatisfied. Royalty was his, and youth, and absolute power, yet,
because of this great longing of his he moved like a beggar through his
splendor and knew hunger of the heart by night and day. Wise men and
temples were questioned in vain, rich gifts vainly sent to distant
oracles; none could tell the king's desire, or cure it. And his dark,
wistful face came to be accepted by his people as a thing usual and
royal.

"One day, when the king walked alone in his garden by the sea, a strange
mist crept over the land and water, silvery, opalescent, wonderful. He
stood, watching. Suddenly a gigantic wave loomed through the haze and
swept curling and hissing shoreward to his very feet, where it broke
with a great sound. When the glittering foam and spray fell away again,
a girl was standing on the sands before him; a girl clad in the floating
gray of the mist, girdled and crowned with soft, dim pearls. Her
lustrous eyes were green as the heart of the ocean, and when the king
gazed into them his sorrow shrank and fled.

"'Who are you, desire of mine?' asked Selim.

"'Alenya of the Sea,' she answered him, and her voice was the lap of
waves on a summer night.

"Then the king took her in his arms and bore her to his palace."

"And she cured him?"

"Better! She satisfied him. Never was a change more marvellous; in all
the kingdom there was no man so happy as Selim the king. Day and night,
night and day, he lingered by the sea-maiden. Riotous prosperity came to
the land, the fields yielded double crops; it seemed that the king's
smile was a very sunshine of the South.

"But by-and-by superstitious dread fell upon the people, and the jealous
priests fostered it. Strange, strange and weirdly sweet was the music
that drifted from Alenya's apartments. There came a day when the country
demanded that Selim put away the evil enchantress, or die. One month
they gave him for the choice."

"The men of the East were poor lovers," commented Adriance. "He banished
the sea-princess?"

"Not at all! He chose death, and a month with Alenya."

"Well, if he lived one month exactly as he willed, he had something."

"Very true, cynical person. But never was such month as his, when the
lonely man still possessed his love and the wearied king had found an
excitement. Intensity is the leap of a flame, and cannot endure. When
the end of the four weeks came--" she paused, her dark little head
tilted back, her regard inviting his hazard.

"They died?"

"Alenya sang to the king for the last time. There is no record of that
lost music; it is so sad that if it were written the paper would
dissolve in tears. When it ceased the king slept, and Alenya flitted
back to the sea and mist, alone. Later came the people and awakened
Selim with their rejoicing, but he stared in cold amazement at the
pageant of their returning loyalty. He had forgotten all."

"Forgotten?"

"Yes, for Alenya's last song had swept her image from his mind. From his
mind, not his heart; he was again Selim the Sorrowful, yearning for the
desire he did not know.

"Often, often he wandered along the shore, suffering, uncomprehending.
It is written that his reign was long, and wise. But on the night he
died his attendants found the print of a small, wet hand on the pillow
where rested the king's white head."

After a moment Adriance rose.

"So he could not keep his own, when he had it!" he said. "Thank you,
Madame Scheherazade. Now come outside and I'll tell you why I wanted you
to sit at that hearth, for luck."

Laughing, she followed him, carrying her hat in her hand.

"Why, Anthony?"

"Because I want this place for our home," he answered.

She uttered a faint exclamation, genuinely dismayed.

"Want it? Why it must be worth ten thousand dollars, Anthony! See, it
even has a little garage. And one would need servants; a
maid-of-all-work, at least."

"Yes. I am working for all that. A while ago I thought I was certain of
it. Now, I am afraid not. But you are not going to live the way we are
now for much longer. Either I shall win my game, and bring you here, or
we will go South and try a new venture."

Amazed and hushed, she met his steady, resolute gaze. She had not
glimpsed this purpose of his in all their intimate life together.

"Do you--care to tell me about it?" she wondered. "And, you know I am
quite, quite happy as we are; as I must be happy with you always, win or
lose, my dearest dear."

The place was quite deserted; he kissed her, before the blank windows of
the house that never had been lived in.

"I know," he said. "As I must be with you, and am! But I will wait to
tell you the rest, until I can tell it all."

She accepted the frank reticence. They walked home more quietly than
they had come, each busied with thought.

But Adriance did not forget to stop at the antique shop for the guitar.
The proprietor lived in the rear of the shabby frame building and
willingly admitted his two customers, after examining them beneath a
raised corner of the sun-bleached green curtain.

"The guitar?" he echoed Adriance's request. "For madame? But certainly!"

He produced the instrument from the window with deferential alacrity. He
was a thin, bright-eyed French Jew; quite ugly and quite old enough in
appearance to justify Elsie's assertion that he was the Wandering Jew
and this the very shop of Hawthorne's tale. She smiled at him with a
mischievous recollection of this, as she pulled off her gloves to finger
the rusty strings.

"It is a good guitar," she approved. "And gay, with all this
mother-of-pearl inlay and the little colored stones set in the pegs! But
these wire strings must come off, Anthony. They are too loud and too
harsh."

"It is so, madame," the old man nodded entire agreement, before Adriance
could speak. "The guitar was used on the stage, where loudness----!" He
shrugged. "Never would you guess, madame, who brought that instrument
in to me last week."

"No?" Elsie wondered, politely interested.

"It was that enormous Russian who formerly rode beside your husband in
the motor wagon, madame. He has not a head, that Michael, but he has a
heart. About the cines he is mad--the moving pictures, I would say. Well
then, into the poor boarding-house where he lives came an actress. She
was out of work, or she would not have been there, _bien sur_! The
guitar was hers. Michael brought it here to sell for her. I believe she
is sick. Because she is of the stage, he is a slave to her."

"He is in love?"

"He, madame? It has not even occurred to him. He would not presume."

"Poor idealist!" said Adriance. "We will take the theatrical guitar, but
wrap it up so I can get home without someone tossing me a penny."

He laughed as he spoke, and had forgotten the guitar's story before they
reached Alaric Cottage. But Elsie neither laughed nor forgot. That
evening, as she sat across the hearth from Anthony, evoking music gay
or weird for his enchantment, she thought much of the girl who had last
played her decorative instrument.

"Is it my guitar, truly, Anthony?" she questioned, at last.

"It certainly isn't mine," he retorted teasingly.

She made a grimace at him. But she also made a resolve.




CHAPTER XVII

RUSSIAN MIKE AND MAITRE RAOUL GALVEZ


Russian Mike lived in a settlement perhaps a mile back from the river
road. He usually passed the Adriances' house each morning, a few moments
earlier than the lighter-footed Anthony set forth, whose swinging stride
carried him two steps to the big man's one. Elsie had long since made
acquaintance with her husband's assistant. During the bitter weather she
frequently had called him from the snow-piled road to warm his slow
blood with a cup of her vivifying Creole coffee. The Monday morning
following the purchase of the guitar, she knew just when to run down the
path and find the bulky, lounging figure passing her gate.

At the sight of the girl in her lilac-hued frock, a drift of white-wool
scarf wound about her shoulders, her dark little head shining almost
bronze in the bright morning light, Mike came to a halt and awkwardly
jerked at his coarse cap. It had flaps that fastened down under his
chin, so that he was embarrassed equally by the difficulty of removing
his headgear and the _inconvenance_ of remaining covered. But Elsie's
smile was a sunshine of the heart that melted such chills of doubt, as
she came up to him.

"Good-morning, Michael. Thank you for bringing back my kitty-puss,
Saturday night. She _will_ run away, somehow."

"It ain't nothing, ma'am," he deprecated, confused, yet gratified.

"It was very kind. Michael," she considerately lowered her eyes to her
breeze-blown scarf, "yesterday Mr. Adriance bought a guitar for me, from
the antique shop. We heard where it came from--how you brought it. Will
you tell the lady who owned it that I should be sorry to keep a thing
she might miss? Tell her, please, that I hope she will soon grow well,
and when she is ready I shall be happy to return the guitar to her. We
will just play that she lent it to me for a while."

His rough face and massive neck slowly reddened to match his fiery hair.

"You, you----" he stammered, inarticulate. His mittened fist wrung the
nearest fence paling. "I ain't----! Thank you, lady."

Mischief curled Elsie's lips like poppy petals, as she contemplated the
discomfited giant.

"Is she very pretty, Michael?"

"No, ma'am," was the unexpected avowal. "Not 'less she's dolled up for
actin'. She's nice, just. I guess many ain't like the swell one Andy
used to work for: dolled up any time."

"Andy? Mr. Adriance? He never worked----"

"For an actress; yes, ma'am," finished Mike, calmly assertive. "He
treated her to tea, the day after Christmas, when we was sent over to
New York. Ain't you seen her? Swell blonde, with awful big sort of light
eyes an' nice clothes on?" He leaned against the frail old fence,
shutting his eyes reminiscently. "She had on some kind of perfumery----!
Since I seen her, nobody else ain't very good-lookin'."

"He treated her to tea?" Elsie faintly repeated. She did not intend an
espial upon Anthony; the question was born of pain and bewilderment.

"She ast him to. They went to a eatin' place an' I watched the truck.
Tony, _she_ called him." Mike ponderously straightened himself and
prepared to depart. "I guess I'll get to work, ma'am."

Elsie nodded, and turning, crept back.

Adriance had appeared on the threshold of the cottage, his dog leaping
about him in the daily disappointed, daily renewed hope of accompanying
the worshipful master. He was whistling and fumbling in his pockets for
a match, as he stood. But he was struck dumb and motionless by the
change in the pale girl who turned from the gate. She seemed almost
groping her way up the path.

"Elsie!" he called, springing down the steps. "Why, Elsie?"

To his utter dismay, she crumpled into his extended arms, her eyes shut.

He gathered her to him and swept her into the house, himself sick with
absolute panic. Illness was so new to them; he did even know of a doctor
nearer than the stately and important family physician in New York. He
felt the world rock beneath his feet; his world, which held only his
wife. Trembling, he laid her on their bed and knelt beside it, her head
still on his arm.

"Elsie!" he choked, his eyes searching her face. "Girl!"

Perhaps it was the misery in his voice, perhaps the anguish of love with
which he clasped her, but she moved in his arms.

"Yes," she whispered. "I--I shall be well, in a moment."

"You're not dying? Not in pain? What can I do?"

"No, no. Wait a little. Put me down; I must think."

He obeyed, settling her among the pillows with infinite tenderness. He
dared not kiss her lest he disturb recovery, but he carefully drew the
pins from her hair and smoothed out the thick, soft ripples. He had a
vague recollection of reading somewhere that a woman's locks should be
unbound when she swooned. It was in a novel, of course; still, it might
be true. And there was one panacea that he knew!

Elsie did not open her eyes, but she heard him rise and hurry into the
other room. The giddiness had left her now, and she could think.

Of course she had recognized Mike's portrait of Lucille Masterson. She
had seen the other woman, lovely, imperious in assured beauty; almost
had breathed the rich odor of her _Essence Enivrante_--which was not
French at all, but distilled in an upper room on Forty-second street
where individual perfumes were composed for those who could pay well.
Anthony had gone to her, the day after Christmas. The day after that
Christmas! Lying there, Elsie recalled how she and Anthony had gone
together to church in Yuletide mood and knelt hand in hand in the bare
little pew as simply as children: "because they had found each other."
And then their first Christmas dinner in their holly-decked house, when
the puppy had sat in rolypoly unsteadiness on Anthony's knee, regaled
with food that should have slain him, while she laughed and remonstrated
and abetted the crime. The day after all that, the day after he had
given her the garnet love-ring, Anthony had gone to Mrs. Masterson? Her
reason cried out against the absurdity. Yet, he had gone.

The clink of china hurriedly moved in the next room had ceased.
Adriance came to the bedside, leaning over to slip his arm carefully
under the pillow and raise the girl's head. In his other hand he held a
cup of hot tea, the only medicine he knew.

All his wife's heart melted toward him in his helpless helpfulness.
Suddenly she remembered that he had come back to her from that meeting.
He had seen the invincible Lucille, yet had returned to glorious content
with his wife. The ordeal she long had foreseen and dreaded was over.
She opened her eyes and looked up at him quietly.

He looked like a man who had been ill, and his gaze devoured her,
enfolded her.

"What was it?" he asked unsteadily. "What is it?"

"Anthony, why did you not tell me that you met Mrs. Masterson?" she put
her quiet question. "Why did you leave me to hear it from Michael?"

Startled, he still continued to look down into her eyes with no
confusion in his own.

"I suppose I should have told you," he frankly admitted. "But it wasn't
of any importance, and I--well, I cut such a poor figure that I dodged
exhibiting it to you. The woman caught me on the Avenue and fairly
bullied me into a tea-room, with my collar wilted and oily hands. I
think she did it out of pure malice, too, for she had nothing to say,
after all. But--surely _that_ did not make you ill, Elsie?"

"You never thought that I might mind your going?"

"Why?" he asked simply. "What is it to us? You don't, do you?"

She put up her hands and clasped them behind his head.

"Set down the tea," she laughed, tears in her mockery, "or we will spill
it between us. Did you think me an inhuman angel, dear darling? No, I
don't mind; but I did."

"Like that?" amazed. "So much?"

"You keep remembering who Mait' Raoul Galvez raised," she warned, her
lips against his. "I'm mighty jealous, man!"

"But I love you," he stammered clumsily. "That woman--she looked like a
vixen! Poor Fred!"

Their first misunderstanding was passed, and left no shadow. By and by
they drank the cold tea together, and Elsie persuaded her nurse to go to
the factory as usual.

"I was not sick, just full of badness," she conscientiously explained.
"Although it might not have happened if I had been altogether just the
same as usual, Anthony."

They talked over the affair at more leisure, that evening. But they
could find no reason for Lucille Masterson's insistence upon that brief
interview with Anthony. Why had she forced him to attend her? He could
honestly assure Elsie that Mrs. Masterson had made no attempt to win him
back to his former allegiance; rather, she had taunted and antagonized
him. As a caprice, they finally classified and dismissed the episode.

What they did not dismiss from their thoughts was the conversation they
had held in the new white house, the day they had bought the guitar.
They did not speak of Anthony's ambitions, but Elsie came to speak often
and with freer enthusiasm of her native Louisiana. Her husband saw
through the innocent ruse with keener penetration than she recognized,
and so far it failed. He understood that she was cunningly preparing to
make easy for him their way of retreat, in case he lost his fight;
preparing to convince him that was the way she most desired to go. He
loved her the better; and was the more obstinately determined to force
his own way.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE CHALLENGE


Each day found Anthony less willing to leave the place he had chosen. He
did not want to abandon the work commenced in the factory; he had
attained an active personal interest in his progress there. He was well
aware that he would soon know more about some possibilities of the mill
than did Mr. Goodwin himself. His father never had concerned himself at
all with such matters. Mr. Adriance was the converging-point of the many
lines forming a widespread net of affairs in which this factory was but
one strand. He did not even find time to notice Mr. Goodwin's advancing
years and the desire for retirement the old man was too proud to voice.
But the strand whose smallness was disdained by the greater Adriance
might well prove able to support the lesser.

An accident still further determined his wish to remain. One day Mr.
Goodwin came down to the lower room; occupied the chair in Adriance's
enclosure for a quarter-hour and watched the proceedings. These
occasional visits had done much to establish firmly "Andy's" authority,
yielding as they did the manager's sanction to the new order of things.
But this time Mr. Goodwin had something to say to the young man whom he
and Cook had grown to regard as a fortunate discovery of their own.

"Andy," he began, using the nickname as Adriance himself had suggested
on observing the positive reluctance with which the old gentleman
handled familiarly the revered name of the factory's owner; "Andy,
to-morrow there will be a meeting at the office of Mr. Adriance in New
York City; I shall be present." He cleared his throat a trifle
importantly. "I shall have pleasure in mentioning the excellent, the
really excellent, work you have done here. I shall mention you
personally."

Anthony carefully put down the papers he held and stood still, trouble
darkening across his face. He saw what was coming, and he saw no way to
stop it. He did not want his father to learn of his presence here from
an outsider, or at a public meeting. He wanted to tell Mr. Adriance his
own story, with their kinship to help him. He wanted to explain Elsie to
the man who was championing Mrs. Masterson; he wanted to tell him of the
new Adriance to come. He hardly thought it possible that his father
would deny him the simple opportunity he asked, or try to force the
monstrous wrong of a separation between man and wife, if he understood.
But if the bare fact that Tony was secretly in his employ were flung
before him, Mr. Adriance was quite capable of regarding this as an added
defiance and even mockery of himself. Mr. Goodwin's speech flowed
placidly on:

"Your abilities are really exceptional, exceptional; I am sure that they
will be suitably appreciated. You are doing much better work than
Ransome. I shall advise that I be allowed to create a new position for
you at a new salary. I should like you to supervise the entire shipping
department on this floor, not merely the trucking."

"You are very good," Adriance murmured; "I am not quite ready perhaps
for that. By the time the next meeting is held----"

"I have said that you were competent," Mr. Goodwin reminded him with
some stiffness. "I am accustomed to judge such matters, pray recollect.
I am quite sure Mr. Adriance will feel pleasure that a connection of
his, even a distant connection, should thus distinguish himself from the
ordinary employee."

"No! That is--I should wish----" Adriance caught himself stumbling, and
colored before the astonished eyes of the other. "I mean to say, family
influence cannot help me in that way. Can you place the matter before
Mr. Adriance without using my name?"

The older man chilled in severe amazement. Very slowly he took off his
_pince-nez_ with fingers a trifle uncertain.

"Certainly not," he said, rigidly. "Why should I do so remarkable a
thing?"

That challenge was not easily answered. The silence persisted
unpleasantly. Through the breach it made trickled a thin stream of
doubt, which rapidly grew to a full current of suspicion. Still Adriance
could find nothing to reply, and the situation became more than
embarrassing. Mr. Goodwin at last arose.

"I regret that I made this proposition," he said. "Of course it was not
in my calculations that you had anything to conceal, especially from Mr.
Adriance. We will of course drop the matter for the present."

"You mean that I may continue here as I am?"

"I hope so. You will comprehend that it becomes my duty to set this
matter before Mr. Adriance. It is not right that I should employ in his
name a man who fears to have his presence here known to his employer. I
will bid you good-morning."

This condition was worse than the first. Recognizing himself as
cornered, Adriance cast a hurried glance around him, found no one within
ear-shot of his little enclosure, and took a step toward the man about
to leave him.

"Wait! Mr. Goodwin, I am Tony Adriance."

The little old gentleman stared at him blankly.

"My father does not know that I am here, no one knows except my wife.
Will you not sit down again and listen to me?"

Still Mr. Goodwin stared at him, dumb. Smiling in spite of his vexation
and anxiety, the young man quietly fronted the scrutiny. He was quite
aware that in his working clothes, his hands evidencing his winter of
manual labor, his face dark with the tan of months of wind and sun, he
hardly looked the part he claimed; that is, if Mr. Goodwin knew anything
of the former Tony Adriance. But he kept the candid honesty of his eyes
open to the other's reading, and waited. Perhaps if those rather unusual
blue-black eyes he and his father had in common had confronted Mr.
Goodwin in the brightness of daylight, he might before this have been
identified. At any rate, they convinced now, even in the deceptive
light.

"There is a resemblance," murmured Mr. Goodwin.

"To my father? Yes, I think so; I have been told so."

"But--why----?"

One of the usual interruptions called Adriance away before he could
reply. The old gentleman sat dazed, watching him. When the vehicle had
passed on, Adriance turned back to the other man.

"I married without consulting my father, last autumn," he said quietly.
"Will you dine with me to-night, Mr. Goodwin, at my own house up the
hill, and let me explain to you what I am doing and why I am doing it?
If you have any doubt of my identity, you may easily fix it by asking my
father when you see him to-day whether his son is at home or not."

Mr. Goodwin found his voice with some difficulty.

"No, I would prefer to understand before I see Mr. Adriance. Come up to
my private office now; Cook can manage here for an hour without you. I
am astounded, even bewildered, Andy--Mr. Adriance----"

"Try 'Tony'," suggested the other with his sudden smile.

So while the indignant Cook struggled with double duties, Adriance and
Mr. Goodwin sat opposite one another in the latter's private office, and
held long converse.

With the exception of the Masterson side of the affair, Adriance told
the story without reserve. He hoped to win Mr. Goodwin's temporary
silence, but he actually won more than he had imagined possible. Mr.
Goodwin was excited and interested as he had not been for years. When
Adriance concluded, the other was quite the most agitated of the two.

"You will not tell my father to-day of my presence here, you will give
me time to do so myself?"

"I will do better," said Mr. Goodwin, much moved, "I will help you--I
adopt you, as it were. Mr. Adriance----"

"Tony."

"Tony, I will train you to succeed me here. I wish much to retire, as I
have told you. My wife and I--we have no children--have long planned to
travel; we have even selected the places we would visit and the routes
we would prefer to take. It has been, I might say, our dream for years;
but Mr. Adriance would not listen to my desire to leave. He declares
there is no one he could trust in my place." Pride colored the thin old
face. "His esteem flatters me; but now I will give him a successor whom
he can trust. It is very suitable that you should have this position. I
will say nothing to him, as you wish; but do you enter my office here
and study the management of this concern with me. I will myself take
charge of that."

Astonished in his turn, and deeply touched, Adriance took the offered
hand.

"Of course you know I can find no words of sufficient gratitude, Mr.
Goodwin. If you will indeed be so good you shall not find me lacking so
far as my abilities reach."

"They have reached quite far already," said his senior, drily.

What had appeared a calamity had become strange good fortune. Mr.
Goodwin readily satisfied any doubt he might have felt of Tony's
identity. Next morning when he would have gone to his usual place, a
clerk stopped him and took him to Mr. Goodwin's private office, where a
desk awaited him.

"Of course it is all my name, or rather my father's," Adriance said to
Elsie that night. "There are a score of cleverer men than I already
there who will continue, I suppose, plodding on as they are. Cook is one
of them. But I am not altruistic enough to throw away the luck I have
been born into, I am afraid. I shall take all Goodwin will give me, and
if my father refuses to keep me there, at least the training will make
me more fitted to earn our living in some other place."

"Man, you have not enough vanity to nourish you properly," Elsie gravely
told him.

Mr. Goodwin proved a harder taskmaster than Cook or Ransome. He entered
upon the education of Tony Adriance with an enthusiastic zest tempered
with a conscientious severity that made him exacting and meticulous in
detail. Adriance was fond enough of the outdoors to miss the motor-truck
at times--there were even hours when he thought wistfully of Russian
Mike; but he learned rapidly under the forced cultivation. Now he saw
how superficial had been the knowledge of the factory on which he had
prided himself in the shipping room, and how absurdly inadequate to the
management of the great place he would have been had his father put it
in his hands. But under Mr. Goodwin he was becoming in actuality what he
once had fancied himself to be. Incidentally the teacher and the student
grew cordially attached to one another; and as this attachment was
obvious, as the new man was known in every department where he was sent
to gather experience as "Mr. Adriance," and as Mr. Goodwin called him
"Tony," his identity was soon no secret in the factory. But the senior
Adriance never came in personal contact with any member of the force
except Mr. Goodwin, so this was a matter of indifference. Adriance
continued to be entered on the books as a chauffeur, and received the
corresponding salary.

The genuine chauffeurs whose comrade Andy had been looked curiously
after him and whispered among themselves when, he chanced to pass,
although his greetings to them were the same as always. Cook dropped the
use of "Andy," and said "sir" if the young man spoke to him suddenly.
Mr. Goodwin advised his pupil to let such things pass without comment.
Either Anthony's position would be assured and demand such deference, or
he would leave the factory altogether; in either case protest would only
be hypocritical or useless.

The time when Anthony should go to his father with an account of the
affair, was indefinitely postponed. The more accomplished first, the
better. Secretly, both he and Goodwin had come to dread the possibility
that Mr. Adriance would refuse to continue Anthony in his position,
either through resentment or lack of faith in Tony's ability.

Sometimes Anthony felt a sharp misgiving that perhaps the very
preparation that fitted him for the place he so much desired, would
deprive him of it. It was more than possible that Mr. Adriance would
keenly resent what was being done without his knowledge. In a sense
Anthony was fortifying himself in his father's own territory in order to
resist the older man's will in regard to Mrs. Masterson. Anthony never
learned to think without vicarious shame and pain of the treachery his
father had planned against Elsie. He could not reconcile that idea with
anything their years together had shown him of his father. But he worked
on and thrust from his mind what he could not remedy.




CHAPTER XIX

THE ADRIANCES


The weeks ran quietly on, bringing spring as the only visitor to the
little red house. Masterson had been invited to come, but he never
availed himself of the invitation. The Adriances did not speak of him,
by tacit agreement feigning to forget the only painful evening they had
spent since their marriage.

The event that fell like an exploding shell into the tranquil household,
shattering its accustomed life as truly as if by material destruction,
came quite without warning. It chose one of the first evenings of April,
when a delicate, pastel-tinted sunset was concluding the day as
gracefully as the _envoi_ of a poem.

Elsie was making ready for her husband, much as she once had described
to him a wife's employment at this hour, and so all unconsciously had
cleansed the temple of his heart, thrusting down the false idols to make
a place for herself. The table stood arrayed, she herself was daintily
fresh in attire and mood; the little house waited, expectant, for the
man's return. The soft flattery of love lapped Adriance around whenever
he crossed this threshold; life had taught him a new luxury in this bare
school-room.

Elsie was singing, as she went about her pleasant tasks with the deft
surety and swiftness so pretty to watch; singing a lilting, inconsequent
Creole _chanson_, velvet-smooth as the sprays of gray pussy-willow she
presently began to arrange in a squat, earthen jar. She was happy with a
deep, abiding, steadfast content, and a faith that admitted no fear.

She was listening, through all her occupations. The crackle of Anthony's
quick, eager step on the old gravel walk would have brought her at once
to the door. But the sound of an automobile halting before the gate
passed unnoticed; many cars travelled this road, day and night. So, as
before, Masterson came unheralded into his friend's house. Only, this
time he found the door open and entered without knocking. When his
shadow darkened across the room, Elsie turned and saw her visitor.

Rather, her visitors. Masterson carried in the curve of his arm a
diminutive figure clad in white corduroy from tasselled cap to small
leggings. The child's dimpled, ruddy-bright cheek was pressed against
the man's worn and sallow young face, the shining baby-gaze looked out
from beside the fever-dulled eyes of the other. A chubby arm tightly
embraced Masterson's neck.

"Holly!" Elsie cried, the willow-buds slipping through her fingers.
"Why--how----? Oh, how he has grown! Holly, baby, don't you remember
Elsie? He does, truly does--please let me have him!"

Masterson willingly relinquished his charge, putting Holly into the
eager arms held out, and stood watching the ensuing scene of pretty
nonsense and affection. He did not speak or offer interruption. When
Elsie finally looked toward him again, recovering recollection and
curiosity, baby and woman were equally rose-hued and radiant.

"But--how did it happen?" she wondered. "Did--was the agreement kept,
after all? Is Holly to stay with you, now?"

The man met her gaze with a strange blending of defiance and entreaty.
Now she perceived his condition of terrible excitement and that his
dumbness had not been the apathy she fancied. He was on the verge of a
breakdown, perhaps irreparable to mental health. Her question was
answered by her own quick perception before he spoke.

"I have stolen him. No! I did _not_ steal him; I took my own. It was in
the park--he was with a nurse, and she struck him. She didn't know me. I
had stopped to get a sight of him. Well, that is all Lucille will ever
give him: nurses! She never wanted him, or had time to trouble about
him. She doesn't like children. He stumbled, fell down, and the woman
slapped him--more than once."

She looked at him with a sense of helpless inability either to aid or
condemn. Every conscious fibre in her championed his cause, except her
reason. How could this sick man hope to keep Holly against the world?

"You----?" she temporized.

"I've told you what I did; I took him away from her. 'Tell Mrs.
Masterson that Holly has gone with his father,' I said. That was all. I
carried him to my car and drove straight here. You will keep him for me?
You and Tony? I have got to go; to get back and make my last fight."

Elsie gently set down the baby. She saw what Masterson in his dazed and
selfish absorption overlooked: that she and Anthony were to be drawn
into a conflict surely evil for them. Mrs. Masterson must resent this,
and call on the law to undo the kidnapping. She herself and Anthony
would be dragged from their happy obscurity, their long honeymoon ended.
More menacing still, Anthony's position in his father's factory would be
discovered and exploited by the newspapers, with the probable result
that Mr. Adriance would end that situation by dismissing the impromptu
employee.

But she never even thought of sending Masterson away. The baby hands
that grasped her dress grasped deeper at her heart. Also, this man in
need was Anthony's friend and one to whom he owed atonement for a wrong
contemplated, if not committed.

"Of course we will keep him," she promised, kindly and naturally. "But
you must stay, too. You are not well and must rest for a while--it is
absurd to speak of fighting when you can scarcely stand. Sit there, in
that arm-chair. Presently Anthony will come home, then we will have
supper and talk of all this."

The serene good-sense calmed and cooled his fever. Sighing, he relaxed
his tenseness of attitude.

"I must go," he repeated, but without resolution.

For answer she drew forward the chair. He sank into it and lay rather
than sat among its cushions, passive before her firmness.

Elsie moved about the matter at hand with her unfailing practicality.
She took off Holly's wraps and improvised a high-chair by means of a
dictionary and a pillow. To an accompaniment of gay chatter she made
ready her small guest's evening meal, tied a napkin under the fat chin
and superintended the business of supping. Hunger and sleep were
contending before the bread and milk and soft-boiled egg were finished.
Afterward, Elsie carried a very drowsy little boy into her room and made
him a nest in her antique-shop four-posted bed. Masterson looked on,
mutely attentive to every movement of the two as if some dramatic
interest lay in the simple actions. When Elsie returned from the
sleeping baby, he abruptly spoke:

"You know, I only mean you to keep him for to-night, not always. I will
come back for him. You know all I planned for him and myself. This has
hurried me, but I have money enough. Earned money. Did I tell you Mr.
Adriance, Tony's father, has offered me a considerable sum to stop
'making a mountebank' of myself at the restaurant? No? He has. I fancy
her former husband's occupation grates on Lucille." He laughed, moving
his head on the cushions of the high-backed chair. "Well, I refused."

"Of course!"

"You knew I would? Then you grant me more grace than she did."

"She? You said Mr. Adriance offered----"

He glanced keenly at her face, then turned his own face aside that it
might not guide her groping thought.

"I must go," he said, again. But he did not move, nor did Elsie.

The pause was broken by Anthony's whistle, the signal which always
advised his wife of his return.

But to-night it was not the blithe hail of custom. The clear notes were
shaken, curtly eloquent of some anger or distress. Acutely sensitive to
every change or mood of his, Elsie caught both messages, the intentional
and the one sent unaware. Dropping upon the table a box of matches she
had taken up, she ran to the door.

It opened before she reached it. Anthony, his face dark with repressed
anger, his movements stiff with the constraint he forced upon them,
appeared outlined against the soft, clear dusk of April twilight. He
looked behind him, and, holding open the door of his house formally
ushered in a guest.

"My wife, sir," he briefly introduced to his father the girl who drew
back, amazed, before their entrance.

Mr. Adriance showed no less evidence of inward storm than his son. But
he stopped and saluted his daughter-in-law with precise courtesy.

"Mrs. Adriance," he acknowledged the presentation, his voice better
controlled than the younger man's.

"Light the lamp, Elsie," her husband requested, dragging off the clumsy
chauffeur's gloves he had worn home. "It seems that we are under
suspicion of child-stealing. My father has done us the honor of looking
us up, to accuse me of conniving at the kidnapping of Mrs. Masterson's
boy. I have not yet gathered exactly what interest I am supposed to have
in the lady or her affairs, or whether I am presumed to be engaged in a
bandit enterprise for ransom. But I understand that there is a detective
outside, who probably wishes to search the house."

Elsie made no move to obey the command. In the indeterminate light
Masterson's presence had been unnoticed, shadowed as he was by the deep
chair in which he sat. She was not afraid, or bewildered so far as to
conceive keeping him concealed, but she was not yet ready to act.

"My son is inexact, as usual," Mr. Adriance gave her space, aiding her
unaware by his irritation. "Mr. Masterson is known to have crossed the
Edgewater ferry with the child, and we know of no friends he would seek
in this place except Tony and you. His brain is hardly strong enough,
now, to plan any extended moves. Surely it needs no explanation that we
wish to rescue a two-year-old child from the hands of a drug-crazed
incompetent?"

Elsie laid her hand over the match-box, wondering that the other two did
not hear, as she did, the very audible breathing of the man in the
arm-chair.

"He is hardly that," she deprecated. "But, if you find him, what will
you do?"

"To him? Nothing. We want the child. If he persists in annoying the lady
who was his wife, however, he must be put in a sanitarium."

"Elsie, why do you not say that we know nothing of all this?" Anthony
demanded, harsh in his strong impatience. "Why do you feed suspicion by
arguing? I don't say that I would not shelter Holly Masterson, if he
were here--in fact, I should! But I do say that he is not here, sir, and
I expect my word to be taken. Elsie----"

His wife put out her hand in a quieting gesture.

"Now I will light the lamp," she stated, in her full, calm voice.

Oddly checked, the two angry men stood watching her. The flame-touched
wick burned slowly, at first, the light rising gradually to its full
power; the circle of radiance crept out and up, warmed by the crimson
shade through which it passed. It crept like a bright tide, shining on
the figure of the woman who stood behind the table, rising over the
noble swell of her bosom, submerging the curved hollow of her throat
where a small ebony cross lay against a surface of ivory, flooding at
last her face set in generous resolution and glinting in her gray,
serenely fearless eyes. She looked, and was mistress of the place and
situation; perhaps because of all those present she alone was not
thinking of herself.

"You see," she broke the pause, "there was much excuse. It is always
wiser and kinder to listen to the excuse for actions; I think usually
there is one. Mr. Masterson loves his little son very dearly, and that
they have been separated is terrible to him. But he was patient, he did
not interfere until to-day; he saw Holly struck and roughly treated by
the nurse. He could not bear that, and just look on. No one could! So
Mr. Masterson, obeying his first impulse, snatched up the baby, and he
did bring him here. It was only a little while ago, Anthony; a very
little while."

Before either Adriance could speak, the third man lifted himself out of
the shadows into the light. He was laughing slightly, all his reckless,
too-feminine beauty somehow restored as he faced them.

"Here is your drug-crazed incompetent, Mr. Adriance," he mocked. "Have
you succeeded so well in training your own son that you want to
undertake bringing up mine?"

The insult changed the atmosphere to that of crude war. Elsie drew back,
recognizing this field was not for her. Mr. Adriance considered his
antagonist with a deliberation cold and very dangerous.

"I think a comparison between my son and yourself is hardly one you can
afford to challenge," he said bitingly.

"Now, no," Masterson admitted. He laughed again. "But a year ago--who
was the best citizen, then? Fred Masterson, with all his shortcomings,
or Tony Adriance, dangling after Masterson's wife? Hold on, Tony! I'm
not saying this for you; you quit the nasty game as soon as you saw
where it was leading. I'm only explaining to your father, here, that the
difference between you and me is chiefly--our wives. Of course we ought
not to lean on our women; we ought to be strong and independent. But I
was not born that way, and neither were you. Lucille wanted me down, and
I am down; Mrs. Adriance wanted you up, and you're standing up. Be
honest, and out with the truth to yourself, if you never speak it, Tony.
As for your father, if our guardians had started us differently, it
might not have been this way with us. I don't know, but that is the
chance I am giving Holly. He shall not have to pick up his education on
the road. I have brought him here, and here he stays with Mrs. Adriance
until I take him away with me. She has given me her promise."

"You forget that the court has given the child to its mother," Mr.
Adriance reminded him, before Anthony could reply. "And let me tell you
I have nothing except contempt for a man who foists off his
responsibilities upon a woman's shoulders."

"Neither have I," retorted Masterson. "Did you imagine I had any vanity
left, or that my self-respect still breathed? You are dull, Mr.
Adriance! But all that is aside from the case. Holly stays here, unless
Anthony turns him out, and then he goes with me, not with his mother. Do
you think I fail to understand why she wants him, and you want her to
have him? It is because he is a social vindication; her possession of
him brands me as the one found lacking in our partnership. Well, he is
not to be so sacrificed."

"May I ask how you intend to enforce this?"

"You may, and I will tell you." He looked return in full measure of the
older man's irony and determination. "I can enforce it because you care
about the public at large, and I do not; because it would make a
beautiful sob story: how Holly's reprobate father rescued him from
neglect and ill-treatment, taking him away from a brutal nurse in the
Park; and how Mr. Adriance, _the_ Mr. Adriance, pursued and recaptured
the child. The newspapers would be interested in learning that Mr.
Adriance had managed the whole Masterson divorce case; with his usual
tact and success. They might wonder why he had done it. I have wondered,
myself, you know. That is, I might have wondered, if I had not known how
much you once approved of Mrs. Masterson as a possible daughter-in-law,
before Tony disappointed you by marrying to please himself. You have the
reputation of never admitting a defeat; and, after all, two divorces are
as right as one! I beg your pardon, Mrs. Adriance."

Elsie uttered a faint cry, abruptly confronted with the hideous thing
Masterson had shown her husband on the night that had changed Anthony
from her playfellow to her defender and fightingman.

"Fred!" Anthony exclaimed indignant rebuke, springing to the girl's
side.

She caught his arm fiercely, as it clasped her. Suddenly she was one
with the men in mood, burning with defiance and alert to make war for
her own. And Anthony was her own, as she was his. Pressing close to her
husband she held him. Arrayed together, the three who had youth stood
against the man who had everything else.

But Mr. Adriance had reddened through his fine, gray, slightly withered
skin like any schoolboy. His dark eyes lightened and hardened to an
unforgiving grimness of wrath that dwarfed the younger men's passion and
made it puerile.

"You will restrain yourself in speaking of the lady who had the
misfortune to marry you," he signified, with a clipped precision of
speech more menacing than any threat. "Since yesterday she has been my
wife."

Of all the possibilities, this most obvious one never had occurred to
any of the three who heard the announcement. The effect held the group
dumb. All thought had to be readjusted, all recent experience focussed
to this new range of vision. In the long pause, Anthony's dog yawned
with the ridiculous sigh and snap of happy puppyhood; ticking clock and
singing kettle seemed to fill the room with a swell of commonplace,
domestic sound derisive of all complicated life. After all, men were
simple, and involved evil usually a chimera. Plots and counterplots
resolved into a most natural happening; thrown into companionship with
Lucille Masterson by Anthony's flight, Mr. Adriance had fallen in love.
Probably at first he had aided her through sympathy, as Anthony himself
had done. There was no mystery in the rest.

The reckless challenge and false gayety died out of Masterson's face,
leaving it dull and bleak as a stage when the play is over and the
artificial light and color extinguished. Quite suddenly he looked
haggard and appallingly ill. Circles darkened beneath his eyes as if
dashed in by the blue crayon of an artist. He was conquered; with his
fancied right to resentment and contempt he also lost all animation. The
fire was quenched, apparently forever.

"I apologize, of course," he said, his lifeless ease a poor effort at
his former manner. "Certainly I would have been--well, less frank, if I
had understood. Pray convey my congratulations to Mrs. Adriance. No
doubt you will be happy, since you can buy everything she wants. But
neither you nor she can care to keep Holly Masterson in your house. I
want him. After all, I am his father, you know, and entitled to some
direction of his future. No? Come, I'll bargain with you! Leave him
here, and I will do what I refused to do for money: I will quit public
dancing and drop out of sight."

The unexpected offer allured. The wrath in the eyes of Mr. Adriance did
not lessen, but speculation crept into his regard. His abhorrence of
scandal urged him to grasp at this escape from having his wife's name
constantly linked with the escapades of her first husband. There could
be no question of Masterson's genius for spectacular trouble-making.
Moreover, Holly would still be with the Adriances, so that dignity was
assured. He did not believe that Masterson really intended to burden
himself with the child. Lucille Masterson had formed his opinion of the
other man; he credited him with no intention good or stable.

"Of course I must consult Mrs. Adriance," he answered stiffly. "But I
have no doubt that she will meet your wishes in the matter, since Tony
is now the child's step-brother. That is, if my son and his wife are
willing to undertake the charge you thrust upon them?"

He turned toward the two, as he concluded. For the first time, the
Adriance senior and junior, really looked at each other as man at man.
For "Tony" no longer existed; in his place was someone the elder did not
yet know. Indeed, he and Tony had been merely pleasant acquaintances; he
and this new man were strangers.

"Why, yes," Anthony replied to the indirect question. He had regained
his composure as the others had lost theirs. His cool steadiness and
poise contrasted strongly with the strained tension of his guests; he
spoke for both himself and Elsie with the assured masterfulness she had
nursed to life in him during these many months. "We will take charge of
Holly until his father claims him, unless it is going to be too
difficult for me to take care of my own family. As you may see, sir, we
are not rich."

"Is that my affair?"

"It has not been. But it is going to be."

"As a question of money----"

Anthony checked the sentence with a gesture. Gently freeing himself from
Elsie's clasp upon his arm, he drew from a pocket of his rough coat that
notebook which had absorbed so many of his leisure hours.

"Let us say a question of business," he suggested. "Six months ago I
entered your employ as a chauffeur. You will find my record has no marks
against it. I did not think at that time of drawing any advantage from
the fact that the mill belonged to you; I worked exactly as I must have
done for any stranger. I was not late or absent, I accomplished rather
more each day than the average chauffeur in the place. Cook and Ransome
can tell you whether I gave them satisfaction. I only speak of this,
sir, because I should like you to understand that I was in earnest. It
was not until months had passed at this work that I began to think of
changing my position. One day Ransome fell sick. I asked for his place
to try out a better system of checking the shipping that had occurred to
me. I was given this at first tentatively, then permanently. In fact,
the system worked so successfully that--Mr. Goodwin came to see me." He
hesitated. "I wish you would ask Mr. Goodwin to tell you himself
something of what has happened."

"Very well."

The laconic assent was somehow disconcerting.

"I had to tell him who I was," Anthony resumed, with less certainty, "I
had meant to find out what your attitude would be, before that happened,
but I had no choice. He was good enough to take me into his office and
offer to teach me the management of your factory. Now----"

"Now, since it is a matter of business," said Mr. Adriance, dryly, "what
do you want?"

"I want a stranger's chance, and your pull," was the prompt return;
Anthony's smile flashed across seriousness. "That is, I want your
influence to give me Mr. Goodwin's position as manager, and after that I
am willing to stand on the basis of my business value to you. Goodwin is
old and anxious to retire. If I hold his place for a year and fail to
earn his salary, then discharge me and I'll not complain. I know this
end of your business as you do not, sir. You are brilliant, a genius of
big affairs; I have discovered in myself a capacity for meticulous
attention to detail. Will you take this little book home with you? It
contains a collection of notes and figures for which you would gladly
pay an outsider. Mr. Goodwin and I have found the plant is enormously
wasteful; every department contributes its quota of mismanagement,
except the office under his own eye. I want a chance to do this work, to
buy a house I like up on the hill, here, and put my delicate Southern
wife in a setting suitable for her. Will you let me earn all this?"

"I am not aware that it has been my custom to interfere with you,"
retorted Mr. Adriance. He eyed his son with icy disfavor. "Between you
and Mr. Masterson it appears to be established that I am the typical
oppressor of fiction and melodrama. Kindly look at the other side of the
shield. Last autumn you chose to marry and leave my house. You did both,
without paying me the trifling courtesy of announcing your intentions. I
knew of no quarrel between us. The rudeness appeared to me quite without
warrant. Nevertheless, I tied all the loose ends you had left behind.
I kept your marriage from furnishing a sensation to the journals. The
lady who is now my wife helped me in convincing our friends that your
wedding was in no way unusual or unexpected, if a little sudden, and
that you had met the young lady from Louisiana at her house. In short, I
smothered curiosity, a task with which you had not concerned yourself.
You choose to enter this place as a truck driver. You did not ask if
that were pleasant to me. It was not, but I made no objection. Oh, yes;
of course I have known what you were doing! Why should I not know? Now,
you meet me with the air of a man hampered and pursued. Why?"

"I was wrong," admitted Anthony, simply. He had flushed hotly before the
rebuke, but his eyes met his father's frankly and with a relief that
gladly found himself at fault rather than the other. "I did not
understand. I am sorry."

They shook hands. A constraint between them was not to be avoided. The
marriage of the older man had thrust them apart. Unforgiveable things
had been said of Lucille Adriance; things that had the biting
permanence of truth.

"I will arrange for Goodwin's retirement," Mr. Adriance remarked. "You
will take his place, and this winter's work may pass as your whim to
study the business from the bottom. I spent an hour discussing your
affairs with him, on my way here, to-night. I had called on him to
ascertain your exact address. He has agreed to remain as your adviser
and assistant for a month or two, until you have quite found yourself.
And of course I will be at your service. That is enough for this
evening; I have already stayed here too long. Come to my office
to-morrow."

When he turned toward the door, Elsie was awaiting him. A moment before
she had slipped away from the two men.

"This is the first time you have been in Anthony's house," she said, her
soft speech very winning. "You aren't going without taking our
hospitality?"

She held a little round tray on which stood a cup and plate. The action
was gracious and graceful, quaintly alien as her own legends. Mr.
Adriance gazed at her, then bowed ceremoniously, lifted the coffee and
drank.

"I think I had forgotten to congratulate Tony," he regretted. "Allow me
to do so, most warmly."

Anthony closed the door behind his guest; presently the sound of a
starting motor ruffled the calm hush of the spring evening.

"I want my supper," Anthony announced, practically. "I shall not have
any more of your cooking, Elsie. What are you going to do with your idle
time--learn to play bridge?"

She ran into his arms.




CHAPTER XX

THE CORNERSTONE


When they looked for Fred Masterson, he was not there. Elsie remembered,
then, that he had gone into Holly's room while Anthony and his father
were intent on each other. On the bed where the baby was asleep they
found an envelope upon which was scrawled a message.

"I'm off for the present," Anthony read. "I'll drop in to-morrow or next
day, when Holly is awake. Thank Mrs. Adriance for me. I'm going to be
old-fashioned, Tony--God bless you both."

"He never will come, I know it!" Elsie exclaimed, her heavy lashes wet.
"Can't we do something? Can't we go after him?"

"I will go after him," her husband agreed. "But not to-night." He
crumpled the envelope and flung it aside. "Fred Masterson is not going
under without a fight. If doctors, sanitariums, his love for Holly and
our help can set him on his feet again, he shall be cured and do all he
dreams of doing. To-morrow I will find him."

"Not to-night?"

"Not to-night. Elsie, don't you understand? He loved his wife. If I lost
you so--if you married someone else----"

She put her small fingers across his lips, stilling the sacrilege.

"No! Do not let our little house even hear you say it!"

"Nor any house of ours! To-morrow I will buy the house we looked at
together, and you shall have an orgy of shopping to furnish it. Oh, yes,
you shall, and I'll help you. Have lots of dark red things and brown
leather in that front room where you told me about Alenya of the Sea.
And--do nurseries have to be pink?"

"Of course not, foolish one. We might make ours sunshine-color, like the
satiny inside of a buttercup or a drop of honey in a daffodil.
Anthony----"

"Yes?"

The rain-gray eyes laughed up at him, demure and daring.

"Please, I want a cloak all gorgeous without and furry within; a
shimmery, glittery, useless brocaded cloak like those in the cloak-room
of that restaurant. I--I just want it!"

"How do you know?" he wondered at her. "How do you always know the
gracious way to delight me most? What a time we are going to have, girl!
I'm going to drag Cook out of his rut and start him up the ladder, for
one thing. If he hadn't given me a chance, and then brought Mr. Goodwin
down to see how I handled it, who can tell how much I might have missed?
I shall bring him here for you to see, before we move, too. You won't
mind?"

"Try it and see."

"And we will spend my first vacation in Louisiana! Can't we take a
trunkful of junk to each girl--including your mother? Let's bribe a
publisher to bring out the poetic drama, if it's ever finished. Ah, be
ready to come to Tiffany's next week. I'm going to buy you a ruby as big
as the diamond advertisements on the backs of the magazines."

"Anthony!"

"Two of them!"

"Dear," she hesitated, "are we going to have so much money? I do not
quite see----"

Her husband looked at her, and laughed.

"You haven't learned to understand your father-in-law. I have not
mastered that study, myself, but I know some branches. He is not a
half-way man. He will expect Tony and Mrs. Tony to proceed precisely as
Tony used to do. And we will offend and disgust him with our
small-mindedness if we do not take this for granted. When I remember the
things I allowed Fred to make me believe of him! Elsie, I always could
have earned our living somehow; I think the best news to-night was that
my father is as fine as I grew up to believe him. By George, I never
told him----"

"What, dear?"

"Don't you know?"

       *       *       *       *       *

They had almost finished their delayed supper, an hour later, when
Adriance set down his cup with an exclamation and stared across the
table at his wife.

"I have just thought of something! Now I understand what Lucille
Masterson wanted of me, that day, in the tea-room. She made me give my
word never to tell anyone that she had been willing to marry me. I was
angry enough that she should suppose such a promise necessary. But now I
can see the reason: she feared I might tell my father enough of that
affair to prevent his falling in love with her. You do not know him,
Elsie. If he had suspected her attachment to him was greed, and that she
had been willing to marry either Adriance for the Adriance possessions,
he would have suffered nothing to bring them together, nothing whatever.
I suppose she told him she never thought of me except as a pleasant
young fool. Think of us!" He pushed back his chair and took an angry
turn across the room. "Fred, and I, and my father--all puppets for her
to move about!"

[Illustration: THE WINTER WAS HARD AND LONG, BUT NEVER DULL TO THEM]

"Holly has Mrs. Masterson, and I have you," Elsie demurred, her mouth
curling into a smile as her glance followed him. "And I do not believe
she has your father, Anthony; I think he has her. You know--excuse me,
dear--both you and Fred Masterson were too young and inexperienced. And
your father heard, in spite of himself, Mr. Masterson's story, this
evening. I'm going to borrow a sentence from Mike: 'She's got her a
boss.' Let the mills grind; we know what grain we put in! Anthony, did
you notice that I gave your father coffee in the Vesuvius cup? If he
noticed its five-cent atrocity, he will ostracize me; and you know who
bought it."

"It is a good cup!" He dropped into his chair again and leaned across
the table to catch her hands in his. "Elsie, we will never sell this
house, or change anything in it, will we? We can come back to it, often,
for just a day. It was the beginning place, however far we go."

"Yes. Oh, yes! Anthony, our hearthstone is our cornerstone; on it we're
going to build, build splendidly, eternally----"

Her voice faltered before the vision. Silent, the two looked into each
other's eyes, seeing a happiness strongly secured, closing them around
like folded wings.


FINIS

       *       *       *       *       *

J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY'S New and Forthcoming Books


Peg Along

    By GEORGE L. WALTON, M.D. 12mo. Cloth, $1.00 net.

Dr. Walton's slogan, "Why Worry," swept the country. His little book of
that title did an infinite amount of good. "Peg Along" is the 1915
slogan. Hundreds of thousands of fussers, fretters, semi- and would-be
invalids, and all other halters by the wayside should be reached by Dr.
Walton's stirring encouragement to "peg along." In this new book he
shows us how to correct our missteps of care, anxiety, fretting, fear,
martyrism, over-insistence, etc., by teaching us real steps in the
chapters on work and play, managing the mind, Franklin's and Bacon's
methods, etc., etc. Send copies of this inspiring little work to friends
who appreciate bright wisdom. Win them into joyful, happy "peggers
along" to health and happiness.


Under the Red Cross Flag

At Home and Abroad

    By MABEL T. BOARDMAN, Chairman of the National Relief Board,
    American Red Cross.

    Foreword by PRESIDENT WOODROW WILSON.

    Fully illustrated. Decorated cloth. Gilt top. $1.50 net.

The American Red Cross and the name of Miss Boardman have been
inseparably connected for many years; her own story is one of
fascinating human interest to all who feel a bond of sympathy with those
who suffer. To-day it is the European War, but in unforgotten yesterdays
there was the Philippine Typhoon, the Vesuvian Eruption, the Chinese
Famine, and almost countless other disasters in which the heroes and
heroines of the Red Cross have worked and met danger in their effort to
alleviate the sufferings of humanity. This is the only complete
historical work upon the subject that has yet been written; no one,
accounting experience and literary ability, is better fitted to present
the facts than is the author.


Joseph Pennell's Pictures In the Land of Temples

    With 40 plates in photogravure from lithographs. Introduction by W.
    H. D. Rouse, Litt.D. Crown quarto. Lithograph on cover. $1.25 net.

Mr. Pennell's wonderful drawings present to us the immortal witnesses of
the "Glory that was Greece" just as they stand to-day, in their
environment and the golden atmosphere of Hellas. Whether it be the
industrial giants portrayed in "Pictures of the Panama Canal" or antique
temples presented in this fascinating volume, the great lithographer
proves himself to be a master craftsman of this metier. The art of
Greece is perhaps dead, but we are fortunate in having such an
interpreter. There is every promise that this book will have the same
value among artists and book lovers as had his others.

    "The isles of Greece, the isles of Greece!
    Where burning Sappho loved and sung,"

have never had a more appreciative and sympathetic lover.


Christmas Carol

    By CHARLES DICKENS. 13 illustrations in color and many in black and
    white by Arthur Rackham. Octavo. Decorated cloth. $1.50 net.

All the praise that can be showered upon Joseph Pennell as a master
lithographer, is also the due mead of Arthur Rackham as the most
entrancing and mysterious color illustrator in Europe. His work is
followed by an army of picture lovers of all types and of all ages, from
the children in the nurseries whose imagination he stirs with the
fiery-eyed dragons of some fairy illustration, to the ambitious artists
in every country who look to him as an inspiring master.

If the decision had been left to the book-reading and picture-loving
public as to the most eligible story for treatment, we believe that the
Christmas Carol would have been chosen. The children must see old
Scrooge and Tiny Tim as Rackham draws them.


Historic Virginia Homes and Churches

    By ROBERT A. LANCASTER, JR. About 300 illustrations and a
    photogravure frontispiece. Quarto. In a box, cloth, gilt top, $7.50
    net. Half morocco, $12.50 net. A Limited Edition printed from type,
    uniform with the Pennells' "Our Philadelphia."

Virginians are justly proud of the historical and architectural glories
of the Old Dominion. All America looks to Virginia as a Cradle of
American thought and culture. This volume is a monument to Virginia,
persons and places, past and present. It has been printed in a limited
edition and the type has been distributed. This is not a volume of
padded value; it is not a piece of literary hack-work. It has been a
labor of love since first undertaken some twenty-five years ago. The
State has done her part by providing the rich material, the Author his
with painstaking care and loving diligence, and the Publishers theirs by
expending all the devices of the bookmaker's art.


Quaint and Historic Forts of North America

    By JOHN MARTIN HAMMOND, Author of "Colonial Mansions of Maryland and
    Delaware." With photogravure frontispiece and sixty-five
    illustrations. Ornamental cloth, gilt top, in a box. $5.00 net.

This is an unique volume treating a phase of American history that has
never before been presented. Mr. Hammond, in his excellent literary
style with the aid of a splendid camera, brings us on a journey through
the existing old forts of North America and there describes their
appearances and confides in us their romantic and historic interest. We
follow the trail of the early English, French and Spanish adventurers,
and the soldiers of the Revolution, the War of 1812 and the later Civil
and Indian Wars. We cover the entire country from Quebec and Nova Scotia
to California and Florida, with a side trip to Havana to appreciate the
weird romance of the grim Morro Castle. Here is something new and
unique.


The Magic of Jewels and Charms

    By GEORGE FREDERICK KUNZ, A.M., PH.D., D.SC. With numerous plates in
    color, doubletone and line. Decorated cloth, gilt top, in a box.
    $5.00 net. Half morocco, $10.00 net. Uniform in style and size with
    "The Curious Lore of Precious Stones." The two volumes in a box,
    $10.00 net.

It will probably be a new and surely a fascinating subject to which Dr.
Kunz introduces the reader. The most primitive savage and the most
highly developed Caucasian find mystic meanings, symbols, sentiments
and, above all, beauty in jewels and precious stones; it is of this
magic lore that the distinguished author tells us. In past ages there
has grown up a great literature upon the subject--books in every
language from Icelandic to Siamese, from Sanskrit to Irish--the lore is
as profound and interesting as one can imagine. In this volume you will
find the unique information relating to the magical influence which
precious stones, amulets and crystals have been supposed to exert upon
individuals and events.


The Civilization of Babylonia and Assyria

    By MORRIS JASTROW, JR., PH.D., LL.D. 140 illustrations. Octavo.
    Cloth, gilt top, in a box, $6.00 net.

This work covers the whole civilization of Babylonia and Assyria, and by
its treatment of the various aspects of that civilization furnishes a
comprehensive and complete survey of the subject. The language, history,
religion, commerce, law, art and literature are thoroughly presented in
a manner of deep interest to the general reader and indispensable to
historians, clergymen, anthropologists and sociologists. The volume is
elaborately illustrated and the pictures have been selected with the
greatest care so as to show every aspect of this civilization, which
alone disputes with that of Egypt, the fame of being the oldest in the
world. For Bible scholars the comparisons with Hebrew traditions and
records will have intense interest.


English Ancestral Homes of Noted Americans

    By ANNE HOLLINGSWORTH WHARTON, Author of "In Chateau Land," etc.,
    etc. 28 illustrations. 12mo. Cloth $2.00 net. Half morocco,
    $4.00 net.

Miss Wharton so enlivens the past that she makes the distinguished
characters of whom she treats live and talk with us. She has recently
visited the homelands of a number of our great American leaders and we
seem to see upon their native heath the English ancestors of George
Washington, Benjamin Franklin, William Penn, the Pilgrim Fathers and
Mothers, the Maryland and Virginia Cavaliers and others who have done
their part in the making of the United States. Although this book is
written in an entertaining manner, and with many anecdotes and by-paths
to charm the reader, it is a distinct addition to the literature of
American history and will make a superb gift for the man or woman who
takes pride in his or her library.


Heroes and Heroines of Fiction Classical, Mediaeval and Legendary

    By WILLIAM S. WALSH. Half morocco, Reference Library style, $3.00
    net. Uniform with "Heroes and Heroines of Fiction, Modern Prose and
    Poetry." The two volumes in a box, $6.00 net.

The fact that the educated men of to-day are not as familiar with the
Greek and Roman classics as were their fathers gives added value to Mr.
Walsh's fascinating compilation. He gives the name and setting of all
the anywise important characters in the literature of classical,
mediaeval and legendary times. To one who is accustomed to read at all
widely, it will be found of the greatest assistance and benefit; to one
who writes it will be invaluable. These books comprise a complete
encyclopedia of interesting, valuable and curious facts regarding all
the characters of any note whatever in literature. This is the latest
addition to the world-famous Lippincott's Readers' Reference Library.
Each volume, as published, has become a standard part of public and
private libraries.


_A Wonderful Story of Heroism_

The Home of the Blizzard

    By SIR DOUGLAS MAWSON. Two volumes. 315 remarkable photographs. 16
    colored plates, drawings, plans, maps, etc. 8vo. $9.00 net.

Have you heard Sir Douglas lecture? If you have, you will want to read
this book that you may become better acquainted with his charming
personality, and to preserve in the three hundred and fifteen superb
illustrations with the glittering text, a permanent record of the
greatest battle that has ever been waged against the wind, the snow, the
crevice ice and the prolonged darkness of over two years in Antarctic
lands.

It has been estimated by critics as the most interesting and the
greatest account of Polar Exploration. For instance, the London
Athenaeum, an authority, said: "No polar book ever written has surpassed
these volumes in sustained interest or in the variety of the subject
matter." It is indeed a tale of pluck, heroism and infinite endurance
that comes as a relief in the face of accounts of the same qualities
sacrificed in Europe for a cause so less worthy.

To understand "courage" you must read the author's account of his
terrific struggle alone in the blizzard,--an eighty-mile fight in a
hurricane snow with his two companions left dead behind him.

The wild life in the southern seas is multitudinous; whole armies of
dignified penguins were caught with the camera; bluff old sea-lions and
many a strange bird of this new continent were so tame that they could
be easily approached. For the first time actual colored photographs
bring to us the flaming lights of the untrodden land. They are
unsurpassed in any other work.

These volumes will be a great addition to your library; whether large or
small, literary or scientific, they are an inspiration, a delight to
read.


Heart's Content

    By RALPH HENRY BARBOUR. Illustrations in color by H. Weston Taylor.
    Page Decorations by Edward Stratton Holloway. Handsome cloth
    binding. In sealed packet. $1.50 net.

This is the tale of a summer love affair carried on by an unusual but
altogether bewitching lover in a small summer resort in New England.
Allan Shortland, a gentleman, a tramp, a poet, and withal the happiest
of happy men, is the hero; Beryl Vernon, as pretty as the ripple of her
name, is the heroine. Two more appealing personalities are seldom found
within the covers of a book. Fun and plenty of it, romance and plenty of
it,--and an end full of happiness for the characters, and to the reader
regret that the story is over. The illustrations by H. Weston Taylor,
the decorations by Edward Stratton Holloway and the tasteful sealed
package are exquisite.


_A New Volume in THE STORIES ALL CHILDREN LOVE SERIES_

Heidi

    By JOHANNA SPYRI. Translated by ELISABETH P. STORK. Introduction by
    Charles Wharton Stork. With eight illustrations in color by Maria L.
    Kirk. 8vo. $1.25 net.

This is the latest addition to the Stories All Children Love Series. The
translation of the classic story has been accomplished in a marvellously
simple and direct fashion,--it is a high example of the translator's
art. American children should be as familiar with it as they are with
"Swiss Family Robinson," and we feel certain that on Christmas Day joy
will be brought to the nurseries in which this book is a present. The
illustrations by Maria L. Kirk are of the highest calibre,--the color,
freshness and fantastic airiness present just the spark to kindle the
imagination of the little tots.


_HEWLETT'S GREATEST WORK: Romance, Satire and a German_

The Little Iliad

    By MAURICE HEWLETT. Colored frontispiece by Edward Burne-Jones.
    12mo. $1.35 net.

A "Hewlett" that you and every one else will enjoy! It combines the rich
romance of his earliest work with the humor, freshness and gentle satire
of his more recent.

The whimsical, delightful novelist has dipped his pen in the inkhorn of
modern matrimonial difficulties and brings it out dripping with amiable
humor, delicious but fantastic conjecture. Helen of Troy lives again in
the Twentieth Century, but now of Austria; beautiful, bewitching,
love-compelling, and with it all married to a ferocious German who has
drained the cup and is now squeezing the dregs of all that life has to
offer. He has locomotor ataxia but that does not prevent his Neitschean
will from dominating all about him, nor does it prevent Maurice Hewlett
from making him one of the most interesting and portentous characters
portrayed by the hand of an Englishman in many a day. Four brothers fall
in love with the fair lady,--there are amazing but happy consequences.
The author has treated an involved story in a delightful, naive and
refreshing manner.


The Sea-Hawk

    By RAPHAEL SABATINI. 12mo. Cloth. $1.25 net.

Sabatini has startled the reading public with this magnificent romance!
It is a thrilling treat to find a vivid, clean-cut adventure yarn.
Sincere in this, we beg you, brothers, fathers, husbands and comfortable
old bachelors, to read this tale and even to hand it on to your friends
of the fairer sex, provided you are certain that they do not mind the
glint of steel and the shrieks of dying captives.


The Man From the Bitter Roots

    By CAROLINE LOCKHART. 3 illustrations in color by Gayle Hoskins.
    12mo. $1.25 net.

"Better than 'Me-Smith'"--that is the word of those who have read this
story of the powerful, quiet, competent Bruce Burt. You recall the humor
of "Me-Smith,"--wait until you read the wise sayings of Uncle Billy and
the weird characters of the Hinds Hotel. You recall some of those
flashing scenes of "Me-Smith"--wait until you read of the blizzard in
the Bitter Roots, of Bruce Burt throwing the Mexican wrestling champion,
of the reckless feat of shooting the Roaring River with the dynamos upon
the rafts, of the day when Bruce Burt almost killed a man who tried to
burn out his power plant,--then you will know what hair-raising
adventures really are. The tale is dramatic from the first great scene
in that log cabin in the mountains when Bruce Burt meets the murderous
onslaught of his insane partner.


A Man's Hearth

    By ELEANOR M. INGRAM. Illustrated in color by Edmund Frederick.
    12mo. $1.25 net.

The key words to all Miss Ingram's stories are "freshness," "speed" and
"vigor." "From the Car Behind" was aptly termed "one continuous joy
ride." "A Man's Hearth" has all the vigor and go of the former story and
also a heart interest that gives a wider appeal. A young New York
millionaire, at odds with his family, finds his solution in working for
and loving the optimistic nursemaid who brought him from the depths of
trouble and made for him a hearthstone. There are fascinating side
issues but this is the essential story and it is an inspiring one. It
will be one of the big books of the winter.


_By the author of "MARCIA SCHUYLER" "LO! MICHAEL" "THE BEST MAN" etc._

The Obsession of Victoria Gracen

    By GRACE LIVINGSTON HILL LUTZ. Illustrated in color. 12mo.
    $1.25 net.

Every mother, every church-worker, every individual who desires to bring
added happiness into the lives of others should read this book. A new
novel by the author of "Marcia Schuyler" is always a treat for those of
us who want clean, cheerful, uplifting fiction of the sort that you can
read with pleasure, recommend with sincerity and remember with
thankfulness. This book has the exact touch desired. The story is of the
effect that an orphan boy has upon his lonely aunt, his Aunt Vic. Her
obsession is her love for the lad and his happiness. There is the
never-failing fund of fun and optimism with the high religious purpose
that appears in all of Mrs. Lutz's excellent stories.


Miranda

    By GRACE LIVINGSTON HILL LUTZ. Illustrated in color by E. L. Henry.
    12mo. $1.25 net.

Nearly all of us fell in love with Miranda when she first appeared in
"Marcia Schuyler," but those who missed that happiness will now find her
even more lovable in this new book of which she is the central figure.
From cover to cover it is a tale of optimism, of courage, of purpose.
You lay it down with a revivified spirit, a stronger heart for the
struggle of this world, a clearer hope for the next, and a determination
to make yourself and the people with whom you come in contact cleaner,
more spiritual, more reverent than ever before. It is deeply religious
in character: a novel that will bring the great spiritual truths of God,
character and attainment straight to the heart of every reader.


_"GRIPPING" DETECTIVE TALES_

The White Alley

    By CAROLYN WELLS. Frontispiece. 12mo. $1.25 net.

FLEMING STONE, the ingenious American detective, has become one of the
best known characters in modern fiction. He is the supreme wizard of
crime detection in the WHITE BIRCHES MYSTERY told in,--"THE WHITE
ALLEY."

The _Boston Transcript_ says: "As an incomparable solver of criminal
enigmas, Stone is in a class by himself. A tale which will grip the
attention." This is what another says:--"Miss Wells's suave and polished
detective, Fleming Stone, goes through the task set for him with
celerity and dispatch. Miss Wells's characteristic humor and cleverness
mark the conversations."--_New York Times._


The Woman in the Car

    By RICHARD MARSH. 12mo. $1.35 net.

Do you like a thrilling tale? If so, read this one and we almost
guarantee that you will not stir from your chair until you turn the last
page. As the clock struck midnight on one of the most fashionable
streets of London in the Duchess of Ditchling's handsome limousine,
Arthur Towzer, millionaire mining magnate, is found dead at the wheel,
horribly mangled. Yes, this is a tale during the reading of which you
will leave your chair only to turn up the gas. When you are not
shuddering, you are thinking; your wits are balanced against the mind
and system of the famous Scotland Yard, the London detective
headquarters. The men or women who can solve the mystery without reading
the last few pages will deserve a reward,--they should apply for a
position upon the Pinkerton force.


_THE NOVEL THEY'RE ALL TALKING ABOUT_

The Rose-Garden Husband

    By MARGARET WIDDEMER. Illustrated by Walter Biggs. Small 12mo.
    $1.00 net.

"A BENEVOLENT FRIEND JUST SAVED ME from missing 'The Rose-Garden
  Husband.' It is something for thanksgiving, so I send thanks to you
  and the author. The story is now cut out and stitched and in my
  collection of 'worth-while' stories, in a portfolio that holds only
  the choicest stories from many magazines. There is a healthy tone in
  this that puts it above most of these choice ones. And a smoothness
  of action, a reality of motive and speech that comforts the soul of a
  veteran reviewer." _From a Letter to the Publishers._

Edition after edition of this novel has been sold, surely you are not
going to miss it. It is going the circle of family after family,--every
one likes it. The _New York Times_, a paper that knows, calls it "a
sparkling, rippling little tale." Order it _now_,--the cost is but one
dollar.


The Diary of a Beauty

    By MOLLY ELLIOT SEAWELL. Illustrated by William Dorr Steele. 12mo.
    $1.25 net.

From the assistant postmistress in a small New England village to the
owner of a great mansion on Fifth Avenue is the story told not as
outsiders saw it, but as the beautiful heroine experiences it,--an
account so naive, so deliciously cunning, so true, that the reader turns
page after page with an inner feeling of absolute satisfaction.


The Dusty Road

    By THERESE TYLER. Frontispiece by H. Weston Taylor. 12mo. $1.25 net.

This is a remarkable story of depth and power,--the struggle of
Elizabeth Anderson to clear herself of her sordid surroundings. Such
books are not written every day, nor every year, nor every ten years. It
is stimulating to a higher, truer life.


RECENT VALUABLE PUBLICATIONS


The Practical Book of Period Furniture

    Treating of English Period Furniture, and American Furniture of
    Colonial and Post-Colonial date, together with that of the typical
    French Periods.

    By HAROLD DONALDSON EBERLEIN and ABBOTT McCLURE. With 225
    illustrations in color, doubletone and line. Octavo. Handsomely
    decorated cloth. In a box. $5.00 net.

This book places at the disposal of the general reader all the
information he may need in order to identify and classify any piece of
period furniture, whether it be an original, or a reproduction. The
authors have greatly increased the value of the work by adding an
illustrated chronological key by means of which the reader can
distinguish the difference of detail between the various related
periods. One cannot fail to find the book absorbingly interesting as
well as most useful.


The Practical Book of Oriental Rugs

    By DR. G. GRIFFIN LEWIS, Author of "The Mystery of the Oriental
    Rug." New Edition, revised and enlarged. 20 full-page illustrations
    in full color. 93 illustrations in doubletone. 70 designs in line.
    Folding chart of rug characteristics and a map of the Orient.
    Octavo. Handsomely bound. In a box. $5.00 net.

Have you ever wished to be able to judge, understand, and appreciate the
characteristics of those gems of Eastern looms? This is the book that
you have been waiting for, as all that one needs to know about oriental
rugs is presented to the reader in a most engaging manner with
illustrations that almost belie description. "From cover to cover it is
packed with detailed information compactly and conveniently arranged for
ready reference. Many people who are interested in the beautiful fabrics
of which the author treats have long wished for such a book as this and
will be grateful to G. Griffin Lewis for writing it."--_The Dial._


The Practical Book of Outdoor Rose Growing

NEW EDITION
REVISED AND ENLARGED

    By GEORGE C. THOMAS, JR. Elaborately illustrated with 96 perfect
    photographic reproductions in full color of all varieties of roses
    and a few half tone plates. Octavo. Handsome cloth binding, in a
    slip case. $4.00 net.

This work has caused a sensation among rose growers, amateurs and
professionals. In the most practical and easily understood way the
reader is told just how to propagate roses by the three principal
methods of cutting, budding and grafting. There are a number of pages in
which the complete list of the best roses for our climate with their
characteristics are presented. One prominent rose grower said that these
pages were worth their weight in gold to him. The official bulletin of
the Garden Club of America said:--"It is a book one must have." It is in
fact in every sense practical, stimulating, and suggestive.


The Practical Book of Garden Architecture

    By PHEBE WESTCOTT HUMPHREYS. Frontispiece in color and 125
    illustrations from actual examples of garden architecture and house
    surroundings. Octavo. In a box. $5.00 net.

This beautiful volume has been prepared from the standpoints of eminent
practicability, the best taste, and general usefulness for the owner
developing his own property,--large or small, for the owner employing a
professional garden architect, for the artist, amateur, student, and
garden lover. The author has the gift of inspiring enthusiasm. Her plans
are so practical, so artistic, so beautiful, or so quaint and pleasing
that one cannot resist the appeal of the book, and one is inspired to
make plans, simple or elaborate, for stone and concrete work to
embellish the garden.


Handsome Art Works of Joseph Pennell

The reputation of the eminent artist is ever upon the increase. His
books are sought by all who wish their libraries to contain the best in
modern art. Here is your opportunity to determine upon the purchase of
three of his most sought-after volumes.


Joseph Pennell's Pictures of the Panama Canal

    (Fifth printing) 28 reproductions of lithographs made on the Isthmus
    of Panama between January and March, 1912, with Mr. Pennell's
    Introduction giving his experiences and impressions, and a full
    description of each picture. Volume 7 1/2 x 10 inches. Beautifully
    printed on dull finished paper. Lithograph by Mr. Pennell on cover.
    $1.25 net.

"Mr. Pennell continues in this publication the fine work which has won
for him so much deserved popularity. He does not merely portray the
technical side of the work, but rather prefers the human
element."--_American Art News._


Our Philadelphia

    By ELIZABETH ROBINS PENNELL. Illustrated by Joseph Pennell. Regular
    Edition. Containing 105 reproductions of lithographs by Joseph
    Pennell. Quarto. 7 1/2 x 10 inches. 552 pages. Handsomely bound in red
    buckram. Boxed. $7.50 net.

  Autograph Edition. Limited to 289 copies (Now very scarce). Contains
  10 drawings, reproduced by a new lithograph process, in addition to
  the illustrations that appear in the regular edition. Quarto. 552
  pages. Specially bound in genuine English linen buckram in City
  colors, in cloth covered box. $18.00 net.

An intimate personal record in text and in picture of the lives of the
famous author and artist in a city with a brilliant history, great
beauty, immense wealth.


Life of James McNeill Whistler

    By ELIZABETH ROBINS and JOSEPH PENNELL. Thoroughly revised Fifth
    Edition of the authorized Life, with much new matter added which was
    not available at the time of issue of the elaborate 2 volume
    edition, now out of print. Fully illustrated with 97 plates
    reproduced from Whistler's works. Crown octavo. 450 pages. Whistler
    binding, deckle edges. $3.50 net. Three-quarter grain levant, $7.50
    net.

"In its present form and with the new illustrations, some of which
present to us works which are unfamiliar to us, its popularity will be
greatly increased."--_International Studio._


The Stories All Children Love Series

This set of books for children comprises some of the most famous stories
ever written. Each book has been a tried and true friend in thousands of
homes where there are boys and girls. Fathers and mothers remembering
their own delight in the stories are finding that this handsome edition
of old favorites brings even more delight to their children. The books
have been carefully chosen, are beautifully illustrated, have attractive
lining papers, dainty head and tail pieces, and the decorative bindings
make them worthy of a permanent place on the library shelves.

  Heidi                            By JOHANNA SPYRI.
                                   Translated by Elisabeth P. Stork.
  The Cuckoo Clock                 By MRS. MOLESWORTH.
  The Swiss Family Robinson        Edited by G. E. MITTON.
  The Princess and the Goblin      By GEORGE MACDONALD.
  The Princess and Curdie          By GEORGE MACDONALD.
  At the Back of the North Wind    By GEORGE MACDONALD.
  A Dog of Flanders                By "OUIDA."
  Bimbi                            By "OUIDA."
  Mopsa, the Fairy                 By JEAN INGELOW.
  The Chronicles of Fairyland      By FERGUS HUME.
  Hans Andersen's Fairy Tales

    Each large octavo, with from 8 to 12 colored illustrations. Handsome
    cloth binding, decorated in gold and color. $1.25 net, per volume.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Man's Hearth, by Eleanor M. Ingram

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MAN'S HEARTH ***

***** This file should be named 36503.txt or 36503.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/5/0/36503/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Susan Skinner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
