The Project Gutenberg EBook of Gage's Instructions, by
Thomas Gage and Ensign de Berniere

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Gage's Instructions

Author: Thomas Gage
        Ensign de Berniere

Release Date: June 27, 2011 [EBook #36536]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAGE'S INSTRUCTIONS ***




Produced by Tor Martin Kristiansen, Joseph Cooper and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Eyewitness Accounts of the American Revolution

Gage's Instructions

Thomas Gage

The New York Times & Arno Press


Reprinted from a microfilm copy in The American Antiquarian Society
Library

Reprint Edition 1971 by Arno Press Inc.

LC# 78-140865
ISBN 0-405-01198-9

Eyewitness Accounts of the American Revolution, Series III
ISBN for complete set: 0-405-01187-3

Manufactured in the United States of America




GENERAL GAGE's

INSTRUCTIONS,

Of 22d _February_ 1775.

To Captain _Brown_ and Ensign _D'Berniere_, (of the army under his
command) whom he ordered to take a sketch of the roads, passes,
heights, &c. from _Boston_ to _Worcester_, and to make other
observations:

With a _curious_

NARRATIVE

Of OCCURRENCES during their mission, Wrote by the _Ensign_.

Together with an ACCOUNT of their doings, in consequence of further
Orders and Instructions from General _Gage_, of the 20th _March_
following, to proceed to _Concord_, to reconnoitre and find out the
state of the provincial magazines; what number of cannon, &c. they
have, and in what condition.

ALSO,

An ACCOUNT of the Transactions of the _British_ troops, from the time
they marched out of _Boston_, on the evening of the 18th, 'till their
_confused_ retreat back, on the _ever memorable Nineteenth of April
1775_; and a Return of their killed, wounded and missing on that
_auspicious day_, as made to Gen. _Gage_.

[Left in town by a _British_ Officer previous to the evacuation of it
by the enemy, and now printed for the information and amusement of the
_curious_.]


_BOSTON_
Printed, and to be sold, by J. GILL, in Court Street.
1779.




INSTRUCTIONS, &_c._


_Boston, February_ 22, 1775.

GENTLEMEN,

You will go through the counties of _Suffolk_ and _Worcester_, taking a
sketch of the country as you pass; it is not expected you should make
out regular plans and surveys, but mark out the roads and distances
from town to town, as also the situation and nature of the country; all
passes must be particularly laid down, noticing the length and breadth
of them, the entrance in and going out of them, and whether to be
avoided by taking other routes.

The rivers also to be sketched out, remarking their breadth and depth
and the nature of their banks on both sides, the fords, if any, and the
nature of their bottoms, many of which particulars may be learned of
the country people.

You will remark the heights you meet with, whether the ascents are
difficult or easy; as also the woods and mountains, with the height and
nature of the latter, whether to be got round or easily past over.

The nature of the country to be particularly noticed, whether inclosed
or open; if the former, what kind of inclosures, and whether the
country admits of making roads for troops on the right or left of the
main road, or on the sides.

You will notice the situation of the towns and villages, their churches
and church-yards, whether they are advantageous spots to take post in,
and capable of being made defencible.

If any places strike you as proper for encampments, or appear strong by
nature, you will remark them particularly, and give reasons for your
opinions.

It would be useful if you cou'd inform yourselves of the necessaries
their different counties could supply, such as provisions, forage,
straw, &c. the number of cattle, horses, &c. in the several townships.

_I am,

Gentlemen,

your most obedient humble servant_,

THOMAS GAGE.

_To Capt._ Brown _52d regiment, and     }
    Ensign_ D'Berniere _10th regiment_. }

(COPY)




NARRATIVE, &_c._


The latter end of _February_ 1775, Capt. _Brown_ and myself, received
orders to go through the counties of _Suffolk_ and _Worcester_, and
sketch the roads as we went, for the information of Gen. _Gage_, as he
expected to have occasion to march troops through that country the
ensuing spring.

We set out from _Boston_ on Thursday, disguised like countrymen, in
brown cloaths and reddish handkerchiefs round our necks; at the ferry
of _Charlestown_, we met a sentry of the 52d regiment, but Capt.
_Brown's_ servant, whom we took along with us, bid him not take any
notice of us, so that we passed unknown to _Charlestown_. From that we
went to _Cambridge_, a pretty town, with a college built of brick, the
ground is entirely level on which the town stands. We next went to
_Watertown_, and were not suspected, it is a pretty large town for
_America_, but would be looked upon as a village in _England_; a little
out of this town we went into a tavern, a Mr. _Brewer_'s, a whig, we
called for dinner, which was brought in by a black woman, at first she
was very civil, but afterwards began to eye us very attentively; she
then went out and a little after returned, when we observed to her that
it was a very fine country, upon which she answered so it is, and we
have got brave fellows to defend it, and if you go up any higher you
will find it so--This disconcerted us a good deal, and we imagined she
knew us from our papers which we took out before her, as the General
had told us to pass for surveyors; however, we resolved not to sleep
there that night, as we had intended, accordingly we paid our bill
which amounted to two pounds odd shillings, but in was old tenor. After
we had left the house we enquired of _John_, our servant, what she had
said, he told us that she knew Capt. _Brown_ very well, that she had
seen him five years before at _Boston_, and knew him to be an officer,
and that she was sure I was one also, and told _John_ that he was a
regular--he denied it; but she said she knew our errant was to take a
plan of the country; that she had seen the river and road through
_Charlestown_ on the paper; she also advised him to tell us not to go
any higher, for if we did we should meet with very bad usage: Upon this
we called a council, and agreed that if we went back we should appear
very foolish, as we had a great number of enemies in town, because the
General had chose to employ us in preference to them; it was absolutely
necessary to push on to _Worcester_, and run all risk rather than go
back until we were forced.--Accordingly we continued our rout and went
about six miles further; we met a country fellow driving a team, and a
fellow with him whom we suspected to be a deserter; they both seemed
very desirous to join company with us and told us, upon our saying we
were going towards _Worcester_, that they were going our way: As we
began to suspect something we stopped at a tavern at the sign of the
golden-ball, with an intention to get a drink and so proceed; but upon
our going in the landlord pleased us so much, as he was not
inquisitive, that we resolved to lye there that night; so we ordered
some fire to be made in the room we were in, and a little after to get
us some coffee; he told us we might have what we pleased, either tea or
coffee. We immediately found out with whom we were, and were not a
little pleased to find, on some conversation, that he was a friend to
government; he told us that he had been very ill-used by them some time
before; but that since he had shewed them that he was not to be
bullied, they had left him pretty quiet.--We then asked him for the
inns that were on the road between his house and _Worcester_, he
recommended us to two, one at about nine miles from his house, a Mr.
_Buckminster_'s, and another at _Worcester_, a namesake of his own, a
Mr. _Jones_. The second day was very rainy and a kind of frost, with it
however we resolved to set off, and accordingly we proceeded to Mr.
_Buckminster_'s; we met nothing extraordinary on the road; we passed
some time in sketching a pass that lay in our road, and of consequence
were very dirty and wet on our arrival: On our entering the house we
did not much like the appearance of things; we asked for dinner and
they gave us some sausages, we praised every thing exceedingly, which
pleased the old woman of the house much; when we told them we intended
staying the night, they gave us a room to ourselves, which was what we
wanted; after being there some time we found we were pretty safe, as by
that time we perceived that the _coate de pay_'s was not a dangerous
one; of consequence we felt very happy, and _Brown_, _I_, and our man
_John_, made a very hearty supper; for we always treated him as our
companion since our adventure with the black woman. We slept there that
night, and the next morning; being a very fine one, we resolved to push
on for _Worcester_, which was about thirty miles from us; we proceeded
about nine miles without any thing extraordinary happening, except
meeting two men whom we suspected to be deserters. We then dined in the
woods on a tongue and some cherry brandy we brought with us, and
changed our stockings, which refreshed us much, our feet being very
wet. We then travelled through a very fine country, missed our way and
went to _Southborough_; we were obliged to turn back a mile to get the
right road. We then passed through _Shrewsbury_; all a fine open
cultivated country. We came into a pass about four miles from
_Worcester_, where we were obliged to stop to sketch. We arrived at
_Worcester_ at five o'clock in the evening, very much fatigued; the
people in the town did not take notice of us as we came in, so that we
got safe to Mr. _Jones_'s tavern; on our entrance he seemed a little
sour, but it wore off by degrees and we found him to be our friend,
which made us very happy; we dined and supped without any thing
happening out of the common run. The next day being Sunday, we could
not think of travelling, as it was contrary to the custom of the
country; nor dare we stir out until the evening because of meeting, and
no-body is allowed to walk the streets during divine service, without
being taken up and examined; so that thinking we could not stand the
examination so well, we thought it prudent to stay at home, where we
wrote and corrected our sketches. The landlord was very attentive to
us, and on our asking what he could give us for breakfast, he told us
tea or any thing else we chose--that was an open confession, what he
was; but for fear he might be imprudent, we did not tell him who we
were, tho' we were certain he knew it. In the evening we went round the
town and on all the hills that command it, sketched every thing we
desired, and returned to the town without being seen. That evening
about eight o'clock the landlord came in and told us there were two
gentlemen who wanted to speak with us; we asked him who they were? on
which he said we wou'd be safe in their company; we said we did not
doubt that, as we hoped that two gentlemen who travelled merely to see
the country and stretch our limbs, as we had lately come from tea,
could not meet with any thing else but civility, when we behaved
ourselves properly; he told us he would come in again in a little time,
and perhaps we wou'd change our minds, and then left us;--an hour after
he returned, and told us the gentlemen were gone, but had begged him to
let us know, as they knew as to be officers of the army, that all their
friends of government at _Petersham_ were disarmed by the rebels, and
that they threatened to do the same at _Worcester_ in a very little
time; he sat and talked politicks, and drank a bottle of wine with
us--and also told us that none but a few friends to government knew we
were in town; we said it was very indifferent to us whether they did or
not, tho' we thought very differently; however, as we imagined we had
staid long enough in that town, we resolved to set off at day-break the
next morning and get to _Framingham_; accordingly off we set, after
getting some roast beef and brandy from our landlord, which was very
necessary on a long march, and prevented us going into houses where
perhaps they might be too inquisitive; we took a road we had not come,
and that led us to the pass four miles from _Worcester_; we went on
unobserved by any one until we passed _Shrewsbury_, where we were
overtaken by a horseman who examined us very attentively, and
especially me, whom he looked at from head to foot as if he wanted to
know me again; after he had taken his observations he rode off pretty
hard and took the _Marlborough_ road, but by good luck we took the
_Framingham_ road again to be more perfect in it, as we thought it
would be the one made use of. We arrived at _Buckminster_'s tavern
about six o'clock that evening, the company of militia were exercising
near the house, and an hour after they came and performed their feats
before the windows of the room we were in; we did not feel very easy at
seeing such a number so very near us; however, they did not know who we
were, and took little or no notice of us--After they had done their
exercise, one of their commanders spoke a very eloquent speech,
recommending patience, coolness and bravery, (which indeed they much
wanted) particularly told them they would always conquer if they did
not break, and recommended them to charge us cooly, and wait for our
fire, and every thing would succeed with them--quotes _Caesar_ and
_Pompey_, brigadiers _Putnam_ and _Ward_, and all such great men; put
them in mind of _Cape-Breton_, and all the battles they had gained for
his majesty in the last war, and observed that the regulars must have
been ruined but for them.--After so learned and spirited an harangue,
he dismissed the parade, and the whole company came into the house and
drank until nine o'clock, and then returned to their respective homes
full of pot-valour. We slept there that night and no-body in the house
suspected us. Next morning we set off for _Weston_, had a very
agreeable day, having fine weather and a beautiful country to travel
through; we met nothing extraordinary on the road, no-body knew us, and
we were asked very few questions: On our arrival at Mr. _Jones_'s we
met with a very welcome reception, he being our friend; we received
several hints from the family not to attempt to go any more into the
country; but as we had succeeded so well heretofore, we were resolved
so go the _Sudbury_ road, (which was the main road that led to
_Worcester_) and go as far as the thirty-seven mile-stone, where we had
left the main road and taken the _Framingham_ road. We slept at
_Jones_'s that night, and got all our sketches together and sent them
to _Boston_ with our man, so that if they did stop and search us, they
would not get our papers. The next day was very cloudy and threatened
bad weather, towards twelve o'clock it snowed; we dined soon in hopes
the weather would clear up.--At two o'-clock it ceased snowing a
little, and we resolved to set off for _Marlborough_, which was about
sixteen miles off; we found the roads very bad, every step up to our
ankles; we passed through _Sudbury_, a very large village, near a mile
long, the causeway lies across a great swamp, or overflowing of the
river _Sudbury_, and commanded by a high ground on the opposite side;
nobody took the least notice of us until we arrived within three miles
of _Marlborough_, (it was snowing hard all the while) when a horseman
overtook us and asked us from whence we came, we said from _Weston_, he
asked if we lived there, we said no; he then asked us where we resided,
and as we found there was no evading his questions, we told him we
lived at _Boston_; he then asked us where we were going, we told him to
_Marlborough_ to see a friend, (as we intended to go to Mr. _Barnes_'s,
a gentleman to whom we were recommended, and a friend to government) he
then asked us if we were in the army, we said not, but were a good deal
alarmed at his asking us that question; he asked several rather
impertinent questions, and then rode on for _Marlborough_, as we
suppose, to give them intelligence there of our coming,--for on our
entering the town, the people came out of their houses (tho' it snowed
and blew very hard) to look at us, in particular a baker asked Capt.
_Brown_ where are you going master, he answered on to see Mr.
_Barnes_.--We proceeded to Mr. _Barnes_'s and on our beginning to make
an apology for taking the liberty to make use of his house and
discovering to him that we were officers in disguise, he told us we
need not be at the pains of telling him, that he knew our situation,
that we were very well known (he was afraid) by the town's people.--We
begged he would recommend some tavern where we should be safe, he told
us we could be safe no where but in his house; that the town was very
violent, and that we had been expected at Col. _Williams_'s the night
before, where there had gone a party of liberty people to meet us,--(we
suspected, and indeed had every reason to believe, that the horseman
that met us and took such particular notice of me the morning we left
_Worcester_, was the man who told them we should be at _Marlborough_
the night before, but our taking the _Framingham_ road when he had
parted us, deceived him:)--Whilst we were talking the people were
gathering in little groups in every part of the town.--Mr. _Barnes_
asked us who had spoke to us on our coming into the town, we told him a
baker; he seemed a little startled at that, told us he was a very
mischievous fellow, and that there was a deserter at his house; Capt.
_Brown_ asked the man's name, he said it was _Swain_, that he had been
a drummer; _Brown_ knew him too well, as he was a man of his own
company, and had not been gone above a month--so we found we were
discovered.--We asked Mr. _Barnes_ if they did get us into their hands,
what they would do with us; he did not seem to like to answer; we asked
him again, he then said we knew the people very well, that we might
expect the worst of treatment from them--Immediately after this, Mr.
_Barnes_ was called out; he returned a little after and told us the
doctor of the town had come to tell him he was come to sup with
him--(now this fellow had not been within Mr. _Barnes_'s doors for two
years before, and came now for no other business than to see and betray
us)--_Barnes_ told him he had company and could not have the pleasure
of attending him that night; upon this the fellow stared about the
house and asked one of Mr. _Barnes_'s children who her father had got
with him, the child innocently answered that she had asked her pappa,
but he told her it was not her business; he then went, I suppose, to
tell the rest of his crew.--When we found we were in that situation, we
resolved to lie down for two or three hours, and set off at twelve
o'clock at night; so we got some supper on the table and were just
beginning to eat, when _Barnes_ (who had been making enquiry of his
servants) found they intended to attack us, and then he told us plainly
he was very uneasy for us, that we could be no longer in safety in that
town: upon which we resolved to set off immediately, and asked Mr.
_Barnes_ if there was no road round the town, so that we might not be
seen; he took us out of his house by the stables, and directed us a bye
road which was to lead us a quarter of a mile from the town, it snowed
and blew as much as ever I see it in my life; however, we walked pretty
fast, fearing we should be pursued; at first we felt much fatigued,
having not been more than twenty minutes at Mr. _Barnes_'s to refresh
ourselves, and the roads (if possible) were worse than when we came;
but in a little time after it wore off; and we got without being
perceived, as far as the hills that command the causeway at _Sudbury_,
and went into a little wood where we eat a bit of bread that we took
from Mr. _Barnes_'s, and eat a little snow to wash it down.--After that
we preceded about one hundred yards, when a man came out of a house and
said those words to Capt. _Brown_, "What do you think will become of
you now," which startled us a good deal, thinking we were betrayed.--We
resolved to push on at all hazards, but expected to be attacked on the
causeway; however we met no-body there, so began to think it was
resolved to stop us in _Sudbury_, which town we entered when we passed
the causeway; about a quarter of a mile in the town we met three or
four horsemen, from whom we expected a few shot, when we came nigh they
opened to the right and left and quite crossed the road, however they
let us pass through them without taking any notice, their opening being
only chance; but our apprehensions made us interpret every thing
against us.--At last we arrived at our friend _Jones_'s again, very
much fatigued, after walking thirty-two miles between two o'clock and
half-after ten at night, through a road that every step we sunk up to
the ankles, and it blowing and drifting snow all the way--_Jones_ said
he was glad to see us back, as he was sure we should meet with
ill-usage in that part of the country, as they had been watching for us
sometime; but said he found we were so deaf to his hints, that he did
not like to say any thing for fear we should have taken it ill: we
drank a bottle of mulled Madeira wine, which refreshed us very much,
and went to bed and slept as sound as men could do, that were very much
fatigued. The next morning, after breakfast, we set off for _Boston_.
_Jones_ shewed us a road that took us a quarter of a mile below
_Watertown_ bridge, as we did not chuse to go through that town. We
arrived at _Boston_ about twelve o'clock, and met General _Gage_ and
General _Haldiman_, with their aid-de-camps, walking out on the neck,
they did not know us until we discovered ourselves; we besides met
several officers of our acquaintance, who did not know us.

A few days after our return, Mr. _Barnes_ came to town from
_Marlborough_, and told us, immediately on our quitting the town, the
committee of correspondence came to his house and demanded us; he told
them we were gone; they then searched his house from top to bottom,
looked under the beds and in their cellars, and when they found we were
gone, they told him if they had caught us in his house they would have
pulled it about his ears.--They then sent horsemen after us, every
road; but as we had the start of them, and the weather being so very
bad, they either did not overtake us, or missed us. Mr. _Barnes_ told
them we were not officers, but relations of his wife's, from
_Penobscot_, and were gone to _Lancaster_; that, perhaps, might have
deceived them.

                 *       *       *       *       *

_Account of the proceedings of the aforesaid officers, in consequence
of further orders end instructions from General_ Gage, _of the 20th
March following; with occurrences during their mission_.

The twentieth of _March_ Captain _Brown_ and myself received orders to
set out for _Concord_, and examine the road and situation of the town;
and also to get what information we could relative to what quantity of
artillery and provisions. We went through _Roxbury_ and _Brookline_,
and came into the main road between the thirteen and fourteen
mile-stones in the township of _Weston_; we went through part of the
pass at the eleven mile-stone, took the _Concord_ road, which is seven
miles from the main road. We arrived there without any kind of insult
being offered us, the road is high to the right and low to the left,
woody in most places, and very close and commanded by hills frequently.
The town of _Concord_ lies between hills that command it entirely;
there is a river runs through it, with two bridges over it, in summer
it is pretty dry; the town is large and covers a great tract of ground,
but the houses are not close together but generally in little groups.
We were informed that they had fourteen pieces of cannon (ten iron and
four brass) and two cohorns, they were mounted but in so bad a manner
that they could not elevate them more than they were, that is, they
were fixed to one elevation, their iron cannon they kept in a house in
town, their brass they had concealed in some place behind the town, in
a wood. They had also a store of flour, fish, salt and rice; and a
magazine of powder and cartridges. They fired their morning gun, and
mounted a guard of ten men at night. We dined at the house of a Mr.
_Bliss_, a friend to government; they had sent him word they would not
let him go out of town alive that morning; however, we told him if he
would come with us we would take care of him, as we were three and all
well armed,--he consented and told us he could shew us another road,
called the _Lexington_ road. We set out and crossed the bridge in the
town, and of consequence left the town on the contrary side of the
river to what we entered it. The road continued very open and good for
six miles, the next five a little inclosed, (there is one very bad
place in this five miles) the road good to _Lexington_. You then come
to _Menotomy_, the road still good; a pond or lake at _Menotomy_. You
then leave _Cambridge_ on your right, and fall into the main road a
little below _Cambridge_, and so to _Charlestown_; the road is very
good almost all the way.

In the town of _Concord_, a woman directed us to Mr. _Bliss_'s house; a
little after she came in crying, and told us they swore if she did not
leave the town, they would tar and feather her for directing Tories in
their road.

                 *       *       *       *       *

Transactions _of the_ British _troops previous to, and at the Battle
of_ Lexington; _with a Return of their killed, wounded and missing, as
made to General_ Gage.

On the night of the 18th of _April_, 1774 at nine o'clock, the
grenadiers and light-infantry of the army at _Boston_, received orders
to embark immediately under the command of Col. _Smith_, in the men of
war's boats, and proceed according to his directions. They embarked at
the common in _Boston_, and crossed to the shore lying between
_Charlestown_ and _Cambridge_, where they landed and received a day's
provisions: They began their march about twelve o'clock for _Concord_,
that being the place they were ordered to go to, for the purpose
of destroying some military stores laid up there by the rebels. The
troops received no interruption in their march until they arrived at
_Lexington_, a town eleven miles from _Boston_, where there were about
150 rebels drawn out in divisions, with intervals as wide at the front
of the divisions; the light-infantry who marched in front halted, and
Major _Pitcairn_ came up immediately and cried out to the rebels to
throw down their arms and disperse, which they did not do; he called
out a second time, but to no purpose; upon which he ordered our
light-infantry to advance and disarm them, which they were doing, when
one of the rebels fired a shot, our soldiers returned the fire and
killed about fourteen of them; there was only one of the 10th
light-infantry received a shot through his leg; some of them got into
the church and fired from it, but were soon drove out. We then
continued our march for _Concord_, and arrived there between nine and
ten o'clock in the morning of the 19th _April_, the light-infantry
marched on the hills that lay the length of the town, and the
grenadiers took the lower road immediately on our arrival; Capt.
_Parsons_ of the 10th, was dispatched with six light-companies to take
possession of a bridge that lay three quarters of a mile from
_Concord_, and I was ordered to shew him the road there, and also to
conduct him to a house where there was some cannon and other stores
hid; when we arrived at the bridge, three companies under the command
of Capt. _Lowry_ of the 43rd, were left to protect it, these three
companies were not close together, but situated so as to be able to
support each other; we then proceeded to Col. _Barrett_'s, where these
stores were, we did not find so much as we expected, but what there was
we destroyed; in the mean time Capt. _Lowry_ and his party were
attacked by about 1500 rebels and drove from the bridge, three officers
were wounded and one killed, three soldiers were killed and a number
wounded, notwithstanding they let Capt. _Parsons_ with his three
companies return, and never attacked us; they had taken up some of the
planks of the bridge, but we got over; had they destroyed it we were
most certainly all lost; however, we joined the main body. Col. _Smith_
during our absence, had sent Capt. _Pole_ of 10th regiment, to destroy
some provisions and cannon that were lodged in another part of the
town, he knock'd the trunnions off three iron 24 pound cannon and burnt
their carriages; they also destroyed a quantity of flour, and some
barrels of trenchers and spoons of wood for their camp. Upon the
different detachment's joining the main body, and after getting some
horses and chaises for the wounded, we began the march to return to
_Boston_, about twelve o'clock in the day, in the same order of march,
only our flankers were more numerous and further from the main body;
all the hills on each side of us were covered with rebels--there could
not be less than 5000; so that they kept the road always lined and a
very hot fire on us without intermission; we at first kept our order
and returned their fire as hot as we received it, but when we arrived
within a mile of _Lexington_, our ammunition began to fail, and the
light companies were so fatigued with flanking they were scarce able to
act, and a great number of wounded scarce able to get forward, made a
great confusion; Col. _Smith_ (our commanding-officer) had received a
wound through his leg, a number of officers were also wounded, so that
we began to run rather than retreat in order--the whole behaved with
amazing bravery, but little order; we attempted to stop the men and
form them two deep, but to no purpose, the confusion increased rather
than lessened: At last, after we got though _Lexington_, the officers
got to the front and presented their bayonets, and told the men if they
advanced they should die: Upon this they began to form under a very
heavy fire; but at that instant, the first brigade joined us,
consisting of the 4th, 23d, and 47th regiments, and two divisions of
marines, under the command of Brigadier-General Lord _Percy_; he
brought two field-pieces with him, which were immediately brought to
bear upon the rebels, and soon silenced their fire.--After a little
firing the whole halted for about half an hour to rest. Lord _Percy_
then made the light-infantry march in front, the grenadiers next, and
the first brigade brought up the rear and sent out flankers; the rebels
still kept firing on us, but very lightly until we came to _Menotomy_,
a village with a number of houses in little groups extending about half
a mile, out of these houses they kept a very heavy fire, but our troops
broke into them and killed vast numbers; the soldiers shewed great
bravery in this place, forcing houses from whence came a heavy fire,
and killing great numbers of the rebels. At about seven o'clock in the
evening we arrived at _Charlestown_, they kept up a scattering fire at
us all the way; at _Charlestown_ we took possession of a hill that
commanded the town, the Selectmen of which sent to Lord _Percy_ to let
him know that if he would not attack the town, they would take care
that the troops should not be molested, and also they would do all in
their power for to get us across the ferry; the _Somerset_ man of war
lay there at that time, and all her boats were employed first in
getting over the wounded, and after them the rest of the troops; the
piquets of 10th regiment, and some more troops, were sent over to
_Charlestown_ that night to keep every thing quiet, and returned next
day. The rebels shut up the neck, placed sentinels there, and took
prisoner an officer of the 64th regiment that was going to join his
regiment at _Castle-William_.--So that in the course of two days, from
a plentiful town, we were reduced to the disagreeable necessity of
living on salt provisions, and fairly blocked up in _Boston_.

                 *       *       *       *       *

RETURN _of the killed, wounded and missing, on the 19th of_ April,
1775, _as made to General_ Gage.

  KILLED.

  IVth regiment, Lieut. _Knight_, at _Menotomy_.
  XLIIId, ditto, Lieut. _Hull_, bridge beyond _Concord_.

  WOUNDED.

  IVth regiment, Lieut. _Gould_, bridge beyond _Concord_.
  Vth,    ditto, Lieut. _Hauxshaw_, near _Lexington_.
          ditto, Lieut. _Cox_,          ditto.
          ditto, Lieut. _Baker_,        ditto.
  Xth     ditto, Lieut. Col. _Smith_,   ditto.
          ditto, Lieut. _Kelly_, bridge beyond _Concord_.
          ditto, Ensign _Lester_, near _Concord_.
  XXIIId  ditto, Lieut. Col. _Bernard_, _Menotomy_.
  XXXVIIId do.   Lieut. _Sunderland_, bridge _Concord_.
  XLVIIth ditto, Ensign _Baldwin_, near _Lexington_.
          ditto, Ensign _McCloud_,      ditto.
  MARINES. {Capt. _Souter_, and } near _Lexington_.
           {Lieut. _Potter_     }

  PRISONERS.

  IVth regiment, Lieut. _Gould_.
  LXIVth  ditto, Lieut. _Hamilton_.
  MARINES.       Lieut. _Potter_.

                 _Killed.  Wounded.  Missing._
  Officers            2        13        3
  Serjeants           2         7        1
  Drummers            1         0        1
  Rank and File      68       154       21
                     --       ---       --
    _Total_,         73       174       26






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Gage's Instructions, by
Thomas Gage and Ensign de Berniere

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAGE'S INSTRUCTIONS ***

***** This file should be named 36536.txt or 36536.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/5/3/36536/

Produced by Tor Martin Kristiansen, Joseph Cooper and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
