The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Brute, by Frederic Arnold Kummer,
Illustrated by Frank Snapp


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Brute


Author: Frederic Arnold Kummer



Release Date: June 28, 2011  [eBook #36551]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BRUTE***


E-text prepared by D Alexander and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 36551-h.htm or 36551-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/36551/36551-h/36551-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/36551/36551-h.zip)





THE BRUTE

by

FREDERIC ARNOLD KUMMER

Author of "The Green God"

Illustrations by Frank Snapp







New York
Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers

Copyright, 1912, by
W. J. Watt & Company

Published, April




[Illustration: "IT'S A LIE," HE GASPED HOARSELY, THEN SANK BACK IN
HORROR]




THE BRUTE




CHAPTER I


Every evening, almost, Donald Rogers and his wife Edith sat in a plain
little living-room in their apartment in Harlem, and worked until ten or
eleven o'clock. By that time they were both ready to go to bed. It was
not very exciting. Edith darned stockings or sewed; Donald toiled at
his desk, writing letters--going over reports. Sometimes, very rarely,
they went to the theater. They had done the same thing for nearly eight
years, and to Edith, at least, it seemed a very long time.

The room in which they sat reflected in its furnishings much of the
life these two led. It seemed to suggest, in every line, an unceasing
conflict between poverty and ambition--not, indeed, the poverty of the
really poor, of those in actual want, but the poverty of the well born,
of those whose desires are forever infinitely beyond their means.

This was evidenced by many curious contrasts. The furniture, for
instance, was for the most part of that cheap and gloomy variety known
as mission oak, yet the designs were good, as though its purchasers had
striven toward some ideal which they had not the means to realize.
The rug on the floor, an imitation oriental, was still of excellent
coloring; the pictures showed taste in their selection--such taste,
indeed, as is possible under the limitations imposed by a slender
purse--among them might have been discovered a charming little
water-color and some reproductions of etchings by Whistler.

The curtains were imitation lace, the ornaments on the mantel imitation
bronze, the cushions in the Morris chair imitation Spanish leather. The
keynote of the whole room was imitation--everything in it, almost, was
the result of refinement and excellent taste on the one hand, hampered
by lack of money on the other. The effect was somewhat that given by
twenty dollar sets of ermine furs, or ropes of pearls at bargain-counter
prices. Edith, caring more about such matters than her husband, realized
this note of imitation keenly, but found it more satisfactory to have
even the shadow of what she really desired than to drop back to another
level of existence, and content herself with ingrain carpets, shiny
yellow furniture, and the sort of pictures made of mother of pearl,
which are given away with tea-store coupons. In her present environment,
she chafed--in the other, she would have been suffocated.

On this particular night in March, they were at home as usual. Donald
had composed himself at his desk, hunched over, his head resting upon
his left hand, staring at the papers before him. The only sound in the
room was the ticking of the trading-stamp clock on the mantel, and the
clanking of the steam pipes. For a long time Donald stared, and wrote
nothing. Suddenly he turned to his wife.

"For Heaven's sake, Edith," he exclaimed impatiently, "what's the matter
with those pipes?"

Edith glanced at him, but did not move. She came back slowly from her
land of dreams.

"The janitor has probably just turned on the steam. It's been off for
the past week on account of the warm weather."

Donald rose, and went nervously over to the radiator under the window.

"I can't write with this infernal noise going on," he grumbled, as he
turned to his desk. "Will it be too cold for you?"

"Oh, no. I'm used to it." Mrs. Rogers' tone was patient, resigned.

Donald resumed his writing, and sat for a few moments in silence, but
the tone of his wife's remark had not been lost upon him. He turned
toward her presently, with an anxious look, searching her face keenly.

"What's the matter, Edith?" he inquired kindly. "Don't you feel well?"

"Not particularly." Mrs. Rogers' voice was discouraging.

"Anything wrong?"

"No."

"You haven't seemed yourself for the past week. You don't seem to take
any interest in things."

"What things?" inquired Edith, with sudden asperity. She took a
sufficient interest in the things that seemed worth while to her, she
well enough knew, but they were not those which made up her present
surroundings.

Donald seemed hurt at her tone. He regarded her with an injured
expression.

"Why," he ventured hesitatingly, "all the things that make up our
life--our home."

The suggestion was not happy. It was, indeed, those very things that
Edith had been mentally reviewing in her inner consciousness throughout
the evening, and her conclusions had not been in their favor.

"The steam pipes, I suppose," she returned scornfully, "and the price of
eggs, and whether we are going to be able to pay our bills next month or
not."

"Don't be so unkind, Edith," said her husband, with an expression of
pain. Her remark had hurt him, and, although she realized it, she
somehow refused to admit to herself that she regretted it.

"It's true, isn't it?" she asked.

"Surely you realize that I am doing the best I can," he replied slowly.
"I can't do any more."

"Well, suppose I do. Does that make it any easier?"

She felt angry and annoyed, first with Donald because he seemed unable
to realize how barren her life with him was, and then with herself
because she had allowed herself to become involved in this useless
discussion. Donald, she knew, would always be the same. It was hopeless
to expect him to change, or to try, by argument, to make him do so.

"Are you angry because I couldn't afford to get you that new hat for
Easter?" he asked, as he began to refill his pipe.

This falling back upon man's universal belief that a woman's happiness
or unhappiness depends solely upon her clothes annoyed her still
further.

"Don't talk like a fool, Donald," she exclaimed, throwing down her
sewing angrily. "I'm tired, that's all. For eight years I've darned
stockings, collected trading stamps, done my own housework, and tried to
imagine that the hats I've trimmed myself looked as though they came
straight from Paris. When a woman has done that for eight years, she has
a right to be tired."

"But, Edith, it will not always be that way. You know how I am working
for the future."

Mrs. Rogers picked up her sewing and resumed her air of patient
resignation. "The future is a long way off. When it comes, if it ever
does, I shall probably be so old that I won't care what sort of hats I
wear."

"Haven't I had to endure it all, as well as you? Don't you suppose it
hurts me not to be able to give you everything you wish?"

"It's different with a man." She smiled a trifle bitterly, as she spoke.
"You have your business, your friends, your ambitions. In ten years I
shall be an old woman; you will be just ready to enjoy yourself."

Donald rose from the desk and began to walk about the room nervously.
He was too sincerely fond of Edith to want to quarrel with her, and
he knew, as well as she did, the truth of what she had just said.
After all, he thought, perhaps the woman does have the worst of the
matrimonial bargain, in circumstances, at least, such as those with
which he and Edith were struggling.

"There's nothing I would care about enjoying, Edith, without you. Surely
you know that."

"I know. It's very good of you to feel that way. It's lack of money, I
suppose, after all, that makes everything so hard."

"I can't do the impossible, Edith. You know what my income is, and what
I have been scraping and saving for all these years."

"To put every cent you had in the world into that glass factory in West
Virginia. I know--very well." It was clear, from the tone of Mrs.
Rogers' voice, that she felt little sympathy for this part of her
husband's plans, at any rate.

"Yes, I have. I know you have opposed it, but I am convinced that it is
a great proposition. In five years, or possibly less, I expect to get
big profits from it. Isn't it worth waiting and saving for?"

"I don't know whether it is or not." Mrs. Rogers' tone was not
encouraging. "Five years is a long time. I'm not sure but I'd rather
have a little bit more human pleasure and enjoyment as I go along. For
years--ever since Bobbie was born--I've had to spend the summer here in
this wretched, hot place. It hasn't done me any good. It hasn't done him
any good. I'd rather you would put a little less into the glass business
and a little more into your wife's and child's health and happiness."

Mr. Rogers stopped in his pacing up and down the room. It was clear that
his wife's remarks had touched a sensitive spot.

"Edith," he exclaimed, "you cannot mean what you say. Everything I have
done has been for you and for him. Bobbie seems to me to be well enough.
Think of the hundreds of thousands of children that have to spend the
summer in the city. God knows I'd give my life for him, or for you, too,
if you needed it; it's what I am doing. I can't do any more."

"I know it," said Edith, with a sigh. "I suppose I'm very unreasonable,
but somehow my life has seemed so empty, all these years."

"Haven't you everything you need?"

"Everything I need? Do you think three meals a day and a place to sleep
is everything a woman needs?"

"Many women have less."

"And many have more. A woman's needs depend upon her desires, her
temperament. What may be a necessity to one, another would have no use
for. Some women, down in Tenth Avenue, might think this Paradise." She
looked about the room scornfully. "And a lot more, up in Fifth Avenue,
would think it--well--the other place. That's the difference."

Donald looked at her curiously, and noted her flushed face, her heaving
breast. These things evidently were very near her heart. "What are your
needs, Edith?" he asked kindly.

"How can you ask me such a question?" Edith failed to appreciate his
kind intention. She was fairly launched upon her argument, and the
tumult of discontent which had been gathering in her breast burst forth
with bitter intensity. "Did you ever suppose for a moment that I was a
woman who could be satisfied with the merest commonplaces of existence?
Don't you see that I need life--real, broadening, joyous, human life,
with all its hopes, its fears, its longings, its successes, its
failures? Do you think I find those things here?" She swept the room
with an all-embracing gesture, and stood confronting him with flushed
cheeks, her eyes flashing rebelliously.

Her evidence of feeling both startled and hurt him. He had supposed that
all her years of patient waiting had covered a mind serenely satisfied
with the present through a belief in the future. He looked at her for a
few moments in surprise. "I am very sorry, Edith," he began haltingly.
"I, too, feel the need of those things, but I do not allow the lack of
them to spoil my life. I have borne my trials and done my duty as best
I could, and I expect you to do the same. If we have not money, and all
the pleasures and luxuries it brings, we at least have health and our
daily bread, and above all, our little boy. We ought to be very
thankful."

"Do you suppose for a moment that I do not appreciate Bobbie? He is the
only thing that keeps me here."

The troubled look on Donald's face grew deeper as he answered her, and
with it came an expression of alarm. He had never doubted Edith's love
for him, and her words were a great shock.

"The only thing that keeps you here!" he cried. "Is your love for me of
no importance to you?"

Edith surveyed the plain, poorly furnished little room with
ill-concealed dislike. "This sort of thing," she said bitterly, "doesn't
offer much for love to feed upon."

"Edith! You surely do not realize what you are saying. To hear you talk,
anyone might suppose we were on the point of going to the poorhouse."

"It couldn't be worse. I'm tired of it, and I can't help saying so. I
suppose you will think me very ungrateful, but I can't help it. We never
have any pleasures, any happiness, any real enjoyment. It's nothing but
mere existence."

"I don't agree with you. I am not doing so badly. We are both of us
young. In a few years I hope to be comparatively well off, and then
things will be very different. I am working and striving for you every
hour of the day. Do you think I would do it, if I did not feel that you
love me--that you believed in me?"

He went over to her, and took her hand in his. "What has upset you so,
to-night, dear? Is there anything you particularly want--anything that I
could do for you? Tell me--if there is, you know I will do everything in
my power to gratify you."

"No--nothing that you could do." She seemed unconscious of the pain she
was giving him.

"I thought perhaps it was about this summer. You told me that your
mother and sister were anxious to take a cottage at the seashore, and
that they wanted you to go with them--is that it?"

"No," she replied. "It isn't important. You said you couldn't afford
it."

Donald left her abruptly and, walking over to the desk, began to fumble
nervously with the papers on it. It hurt him to the depths of his
nature to be obliged to refuse Edith this request; indeed, what she had
asked he had already himself thought of, and been forced to conclude
that, much as he wanted to give her and Bobbie this pleasure, he could
not do it. He turned to her with a nervous twitching of the mouth, which
had of late become characteristic.

"Every year, Edith," he said, "we have this discussion. Your mother and
sister have no responsibilities. They can give up their rooms at the
boarding house and go to the country without adding a dollar to their
expenses. You cannot do that. It will cost a hundred dollars a month, at
least, for your expenses and Bobbie's, to say nothing of the extra
expense of my taking my meals at restaurants. I can't afford it this
year, Edith. I wish I could, but I can't."

"Why can't you?" Her tone was aggrieved--almost defiant. "Is business so
bad? I thought things had been so much better this month."

"It's the glass plant, Edith. We are having a lot of trouble. It takes
every cent I can scrape together to meet expenses. We are a new concern.
Our goods are not known. Competition is severe.

"We are trying to build up a new business. I can't weaken on it now.
Surely you can stand one more summer in the city--if I can. Perhaps,
next year--"

"Next year!" she cried. "It's always next year. It's been that way now
for eight years, and about the only outing I've had has been a trip to
Coney Island on the boat. I'm sick of it. It's drudgery. A hired girl
has more freedom that I have--and more money, too, for that matter."

"Edith!"

"Oh, I know what you are going to say. I made my bed, and I ought to be
willing to lie in it. I knew you were a poor man when I married you.
Well, suppose I did. I didn't mind poverty then--the enthusiasm of youth
made it all seem a pleasure, like camping out, and living on canned
beans and corn bread. It's fine, for a time, but after a while, when the
novelty has worn off, you get sort of tired of it. There comes a time in
every married woman's life when she sits down and looks at things from
both sides, and wonders whether, after all, it's really worth while."

"I don't see why you should complain, if I don't," said Donald wearily.
"I'm sorry we haven't more money, on your account and on my own, as
well. There are many things I should like to do."

"Oh, you're a man." Edith flung herself across the room and began
turning over the sheets of music upon the piano. "If you have a couple
of new suits of clothes a year and can smoke the kind of cigars you
like, you don't bother your head if some other man has a dozen suits and
keeps a valet. It's different with a woman. Home-made dresses, dollar
corsets, riding in surface cars, seem mighty hard, when you see other
women in their autos, their Russian sables, their Paris gowns--women who
spend more money on their dogs every month than I have to spend on
Bobbie. It's a thousand times harder for a woman to be poor than it is
for a man. Most men don't know it, but that doesn't alter the fact--it's
true, just the same."

She suddenly sat down at the piano, and after striking a few discords,
began to play the "Jewel Song" from "Faust" in a rapid tempo.

Donald followed her with his eyes. "It seems to me," he said gravely,
"that when a man wants to do so much for his wife and realizes that he
can't it's the hardest of all--much harder than doing without things
yourself."

Edith did not speak for several moments.

"I don't wonder Marguerite was tempted by the jewels, and all that," she
remarked, presently, then concluded her playing with a series of
crashing chords, and rose from her seat with a harsh laugh.

"Edith, I wish you wouldn't say such things."

"Why shouldn't I? Perhaps they are true. How do you know that I am not
being tempted, too? I suppose, if the devil were to come along and offer
me a million or two, I'd run away with him without stopping to pack my
trunk." She resumed her chair, and picked up her sewing again. "Go on
with your writing, Donald. I'm sorry this discussion came up. It hasn't
done a bit of good. I suppose you think me heartless and unkind. I can't
help it. I'm not the first woman who has found married life a harder
road than she had anticipated."

She bent over her sewing with a sense of anger and annoyance with
herself for having entered into such a purposeless discussion. Donald
sat down at his desk and again took up his work. Only the ticking of the
clock and the scratching of his pen broke the heavy silence. Life had
once more resumed its monotonous procession.

After a long time, Edith put away her sewing, and retired to her
bedroom. What sort of a life was this, she thought to herself, where one
was forced to go to bed at ten o'clock because there was nothing further
to keep one awake? She got into bed and read a magazine for an hour.
Then she fell asleep. Donald was still writing.




CHAPTER II


When Donald Rogers left his apartment in One Hundred and Tenth Street
the next morning, he had an unaccountable feeling that something out of
the ordinary, something of a nature unforeseen and menacing, would occur
to him before the day was over. Being of a somewhat matter-of-fact turn
of mind, however, he laughed at his fears, and attributed them to a
slight attack of the great American disease, brought on by over-much
smoking. Perhaps, had he been a Frenchman, and a magpie or a hare had
suddenly crossed his path, he might have been tempted to take off his
hat to the one, or to bow politely to the other; as it was, he put
forebodings out of his mind, as unworthy a practical man of affairs. The
uncomfortable feeling persisted, however, in spite of his optimistic
efforts to escape from it in the depths of his morning paper, all during
the long ride down-town in the subway, and was forgotten only in the
complexities of his morning's mail.

The unfortunate discussion with his wife, Edith, the night before, which
was the real cause of his depression, he had religiously put out of his
mind, attributing her discontent to some purely temporary irritability
which would soon be forgotten.

They had neither of them referred to the matter at breakfast; Donald had
been in his usual hurry, Edith occupied with Bobbie, who had a habit of
awakening somewhat querulous and difficult to please. Her manner had
been serene, if a trifle distant and reserved. Donald felt that already
the storm had passed, and dismissed the matter from his mind.

He spent the forenoon busily occupied in his office. It was not much of
an office, as such things go in New York, being merely a small private
room with a larger and lighter one adjoining it, but it sufficed for all
the needs of his business, which was that of a consulting mechanical
engineer.

The inner room, which was the smaller of the two, served to receive his
clients, of which there were not many; the outer contained the
draughting tables and his assistant. Yet, small and plain as these rooms
were, they reflected to a surprising extent the character of the man.
There were no attempts at decoration; no concessions to any sense of
the artistic; everything was plain, solid, durable, honest, like the man
himself. Only the photographs of Edith, his wife, and Bobbie, his little
boy, in a silver frame upon the flat-topped oak desk, bespoke the
sentiment which was so deep and vital a part of Donald Rogers' nature.

Existence had not dealt over kindly with this descendant of the dour
land of Wallace and Bruce, but he met it with high courage, and head up,
as befitted one of his race. Born in a small town along the upper
reaches of the Hudson, he had known the love of a father only long
enough to clutch his fingers in the first futile efforts to face the
world upon two feet, instead of on all fours; the mother, however, had
survived longer, and it was to her that Donald owed the sturdy lessons
in the eternal rightness of things that underlay and governed all his
actions.

He was sixteen when she was laid beside her long-expectant husband, and
Donald, her only child, went out into the world with a very small
patrimony and a very great grief. Yet this sweet-faced woman, locked in
her long leaden sleep, was not dead; her faith, her courage, her high
ideals, lived and breathed in her son, and no act of his life but
showed in some way, however slight, their purifying effect.

Donald Rogers' father had been a steam engineer without a college
education; his son determined to follow in his footsteps with one, and,
with this purpose strong within him, gathered together the small store
of worldly goods with which the fates had endowed him and went to New
York and the engineering course at Columbia. It took him five years
to complete the course, partly because his early education had been
somewhat incomplete, partly owing to the necessity under which he
labored, of earning sufficient money, as he went along, to piece out
the fragments of his small inheritance and maintain himself. This he
did by doing draughting work at night; it was hard on the eyes, but the
experience helped him in his profession. At twenty-two he was graduated
with honors; these, with his diploma, constituted his stock in trade;
his weapons with which to win fame and fortune.

Five years of employment in subordinate positions had not only given him
practical experience, but had taught him the futility of expecting the
aforementioned fame and fortune while working on a salary; his courage,
his savings and some staunch business friends all favored the idea of
launching out for himself. The results had been encouraging; he now,
after eight years, had a substantial, if small, practice, and an
unshaken belief in himself and his future.

It was about the time he first opened his office as consulting engineer
that he had met Edith Pope, and they were married within a year. She was
a girl of unusual beauty, and through both inheritance and training
quite his opposite. Perhaps it was because of this that she had
attracted him.

Her father had been a real-estate dealer, and through his ability and
industry had made during his somewhat short business career a large
income. His wife, on the other hand, had shown such ability and industry
in spending it that, when he died, which he did about the time that
Edith was just entering her 'teens, he left only enough to provide a
meager living for herself, her mother and her sister Alice, two years
her junior. Mrs. Pope had never been able to accustom herself to the
blow; she lived in a constant atmosphere of past glories and was never
tired of recounting to her daughters all the comforts she had enjoyed
when her "dear J. B.," as she mournfully designated her deceased better
half, was alive. Never a day passed, but Edith and her sister were
warned against the evils and dangers of marrying a man without money;
to some extent it might have appeared that Mrs. Pope hoped to regain,
through the matrimonial successes of her daughters, those luxuries of
existence which she fondly believed were, to her, absolute necessities.

Whether or not her children paid any serious attention to her advice it
would be difficult to say; perhaps the best answer to the question lay
in the fact that, when Edith met Donald in the boarding-house on Tenth
Street, which was for the time being their mutual home, she straightway
fell head over heels in love with him, and married him before the year
was out, in spite of her mother's strenuous objections. That was eight
years ago, and, if Edith Rogers was not entirely reconciled to living in
a Harlem flat and doing her own housework, she at least found a large
measure of compensation in her little boy, Bobbie, who was now six, and
a darling, as even his grandmother was forced grudgingly to admit. Her
assent was grudging because Mrs. Pope had never forgiven her son-in-law
for depriving her of her daughter; one matrimonial asset thus rudely
snatched away forced her to concentrate all her hopes upon Alice, and
that young lady, at the age of rising twenty-six, had begun to show
signs of extreme restiveness, possibly due to an inward conviction
that even a Harlem flat and a four-by-six kitchenette possesses some
advantages not to be found in boarding-houses of the less-expensive
variety, and that a real live man with a living income is better than an
old maid's dreams of a possible, but hitherto undisclosed, millionaire.
Emerson Hall, a friend of Donald's, whom she had met a few months
before, assisted her greatly in arriving at these not unusual
conclusions.

It was long after one o'clock when Donald Rogers, absorbed in a problem
of power transmission, bethought himself of luncheon. One was his usual
hour; he dropped his calculations, seized his hat, and in a moment
was threading his way through the never ending throngs of lower
Broadway, on his way to a little chop house in John Street, long famous
for its English mutton chops and cream ale.

As he came abreast of the Singer Building, he felt someone grasp his arm
from behind and heard a cheery voice, with a familiar ring about it,
calling to him. He turned and looked into the handsome, smiling face of
a tall bronzed man, whose costume indicated clearly that he hailed from
the West.

"Billy West!" he exclaimed, gripping the new-comer's hand joyfully.
"Where on earth did you drop from? I thought you were in Colorado."

"I was, until four days ago. Thought I'd come East for awhile and look
the old town over. How's everything?" His glance was full of smiling
inquiry. "Making lots of money?"

"Not so much that I have to sit up nights thinking how to spend it,"
replied Rogers, a trifle bitterly. "Had your lunch?"

"No. Didn't want to eat alone. I've been away so long I hardly know a
soul in this blessed burg."

Rogers took his arm. "Come along with me," he said. "I'm just on my
way."

West nodded. "Got to see my lawyers some time to-day, but later will do
just as well." In five minutes they were seated in the chop house,
ordering luncheon.

"How are you getting along out there among the miners?" laughed Donald,
as he dismissed the waiter with their order. "Hope you like it better
than doing laboratory work down in Jersey. Ought to be wonderful
opportunities for a man, out there." He paused for a moment, thoughtful.
"You know I always used to say, when we were in college, that I meant to
go West some day. I've never got there, though. New York has become a
habit, I'm afraid. Can't seem to break away from it."

West looked at his friend with a faintly quizzical smile, and hesitated
for a moment, as though he almost feared to tell the other what had come
into his mind. Then he leaned across the table, and his face suddenly
became grave. "Don," he said earnestly, "the luck I've had out there has
been so wonderful, so almost unbelievable, that, even though it happened
nearly two years ago, I still can hardly realize that it's true."

"Strike a gold mine?" inquired Rogers, with a laugh.

"That's exactly what I did do, and believe me, Don, it's some mine. We
capitalized it last year at a million, of which yours truly, owns half,
and it paid over five per cent. from the start. I haven't got used to
figuring up my income yet, but just at present I think it's running
pretty close to thirty thousand a year, and more coming." He leaned
back in his chair with a satisfied smile. "I'm vice-president of the
concern. The Lone Star mine, it's called, up on the Little Ash river;
but I haven't anything much to do with the management--leave all that to
the Boston crowd that put in the money. They're a fine, conservative
lot of fellows, with plenty of experience, and I know my interests are
perfectly safe in their hands. So you see, I'm a sort of a gentleman of
leisure just at present, with plenty of money to spend, and nobody in
particular to spend it on, so I thought I'd take a run down to little
old New York and put in a year or so getting acquainted with some of my
old friends. I was on my way to my lawyers, as I said, when I met you,
and, after attending to a little matter of business, I was coming right
up to your office to see you. I looked up your address in the telephone
book."

Donald, who by this time had succeeded in digesting this remarkable
piece of news, reached across the table and took his friend's hand.
"Billy," he said, with a look which left no doubt as to the sincerity
of his feelings, "congratulations from the bottom of my heart."

"Thanks, old man. I knew you would be glad to know about my good luck."
He attacked the chop, which the waiter set before him with a flourish.
"And now tell me about yourself. How's your wife, and the boy--it was a
boy, wasn't it? The happy event occurred just before I went West, and
I'm not exactly sure." He flashed on Rogers one of those brilliant
smiles which had always made him loved by both sexes, and particularly
the one in petticoats.

"Edith is very well, and the boy is fine. I don't wonder you did not
remember. They will be delighted to see you. Why not come up to dinner
to-night. We can't offer you a feast, but you won't mind taking pot
luck."

"Well, I should say not. I was hoping you would ask me. You can't
imagine how lost I feel in this town. I suppose it would be different if
I had any family, but you know I haven't even a second cousin I can call
my own. I've often thought of you and Edith. You know that she might
have been Mrs. West, once, years ago, if you hadn't stepped in and taken
her away from me. I'd have been jealous of anyone but you, Don, but I
guess the best man won." He laughed with a hearty frankness, and took up
his mug of ale. "Here's to the youngster. May he live long and
prosper."

Donald drained his glass. "I suppose you will be busy for a couple of
hours," he said, "with your legal matters. Why not come up to my office
when you get through--I'm in the Columbia Building, you know--and we'll
go up-town together?"

"I'll do it. We can stop at my hotel on the way, and give me a chance to
clean up a bit. I only got in this morning on the sleeper, you know, and
I feel a bit grubby."

Some half-hour later they were making their way slowly toward Broadway.
"What a great town it is, after all!" remarked West, as they turned the
corner at John Street. "Every time a fellow goes away for a few years
they seem to build it all over again before he gets back." He turned to
look at the towering mass of the Singer Building. "That's a new one on
me. Wouldn't it make some of my friends back in Colorado have cricks in
their backs?"

"It is a wonderful city," replied Rogers grimly. "I don't think I should
ever care about living anywhere else, but the man who wins out in it has
got to deliver the goods. Big as it is, there is no room in it for
failures." He waved his hand to West as the latter turned into Wall
Street. "See you around four-thirty. So long."

"I'll be there. Wait for me if I'm a little late," was the reply, as the
two separated.

Donald went back to his plain little office and his power-transmission
problem with a curious feeling of futility. Thirteen years of hard work
had given him but little more than the right to fight that never ceasing
battle with the grim city which could excuse anything but failure.
West--pleasure-loving Billy West--who from his freshman days had looked
upon the world as little more than an amazing joke, had by one stroke of
fortune suddenly found all the pleasures, all the luxuries that life
contained, at his feet. He did not envy West this good fortune, he was
too staunch a friend for that, but he thought of Edith, and their little
up-town flat, and as her tired face rose before him he suffered the
pangs of that greatest of all forms of poverty, the inability to do for
those we love.




CHAPTER III


During the year that preceded her marriage to Donald Rogers, Edith had
seen a great deal of Billy West, and had liked him more than anyone
except herself had realized. His was a personality, indeed, to compel
the admiration of women. Tall, good-looking, of a reckless and
laughter-loving type, he naturally appealed to that peculiar chord in
the feminine make-up which responds so readily to the Cavalier in the
opposite sex, while paying scant attention to the sturdy adherence to
duty characteristic of his Roundhead adversary. For this reason, it is
probable that, at one period of Donald's courtship, she would have
listened more kindly to the love-making of his friend, had the latter,
indeed, seen fit to make any. That he did not was due to no Quixotic
sense of friendship for Donald, but to a very real and honest belief on
his part that marriage on the slender pay of an assistant chemist was
not for one of his type, an opinion in which he was entirely correct.
Therefore he had hidden his love, which was in truth a real and lasting
one, beneath his careless laughter, and had gone to Colorado when the
occasion offered, neither heart whole nor fancy free, but just as
determined to make much money with the utmost quickness as though he and
Edith Pope had never laid eyes upon each other. After all, he and Edith
were very much alike. They belonged to that class which demands of life
its luxuries almost before its necessities, and it is a curious fact
that they nearly always get them.

After eight years of married life, Edith Rogers, busy with her child,
her household cares and the various complexities of domesticity, had
forgotten her husband's friend as completely as though he had never
come into her life at all. He, on the contrary, had thought of her
continually, for his life in the West had been too keenly devoted to
business to leave either time or opportunity for dalliance with the
opposite sex. Hence the memory of his first and last love had not been
effaced by the passage of time, but remained in his heart as a sweet and
pleasing memory, gathering increased strength from the years as they
rolled swiftly by. It should not be inferred from this, however, that
William West had the slightest thought of ever renewing his courtship of
Edith, now that she had become Donald Rogers' wife. His love for her was
like a pleasant recollection, a package of old letters, a book read and
closed forever. For all that, he was conscious of a queer feeling in the
region of his heart as he followed Donald into the tiny living-room of
the Rogers' apartment in Harlem.

Mrs. Rogers had not been apprised of her husband's intention to bring a
guest home for dinner, least of all so unexpected a one as Billy West.
The reason for this was that the Rogers' apartment boasted no telephone.
The servant problem they had solved by the simple expedient of not
keeping any. Hence it was that West's first glimpse of the Edith of his
dreams was of a tired little woman, flushed from her efforts over the
gas range, and in no sweet temper with her husband for having taken her
unawares and at such a disadvantage. It is a fact worthy of record,
however, that West found her, in this homely garb, more humanly
delightful and attractive than would have been the case had she spent
hours of preparation at her toilette table. He had been living for five
years among men who found women more attractive as helpmates than as
ornaments, and she appealed to him accordingly. As for Donald, no
thought crossed his mind that these two were, or ever had been, anything
more to each other than the best of friends.

"Billy!" Mrs. Rogers had gasped as she came into the room to greet her
husband on his arrival, and had thus, by using the old familiar title,
established a footing between them that somehow refused to return to the
more formal one of "Mrs. Rogers" and "Mr. West." After all it was of no
great importance--Billy and Edith they had always been to each other,
and Billy and Edith they remained. Donald, if he noticed it at all, was
glad of the fact that his wife and his old friend liked each other so
well. The meeting became a little reunion, in the pleasure of which Mrs.
Rogers soon forgot her plain, cheap house-gown and her flushed face, and
entered into the spirit of the occasion with an unwonted gayety. She was
a beautiful woman, in spite of her twenty-eight years; perhaps it would
be more correct to say because of them, for while at twenty she had been
exceedingly pretty, it was little more than a youthful promise of what
she had now become.

Her grandmother had been a Southern woman, and a noted beauty in those
much talked of days "before the war," and whether this lady's beauty
had, as time passed, taken on added glory, like most other things of
that hallowed period, certain it is that Edith Rogers had received from
some source a priceless inheritance as far as the perfection of her
figure or the beauty of her coloring was concerned. Perhaps it was some
forgotten strain of Irish blood that was responsible for her deep violet
eyes and her dark chestnut hair, although her dusky complexion belied
it.

West observed the change which the years had made in her, at once, and
complimented her on it. "I have never seen you look so well," he said,
as he grasped her hand. "You were a rosebud when I went away, now you
are an American beauty." It pleased her mightily, for she felt that he
meant it, and, like most married women, she heard few compliments from
her husband. Mrs. Pope, her mother, never lost an opportunity to tell
her that with her looks she could have married any man she pleased, but
she paid no attention to remarks of this nature, knowing as she did
that her mother was only trying to hit, indirectly, at Donald, whom she
affected not to like.

She knew from West's voice that he was very glad to see her, and after
all these years, when he grasped her hand, and pressed it in his strong,
firm grip, she felt the old familiar shock, the sensation of gladness
for she knew not what, that almost took her breath away. It had always
been that way with him. He was very different from Donald in many ways,
for, while Donald was serious and earnest and very conscientious, West
was always merry and gay and careless, never seeming to worry about
money, although his income, at the time of her marriage, had been
smaller even than Donald's.

There was something about him that always attracted women. She felt this
whenever she was with him, yet it did not come from any appreciation of
his character, or his mind, for she knew very little about either. There
was some sort of psychic magnetism about the man, some vibrating sense
of physical vitality, which she felt whenever she was near him. His mere
presence made her strangely silent and in a way afraid, yet, whatever it
was that she feared, it at the same time attracted her, and made her
sorry when it had passed. She had never felt that way with Donald,
although always she had liked to be with him, for somehow she felt more
comfortable and sure, and could talk things over better, and plan out
the future. She had not thought much about the future when she was with
West--there did not seem to be any need for a future--the present had
been all she had desired, but that she had desired very much. All this
had passed, years ago, but still it came back to her, in a measure, when
she thus first met him again.

He looked at her, in that curiously intimate way he had, and even his
smile made her happy. She felt his glance sweep over her face, her whole
body, and almost embrace her in its pleasant radiance--it thrilled her,
yet she almost resented the way in which it left her helpless and
confused. In a moment he had looked beyond her, at Donald, and was
making some laughing inquiry about their boy--and then she felt sorry
and wanted him to look at her again.

Mrs. Pope had taught her daughters many things, but cooking was not one
of them. Edith had been forced, like many another married woman, to
learn it in the school of hard practical experience, and, to her credit
be it said, she had learned it surprisingly well. She excused herself
after the first greetings had been said, added an extra dish to the
partially prepared meal, and hastened to her room to change her dress.
Of West's new fortunes she as yet knew nothing; it was to the man that
she wanted to appeal, to the old friend, before whom her natural woman's
vanity made her wish to appear at her best. When she served the dinner
half an hour later, it was in a light-green pongee that seemed to West a
triumph of the dressmaker's art. As a matter of fact she had made the
dress herself, but it would have taken a far worse costume to have
spoiled the lines of her superb figure, or dulled the sparkling mobility
of her face.

Donald, with a father's pride in his boy, dug out Bobbie from the
recesses of his mother's room, and brought him to West to be admired.
He was a manly little fellow, with a large share of his mother's good
looks, and West took him upon his knee, wondering inwardly if he would
ever have a son of his own to inherit his newly acquired fortune.

To the boy he told stories about the Indians that made the youngster
open his eyes very wide indeed, and Uncle Billy, as West admonished him
to call him, became at once a very important personage in his childish
eyes.

It was when dinner had progressed to the stage of the salad that Donald
mentioned the matter of West's sudden rise to fortune. "Billy had made
a ten-strike in the West," he remarked to his wife. "Discovered a gold
mine."

"Really!" Edith laughed. "Is there any gold in it? Almost all the gold
mines I ever heard of were lacking in that important particular."

"This one wasn't." Donald looked at West and laughed. "Billy tells me
it's made him worth half a million."

Mrs. Rogers gasped, then turned to her guest. "You are not in earnest?"
she inquired wonderingly. "Half a million?"

"About that," said West, trying to look as if he were speaking of the
price of a new hat, or something equally unimportant.

"But you--you don't seem a bit excited about it, or anything." Mrs.
Rogers' own eyes were big with interest. "I should think you would
be simply overcome. I know I should. Half a million!" She glanced
unconsciously about the poorly furnished little room and sighed. Donald
noticed it; her thoughts, for the moment, had been his own.

"I was excited enough when I found it," remarked West with a chuckle.
"It came like a snowstorm in August. Last thing in the world I had
expected--at least just then."

"I suppose you just stood up and shouted," said his hostess.

"No, I didn't. I lit my pipe. I didn't want the rest of the bunch to
know about it."

"Tell us the whole story." She was as interested as a child. Half a
million dollars sounded like such a vast amount of money. All her life
she had imagined what she would do if she were only rich. She had often
thought it all out, in her day dreams--how she would give her mother so
much for the trip to Europe that she was always talking about, and her
sister so much more for the diamond necklace she wanted, and have an
automobile and a place at the seashore and many other things. She had
an exalted opinion of wealth and its possibilities; if she had known
any wealthy people she would probably have found them very much like
everyone else, complaining about the price of beef, and the difficulty
of keeping one's servants and paying one's bills. She believed that it
was not what one has, but what one has not, that counts. The sound of
West's voice interrupted her thoughts.

"There isn't much to tell. I was on my vacation at the time, and there
were about a dozen of us, camping up on the Little Ash river. There
hadn't been any gold found in that section, before that, but I was
always looking out for it--you see I had studied the formation up that
way the summer before, and I was certain the rock was there. The boys
used to make a good deal of fun of me, poking about with my geologist's
hammer, instead of fishing or the like. It was the last day of our stay,
I remember, and we had already begun to get our things together, in
readiness to break camp in the morning. I had strolled up the river a
few hundred yards, feeling a little disappointed at going back to Denver
without even a piece of iron pyrites, when I noticed a sort of whitish
streak in the rocky bank just a little above where it rose from the edge
of the river. It was mostly covered with underbrush and thick bushes,
and I wonder that I saw it at all. I climbed down and took a good look,
and then I just sat down on a rock and got out my pipe and had a good
smoke. I felt somehow as though a new life had begun for me, and I
wanted time to think things out. After a while I broke off a few samples
of the quartz--it was a beautiful outcropping, with a pay streak in it
as thick as your two fingers--and I stowed them away in my pocket and
strolled back to camp as though nothing had happened. One of the boys
said, as I came up, 'Find your gold mine yet?' and laughed. 'Yes,' I
said, 'and it's worth a million.' They all laughed, for they thought I
was joking, but I felt my bits of quartz in my pocket and said nothing.
We got back to town the next afternoon and I had made my assays before I
turned in that night."

"And then you knew?" she asked eagerly.

"Yes. I staked out my claim very quietly. Of course I gave up my
position the next day. After I had had the claim registered, I went to
see a man in Denver that I had come to know pretty well--he was the
representative of a wealthy crowd in Boston who dealt extensively in
mining properties, and I told him what I had. I won't bother you with
the details. We formed a company, and they gave me half of the stock and
made me vice-president, and then we started in to work the claim. In six
months we had got in our stamping mills and were taking out ore. The
rock got better, as we went into the hill, and we began to pay dividends
almost from the start. There isn't any of our stock for sale now. I
don't have much of anything to do with the management. It's in good
hands, and last month, when I saw that everything was working smoothly,
I made up my mind to come East, and look up some of my old friends." He
glanced at Donald as he said this, and then at Edith, and she felt
somehow, that he wanted her to feel that it was she that he meant.

She began to see, that very evening, something of what it meant to have
so much money that it was not necessary to think about how one spent it.
When West suggested, after dinner, that they all go to the theater, she
said at once that it was too late--that they would never be able to get
tickets at that hour. It was then close to eight o'clock, but West
laughed, and said he would see to the tickets, so she put on her hat
and they went.

When Donald and she went to the theater, which was not very often, they
used to think about it for days ahead and were delighted if they were
able to get good seats in the balcony at less than the prices charged
downstairs.

Their evening was a delightful one. They whirled down-town to the
theater in a taxicab, and went to supper afterwards at one of the
best-known restaurants, where Edith wondered how the countless array of
young and very beautiful women managed to get such gorgeous gowns and
such magnificent jewelry. She and Donald did not often patronize such
places.

They came home in a whirl of excitement, and Edith lay awake a long time
after she had gone to bed, wondering if after all her mother had not
been right in urging her to marry for money. She looked at Donald, who
lay at her side, and thought long, long thoughts. She was not conscious
of any disloyalty to him--she liked Donald very much--he seemed almost
like a dear friend. Presently she began to try to analyze her love for
him, her marriage, and her after life. She respected and admired his
mind, his character, but was there not, after all, something else in
life--something deeper and more vital in the marriage relationship,
something that she had missed? Why was it that Donald's presence, his
touch, his look even, gave her no such glow of happiness as she had
suddenly found with this man who had been a stranger to her for so many
years? It was wrong, she knew, but clearly there was something lacking.
Bobbie, waking fretfully, brought her to a sudden sense of the realities
of life. She got up and placed an extra cover over him, and when she had
once more succeeded in putting him to sleep her questions seemed for the
time being answered.

[Illustration: EDITH LAY AWAKE A LONG TIME AFTER SHE HAD GONE TO BED,
WONDERING IF, AFTER ALL, HER MOTHER HAD NOT BEEN RIGHT IN URGING HER TO
MARRY FOR MONEY]




CHAPTER IV


West spent the next few days in getting comfortably located in New York,
laying in a supply of new clothes, and purchasing an automobile. His
life in Colorado had been unusually simple, since, with his time almost
entirely given over to business affairs, he had had neither inclination
nor opportunity for amusement. Now, however, he felt himself on a
holiday. His bank account was bulging with unspent income, and he
frankly admitted to himself that he had come to New York to spend it.
Edith, who seemed almost continually in his mind, provided the necessary
outlet, and he pictured the two of them making many delightful
excursions into the country about New York in the big touring car which
he had selected.

During his visits to tailors, bootmakers, haberdashers, and the like, he
found time to send her a huge box of violets on two different occasions,
and, with a vague idea of salving his conscience, hunted up Donald one
day and took him to luncheon.

It was nearly a week after his first visit to the Rogers' apartment that
he suddenly made up his mind to call, and, as luck would have it, Donald
was not at home on that particular evening, having gone to a meeting of
one of the engineering societies of which he was a member. The absence
of a telephone brought West before the Rogers' door without any previous
knowledge of his friend's absence. Edith, who was sitting alone, reading
a magazine, and, to tell the truth, thinking of West himself and
wondering what had become of him, received her caller with unfeigned
gladness and insisted upon his remaining until Donald's return, which,
she assured him, would not be late. Between spending the evening alone
at his hotel, and here with the woman he had half-begun to believe was
dearer to him, in spite of the lapse of years, than anyone else in the
world, there was no choice. West came in and sat down, delighted at the
opportunity which fate had thus generously accorded him.

They talked along conventional lines for a time, West entertaining her
with an account of his experiences during the past week, and dilating
upon the merits of his new automobile, which he insisted she must try
at once. Edith was delighted at the prospect--he told her that he was
taking lessons in driving, and would soon be able to manage it with the
best of them.

After a time, the topic having been exhausted, a silence came upon them,
one of those portentous intervals that form a prelude to the expression
of the unspoken thought, the unbidden wish.

Edith was more than ever conscious of some powerful attraction in this
man; he seemed to represent vast possibilities--possibilities for future
happiness--of what nature she did not dare even to ask herself. She
felt, whenever she was with him, a strange confidence in the outcome of
things; although what things she did not know. "I should be so glad to
go," she had said, in reply to his suggestion regarding the proposed
automobile trips. "I am alone so much!" There had been a touch of
sadness in her voice that did not escape him. He looked at her keenly.
"Are you happy, Edith?" he asked with directness which startled her.

"Why--yes--of course I am. I hope you do not think that I was
complaining. I only meant that I am a good deal alone during the day,
and--and--" She hesitated. He knew quite well that she was not
happy--or, at least, that she found her life far more empty than she
had ever dreamed it would be when she married.

"--And you will take pity on a lonely bachelor," he completed her
sentence for her. "As a matter of fact, I haven't anyone else to go
about with, you know."

"And so you fall back on me. You're not very complimentary, Billy.
I'll have to find someone to help you spend your money." She laughed,
watching him narrowly as she spoke. After her eight years of married
life, the subtle flattery of this man's attentions seemed doubly sweet,
and, woman-like, she wanted to hold on to them, and enjoy them, as long
as she could.

"I don't think I'd care about any young girl," he remarked gravely. "You
know I always liked you better than anyone else, Edith, and I'm glad to
say I still do."

"In spite of my gray hairs," she laughed. She had none, as a matter of
fact, being especially youthful in appearance for a woman of nearly
thirty, but she longed for the compliment she felt sure her remark
would elicit.

"In spite of everything," he declared, "I have never forgiven Donald for
cutting in and marrying you while I was away trying to make a fortune to
lay at your feet." He spoke banteringly, with a laugh, but something in
his voice told her that he was far more in earnest than his manner
indicated. "Now that I have made it, I am determined that you shall have
some pleasure out of it."

"That's very sweet of you, Billy," she said, with a touch of gravity in
her manner. "I cannot tell you how much I appreciate it."

"Nonsense. Think what old friends we are. If you will take pity on my
loneliness, and all that, I shall feel that I am the one who should be
grateful." He rose from his chair and came over to where she sat, near
the desk. "Do you know, Edith," he said suddenly, "that in all the time
I have been away I don't suppose a single day went by that I did not
think of you?"

"Don't tell me that, Billy. If you thought of me once in six months you
did well." Her nervous laugh, as she attempted to meet his gaze, sounded
unconvincing. She almost began to believe that he had thought of her
every day.

"Do you remember that picture you once gave me--the one in the big
Leghorn hat?"

"Why, yes," she answered slowly.

"I've had it on my dresser always, wherever I've been--it was the last
thing I looked at when I went to bed at night. So, you see, I did think
of you every day--honestly."

She felt her color coming--something in his manner, as he stood there
gazing down at her, alarmed her. She felt that he still loved her, and
that it would be only a question of time until he should tell her so.
She was by no means prepared for any such rupture in their friendly
relations, for rupture she knew it would certainly be, should he speak.
She rose hastily and went toward the piano.

"Shall I play for you?" she asked. In the past it had been his
invariable habit to ask her to do so.

"Will you?" His voice showed his appreciation of the fact that she had
remembered.

"What would you like?"

"Oh, anything--it's been so long since I've heard any good music!" He
joined her at the piano. "How about that beautiful thing you used to
sing sometimes--Massenet's 'Elegy,' wasn't it? Don't you remember I
always said I'd rather hear you sing that than listen to a grand opera?"

"Oh--I couldn't. I haven't sung for years."

"What a pity! I shouldn't think Donald would let you give it up."

"Donald doesn't care much for music." She felt as she spoke that she had
in some way criticized her husband and hastened to make amends. "He's
too busy--that's the reason. Donald is working very hard, and has to do
a lot of work at home--nights. If I sang, it would bother him." She
began to play the piece with considerable feeling and skill, and West,
who was intensely fond of music, leaned over the piano and watched her
happily. To have this woman all to himself seemed to him the only thing
that fortune had denied him. The love which had lain so quiet all these
years surged up within him with unsuspected force. His arms longed to
draw her to him, to clasp her to his heart. He looked at her expressive,
delicate face, her round, smooth neck, her dark, heavy hair, and
wondered how Donald could bring himself to think that she could possibly
be happy in the position of a mere household drudge. His reflections
did Donald scant justice; the latter, poor fellow, was trying with all
his strength to lift both Edith and himself out of their present
environment, but Donald was a silent man, who endured all things
patiently, and he expected his wife to do the same.

West's intentions, if, indeed, he admitted to himself that he had any at
this time, were directed toward two ends--his own amusement and Edith's.
Perhaps amusement is not the exact word--it was more than that to him,
for he could have amused himself with many women. He was really very
fond of Edith, more so, perhaps, than he himself fully realized, and in
giving her pleasure he gave himself pleasure as well. The idea of making
love to her, of coming in any way between herself and Donald, had never
entered his mind. After all, we so rarely erect barriers against certain
experiences in life until after they have occurred, by which time
barriers are no longer of any avail.

When Edith stopped playing, West begged her to go on, and presently,
running into the accompaniment of "Oh, Promise Me," she began to sing
in a clear, sweet voice which brought back to him the evenings, long
before, when she had sung this song to him. Unconsciously the years
passed from them--he joined in the chorus of the song with his
uncultivated, yet not unmusical, baritone, and once more they seemed
back in the boarding-house parlor, she the young girl with life all
before her, and he the happy-go-lucky Billy West, making and spending
his small salary with joyous indifference as to the future.

He stayed until nearly half-past ten, hoping that Donald would return,
but the latter evidently had been kept longer than he expected. Edith
did not press him to remain--somehow, in spite of her old friendship for
West, it seemed a bit queer, this sensation of being here alone in her
apartment with a man other than her husband. She did not propose to
conceal the fact of his having been there from Donald, but it seemed to
her easier to tell Donald that Billy had called during his absence than
to have him come in and find them together even as innocently engaged as
they were. She knew that this feeling on her part was absurd, that
Donald would not have the least idea of jealousy or suspicion--he was
too clean minded a man for that. Her scruples arose from a deeper cause.
She had begun to think about West in a way that caused her to feel
guilty of disloyalty to her husband when no disloyalty had occurred--to
desire to avoid the appearance of evil where no evil existed. All that
she had done had been to liken her life with Donald, to what it might
have been had she married West. It is a curious fact that the best of
women are willing at times to compare the husband at his worst, with the
lover at his casual best, and judge both accordingly.

West rode back to his hotel in a maze of doubts. He was genuinely fond
of Donald--he liked him better than any man he knew, and this, probably,
because he was in all things so nearly the other's opposite. He wondered
whether Donald would object in any way to the attentions he proposed
showing Edith--whether he would become jealous, and feel that his wife's
place was at home, rather than dashing about in a five-thousand-dollar
automobile with another man. Perhaps it would be but natural that he
should, although not by nature a jealous man, and West realized the
confidence that he placed in both his wife and himself. What West did
not realize was the effect which his money and the pleasures and
luxuries it could command would have upon this woman whose married life
had been one long lesson in economy. He had no conception of the
contrast in Edith's life between a quiet existence in a Harlem flat and
the land of dreams to which his money was the open sesame, the golden
key, unlocking the barriers between poverty on the one hand and all that
the heart could desire on the other. He did not, could not, realize
the upheaval which would necessarily take place in her life, the
dissatisfaction which must inevitably ensue, if she were once drawn into
a whirl of pleasures and excitements to which her existence for so many
years had been totally foreign. If she and Donald lunched or dined
together at an expensive restaurant it was an event, commemorating some
anniversary--such as their wedding or a birthday. West, on the contrary,
regarded dropping into any of the hotels or cafes for luncheon or dinner
as a most ordinary performance--he was forced to do it himself, and his
only desire was for company. As for going to the theater, he knew
that the best seats were always obtainable at the hotels, or on the
sidewalk--at a small advance in price, it is true. But what difference
did that make to a man who had a hundred dollars a day to spend and no
reason whatever for not spending it?

Even before West's coming, the subtle poison of dissatisfaction had
begun to eat its way into Edith's heart. Money had always appeared to
her a vital necessity in life--her mother had taken care of that--but in
the flush of youthful enthusiasm she had believed that, with Donald at
her side, she could endure comparative poverty with a light heart, until
he had made his fortune, as so many another man had done before him. She
had not thought, however, that the time would be so long. West came
into her life at a moment when she was fertile soil for the seeds of
discontent which he so unconsciously was planting in her nature.

She greeted her husband with indifferent coldness upon his return, about
half-past eleven, and told him of West's call. Donald was unfeignedly
sorry that he had missed his friend, but showed no least trace of
annoyance on learning that West and Edith had spent the evening
together. "I hope he will come often," he said. "We have both been a
bit lonely of late. It will do you good, dear, to have new interests in
life. I am only sorry that I cannot do more for you myself." He drew her
to him, and kissed her tenderly, but, somehow, under his caress she
shivered and grew cold. "Billy is a splendid fellow, and I don't doubt
you will be doing him a real kindness to help him amuse himself a bit
until he has got settled in town. It makes a great difference to a man,
to be away from New York for five years."

West had suggested to Edith that they take a trial trip in the new
automobile the following Friday, but of this Edith said nothing at the
time. It was not that she wished to conceal the fact, but it seemed to
her pointed, and as though drawing especial attention to an unimportant
matter, to speak of it at this time. So she said nothing. After all, she
had nothing to conceal or be ashamed of. It is true that, in her more
introspective moments, she saw a dim shadow of danger ahead; but she put
it resolutely aside, and contented herself with a sophistry which has
led many another along devious paths. "Sufficient unto the day is the
evil thereof."




CHAPTER V


It was early in March that West came to New York, and from then on Edith
Rogers lived what was to her a new life. She had persuaded Donald to let
her have a nurse for Bobbie, a young girl who came in every morning,
took the child out in the park, amused him during the day, and helped
with the housework. This left her comparatively free to spend a large
part of her time with West. Their automobile trips became a matter of
almost daily occurrence.

Thrown thus so much together, these two closed their eyes to the danger
which they both knew was impending; they walked gayly upon the edge of a
yawning chasm and refused to admit that one false step would send them
both crashing down into an abyss of chaos and destruction. In a few
weeks, from talking first of themselves, then of each other, during long
days when Donald labored patiently in his office down-town, it was but a
question of time when "you" and "me" became "we," and Edith would have
missed Billy West from her life more than she would have missed Donald,
because he had become more a part of it. Like a ship at anchor, with all
sails set and filled by a strong and ever increasing gale, it was
inevitably certain that before long either the anchor must give, or the
white sails of her reputation be blown to rags and tatters--bitter
state, indeed, for a wife and mother!

One of the things about West which appealed to her most was his ever
ready sympathy. Donald, made of sterner stuff, realized that sympathy,
overdone, weakens one's powers of resistance, and exaggerates one's
burdens. He expected his wife to bear what life accorded to her in the
way of hardship as patiently as he himself did. West, on the contrary,
was always sympathetic. Edith's cares, her worries, her troubles, he at
once made his own, and seemed only content if he could in some way
relieve them. That he had the means to do so, and could not, made it
all the harder for him. He would have given her anything he possessed,
yet knew she could accept only the veriest trifles. Flowers, theater
tickets, automobile rides, served to intensify, rather than lessen, her
longings for the things she must perforce do without. Expensive
restaurants implied expensive costumes, hats, jewels, which she did not
have and could not get, and she often wondered that her companion did
not feel ashamed of her in her home-made clothes.

By some system of more-than-rigid economy known only to herself she had
managed to procure a few of the things she felt she most needed: a long
automobile coat--reduced because shop-worn--a motor hat and veil, and
an evening gown which had once been part of the theatrical outfit of a
well-known star, and which she had picked up, second-hand, at a little
shop on Sixth Avenue. It was very magnificent; she felt almost ashamed
to wear it so often, but she knew that it showed off her charms to
the greatest advantage, having been designed, primarily, with that
end in view. Had she ever stopped to ask herself why she wanted to
exhibit these charms to West she would probably have been unable to
answer her own question, but she had long ago ceased to catechize
herself--sufficient it was that Billy was pleased that she looked well,
and that Donald did not blame her. She was floating happily along from
day to day, not daring to ask herself what the outcome of it all would
be.

She was seldom alone with West--alone, that is, in the sense of being to
themselves. She had not dared, after that first night, to have him at
the apartment--they had met at the doorstep, and their hours together
were spent over restaurant tables, or in theater seats, or the
automobile. She had a terrible fear that some time or other West would
reach out his arms to her and she knew that, if he did, she would go
to him without a question. He had assisted her in avoiding such a
_contretemps_, for he, too, knew his power, and was fighting to hold
what he had, rather than lose it in a vague and mysterious future, at
the character of which he could only guess. On one or two occasions,
when they had come in from automobiling, and West was waiting until
Donald should arrive from the office, preparatory to their all going to
dinner together, she had purposely brought Bobbie into the room. Once
when they had so come in, Bobbie was out with his nurse, and she had
wondered if Billy would take advantage of the fact. Much as she feared
it, she was conscious of a fierce hope that he would. These two were
like firebrands--he longed in every fiber to take her into his arms and
kiss her, and she knew it. She equally hungered for his embraces, and he
knew that this was so; in both their minds this maddening thought had
become a reality--a thousand times. She had acted it to herself over and
over, as he had done, and had felt, in her imagination, every thrill of
delight which this physical contact would give her, yet something, some
leash of conscience as yet not worn to the breaking point, held them
apart.

On this particular occasion he sat far from her, and held on to his
half-smoked cigar as though it had been his salvation. She busied
herself turning idly the leaves of a magazine. He knew, if he threw that
cigar away, he would go over to her and take her in his arms, and kiss
her, and he dared not to do it--for fear of what might come thereafter.

In April, he had been obliged to go away for three weeks, in connection
with some business affairs in the West, and the separation had come
almost as a relief to both of them. They had endured as far as human
flesh and blood could endure. West told her of the matters which made it
necessary for him to go, but she felt that they were not so important as
he represented, and knew in her heart that he was going away because he
wanted to give both himself and her an opportunity to readjust
themselves, to think matters over calmly, without the presence of each
other to affect their judgment.

The time of his absence seemed interminably long. Edith found that most
of the long series of introspective analyses to which she subjected
herself terminated in a mad desire to have him back again in New York.
His absence had shown her how absolutely she had been depending upon
him, how his going had taken from her everything that made her life
joyous and happy, leaving only the dull background of duty and work, two
things that she had come to regard merely as unfortunate necessities of
existence.

During his absence she spent a great deal more time with Bobbie than she
had been in the habit of doing of late, and found to her surprise that
the child depended upon her and thought of her less than he had done
before. His nurse was a kind-hearted young girl, who had come to love
the little boy deeply and mothered him in all sorts of ways. He had got
out of the habit of seeing his mother all day as he had done in the past
and, with the easy forgetfulness of childhood, clamored for Nellie, as
the girl was called, and their daily walks in the park, the games she
had thought out to amuse him, the easy comradeship that made her his
playfellow rather than a superior and distant grown-up. Edith resented
this, at first, but soon ceased her attempts to change matters and
busied herself in making dresses for the coming summer.

She saw West again on a drizzly afternoon in May. His frequent letters
had told her of his life while away and of the day of his return. He had
called rather unexpectedly about three o'clock, and they had gone for a
walk in the park. He seemed strangely silent, at first, and neither of
them spoke much for a few moments; they walked along side by side,
inwardly trying to bridge the gap which the past few weeks had made in
their lives. Presently he spoke.

"I cannot tell you how glad I am to be back again. I used to like the
West, but I do not think I could ever live there again."

She said what was nearest her heart. "I am glad, too--very glad," then
grew confused and silent.

"I brought you a little souvenir," he said, taking a small package from
his pocket, and handing it to her. She opened the box it contained and
drew out a magnificent gold chain purse. "I had it made from some of the
gold from our mine," he continued hesitatingly; "I thought you might
like it."

"Oh, Billy!" she cried, and looked up at him with darkening eyes. "How
lovely of you to think of me! It is beautiful--beautiful." She gloated
over its exquisite workmanship with all the joy of suddenly possessing
something which had always seemed very far away.

"I hoped you would like it," he said.

"Oh--I do--more than I can tell you. I never expected to have one,
though I have longed for it all my life." She smiled, dangling the purse
delightedly from its gold chain. "I only wish I had more to put in it,"
she concluded thoughtlessly.

"So do I--Edith--so do I." His tone betrayed the intensity of his
feelings. "I wish I could do more for you--but I haven't the right--I
haven't the right." His voice trailed off helplessly. "I only wish I
had."

She said nothing to this. It was perilous ground and they both knew it.
"How is Donald?" he asked suddenly.

"Oh, he's very well. Busy as ever. Won't you come in and see us this
evening?"

"No--not this evening. I have a man with me from Denver that I must be
with. He is going on to Boston at midnight. One of our directors," he
added by way of explanation. "But we must take a ride in the machine
to-morrow. I suppose it will be quite rusty for want of use."

"I suppose so. I've missed our trips."

He looked at her closely. "Yes, I can see that," he said, "you do not
look so well--you are pale and tired. What have you been doing with
yourself?"

"Oh, nothing much. Sewing, mostly." She did not tell him that her
principal occupation had been waiting for him to return.

"You need the fresh air. Suppose we take a run down to Garden City and
have luncheon there. I'll look in and see Donald in the morning and say
hello. Does he know I am back?"

"No--I don't think so. I didn't mention it."

He said nothing to this at first and did not even look at her. "I
wonder if Donald minds my--our--our going about so much together," he
ventured, at last. "Do you think he does?"

"I don't think so," she replied. "Why should he? I think he is rather
glad that I have had so much pleasure." She hesitated a moment, then
went on. "He has never said anything. You know how fond he is of you."

"Yes--I know it." He spoke as though the thought brought up unpleasant
ideas. "Isn't life a terrible tragedy?" he said, as though to himself.
"The things we want most, it seems, we can never, never have, without
hurting someone else to get them."

"Donald says that is sure proof that we ought not to have them," she
said in a low voice.

"And do you think so, too?" he asked eagerly.

"I--I do not know."

He hesitated a moment, then went on impetuously. "Is duty after all
everything in the world? Is there not a duty to ourselves as well as to
others? May not one duty conflict with another, and make it hard to know
which one we ought to follow? Must two people make themselves utterly
wretched, to give happiness to a third? Isn't it somehow sort of
unequal--paying too great a price for a thing that is not worth it?"

She did not answer him, nor did he expect her to do so. He was in
reality only thinking aloud--expressing the thoughts which had been
uppermost in his mind for the past three weeks, and, woman-like, she
took refuge in silence, for she knew that were she to answer him
truthfully she would agree with him.

"If two people love each other enough, doesn't it make up for anything
else in the world? We can't control our feelings. We can't help it, if
love comes to us and takes from us everything in our lives, and leaves
nothing behind but itself. There must be some purpose in it all. If
there is nothing left to us but love, why should we have to give that
up as well, and go on and on in wretched misery to the end? I can't do
it--and yet, I know that I must."

She trembled as she heard his words--so unlike the care-free man she had
come to know. He had changed very much, in these past few weeks. The
lines of suffering in his face were new to it, and only a great emotion
could have set them there. He loved her with a strong, compelling love,
and he was wrestling with the vital problems of duty and right. She, on
her part, loved him because of what pleasure he had given her, and was
wrestling with no problems whatever. Her only thought at the moment was
a great desire to have him put his arms about her and crush her to him.
This, however, he did not know, for he had idealized her and invested
her with all manner of high qualities and virtues which she by no means
possessed. She had begun to feel just a trifle annoyed by his constant
self-control. Somehow it seemed to belittle her own powers of
attraction. She feared, at times, that he might, casting prudence,
duty--honor to the winds, overwhelm her in a wild and rapturous outburst
of love, but the fact that he had not done so, up to now, annoyed her a
little, and almost made her desire the more that he would. She liked to
feel that West was a firebrand, that she herself was keeping him at a
distance--she did not enjoy the thought that he was controlling himself
in spite of her. He pedestaled her as a paragon of virtue, a creature of
restraint, which he, a devastating male, had caused to love him. She was
in reality far more frail than he, and the more he held aloof, the more
she burned for his caresses. Passion had made her shameless.

She walked along without replying for a long time, and he, misconstruing
her silence, thought he had offended her, by what he had said, and began
to speak of lighter things. He told her of his trip to Denver, of his
friends and acquaintances there, and she pretended to a deep interest,
but all the while she was longing to hear him burst forth with, "I love
you, I love you." After all, there was much of logic in her position,
for she knew perfectly well that the time would eventually come when he
would say those words to her, unless, indeed, he were to go away from
her, and avoid yielding to temptation by fleeing from it, and of this
there seemed not the slightest prospect. She knew she had a compelling
hold on him--he might for a time prevent himself from telling her his
feelings, but she could hold him near her as long as she pleased.

The rain made the afternoon unpleasant for walking. They turned into the
Casino and had a cup of tea, and chatted indifferently of subjects in
which neither of them was interested. West was in a hurry to get
away--he seemed less sure of himself than usual, and ill at ease. At
close to five o'clock they returned to the apartment and he left her,
with the understanding that he would stop for her in the machine at
eleven the next day.




CHAPTER VI


Edith came back from her walk very much out of sorts. It seemed to her
as though Billy understood her so much better than Donald ever had, or,
as far as she could see, ever would understand her, and yet their love,
for such she admitted it to herself to be, was leading to nothing. The
gloomy entrance of the Roxborough seemed to grate upon her nerves, and
her feeling of dissatisfaction persisted throughout the evening. Donald
had some work to do after dinner, and sat at his desk in silence for a
long time, writing steadily. She, on her part, got out her sewing, and
prepared to spend the evening darning Bobbie's stockings. She hated
it--she had always disliked to sew, but in a way it seemed a sort of
penance, a duty, whereby she paid for the pleasures of the day.

Donald was more than usually quiet over his letters. Presently he sealed
up the last one and, rising, began to walk uneasily up and down the
room. She waited for him to speak, guiltily wondering if he suspected
anything. Presently he turned to her.

"Edith," he said, "have you heard from Billy West?"

For a moment she hesitated. To what was this question leading? What had
prompted it? Then she dropped her sewing into her lap and faced him.
"Yes," she said slowly. "He was here this afternoon."

"Then he is back?" He glanced at her suddenly, but without suspicion.
"Queer he didn't let me know."

"Oh, he just ran in for a moment to say he'd returned. He intended to
look you up in the morning. He was very busy--he told me--some man from
Boston to entertain--one of the directors of his company, I believe."

Donald seemed for a moment engrossed in his thoughts. She observed a
worried look cross his face, but could not determine its cause.

"I'm glad he's back," he said. "I've got a matter I want to talk over
with him."

"What is it?" His seriousness for a moment frightened her.

"It's something I've been considering for a long time. I hardly like to
speak of it to him, and yet I don't know anyone else to whom I can turn.
It's about that glass plant of ours, in West Virginia. We're awfully
short of capital, and I have an idea that there is trouble ahead. The
money market is getting tighter and tighter. The outlook for business is
bad. We are likely to need a little money, before long, to tide us over.
I'm thinking of suggesting to Billy that if he wants to invest a few
thousands on first-class security--bonds, he might very easily do much
worse than put it into our concern."

She took up her sewing again with a sigh of relief. So it was nothing
but a matter of business, after all, with which she was not greatly
concerned. Yet, before she replied, a curious pang of conscience smote
her. Billy would do this, she knew; do it for her sake, if not, indeed,
for Donald's, and for a brief space she felt ashamed to think that
Donald would owe the assistance he needed to the fact that Billy West
loved her. The thought was fleeting--elusive--and in a moment was
swallowed up in the greater knowledge of their love; yet, for that
moment, she had ranged herself beside her husband, resenting the
suggestion for his sake, finding in it something that humiliated and
hurt her.

"If it is a good investment," she presently exclaimed, "I don't see why
he should not put some money into it."

"Of course it's a good investment. I shouldn't have my own in it, if it
weren't. We need only a small amount--nothing to West. He can't begin to
spend his income." He looked moodily about the room. "I'm not envious,
but I wish I had a tenth of it. There are so many things I'd like to do
for you, dear, if I only could. I'm glad that he has been able to make
the past few months more pleasant for you. Billy is one of the best
fellows I've ever met--generous and unselfish to a fault. I'm very fond
of him; I haven't a friend I think more of."

Again the pang of conscience smote Edith. The enormity of the deception
which she and West had been practicing upon Donald appalled her, and he
seemed so unsuspecting, so guileless. His next words, however, drove the
thought from her mind.

"I wish he'd marry. He really needs someone to look after him. I wonder
that your sister Alice doesn't get along with him better. What's the
trouble, anyway? She hardly ever sees him. Why don't you do more to
bring them together?"

Edith instinctively resented the suggestion. Billy West was hers, by
right of conquest. The thought of turning him over to anyone, even to
her sister, annoyed her. "Alice thinks too much of someone else," she
replied primly.

"You mean Hall?"

"Yes. They've been as good as engaged for months. Mother objects, of
course, but I think Alice loves him."

Donald smiled. "In that case, we'll have to find someone else for Billy.
Emerson Hall is a splendid fellow, and I'd be glad to see Alice marry
him." He came over to Edith and patted her shoulder affectionately. "I
never expected to play the role of a matchmaker, but I'd be mighty glad
to see Billy fall in love with some nice girl, who would appreciate him,
and help him to make something of his life. Just sitting around New
York, spending thirty or forty thousand a year, isn't good for any man.
With his money he ought to travel, see the world, take up some hobby,
have children--that's about the most human thing a man can do. With all
that money at his command he could do so much for them."

"Yes," she assented, not daring to look at him.

"What I'm afraid of is that he'll fall in love with some woman who'll
ruin his life--somebody that won't have an idea above clothes, and
automobiles, and physical enjoyment. There are so many like that, here
in New York, and, if he should happen to care for one of them, it would
spoil his whole future. Billy is really quite simple in his tastes. He'd
love a big country place, and horses, and dogs, and all that. This gay
New York life attracts him now, because he's been away from it for so
long, but in another six months he'll be sick of it. I'm going to have a
talk with him."

Edith said nothing. What, indeed, was there for her to say? Donald's
words cut deep. For a brief space she almost hated herself. Was West's
love for her going to spoil his whole life? She shivered at the thought.
Then the picture of the man, his smiling face, his attractive and
alluring personality, rose before her, and drove away the doubts which
had for the moment chilled her heart. She rose and put away her sewing.
"Perhaps you had better let Billy West manage his own love-affairs,"
she remarked quietly.

Donald, busily engaged in refilling his pipe, failed to see the trace of
resentment which accompanied her words. "Oh, I don't mean to interfere,"
he said. "I'm not a fool. But Billy and I have been friends for a long
time, and I don't think he'd mind a little advice from me."

"You are going to ask him about this--this money, to-morrow?" Edith
inquired presently.

"Perhaps. I may sound him out, at least. We sha'n't need the money for
some weeks--may not need it at all, in fact, but I want to be prepared."

He did talk the matter over with West the next day, and the latter fell
in with the plan at once. He felt a deep sense of shame at the injury he
was doing his friend, and was anxious to make amends in any way that he
could. It occurred to him, also, that perhaps in this way he might,
indirectly at least, help Edith. Deep down in his soul he despised
himself, felt himself a traitor, in thought at least, if not yet in
deed, to this man who loved and trusted him. For a moment he almost made
up his mind to tell Edith at once that he could not see her again, that
they must part forever. The intention was an honest one, at the time.
Even he did not admit, that one smile from her--one touch of her
hand--would consign it to the paving operations in hell which is the
destiny of so large a proportion of all good intentions.

He refused Donald's invitation to luncheon, explaining that he meant to
take Edith out for a drive in the car. Donald even thanked him for this.
"You are a brick, Billy," he said, gripping his hand at parting. "Since
you've been back, Edith has been like another woman. I believe she's
gained ten pounds, and all her nervousness is gone. Being out in the air
so much, I suppose. But we can't let her monopolize you. Why don't you
get married, Billy?"

The suddenness of the question threw West for the moment off his guard.
"Married!" he exclaimed. "Why--I--what do you mean?" He looked at his
friend narrowly.

"It's plain enough, isn't it? Here you are, a young and good-looking
chap with plenty of money. What more natural than to marry, and have a
home, and children? It's the only way to be really happy. All this"--he
waved his hand toward the vista of roofs and pinnacles which stretched
endlessly northward--"doesn't really get you anywhere. You know that, as
well as I."

"I--I guess you're right. I'd be glad enough to get away from it
all--with a woman I loved. I'd never want to see New York again.
But--I--" he hesitated, faltered--"I guess I won't marry yet awhile,
Don--not yet awhile."

"Better think it over, old man," he heard Donald call out to him, as he
turned away.

All the way up-town he hated himself, hated the circumstances which had
placed him in this horrible situation, with love on the one side, duty
on the other, tearing at his heart. He felt so depressed that he stopped
on the way and drank two highballs. They served to drive away the fog of
doubts which had begun to envelop him.

By the time he reached the Roxborough, his spirits had commenced to
revive. The presence of Edith, her happy, smiling face, her unconcealed
joy at seeing him, completed the change. After all, he was only taking
for a spin in the country the woman he loved, the woman he had always
loved. There was nothing wrong in that. He had not been false to Donald
by any overt act. God had put this love into his heart, and he had only
responded as his nature made him respond. The futility of blaming the
whole affair upon God did not at the moment occur to him. It was a
convenient way of shifting the responsibility, and one that has been
much utilized since the days of Adam.

Edith, on her part, felt that the time had come for an understanding of
some sort between West and herself. It would be unfair to all concerned,
she decided, to allow matters to drift as they had been drifting. If
West should tell her that he loved her, it would give her a reason for
not seeing him, an excuse for driving him away. Until he did speak, she
could do nothing. She was by no means certain that, should he declare
himself, she would forthwith proceed to put him out of her life. That
question she left for the emotions of the moment to decide. But she
believed that, until the moment arrived, she was quite helpless, for
either good or ill. To break with West, her husband's friend and her
own, now, without apparent reason, would be to assume that he loved her,
and loved her wrongfully--she was not certain that this was true, not
sufficiently certain, at least, to deny herself the joy of finding out.

For all these reasons she decided to do her best to force West to
declare himself. Then she would have a crisis to face--a reality, not a
mere supposition. And whatever course she then decided upon, whether
love, or duty, it would at least be definite and final, and the present
state of affairs was neither.

By this complex system of reasoning Edith Rogers justified herself in
her intention to force from West a declaration of his love, and
justified herself so completely that, when she joined him at the
entrance to the apartment, she had almost convinced herself that she was
about to commit a most laudable and praiseworthy act.




CHAPTER VII


It is a curious, but undeniable, fact that there is something in the
effect of rapid motion upon the senses that generates love. Possibly it
is the poetry of movement which attunes the mind to thoughts of a less
practical nature. The dance, the swift motion of an ocean liner, the
whirl of a motor car, are they not responsible for a multitude of sins;
else why the ballroom flirtations, the love-affairs on shipboard, the
eloping heiress and the chauffeur? Certain it is that there was
something in the drive to Garden City at Edith's side that morning,
which engendered in West a more passive attitude, a more willing
yielding to their growing love for each other, than he had felt while
walking with her in the park the day before. She, on her part, dismissed
all unpleasant thoughts from her mind, and reveled in the joy of the
moment. The day was brilliant, though somewhat cold. The heavy fur-lined
coat she wore had been purchased a short time before by West, for her
especial use; she appreciated the motive which had prompted him to do
this--he thought so continually of her comfort, her happiness.

She turned and glanced at him, and noted with pleasure, even with a
secret glow of happiness, the strong, handsome lines of his face, ruddy
in the sharp wind, the strength of his arms, the poise of his shoulders.
Through the coat which enveloped her she could feel the subtle warmth
of his body--she nestled closer to him, and basked in a delightful
realization of his strength, his mastery over the on-rushing car, his
steady, unfailing nerves, which alone stood between her and death. It
seemed so fine to know that her life rested in his hands, that a
momentary weakness, a trifling slip on his part might hurl them both to
destruction against some tree, or rock, or ever present telegraph pole.
She began to wonder, after all, how she had ever lived these years
without love, real, dominating love, such as she believed this to be, to
illumine and glorify her life. Everything, indeed, with Donald seemed so
sordid. There was the everlasting talk of money, the continual effort to
make ends meet, the constant fear lest she spend a little more than his
income would justify. All this had passed from her, to-day. She moved
along in a cloud of wonderful, waking dreams, and life seemed once more
a joyous, sentient thing. She even forgot Bobbie, and it almost seemed
as though, if she could spend all the rest of her life by West's side,
anything else would be of but minor importance.

West interrupted her day-dreams. "Are you warm enough, dear?" he asked
suddenly.

"Oh, yes, quite," she gasped against the wind and wondered if he
realized how in using that term of endearment he had caused a glow of
happiness to flood her until her faced burned. It was something he
had never done before, yet it did not seem strange to her. Their
personalities seemed vibrant, attuned to each other and to some great
harmony of love which was a part of the rushing wind, the brilliant
sunshine, the blue sky. She felt that he was going to say something to
her--something that she dreaded, yet waited for as a bride for her
bridegroom. Somehow all thought of disloyalty to Donald had vanished. It
was not that she put it aside, or trampled upon it--in this glorified
atmosphere of love it simply no longer existed.

Presently he turned to her, as they were slowly mounting a long stretch
of hill. "I wish we could go on and on, and never stop, for all the rest
of our lives," he said, looking at her hungrily. She met his gaze with a
glad smile and they told each other with their eyes what had been
growing in their hearts for all these months. The road stretched before
them, gray and lonely. West put his left arm about her with a caressing
motion that seemed to embrace within it not only herself, but all her
hopes and fears, her troubles and her joys. She did not passively yield
herself to his embraces, she leaped to him, her brain on fire, her soul
in her eyes. When their lips met, she hardly knew it, all the music of
the heavenly choirs seemed singing in her ears, and in that moment of
supreme happiness neither future nor past for her existed. In an instant
he had turned from her and, with his hands on the steering wheel, swept
the road ahead with cautious eyes. The whole thing seemed like a
dream--a fantasy of the imagination, yet she knew it was the realest
thing in her life at the moment, the one great experience that eclipsed
all lesser experiences as though they had never been at all.

They did not say much for a long time, for each seemed to feel the
irrevocability of the thing that had befallen them. It was not as though
West had kissed her, as a man might kiss a flirtatiously inclined woman.
She knew that to him, at least, that kiss had meant a seal of love; what
it had meant to her she had not yet in her own mind decided.

After what seemed to her hours, he spoke again. "I am thinking of going
away, Edith," he said, and his voice seemed to come to her from a long
way off, and wake her from happy dreams.

"Going away?" she asked, with a new timidity. "Where?"

"To Europe, to Cairo, to the East."

"Why?"

"Because I cannot stay here any longer."

"Why not?" she found herself asking. "Why not?"

"Because I love you, dear, and because, if I stay here, I am afraid of
what might happen. I want to go away, to get out into the great, wide
places of the world, where air, and sunshine, and love are free and
God-given. I hate New York and all it means. I cannot stay in it any
longer--as things are."

"Then I shall not see you--any more?" she asked in a voice from which
she was unable to keep a quivering sense of loss, of pain.

"Not unless you will go with me," he said suddenly, turning and looking
into her face.

"Go with you--go with you?" She repeated the words mechanically, as
though the thought suggested by them had not yet found a place in her
mind. "How could I?"

"Why not?" His voice became suddenly intense, trembling with feeling. "I
love you, and I want you, always, close by my side. I cannot think of
going on, all the years of my life, without you. I know how wrong, how
disloyal it all must seem to you, but I cannot help it. I love you--I
love you--what more is there for me to say? If you wish it, I will go
away from you at once--to-day, and never see you again, if it breaks my
heart. Shall I?"

She gave a faint cry. The thought hurt her, in its unexpected cruelty.
"How can you ask me that?"

The car was running very slowly now, along a stretch of road bordered by
high trees, faintly green in their early spring garb. He let the
machine come to a standstill beside the road and took her fiercely into
his arms. "Edith, I cannot go without you--my God--I cannot. Come with
me, dearest, come, and forget all the troubles and cares of your life
here." He pressed her to him with quivering muscles and kissed her.
"Will you? Will you?" he demanded, and his voice seemed to her a
command, rather than a question.

She yielded to his embrace gladly, with a joyous sense of freedom.
"Yes--yes!" she cried, and lay still in his arms.

Presently they heard, far behind them, the sound of another car
ascending the hill. West put her from him, started the machine, and they
rushed along against the southeast wind, their hearts big with their
new-formed plan.

Then a long silence came upon them. Perhaps they were both thinking of
the pain which their love must cause to Donald, the inevitable
consequences which must flow from it. It was a natural reaction from the
exaltation of the moment before. Edith, too, was thinking of Bobbie, and
already in her inmost soul had begun to resent the demands of this new
emotion, which required her to tear out of her heart all that now lay
within it, that there might be room for her love for West alone. Yet so
strange are the ways of love, that, while resenting the result, she did
not resent the love which caused it--to her Billy West was, for the time
being at least, the sum of all earthly existence.

It was after one o'clock when they reached the hotel at Garden City, and
in a few moments they had secured a table and were ordering luncheon.
West suggested a cocktail, which seemed very grateful after the long
ride. Edith did not feel hungry, but ate mechanically, hardly knowing
what was set before her. She looked timidly at him, and felt her cheeks
redden with a sudden flush. Somehow he seemed so big, so masterful, so
different from Donald, and she knew that whenever he desired, from now
on, to take her in his strong arms, she would not resist him, but would
be glad. She seemed to feel toward him an intense physical attraction,
something that she had never felt toward her husband, an unreasoning
instinct, that made her long to be near him, to hear his voice, to put
her hand in his, and forget everything else in the blessed knowledge
that this man of her desire possessed her completely and utterly.

These thoughts came to her as an undercurrent, far below the ripple of
conversation with which the meal passed. Only once did they look over
the precipice upon the edge of which they walked so lightly. She
ventured, half-afraid, to ask him when he thought of leaving New York.
His answer showed that he, too, had been thinking deeply of the matter
which lay nearest their hearts.

"I must go to Denver first," he said. "All my property is there, you
know, and I shall have to arrange about it."

"What are you going to do?"

"I shall sell out my stock in the mine, and resign my position as
vice-president. It may take a week or two to do that. After I have
converted the stock into money, it will be necessary to put it into some
good security, bonds probably, which will require no attention. That
will leave me free to go abroad, and stay as long as I please, without
having to bother about business affairs. We can go to Egypt, to Persia,
to India, to Japan, and when we come back--" He hesitated, halted.

"When we come back! Can we ever come back, dear?" she asked timidly.

"Of course we can. Your husband will know that we love each other; and
surely he will make it possible for us to be married. After all, you
have never been happy with him. He should be glad to see you happy with
someone else."

The matter-of-fact way in which he spoke of their future jarred upon
her. It was one thing to dream of running away to some imagined country
of palms and eternal summer, in an ecstasy of love, but the details, the
sordid necessities of the thing, seemed hard and cruel, even when viewed
through the rosy spectacles of love. To think of coming back to New York
and the chilly isolation of the social outcast did not appeal to her--it
was like awakening from the dream to realities anything but pleasant. He
must have seen her distaste, or felt it, for he changed the subject
abruptly, merely remarking that he had decided to go to Denver that
night.

"To-night?" she asked--"Why to-night? You have only just come from
there."

"The sooner I go, the better. Matters are in such shape now that I can
sell out my interests quickly. I found that out, while I was there. If
I wait, it may be more difficult. The company is thinking of taking over
some new properties, and that will require considerable money. I had
better go at once."

She trembled at the thought of what it all meant, but said no word to
discourage him. Somehow the very success which had crowned her dreams
now seemed to make them less beautiful--less to be desired. Why couldn't
they just go on loving each other, without all this--this upsetting of
things? She suddenly found herself blushing at the realization of just
what it was that her thoughts actually meant.

The run back to town was cheerless and cold, and singularly symbolic of
her state of mind. The brightness of the morning had faded before the
bank of ashen-colored clouds that whirled up from the southeast with a
suggestion of winter in their formless masses. West drove the car at top
speed, as though he, too, felt the approach of something chilling, an
aftermath to their dreams. It was nearly five when they reached the
ferry in Long Island City, and the lights in the stores and along the
streets had already begun to sparkle through the gathering mists of
evening.

"We should have come back earlier," said Edith, a bit worried. "Bobbie
will wonder what has become of me." She had left the child in Alice's
care, the nurse being out, and knew that the latter would be anxious to
get back to the boarding-house and dinner. There was her own evening
meal to prepare as well. At once all the realities of life arose to
reach out to her, and draw her back to her old routine.

"We can easily make it by half-past five," said West, as they turned
from Thirty-fourth Street into Madison Avenue. "What time will Donald be
home?"

"A little after five, I suppose. We shall probably find him at home when
we get there."

They drove up to the house just as Donald was ascending the steps. Edith
felt an overpowering sense of guilt as he helped her from the machine;
she said good-by to West rather hastily, as she stood beside her husband
on the sidewalk. Nothing was said about the proposed trip to Denver;
Donald asked them about their day's outing, hoped they had had a
pleasant time; further than that there was no conversation. As the motor
rolled off, West looked back and nodded, and in a moment Edith found
herself ascending the elevator with her husband, wondering if, after
all, the experience of the day had not been a strange dream.

It seemed queer, unreal, to come down to the commonplace things of life.
Potatoes had to be peeled, a steak cooked, all the details of the
preparation of their simple dinner. Bobbie was cross and hungry, and
hung about her skirts as she moved to and fro in the kitchen. Alice had
hurried away, with a rather nasty remark concerning her long stay. More
than ever she realized that life--her life--was so full of things that
meant nothing to her, so barren of those that really counted. She placed
the dinner upon the table with a heart full of bitterness, but she
showed nothing of it to Donald.

He was full of his new venture in the glass business. A friend by the
name of Forbes had come to him that afternoon with some patents for
making glass tiling; there was a fortune in it, he rattled on, and she
listened, only half-comprehending what it was all about. She had always
tried to take an interest in her husband's business affairs, but,
to-night, her heart was too full of other things--things that
alternately lifted her up into realms of hitherto unknown happiness, and
then dropped her into the black depths of despair. After all, it would
soon be over, she reflected, and then, frightened by her thoughts, put
them from her, and choked down her dinner with a strange sense of
desolation. Billy was gone--Billy, who had filled her days and nights
with a new joy of living. Gone--gone! Suppose something were to happen
to him! The thought that she might never see him again frightened her.




CHAPTER VIII


One evening, about two weeks after West had left New York for Denver,
Alice Pope, Edith's sister, came down to the Roxborough for the purpose
of spending the evening.

The two girls were very much alike in temperament and training and had
always been great friends, confiding to each other most of the affairs
of their rather uneventful existence. Alice was two years younger than
Edith, and while not so handsome a woman, was the stronger nature of the
two; as was evidenced by her somewhat more firmly molded chin, her lips,
less full than Edith's, and her gray eyes, which, set somewhat more
closely together, gave to her face an expression of shrewdness and
determination only relieved by her good-natured and rather large mouth.

She was not a frequent visitor at the Rogers' apartment, at least in the
evening, as she and Donald did not get along very well--they were good
enough friends, but neither found the other very congenial. Alice
thought Donald hard and unsympathetic, a feeling which arose largely
from the tales of woe with which Edith so frequently regaled her.
Donald, feeling this attitude of criticism, and too proud to attempt to
controvert it, remained silent, which but convinced Alice the more of
his lack of warmth and geniality. Thus the two preserved a sort of armed
neutrality, the effect of which was to keep them forever at arm's
length.

Edith was in a state of extreme nervousness, and even the pretense of
looking at a magazine hardly served to conceal the fact from Donald--he
would inevitably have noticed it, had he not been busily occupied at his
desk.

The cause of her nervousness reposed safely within the bosom of her
dress. It was a letter from West which had come for her, three days
before, and its contents had caused her the gravest concern. She felt
glad that Alice was coming--glad that Donald had decided to go out for a
stroll. She had been inwardly debating the advisability of taking her
sister into her confidence, when the door-bell rang.

It was about eight o'clock, and Donald was just going out to post his
letters.

"Hello, Sis!" said Alice, as she came in, then she nodded to Donald.

"Good-evening, Alice," Edith replied. "Where's mother? I thought she was
coming with you."

"She'll be along presently." The girl took off her long pony-skin coat
and threw it carelessly upon the couch. "She stopped at Mrs. Harrison's
for a few minutes to return a book she had borrowed." She shivered
slightly. "Pretty cold, isn't it? Never knew such a late spring."

Edith turned to Donald, who was putting on his coat. "Get some quinine
capsules, Donald--two grain. Bobbie's cold is worse to-night."

"Have you had the doctor?" inquired her husband.

"Oh, no, it isn't as bad as that. Just a little fever."

"Very well. I'll be back presently." He took up his hat and went out.

Edith, instead of joining her sister, began to walk aimlessly about the
room. She had with difficulty concealed her agitation from Donald, and,
now that he had gone, she still could not decide whether or not it would
be wisdom on her part to confide in her sister. She felt the necessity
of confiding in someone.

Alice presently observed the nervousness, and commented upon it in her
usual frank way. "For heaven's sake, Edith," she remarked, "sit down.
Don't walk about like that. You make me nervous. What's the matter with
you, anyway?"

"Oh, nothing!" Edith threw herself dispiritedly into a chair, and, with
an expression which bespoke an utter weariness of spirit, gazed moodily
at her hands, roughened and red from the washing of dishes.

"Nothing?" said Alice, looking at her closely. "You look as though you
had lost your last friend."

"Perhaps I have." The answer was significant, although to Alice it meant
nothing.

"What do you mean by that?" she inquired. "I think you might try to be a
little more agreeable. It wouldn't hurt you any. If you are going to sit
here and hand out chunks of gloom all the evening, I think I'll go
home." It was characteristic of Alice to be determinedly cheerful on all
occasions, a trait born not so much of any inherent optimism as of a
dislike for being made uncomfortable.

Edith looked at her hesitatingly. "Don't mind me, Alice," she presently
observed, in an apologetic voice, "I'm worried."

"Do you suppose I can't see that? You've been acting like an Ibsen play
for the past three days. Why don't you get it off your mind?" She
hitched her chair about, and faced her sister with a curious look. "I'm
safe enough. You ought to know that by this time. Come--out with it.
What's wrong? Let's have the awful details."

"It isn't anything to joke about," remarked Edith, not entirely
relishing her sister's tone.

"I'm not joking--not a bit of it. If you are in any trouble, Sis, you
know you can count on me. I may be able to help you out; two heads are
better than one, you know."

With a sudden glance, Edith decided to take her sister into her
confidence. Her question, quick and unexpected, aroused Alice to new
interest. "Do you like Billy West?" she asked.

"Billy West? Of course I do. What's he got to do with it?"

"Everything!"

Alice hitched her chair still closer, and looked at her sister in
surprise. "You don't mean to say--?" she began, then concluded her
remark with a significant whistle.

"Alice," said her sister, "you've known Billy for a long time. You know
he is one of Donald's best friends--"

"I always thought so. He must like one of you pretty well, judging by
the amount of time he spends here."

"You didn't know, perhaps, that he was very much in love with me, years
ago, before he went to Colorado."

"I always suspected it. Pity you didn't marry him. He made about half a
million out there, didn't he, in that gold mine?"

"I don't know just what he made. That has nothing to do with it. Ever
since he came back to New York to live, three months ago, I've seen a
great deal of him--"

"I should say you had. If I hadn't thought him such a good friend of
Donald's I'd have been suspicious long ago. I've envied you often
enough, your auto rides, and luncheons at the Knickerbocker, and
dinners, and theater parties. He doesn't mind spending his money--that's
one thing sure, but I never thought--" She paused and looked at her
sister with renewed interest. "Is he in love with you now?"

"Yes." Edith spoke slowly--almost as though to herself. The thought was
apparently not distasteful to her.

"You don't say so! The plot thickens. So that's why he's been here
morning, noon and night. Does Donald know?"

"Donald! Of course not."

"Has Billy said anything?"

"Said anything? To whom?"

"To you, of course. Has he told you that he still loves you?"

"Yes."

"That wasn't exactly fair of him." Alice was a good deal of a Puritan at
heart, and not at all lacking in frankness. "He ought not to have done
it. I'm not so strong for Donald, goodness knows, but it strikes me as
being pretty rough on him, just the same. Don't you think so?"

"Yes, and I told Billy so."

"What did he say?"

"He said he had tried his best to keep from telling me, all these
months. He went away, once, in April, you remember, and stayed nearly a
month, to try to forget, but it didn't do any good. He says he loves me
more every day, and at last he had to tell me of it--he couldn't keep
from it any longer."

"Well, what good has it done? He has sense enough to see that it's
perfectly hopeless, hasn't he?"

"No, that's the worst of it."

Alice sat back in her chair in alarm. "Good heavens, Edith," she gasped,
"you must be losing your mind."

"Why?"

"It isn't possible you are thinking of--" She paused and left her
sentence incomplete, gazing intently at her sister. "Do you care for
him?"

"I don't know. Sometimes I think I do. You know what my life has been
here. You know what it is going to be, for years. I suppose you will
think me very disloyal and wicked, but, when a woman's whole existence
is made up, year after year, of wishing for all the things that make
life worth while, and never, never being able to afford them, her love
for her husband seems somehow to become dried up, and unimportant."

"Hm-m--I suppose it does. I've never yet got to the point, myself, where
I can really enjoy making over my last season's clothes. I try to think
they look as good as new, but they never do. I'm afraid I haven't enough
imagination. But all that doesn't make any difference now. You're
married to Donald, and you've got to make the best of it. What a pity
you didn't choose Billy! Half a million--hm-m--it sounds like heaven to
me. I wonder if he wouldn't like me as a second choice," she rattled on.
"We certainly ought to try to keep that money in the family, somehow."

"Alice, don't talk such nonsense. It isn't Billy's money I'm thinking
of."

"If you can persuade yourself that that's true," said her sister grimly,
"you really must be in love with him. But what's the use of talking
about it? It's absurd."

Edith stood up and walked nervously over to the desk, where she began
idly fumbling with the papers upon it. Presently she turned to her
sister who was regarding her with an inquiring look.

"He--he wants me to leave Donald," she cried, in a half-frightened way.

"No! What a nerve!" Alice seemed to regard the whole affair as a huge
joke.

"He says that I am wearing myself out," continued her sister, "that I am
wasting all the youth, and sweetness and joy of life, grinding on here
in this hopeless situation. He says that, if Donald really loved me, he
would see that, too."

"It sounds like the latest best seller. The hero always says that to the
neglected wife, doesn't he?"

"If you are going to make fun of me," remarked Edith with a show of
anger, "I think we had better drop the subject."

Alice got up and went over to her sister. "Oh, come now, Edith," she
said kindly, "don't get so grouchy. I don't see anything so tragic in
all this. Suppose Billy does love you--what does he propose to do about
it--run away with you?"

"Yes." Her sister's quiet tones had a ring of earnestness to them, of
finality almost, that was alarming.

"The idea! Billy West of all people! I can't believe it. I suppose you
indignantly refused."

"No, I didn't. He told me how lonely he was; how bad it all made him
feel; how it seemed so disloyal to Donald, but he--he couldn't help it.
He said I was everything in the world to him--that he had never loved
any other woman, and never would--"

"Oh, I can imagine what he said," interrupted Alice. "That's easy. The
question is, what did you say?"

Edith looked at her in a frightened way, seemingly for a moment
unwilling to meet her glance. "Alice," she said, slowly and very softly,
"I--I told him I would go."

"Edith, you really can't mean it."

"Yes," said Mrs. Rogers, nodding her head slowly. "Yes. That was over
two weeks ago. We had gone down to Garden City in the auto, and had
luncheon there. It was a wonderful day--so clear, and bright and
beautiful. I had had a row with Donald, the night before. It was about
going away this summer. When I met Billy the next day, everything seemed
so different. He was telling me about a wonderful trip he was planning,
to India, and the East. We talked it over like two children, and then
all of a sudden he said he wouldn't--he couldn't go, unless I went,
too--"

"It sounds fine." Alice's voice was not approving. "But what about
Bobbie?"

Her sister passed her hand over her forehead and shivered slightly,
glancing as she did so at the door of the adjoining bedroom. "Can't you
see that is why I cannot do it?" she cried with bitterness.

"Oh--you aren't going to, then!" exclaimed Alice in a tone of relief. "I
thought you said you had agreed to go."

"I did. I must have been mad. I didn't think of Bobbie, or of Donald, or
anything, except that Billy and I loved each other, and were going away
together, to be happier than I had ever dreamed of being in all my life.
It all seemed so wonderful--almost like being born over again and living
a new existence in a new and happier world. Then when I got home--" She
hesitated, and a look of pain crossed her face.

"You weakened on the proposition, of course. That's the effect of habit.
It's a wonderful thing how it keeps us in the straight and narrow path.
I once heard a divorced woman say that it took her over a year to get
out of the habit of being married to her first husband. What did Billy
say when you told him you had changed your mind? I'll bet he was
furious."

Again Mrs. Rogers seemed unable to meet her sister's keen gaze. "I
haven't told him," she exclaimed, her voice little more than a whisper.

"Good heavens! Why not?"

"Because he had gone away. He went to Denver that same night. Didn't you
know?"

"Now that you mention it, I believe I did hear you say that he was out
of town. I thought it strange I hadn't seen anything of him, lately.
What did he go to Denver for? I must say, it seems rather inconsiderate
of him, under the circumstances."

"He went to Denver, Alice, because his property is there. He intends to
sell out his interest in the mine, and close up his affairs so that we
can go away together, don't you see? He said he was going to dispose of
everything he had, and put all the money in bonds, so that he would be
free to go away, and stay away the rest of his life, if he felt like
it."

"Well, I must say," cried her sister, "he seems to be in earnest, at any
rate, even if you are not."

"Alice, Billy West loves me as truly and deeply as any woman was ever
loved."

"Then it seems to me that you are treating his love pretty shabbily. Why
don't you tell him the truth?"

"It wasn't until after he had gone away that I began to realize what a
terrific mistake it would all be--that I would probably ruin his life as
well as my own. I ought to have written him at once, and told him I
couldn't do what I had agreed."

"Why didn't you?"

"I don't know. I suppose I was weak. I hadn't the courage. Every day I
put it off till the next."

"Well, it isn't too late yet, is it? If I were you, I would sit right
down and write him a letter."

Edith flung herself despairingly into a chair. "I don't know whether it
is too late or not," she wailed. "That's what is worrying me so. I
haven't slept for three nights--ever since I got his last letter."

Alice went over to her sister's chair, and put her arm about her
shoulder. "Look here, Edith," she said, her tone showing plainly her
anxiety--"what's all this about, anyway? You seem to be terribly upset.
I can't make head or tail of the matter. What's worrying you so?"

"Three days ago," said Edith, with quivering lips, "I got a letter from
him. He'd been writing me every day up to then. That letter told me that
he had appendicitis, and had gone to a hospital in Denver to be operated
on. It was written last Thursday--that's six days ago. Since then, I
haven't heard a single word."

Alice appeared greatly relieved. "Is that all?" she cried. "I shouldn't
worry about it, if I were you. When anyone is lying flat on his back in
a hospital, he doesn't feel much like writing letters. Appendicitis
isn't very dangerous. I've known any number of people that have had it."

"I know, but I can't help worrying. I don't know what to do."

"I should think the first thing you would do would be to sit down and
write him that letter."

"I don't dare to."

"I don't see why not."

"Suppose something has happened to him. How can I know who might get the
letter? I don't dare to write the things I've got to say to him."

Alice considered a moment. "No, I don't suppose you'd better. I didn't
think of that. Can't you find out, some way, how he is?"

"I don't know a soul in Denver."

Her sister paused for a moment, thinking deeply. "What is to-day,
Edith?" she suddenly inquired--"The twentieth?"

"Yes, I believe so. Why?"

"Then Emerson Hall got to Denver last night. He wrote me from St. Louis
that he was going there this week, and would arrive the night of the
nineteenth. He expects to be there several weeks. I might ask him."

"Will you?" Mrs. Rogers looked at her eagerly. "I must find out somehow.
It seems terrible, not to write to him, now that he is so sick. I--I
care a lot for him, Alice, even if I have decided not to run away with
him. Do you think Mr. Hall will do it for you?"

"Who, Emerson? Of course he will. He'd do anything for me. And, besides,
I think he knows Billy slightly. They're both Columbia men, you know."

"Send him a wire. Ask him to go to the hospital at once and find out
how Billy is. I've got to know."

"All right," said Alice, as she made her way to the desk. "Got a blank?"

"I think there are some here." Edith accompanied her sister to the desk.
"Here's one." She handed Alice the blank.

"What shall I say?" asked Alice, as she seated herself at the desk.

"Just ask him to go to the City Hospital and inquire for William West.
I'll get the elevator boy to take it." She stepped out into the hall and
pressed the electric button. "How much is it for ten words--do you
know?" she asked as she re-entered the room.

"Haven't the least idea," said her sister as she handed her the message
she had written.

Edith glanced at it, took a dollar bill from her purse, and gave it and
the message to the elevator boy who had answered her ring. "You'll
probably get the answer in the morning, Alice." She turned to her sister
as she closed the door. "You'll bring it right down to me, won't you?"

"Of course."

"And not a word to Donald--that goes without saying. I wouldn't have
him know for anything."

"All right. Billy is probably all right by this time, anyhow. As soon as
you know that he is, I advise you to sit down and write him a nice,
sensible letter--tell him you have reconsidered, and all that. You
certainly owe it to him."

"I will, Alice. I ought to have done it long ago. There's the bell," she
added, wearily. "It's probably mother."




CHAPTER IX


It was on a cold raw morning, that William West arrived in Denver, and,
as he made his way slowly from the sleeper to the waiting 'bus, he
shivered under his heavy overcoat. He was not glad to be back. Denver
and all its associations had faded into the pale background of past
memories--his face was set toward the future, a future that promised all
that joy of living, of loving and of being loved in return, which he so
eagerly desired.

It cut him bitterly to think of his treachery to Donald, a treachery in
no way lessened by the fact that love was its motive, yet he argued to
his conscience that the future happiness of both Edith and himself was
at stake and demanded of him even the sacrifice of his friendship.

He did not go to his accustomed rooms at the _Prairie_, for he intended
to make his stay in the city as short and uneventful as possible. There
was but one purpose in his mind--to dispose of his holdings in the mine,
resign his office as vice-president of the company and invest his
entire fortune in safe and desirable bonds, upon the interest of which
he would be able to carry out his future plans with no greater attention
to business affairs than that involved in clipping off his quarterly or
half-yearly coupons. Therefore he held aloof from his old friends, his
former associations. If he should let the men at the club know of his
presence in the city, they would not only take up a great deal of his
time, but would inevitably inquire into his plans in a way that might
easily prove embarrassing. He therefore betook himself to a quiet hotel,
not usually patronized by the traveling public, and, after a smoking-hot
breakfast, proceeded to the offices of the company.

West had anticipated that his associates in the Lone Star Mining Company
would be the most probable purchasers of his holdings and for this
reason had determined to offer them the first opportunity to buy. His
interview with Atkinson, the president, was entirely satisfactory. While
expressing deep regret at West's desire to withdraw from active
participation in the business, the astute Boston man grasped at once the
opportunity to acquire at, or near, par, a block of stock which would
be worth double its present value in the course of a few years. He at
once closed with West's offer, taking an option on his holdings for ten
days, during which time he expected to arrange for the necessary capital
to carry out the purchase. A meeting of the board was called to act upon
West's resignation, and, when the latter left the office for luncheon,
he had, as far as was possible, for the moment, completed the business
that had brought him to Denver.

The following ten days were a nightmare. There was nothing to do, but
write to Edith, it seemed, and to read her daily letters over and over,
drawing from them new inspiration for his plans with each rereading.
Slowly the ten days passed. Atkinson reported entire success in his
plans for the syndicate he was forming to take over West's holdings;
within a week the latter expected to be flying eastward, leaving the
matter of reinvesting his money until he should reach New York.

His anxiety to return as quickly as possible was accentuated by traces
of a change of heart which he fancied he detected in some of Edith's
later letters. She had spoken of her fears for the success of their
plans--her duty to her husband, her boy. "Poor little girl," thought
West, "she needs me with her, to keep up her courage in these most
trying hours of her life."

The night of the ninth day he went to bed early, with a dull, insistent
pain in his right side which he attributed to a cold, a result of the
raw, unseasonable weather. In the morning the pain had increased; he had
passed a restless, broken night, and arose feeling dizzy and half-sick.
He determined to consult a doctor, but not until he had completed his
business.

At ten o'clock he met Atkinson and his associates, and within an hour
the stock had been delivered, and the certified check for close to half
a million dollars deposited in the bank. A great sense of relief filled
his mind--he was free, to seek happiness wherever in the broad expanse
of the world he might find it. Yet beneath all his joy--his exultation,
there throbbed a double sense of pain, the dull gnawing of conscience at
his heart, and the sharp, insistent throbbing that, knife-like, shot
through his right side. Clearly this latter was not a matter to be
trifled with. He turned into the first doctor's office that met his
eye, and joined the other unfortunates waiting in the anteroom.

The doctor would see him presently, the low-voiced maid informed him. He
sat bolt upright in an uncomfortable chair and gripped his hands
together fiercely as the sharp pangs of pain tore at his vitals. Would
these people never be through? he wondered. From within the doctor's
office, shut off by glass doors, came the faint echoes of conversation;
some unfortunate, no doubt, hearing the dread sentence of life or death,
or perhaps only a nervous woman, being prescribed bread pills for a
fancied indisposition. There were two men and a woman waiting ahead of
him. They looked healthy enough; he wondered what they could have the
matter with them that made their faces so grave.

For nearly an hour he was forced to wait in an agony of mind and body,
until his turn came, and his thoughts were the thoughts of a man upon
whom the hand of death has already laid its icy touch. He knew it was
all nonsense--engendered of pain-racked nerves, yet his conscience smote
him, and would not be stilled. The pain in his side spelled disaster,
and he could not shake off the thought. He had never believed in the
direct intervention of Providence in the affairs of mankind, yet here
was he, at the moment when all his future, as he had planned it, lay
smiling before him, stricken with an illness which, laugh at it as he
would, he could not help fearing might mean an end to all his hopes.

He sat up and shook his head with a quick, nervous motion which had been
characteristic of him since childhood. This was all the height of folly,
he argued--the natural train of gloomy thoughts which resulted from his
surroundings. Even the faint odor of carbolic acid, compounded with that
of other unknown chemicals, was enough to make a man feel blue. He rose
as the maid beckoned to him--the other consultations had happily been
short.

Dr. Oliver was a man of few words. He had not time for more, for his
practice was one of the largest in the city. He glanced at West's
pain-drawn face, listened to his few words of explanation, felt his side
with practiced hands, and delivered his opinion in a few terse words.
"Appendicitis," he said quickly, "and an aggravated case. You must
undergo an operation at once."

Somehow or other West felt a sudden sense of relief at these words.
After all, an operation for appendicitis was not such a serious matter.
He knew any number of people who had been through it. "I am stopping at
a hotel," he observed. "I do not live in Denver. I suppose I shall be
obliged to go to a hospital at once."

"By all means." The doctor turned to his desk telephone and called a
number. "I will arrange for an operation at the City Hospital, if you
wish it."

"Thank you," replied West, "I do wish it."

The doctor held a short conversation over the telephone. "I presume you
can go to the hospital at once?" he inquired.

West nodded.

"I will send for a carriage," the doctor went on, as he drew a
thermometer from a leather case and placed it beneath West's tongue.
"Your case is an acute one, Mr. West, and we cannot afford to lose any
time." He again spoke sharply over the telephone, then, bidding West
bare his arm, gave him a quick hypodermic injection which diffused a
blessed sense of relief through every nerve of his pain-racked body. He
sank upon a couch, and awaited the coming of the carriage. His thoughts
were no longer gloomy. He seemed to be floating in a sea of warmth,
which caressed him pleasurably and filled him with a delicious feeling
of well-being. Even the dull-figured flowers on the walls of the
doctor's office seemed alive, and glowing with color. The coming of the
carriage seemed unimportant; nothing, in fact, seemed to matter, now
that the gnawing of that terrible pain had left him.

It was Wednesday afternoon when West arrived at the City Hospital, and
within two hours thereafter the operation was over, and he slowly
returned to a sense of the reality of life, with a feeling of deadly
nausea, and the pain once more throbbing in his right side. Over him
bent a clear-eyed nurse, sympathetic as to his comfort, offering him a
glass of water. Presently a physician joined her. West looked at them
without interest and from the jumbled impressions of the day once more
passed into a dreamless sleep.

It was in the early morning that he first began to think of Edith. Her
letters would be awaiting him at his hotel. He must send for them--he
must write to her and tell her of all that had happened. He felt that
she would be alarmed at not hearing from him, for, until the day
before, he had not failed to post a letter to her each night, telling
her of the events of the day.

In response to his repeated requests, the nurse sent a messenger boy for
his mail, and, when the latter returned, she read him Edith's letter at
his request. He could not read it himself--he lay flat on his back, in
semi-darkness, and even the slight effort of moving his hands seemed to
send innumerable sharp quivers of pain through every portion of his
body.

The nurse read the letter haltingly, as one reads an unfamiliar
handwriting; it was signed, like all the letters, with initials only,
and told him of Edith's anxiety to see him, of her hopes and fears, and
all the other foolish things that women write to men they love. To him
it seemed a message from heaven, for he loved her very deeply, and
her slightest word became a treasure to him, invested with a new
significance; lifted from its commonplace surroundings; something
to ponder over, and think about all through the long, weary day. He
sent a reply, treating lightly of his illness, so as not to alarm her
needlessly. The nurse carefully wrote it down for him at his dictation.
He hesitated when it came to telling the woman the address--he did not
wish to compromise Edith, to give her name to a stranger. There was no
other way, however, and, after all, he believed that, within a month at
the outside, they would be standing hand in hand at the taffrail of some
great ocean liner, watching the towering skyline of New York as it
disappeared in the hazy distance along with their troubles and cares.
The mere fact that their secret was known, now, to a hospital nurse,
could do no harm; in a few weeks all the world would know it, but they
would be in each other's arms, and the opinion of the world would not
matter very much.

The day seemed strangely long and he was glad when night came, and with
it some respite from his pain. He felt tired, terribly tired, and his
head throbbed with a burning fever. They gave him things to make him
sleep, and water for his cracking lips. As the evening wore on even the
thoughts of the morning's letter no longer interested him. He turned his
face to the wall, and tried not to think of anything at all. After a
while he slept, while the nurse and the doctor on his evening round
spoke together softly, and in grave tones, with many anxious glances in
his direction.

The next morning his fever was better, and the letter brought him from
his hotel made the day seem for a time full of joy and brightness, but
after a little while a great sense of weariness overcame him. Nothing
seemed to matter much; whether he lived or died. He was conscious only
of a desire to sleep--how long, even though forever, he did not care in
the very least.

About noon he was roused by the approach of someone toward his bed,
and opened his eyes to see Doctor Oliver standing beside him. The
doctor looked very grave as he took his patient's hand, his fingers
mechanically feeling the rapid, weak pulse. "Mr. West," said the
doctor, "I think you should let your family know of your illness."

West tried to raise his hand, then fell back with a sigh of weariness.
"Am I as sick as all that?" he inquired faintly, as he gazed into the
doctor's inscrutable eyes.

"You are a very sick man, Mr. West. I do not wish to needlessly alarm
you, but it would be best to communicate with your people, and put your
affairs in order, so that, whatever happens, you will be ready to meet
it."

The sick man looked at the doctor with a long, intent look. His lips
quivered, his hand tightened fearfully upon the one that held it. "You
mean that I am going to die?" he asked bravely. "Tell me the truth,
doctor. I would rather know." The doctor nodded his head slowly, but
made no other reply.

West was a long time in realizing the truth, yet it seemed as though he
had always known it. He had never quite believed that all the happiness
he looked forward to so gladly would ever really come true. It seemed
almost too much to ask of fate. And now it was all ended. He must die,
here alone, with not even Edith's presence to gladden his few remaining
hours. For a long time he looked at the doctor with burning eyes, yet no
words would come to say that which he felt. The doctor must have
understood, for he, too, stood silent, his eyes fixed tenderly upon the
dying man's face. At last he spoke.

"You should send for your people, Mr. West," he said.

"I have no people, doctor."

"Is there no one you would care to see?"

"No--no one that could come to me here." He thought of Edith--so far
away--even if she could come to him, he knew there would not be time. He
looked once more at the grave face which bent over his. "How long have I
to live, doctor?" he asked.

"I am afraid the time is not very long, Mr. West. If you have any
business affairs that you wish to attend to, I would advise you to do so
at once."

Business affairs! What business affairs could interest him now? His
fortune lay in the Central National Bank, and beyond some distant
relatives in New Hampshire whom he had never seen, and who scarcely knew
of his existence, there was no one on earth to whom he could leave it.
No one? The thought flashed through his mind--what about Edith? She was
nearer and dearer to him than all the relatives in the world--she must
have this money; at least it would bring her comfort and the ability to
make her life what she had always wished it to be. He raised his hand,
and began to speak. "You must send Austin Williams here, doctor. He is a
lawyer in the Pioneer Building. You can call him up on the telephone."
He sank back, exhausted from the effort of speaking. Williams had done
work for him in the past. It would be a small thing, to make his will.
The doctor and the nurse would act as witnesses. He asked the former to
hurry--there was no time to be lost--he felt his strength ebbing away
even as he spoke.

The long silence that followed until the lawyer arrived was unbroken
save by the labored breathing of the man in the bed. What thoughts
passed through his pain-tortured brain--what agony of regret, of
remorse, of self-accusation, he did not show by word or look. He lay
with his eyes closed, the seal of death upon his forehead. At last
the lawyer arrived, and in a few moments was apprised of the sad
circumstances which had called him. He gripped West's hand with a silent
pressure of sympathy, and listened to the broken words that told him of
last wishes. His entire property was to be left to Edith Pope Rogers,
wife of Donald Evan Rogers, of New York City. That was all. The lawyer
called for pen and paper, and rapidly drew up the short, concise will.
West's attorney in New York, Ogden Brennan by name, of the firm of
Gruber, McMillan, Brennan & Shaw, was named as executor.

Within fifteen minutes the will had been drawn, signed and duly
witnessed, and William West had completed his last earthly task. He bade
Williams a steady farewell, and then turned toward the wall. "I'm so
tired!" he moaned, then became quiet. They thought he was sleeping, and
did not disturb him. He was, but it was the sleep from which there is no
awakening.




CHAPTER X


The bells in Old Trinity were chiming the hour of five and all New York
began to turn its face homeward. The human tide flowed from offices to
elevators, from elevators to corridors and thence in an ever growing
stream toward the subway and elevated stations. The sun, like a round
red Chinese lamp, was poised above the gathering mists of the Jersey
shore, ready for its plunge behind the distant hills. Office boys
and bank presidents, stenographers and captains of industry fought
democratically for seats in the overcrowded trains, while over all
sounded the shrill call of the newsboys as they disposed of the
afternoon papers. Down-town New York had completed another day--the
tides now moved on to Jersey, Harlem, Brooklyn, or the great center
of life that throbs unceasingly about Times Square.

Against this ever increasing torrent of humanity Mr. Ogden Brennan of
the firm of Gruber, McMillan, Brennan & Shaw, Attorneys-at-Law,
struggled irritably, as he forced his way from a down-town subway
train, and hurried to the firm's extensive suite of offices in Wall
Street, near Broadway.

He gave a quick glance about as he entered, and, making rapidly for
his private office, called sharply to young Garvan, one of his
assistants, to ask Mr. Shaw to join him at once. Mr. Brennan was
tall and gaunt-looking, and peremptory alike in his physical and mental
processes, and, when he entered his office, as he did on this occasion,
in a more than usually energetic fashion, everybody, down to William the
office boy, was galvanized into an unwonted activity.

Mr. Shaw, the junior member of the firm, with a dinner on at his club,
had already donned his overcoat and was giving some parting instructions
to his stenographer as young Garvan entered and delivered the message.
He took up his hat with a sigh--he was of a more placid and phlegmatic
temperament than his partner--and, picking up his afternoon paper,
folded it carefully, selected his walking stick from the stand near the
door, and proceeded in a leisurely manner to Mr. Brennan's private
office.

The firm of Gruber, McMillan, Brennan & Shaw was a large one, and its
principal practice lay in the handling of the affairs of corporations
and estates. Criminal practice knew it not, but it was said of Mr. Shaw
that he could draw a better contract, or handle a difficult merger, more
successfully than any other lawyer in New York, which was saying much.
Mr. Brennan dealt with estates and wills--the latter were his hobby. He
claimed that none drawn by himself had ever been broken.

As Mr. Shaw entered his partner's private office, with a bland look of
inquiry upon his well-bred countenance, he observed Mr. Brennan throw
down upon his desk, with an exclamation of annoyance, a thin legal
document, comprising but two pages, written, as he noted, in longhand,
instead of the usual typewritten characters. Mr. Brennan looked up with
a frown.

"Sam," he said hurriedly, "you know that young Billy West? He's dead."

Mr. Shaw put on his eyeglasses, and regarded Mr. Brennan curiously. "I
don't seem to remember him," he replied. "Who was he?"

"Son of old Josiah West, the patent attorney. He made a fortune in
mining operations in Colorado. His father used to be a client of mine,
twenty years ago. Don't you recollect the suits he brought against the
paper trust?"

"Before my time, I think," replied Mr. Shaw.

"Well, it's not important now. I've been wanting to see you about the
matter all day, but that case of the Webster estate has kept me on the
jump. Young West died in Denver last Friday. I've just received a copy
of his will from an attorney out there by the name of Williams." Mr.
Brennan referred to the papers impatiently, adjusting his glasses with
a jerk. "Austin Williams. He writes a long letter, telling me of
West's death in the City Hospital there, following an operation for
appendicitis. Very sudden affair. West was interested in a mine out
there, but had sold out his holdings and put the proceeds in bank. About
half a million, I believe. I'm executor of his estate." He looked at Mr.
Shaw with a frown.

"What of it, Ogden? Simple enough affair, I should think. No contesting
claims, I hope, or anything of that sort."

"None, so far as I can see. It's the terms of the will that I can't
quite understand, and they impress me unpleasantly."

"What are they?" Mr. Shaw regarded his partner wearily. He wondered why
Brennan troubled to explain to him all these apparently unimportant
details, just when he was in an especial hurry to get up-town and change
in time for dinner. "Is there anything in the matter that requires
action to-night?" he inquired. "I have a rather important engagement,
and--"

"Sam," interrupted his partner, "I won't keep you long. My object in
telling you of this matter is to find out if by any chance you know a
man in town named Donald Rogers. The name, somehow, sounded familiar to
me, and I thought possibly you might be able to tell me something about
him. You know everybody, almost."

"Rogers," repeated Mr. Shaw to himself, slowly; "Donald Rogers. Isn't he
a mechanical engineer? There was a chap by that name who had something
to do with the Sunbury Cement case. Expert witness, if I remember
rightly. Seemed a very decent sort of a fellow, and knew his business.
We won the case on his testimony. What's he got to do with it?" The
junior partner took a chair, and laid his cane, newspaper and gloves
carefully upon the desk. "Go ahead," he said quietly. "Let's have the
details."

Mr. Brennan took off his glasses and nervously put them on again. "This
will that West made, upon his deathbed--" he picked up the document from
the desk and regarded it distastefully--"leaves his entire estate to a
woman." He paused and glanced at his partner as though to note the
effect of his statement.

Mr. Shaw turned restlessly in his chair. He evidently saw nothing
strange in this. "Well, why not?" he asked. "I don't see anything about
that to cause anyone any alarm. It had to be either a woman or a man, I
suppose, if he left no children."

"The strange part about the affair, Sam, is this: Young West was not
married. He left this money to the wife of another man with whom he was
madly in love. So far as I can learn, she was equally in love with him.
They were planning an elopement, or something of the sort, when he was
stricken with this illness. He insisted upon leaving her everything."

"You don't say so! Who is she?" asked Mr. Shaw, for the first time
manifesting an interest in his partner's story.

Mr. Brennan took up the will, and, opening it, read aloud, "Edith Pope
Rogers, wife of Donald Evan Rogers, of New York City."

Mr. Shaw arose. He took up from the desk a telephone directory and
consulted it with interest. "Donald Evan Rogers," he presently read,
"mechanical engineer, Columbia Building." He put down the book and
glanced at his partner. "That's the man. I remember him well now. Bright
young fellow, and very hardworking. I took quite a fancy to him. Rather
a queer state of things, I must say." He whistled softly to himself.

"Decidedly so. I have no choice in the matter, of course, but I fancy
this document is likely to cause considerable trouble in the Rogers'
household."

Mr. Shaw wrinkled his brow in a frown. "You don't suppose for a moment
he'd let his wife take this money--unless, of course," he added
reflectively, "she intends to leave him."

Mr. Brennan threw the will upon the table with a snort. "That's the
whole trouble, Sam. The woman had been writing young West every day.
Williams has sent me all her letters to him, along with his other
papers. I've glanced through some of them. She had evidently made up
her mind to leave her husband at once, as soon as West got back from
Denver."

"I don't see that there is anything for you to do but to go ahead with
the matter as the law requires. You are not supposed to know anything
about West's relations with this man's wife. Possibly her husband
doesn't know, either. It is none of your affair."

"I know it, but doesn't it occur to you, Sam, that this is likely to
explode a bombshell in this young fellow's home?"

"Did West know Rogers well?" inquired Mr. Shaw.

"I don't know."

"Why don't you call on them this evening and find out? Possibly the
husband may see nothing queer in this money being left to his wife. West
may have been a friend of his. The woman will say nothing, you may be
sure of that."

"It's the only thing to do, I know, but I can't say that I look forward
to the interview with much pleasure. I thought at first of asking Mrs.
Rogers to come here, and telling her the whole story; but, if I do, she
will of course ask me to keep quiet about the matter, and that will put
me in the position of aiding and abetting her in deceiving her husband.
I want him to be present, when I see her."

"Then I would suggest that you go to their house to-night. You will most
probably find the husband at home." He took up the city directory and
searched its columns carefully. "Here you are," he exclaimed at length.
"Roxborough Apartments, One Hundred and Tenth Street. Drop in on them
this evening, why don't you?"

"I suppose I had better," observed Mr. Brennan slowly, "though I must
say it is a damnably disagreeable task. The case presents some extremely
unpleasant problems."

Mr. Shaw picked up his stick, his gloves, and his newspaper, and began
slowly to button up his coat. "Decidedly so," he observed. "I can't say
I like it. This woman has been on the point of eloping with another man,
who leaves her a large fortune. She might of course refuse to accept it,
or at least dispose of it in some way, but I fail to see how she can do
so, without arousing her husband's suspicions. If, on the other hand,
she can convince him that West left her the money from pure friendship,
and goodness of heart, she places herself in the position of accepting
the money of her lover to spend upon her husband--her children--if she
has any. Pretty rough on the husband, I must say. No self-respecting man
could permit such a thing. The worst of it is that we have got to be a
party to it. What sort of a woman can she be, I wonder?"

"That is just the thing we must determine. Understand, this woman knows
nothing of the will as yet. I confess I feel considerable curiosity as
to what her course of action will be when she learns of it. It's a
mighty difficult position for any woman to be in, there's no denying
that. She may, of course, refuse to accept it at all."

"She couldn't very well. It's hers by law."

"Of course, I understand that. But she could dispose of it in some way,
possibly."

"Not without its looking very queer to her husband." Mr. Shaw moved
toward the office door. "I guess I wouldn't worry about the matter,
Ogden, if I were you. Let them fight it out themselves. After all, it's
their funeral, not ours, you know. If there is anything I can do in the
matter, let me know. Good-night. I've got to hurry." He passed out, the
expression on his face indicating a sort of morose satisfaction. Perhaps
he was congratulating himself upon the fact that he was not married.

Mr. Brennan put the will into his pocket, called in his stenographer,
and spent half an hour in clearing his desk for the night. He tried to
dismiss the matter of the will from his mind as he rode up-town in the
subway, but it persisted with annoying regularity, and prevented his
usual enjoyment of his evening paper. He was a man whose gaunt and
forbidding exterior masked a nature innately kind, and he deeply
regretted the circumstances that forced him to play the part in the
affairs of the Rogers' family which now confronted him. The more he
thought of the matter, the more difficult it became to evolve any course
of action that would obviate the apparently inevitable crash. The law
required that he, as executor of West's estate, should turn over all the
property to Mrs. Rogers, and that duty he could in no way evade. His
conscience told him that to do so in such a way as to hoodwink or
deceive her husband would be wrong, and yet he hesitated to put the
matter in a light that would result in a complete disruption of the
Rogers' domestic affairs. It spoiled his enjoyment of his dinner, which,
being a bachelor, he ate at his club, and it clung to him like a cloak
of gloom all the way up to the Roxborough. It was close to half-past
eight when he entered the vestibule of the apartment house, and, after
inquiring whether Mrs. Rogers was in, sent up his card by the elevator
boy.




CHAPTER XI


Mrs. Pope did not often spend an evening at her son-in-law's. She lived
some distance down-town, at a boarding-house kept by an old acquaintance
of hers, on Fifty-ninth Street, and she had an aversion to the trip to
Harlem. She often told the girls that New York stopped at Fifty-ninth
Street and that she could never endure living beyond it.

Her object, on this particular occasion, was to induce Donald, if
possible, to change his mind with reference to the seashore cottage
which she was so anxious to take for the summer.

She came in puffing audibly, accompanied by Alice. Her usual
dissatisfied expression was in evidence. Mrs. Pope was chronically
dissatisfied with everything--her income, her life, her increasing
flesh, her daughter's marriage, and the weather.

"Edith," she announced, as she entered the room, "the elevator service
in this place gets worse every day. I've been waiting downstairs for a
car for over five minutes, and the boy had the impertinence to tell me
he had been out running errands for one of the tenants. You ought to
complain about it."

"I'm sorry, mother," said Edith, as she helped in the removal of Mrs.
Pope's coat.

"Why don't they have a hall boy?" demanded her mother, glaring at Edith
as though it were her daughter's particular fault that this service was
lacking.

"I suppose it's on account of the expense."

"Humph! That's one of the joys of living in such cheap apartments. When
I lived at the Bolingbroke Arms--"

"Please, mother, don't tell us about it again," exclaimed Alice
impatiently. The story of her mother's former grandeur was an oft told
tale in the family.

"Alice, you are impertinent." Her mother's tone was deeply aggrieved.
"Before your dear father died, we had everything heart could wish. It
is not strange that I find myself unable to get accustomed to Harlem
flats." She turned to Edith, who had taken up her sewing. "Edith,
where's your husband?"

"He went out to post some letters, mother. He'll be back presently."

Mrs. Pope glared about the room with an impatient snort. "Huh!" she
exclaimed. "I don't wish to make unkind remarks about Donald behind his
back, but, when I consented to your marriage, I certainly never expected
to see you come to this. I've just come from the Harrisons'. They have
taken an apartment in the St. George. You ought to see it, Edith.
Persian rugs all over the place, real-lace curtains, Circassian-walnut
furniture in the dining-room, cold-storage ice-box, vacuum cleaner free
every week. It's perfect, and only two thousand a year. I couldn't help
thinking that that was the kind of a home I hoped to see my daughter in,
instead of a fifty-dollar-a-month tenement." She sank heavily into a
chair, and emitted a windy sigh.

Alice threw down the magazine which she had been looking over and
laughed. "Well, mother, you may see it yet, you know. I'm still in the
running."

"Not unless you give up your ridiculous idea of marrying that young
Emerson Hall, and pick out a man with some money. He need not be a
millionaire, but he at least ought to be able to keep you in the style
to which you have always been accustomed."

Alice laughed. "Don't forget, mother," she said with a mischievous look,
"that he has been to our boarding-house. I guess he'll be able to match
that, at least."

"Alice, I see no necessity of your reminding me of our present poverty.
When your father, my poor, dear J. B., was alive, we lived just as well
as the Harrisons'."

"I know it, mother. That's one reason why father left debts, instead of
a bank account."

"Alice, how can you speak so of your poor father? He was the best
husband I ever knew. He never refused me anything." She took out her
handkerchief and applied it gently to her eyes. "I shall never get over
his untimely end--never."

"Don't mind me, mother. Poor old dad was the best father in the world."
Alice went over to her mother and patted her consolingly on the
shoulder.

"He certainly was," continued Mrs. Pope. "I never had to ask him for a
dollar. He anticipated my every wish. One of the last things he said
was, 'Mary, see that the girls marry well.' I often think of it, Edith,
when I look at you."

"Oh, well, mother," rejoined Edith, "I certainly wouldn't have wanted to
marry any man just for his money."

"It's just as easy to fall in love with a rich man, my dear, as with a
poor one. I always told you that. With your looks, you might have had
anyone you pleased."

"How about me, mother?" asked Alice mischievously.

"You certainly ought to do better than that young Hall, as I've told you
before. I doubt if he has five thousand a year."

"Four, mother, I understand."

"Then he is worse than impossible. Four thousand a year! Your father
never spent less than fifteen and we had hard enough work to make ends
meet as it was, but I always had my maid, and my carriage. I'm an old
woman now, and it doesn't make any difference if I have to do
without--though I can't say I've ever become used to it--but you are
young; you ought to have pleasure, luxury, the good things of life. Look
at Edith, poor child, stuck here in this awful place without a cent she
can call her own. It ought to be a lesson to you."

"Sort of horrible example, I suppose," remarked Mrs. Rogers, with a
trace of bitterness in her voice.

"Well, you're not happy, are you?" asked her mother, turning on her
suddenly. "Why should you be? Donald may be a very faithful husband--at
least I don't know anything to the contrary, but why he should expect a
girl like you to bow down and worship him, just for permitting you to
cook his meals, is more than I can see. If he only had a little more
spirit, he would get out and make money, the way other men do, instead
of being content to live on little better than a clerk's hire. I don't
like to hurt your feelings, my dear, any more than I can help, but you
know I've always thought him a pretty poor sort of a stick."

"I know you've never liked Donald, mother. Let's talk of something
else."

"What we really came for, Edith, was to talk over our plans for the
summer." Alice drew up her chair and looked significantly at her mother.

"Exactly," said Mrs. Pope. "I know that Donald hasn't given his consent,
but I intend to talk to him about the matter myself." Mrs. Pope looked
at her daughter as though she believed the matter as good as settled
already. "Alice and I are paying thirty-five dollars a week where we
are. If you and Bobbie could pay twenty-five that would make--let me
see--" she paused, absorbed in the effort of mental calculation--"two
hundred and sixty a month."

"Two hundred and forty, mother," corrected Alice.

"Oh, well--two hundred and forty, then. We could rent a bungalow,
furnished, for a hundred a month; that would leave a hundred and forty
for living expenses--we wouldn't need to keep a girl. Donald could come
down for week ends."

"I'm afraid I can't do it, mother. Donald says he can't afford it. I
told you what he said."

"Edith, for goodness' sake, have a little spirit. Your health demands a
change. Your child's health demands it. And, besides, if you don't come,
Alice and I shall be obliged to go to a hotel and live in a couple of
stuffy rooms. We couldn't afford to take a cottage, just for the two of
us."

"We can't spare the money, mother. I'm sorry, but I can't do anything
more."

"What on earth does Donald do with his money, Edith? He certainly
doesn't spend it on you."

"He is investing it in a glass factory, in West Virginia, I believe."

Mrs. Pope looked supremely disgusted. "Glass factory!" she snorted.
"Isn't that just like him. He thinks little enough of your happiness.
Poor Edith! My poor child! You certainly are to be pitied."

"He hopes to make a great deal out of it, some day."

"Fiddlesticks! He might just as well throw it in the street. My poor
dear J. B. always said that Government bonds were the only safe
investment. Glass factory, indeed!" She seemed unable to contain her
indignation.

The rattle of a key in the door warned her of Donald's approach. She
composed her face in a smile, and rose to greet him as he entered. "My
dear Donald," she exclaimed effusively, "I'm so glad to see you!"

"Good-evening, mother. You don't mind?" Donald replied pleasantly,
holding up the cigar he was smoking.

"Oh, not in the least." Mrs. Pope resumed her chair with a
self-satisfied air. "My poor dear J. B. always smoked the very best
Havanas. I love the odor of a good Havana cigar."

Donald went over to the desk and seated himself in his accustomed chair.
"I'm afraid you won't like this one, then," he said, with a short laugh.
"Pure Connecticut, five straight. I can't afford the imported kind."

Mrs. Pope took no notice of his remarks on the subject of cigars. She
looked from Alice to Edith, as though to gather courage, preened herself
with a conscious effort, then plunged into the fray. "Donald," she
began, "we were just speaking of our plans for the summer. I know you
will be interested on Edith's account, and Bobbie's. The poor child
doesn't look very well. Edith tells me he has a racking cough. Now let
me tell you what we propose to do. Edith thinks it a perfectly splendid
plan."

"Mother, you know what I told you," began Mrs. Rogers warningly.

"Never mind, child. I wish to place the matter before Donald in a
businesslike way. I am an old woman, but I am willing to sacrifice
myself for my children's sake."

"I couldn't think of letting you do anything of the sort on Edith's
account," remarked Donald dryly.

"Edith is my child, Donald. I must think of her welfare. I propose to
rent a cottage at the seashore--a little bungalow--"

"I know all about it, mother," interrupted Donald, with a look of
weariness. "Edith has told me. We can't do it this summer."

"But, Donald, surely you realize what it would mean for her, and for
your child?"

"Quite as well as you do. I'm sorry, but I can't do it. We have to make
sacrifices now, for the sake of the future." He turned to his desk, and
began to look over some papers which he drew from his pocket.

"But surely you realize--you can't mean--" stammered Mrs. Pope feebly,
her face reddening angrily.

"I shouldn't say anything more about it, mother, if I were you,"
remarked Edith.

Mrs. Pope sank back into her chair, with an air of deep resignation.
"Very well," she said, as though allowing the whole matter to pass from
her hands into those of Divine Providence. "I've tried to do my duty.
If anything happens to Bobbie, remember that, Donald." It was quite
clear that whatever might happen she would regard as solely her
son-in-law's fault.

"I shall," remarked Donald, going on with his reading.

There was an ominous silence, broken only by the ticking of the clock
upon the mantel. It was interrupted by the sudden ringing of the
door-bell. Donald rose and went over to the door. The others heard him
talking with someone outside. Presently he turned, with a card in his
hand. "The boy says there is a gentleman downstairs to see you, Edith,"
he said to his wife.

Edith rose in surprise. "To see me?" she asked. "Who is it?"

Her husband looked at the card. "Mr. Ogden Brennan, the card says. Do
you know him?"

"No, I never heard the name before." She came over to Donald and, taking
the card, looked at it curiously. "Perhaps we had better ask him to come
up."

"Send him up," said Donald to the boy at the door, as he closed it.

"I wonder who he can be?" Edith asked in mystified tone.

"Possibly a bill-collector," said Mrs. Pope sarcastically.

"Hardly, at this time of the night." Donald looked at his watch. "It's
almost eight-thirty." He took a match from the desk, and carefully
relighted his half-smoked cigar.

Mrs. Pope rose. "Alice, I think we had better be going," she remarked,
with a frown.

"Nonsense, mother. Sit down. You've only just come. There is some beer
on the ice." She paused, and Mrs. Pope relapsed into her chair with
sudden promptness. "Very well, Edith, if you insist," she said
resignedly.

"Let's make a welsh rabbit," suggested Alice, looking up from her
magazine. As she spoke the door-bell rang. Her sister hurried over to
the door and threw it open.

Mr. Brennan came in with a slight show of hesitation, looking about him
curiously. The household of the persons who were to have the spending of
West's fortune had a peculiar interest for him. What sort of persons
were they? he had asked himself half a hundred times since he left his
office. "This is Mrs. Rogers' apartment?" he inquired, as he came in.

"Yes," answered Edith, returning his glance of scrutiny with interest.

"I wish to see Mrs. Rogers."

"I am Mrs. Rogers."

"I am here on a matter of business, Mrs. Rogers." He glanced about the
room, embracing the others in his comprehensive survey. "Of course, if
you have guests, I could perhaps come at some other time."

"I hardly think it will be necessary," remarked Edith nervously. She had
not the least idea what this dignified-looking old gentleman could want
with her, but it was clearly evident that he was neither a book-agent
nor a bill-collector. She was conscious of a growing presentiment of
evil and, in her perplexity, she turned to her husband. "Mr. Brennan,"
she said, "this is my husband."

The two men bowed. "I am glad to meet you, Mr. Brennan," said Donald,
coming toward him. "You have business with my wife, I understand."

"Yes, Mr. Rogers. Business of great importance." Mr. Brennan's tone was
significant--ominous.

Donald took the lawyer's coat and hat. "My mother and sister, Mr.
Brennan," he observed. "Won't you take a seat?"

Brennan bowed, but declined the chair. "I shall keep you but a moment.
My business is with your wife, Mr. Rogers, but I came at this hour, in
the hope of finding you at home as well. The matter concerns you both. I
am an attorney, of the firm of Gruber, McMillan, Brennan & Shaw, of
Number 11 Wall Street."

"Yes?" replied Donald, looking in surprise at Edith. She with Alice, and
the mother, who had risen from her chair, stood regarding the visitor
with interest.

"I regret to say," continued Mr. Brennan, in an even tone, "that I have
come upon a very sad errand."

The fears which had been torturing Edith all the evening suddenly took a
more concrete form. "What!" she cried, clutching at her breast--"I--I
don't understand."

"You were acquainted with Mr. William West, were you not, Mrs. Rogers?"
He turned to her with a look of interrogation.

Edith stared at him in wide-eyed terror, her fingers convulsively
clutching the lace at her throat. "Were!" she cried. "Were!" then
relapsed into silence. Donald seemed surprised at her agitation; to him
it meant nothing. He turned to Mr. Brennan. "Certainly. Billy West. He's
one of my best friends."

"It is with the deepest regret that I am obliged to inform you of his
death." Mr. Brennan's voice was not so even as it had been, and held a
note of sorrow. He had been genuinely fond of West, and the latter's
death was a great shock to him.

Edith shrank back with a cry, her hand over her eyes, as though trying
to ward off this sudden blow. Her sister put her arm about her. "Edith!"
she whispered, and spoke to her in a low voice. The others were too much
surprised by the lawyer's announcement to give much attention to her
agitation.

Donald was the first to speak. "Dead! Billy West dead! Impossible!" He
gazed at Mr. Brennan with a stare of incredulity.

"Unfortunately not, Mr. Rogers. I only wish it were. Mr. West died
suddenly last Friday in Denver, Colorado, following an operation for
appendicitis."

In his sudden realization of his friend's death, Donald turned away, the
tears very near the surface. "Poor old chap!" he muttered. "Poor old
Billy!" He looked over at his wife. "Edith, isn't it terrible? Think of
it, Billy West dead."

"Why do you come to tell us? How do you know?" asked Edith, staring at
Mr. Brennan in a frightened way.

"I have been Mr. West's attorney for a number of years. I received word
of his death this morning."

"Poor young man! I always liked him so much!" Mrs. Pope assumed an
expression of deep solicitude. "He was very well off, was he not, Mr.
Brennan?"

"Very," answered Brennan shortly, then turned to Donald. "You knew Mr.
West very well, I take it?"

"Intimately. We had been bosom friends for years. He was in my class at
college. I loved him like a brother. He had a heart of gold, Mr.
Brennan. Of all the men I know, he was the squarest and best friend.
You cannot realize what his death means to us. Edith, isn't it sad?"

Edith began to cry. "I--I can't realize it," she sobbed; "it seems so
terrible."

Brennan drew a thin, folded document from his pocket, and regarded it
critically through his eyeglasses. "He must have thought a great deal of
you--and Mrs. Rogers," he observed, glancing at Donald.

"I am quite sure he did, Mr. Brennan, but why--?"

Brennan interrupted him with a wave of his hand. "I will explain," he
said. "Before Mr. West died, he made a will. It was drawn up by an
attorney in Denver who, acting on Mr. West's instructions, at once
communicated with me. I am the executor of the estate."

"But, Mr. Brennan, how does the matter concern us?" Donald was becoming
a trifle impatient under the continued strain of Mr. Brennan's
significant manner.

"The best way to answer that, Mr. Rogers," said Brennan, adjusting his
eyeglasses, and unfolding the document he held in his hand, "is to read
the will."

With a sudden start, Edith dashed the tears from her eyes and turned
toward the lawyer. She was conscious of a horrible fear--a feeling of
dread lest this document, to which Mr. Brennan evidently attached such
sinister importance, might contain something, she knew not what, which
would apprise Donald of her relations with the dead man, and, like a
voice from the grave blast her whole life. "Why is it necessary to read
it?" she asked, her voice trembling with emotion.

Brennan turned and observed her gravely through his glasses. "Because,
Mrs. Rogers," he replied, "this document concerns you most intimately.
It isn't very long." Again he took up the will and prepared to read.

"I--I don't want to hear it," sobbed Edith.

"Edith, what is wrong with you? Why should Mr. Brennan not read the will
if it contains matters which concern us?" Donald turned to the lawyer.
"You must pardon my wife, Mr. Brennan. This sad news has completely
upset her. Go ahead." He went over to Edith and, taking her arm, led her
to a chair. "You had better sit down, Edith, and let Mr. Brennan finish
what he has to say. There is no occasion for all this excitement."

"But, Donald--listen--I--"

"Never mind now. We are detaining Mr. Brennan." His voice was impatient,
and he looked at her curiously. "Go ahead, sir," he said, "and let us
have the matter over with, whatever it is, as quickly as possible."

Brennan, clearing his throat with a nervous cough, took up the will and
began to read.

"'I, William West, being of sound mind, do hereby make this my last will
and testament.

"'I give, devise and bequeath all my property, whether real or personal,
and wherever situated, to Edith Pope Rogers, wife of Donald Evan Rogers,
of New York City.'"

He paused, and glanced about to note the effect of his words. Edith had
slowly risen from her chair, and her face was a picture of horrified
amazement. Donald, almost equally surprised, looked from the lawyer to
her, apparently unable to speak. Alice and Mrs. Pope were dumfounded.
The whole party stood in silence regarding Mr. Brennan as though they
could scarcely grasp what they had heard.

Suddenly the tenseness of the moment was broken. Edith had come slowly
toward Brennan, her hand outstretched, her face white with horror.
"No!--my God! No!" she cried, then tottered and would have fallen had
her mother not stepped quickly forward and supported her. "I can't take
it--I can't take it!" she cried, in spite of her mother's attempts to
quiet her.

"The remainder of the will," continued Brennan coldly, as he folded up
the document and placed it in his pocket, "refers only to my appointment
as executor." He removed his glasses and looked at Donald.

"You mean that he has left everything to my wife?" gasped the latter,
faintly.

"Everything."

"No! No!" cried Edith.

"Be quiet, my child," Mrs. Pope said soothingly, then turned to the
lawyer. "How much did he leave, Mr. Brennan?" she asked.

"I cannot say exactly, madam. It will be impossible to tell until the
estate is settled up. Probably not less than half a million."

[Illustration: EDITH HAD SLOWLY RISEN FROM HER CHAIR, AND HER FACE WAS A
PICTURE OF HORRIFIED AMAZEMENT]

"Half a million!" Mrs. Pope collapsed limply into a chair. "Edith!
Half a million! Think of it!" She sat gazing before her with a
half-incredulous smile, as though the thought of so much money were
difficult of digestion.

"Mr. Brennan, I can't understand it--I can't believe it." Donald's voice
was trembling with excitement. "Why should he have left Mrs. Rogers all
this money? Had he no relatives--no connections--who would have a better
right to it?"

"None, I understand. In any event, the will would stand. Mr. West has
shown his affection for your wife by leaving her his entire fortune. No
court could break that will."

"What a man!" exclaimed Donald. "I knew he was very fond of us; we had
been friends for years, but I never thought of anything like this." He
went up to his wife and took her hand. "Edith," he said earnestly, "do
you realize what it means? Poor old Billy has made you a rich woman."

"I cannot take this money," cried Edith, her face dull with despair. "I
cannot--I cannot." She tore herself away from her husband and faced
Brennan with the look of an animal at bay.

"Edith, my dear, are you losing your senses?" inquired Mrs. Pope.

"I cannot take it," repeated Mrs. Rogers, mechanically.

"Why not?" asked Donald. His question came like a blow.

She did not dare to tell him that--she clenched her hands until the
blood came, looking at him in sudden confusion.

"Of course, it is a very large amount," he went on, "but if he wished
it--"

"You are right, Donald." Mrs. Pope favored him with a smile which seemed
almost genial, compared with those she usually bestowed upon him.
"Edith, my dear, it is your duty to respect the wishes of the dead.
Don't you think so, Mr. Brennan?"

"The will allows me no latitude, madam. Whatever your daughter's
feelings in the matter may be, it is my duty as executor to turn over to
her Mr. West's estate in its entirety. What disposition she may see fit
to make of it afterward is, of course, no affair of mine." He turned and
picked up his hat and coat from the chair where Donald had placed them.
"It will be desirable, Mrs. Rogers, for you to come to my office at
your early convenience for a business consultation. There are some
papers I shall want you to sign. If possible, I should be glad to have
you come to-morrow--say at twelve o'clock."

"I--I tell you I don't want this money," faltered Edith. "I--I have no
right to it--"

"Mr. Brennan has just explained to you, Edith, that the money is yours
by law. He is obliged to turn it over to you. I can understand, of
course, that it is a great surprise to you, but surely, if it was _his_
wish, there is no reason for you to feel so strongly about it." She fell
to sobbing softly and, clutching at his arm, put her head upon it.
"Donald--oh, Donald!" she moaned.

"I think, Mr. Brennan," said Donald, turning to the lawyer, "that you
can depend upon Mrs. Rogers coming in to see you at twelve to-morrow.
Good-night."

"Good-night," said the lawyer, as he bowed and left the room.

"Think of what this money will mean, Edith," exclaimed her mother, her
face aglow with anticipation, "to you--to Bobbie--to all of us." She
looked at Alice with a joyful smile. "I guess we can have that cottage
after all."

"Don't! Don't!" cried Edith. "My God, you don't realize what you are
saying."

She swayed suddenly forward, overcome by the terrible strain of the past
half-hour, and fell heavily to the floor.




CHAPTER XII


At twelve o'clock the following day, Edith Rogers entered the offices of
Messrs. Gruber, McMillan, Brennan & Shaw, at Number 11 Wall Street, and
asked to see Mr. Brennan. She was at once ushered into the latter's
private office, and found him awaiting her.

This visit to Mr. Brennan's office was to Edith an ordeal that she
greatly dreaded, and one that it had required all of her courage to
face. All the night before she had lain awake, thinking about it, and
even with the coming of the day her fears had not to any great extent
left her.

For one thing, however, she felt thankful. Donald had, at the last
moment, decided not to accompany her. At first he had insisted upon
doing so, partly because of her unfamiliarity with business affairs,
more because of her nervous and unstrung condition, the result of the
terrible shock which the news of West's death had given her. She had
done her best to conceal her sufferings, or at least so to modify them
that Donald might have no suspicion of their real cause, and in this she
had been more successful than she had supposed possible. After the first
shock which Mr. Brennan's words had given her, she was conscious of a
reaction, resulting in a sort of numbness, in which her mind was filled
less with thoughts of the man she had supposed she loved than with a
ghastly fear lest the fact of this love might become known to her
husband.

Had she been able to analyze, during all the eternities of that horrible
night, the cause of this fear, she might have realized that her love for
West had been no love at all, but only a sudden infatuation, born of her
overweening vanity and love for the good things of life on the one hand,
and her utter failure to appreciate her husband's rugged honesty of
purpose on the other. The very fact that her horror at the thought that
Donald might learn of her affair with West overshadowed all else in her
mind, might have told her that she still valued her husband's love and
that of her child, far above that of the man who had so suddenly been
taken away from her.

Donald, who sat beside her most of the night, was too generous, too
unsuspicious a nature, to attribute her tears to anything but a very
natural grief at the loss of a dear friend. He felt the matter keenly
himself, but, man-like, strove to hide his own sufferings in order that
he might the more readily comfort her.

Mrs. Pope and Alice had remained until midnight. They would have stayed
longer, but Edith would not permit it. "I'm all right, mother," she
said, choking back her tears. "Go home and get your rest. I'll see you
to-morrow."

So the mother departed, accompanied by Alice. Her whole attitude toward
Edith seemed to have undergone a sudden transformation. The latter was
now rich--the possessor of half a million dollars, and hence no longer
to be criticised or blamed for having married a poor man. Even toward
Donald her manner had changed. She addressed him as "my dearest boy,"
and threw out vague hints concerning Edith's and Bobbie's health and the
sea air which they so greatly needed. Donald paid little attention to
her. He recognized her shallow-souled adoration of money and secretly
despised it.

It was after they had gone, and Edith had lain sobbing upon the bed for
a long time, that Donald brought up the subject of her visit to Mr.
Brennan's office. "Perhaps I had better call him up in the morning and
postpone it," he said. "Any other day will do. There is no hurry, and
I'm afraid, dear, that you are hardly in a condition to discuss business
matters."

"Oh--no--no. I'd better go and get it over with." She dried her eyes and
sat up, looking at him, half-frightened. "I'll be all right in the
morning. I'd better go."

"Very well, if you think best. Of course I shall go with you, and,
really, the whole affair need not take long."

The thought that Donald was to be with her was terrifying. For a time
she was afraid to speak. She did not know what Mr. Brennan might have
learned about herself and West--what information might have come to him
along with the dead man's papers and effects. Suppose Donald were to
find out. She glanced at his careworn face, upon which the lines of
suffering were set deep, and her heart smote her. He must never find
out. After a time she spoke.

"I think, Donald, that perhaps I had better go alone."

"Why?" He seemed surprised.

"Oh--I can hardly say. Mr. Brennan might prefer it so. Don't you think
it would look just a little--bad--for both of us to go--as though we
were so anxious for poor--Billy's--money?" Her tears broke out afresh.

He regarded the idea as a foolish whim, born of her hysterical
condition, but good-naturedly humored her. "I'm not at all anxious to
go," he said. "Poor Billy--I don't want his money. I only suggested
going with you because I thought you would rather not go alone. We can
decide in the morning, however. You'd better lie down now, and try to
get some sleep."

Edith began slowly to undress. As she did so, the letter from West,
which she had been carrying about in her bosom all day, fell to the
floor. Donald picked it up with a queer little smile and returned it to
her. "Poor old Billy!" he murmured. "How strange, to think that we shall
never see his handwriting again!"

The incident increased Edith's fears; the letter was filled with
expressions of love, and Donald, unsuspecting, trusting her always, had
not even asked to see it. She went into the kitchen on the plea of
making a cup of tea, and burned the letter at the gas range, fearful
every moment that he would come in and see what she was doing. There
were many other similar letters, locked in a drawer of her bureau. She
determined to destroy these as well, in the morning.

Later on, Donald slept, supposing that she was doing likewise, but she
only made pretense, designed to hide her feelings. She sobbed softly to
herself throughout the long hours till daybreak, but morning found her
dry-eyed, ready to face whatever disaster the day might bring.

Mr. Brennan was standing behind his broad mahogany table-desk, his
eyeglasses in one hand, the other grasping a package. Edith, in
her agitation, did not observe the latter. She sank into a big
leather-covered chair and looked at the lawyer expectantly.

He pushed some papers across the desk to her and requested her to sign
them. She did so, without reading them, or knowing what they were. These
formalities completed, he drew the package, which appeared to contain
a large number of letters, toward him and began to tap it in gently
emphatic fashion with his eyeglasses.

"There is a certain matter, Mrs. Rogers, about which I must speak to
you," he began, after a long contemplation of the letters.

"Yes?" she answered, with a rising inflection. Something in his manner
warned her that what he was about to say would concern her very deeply.

"When Mr. West died, his papers and other effects were forwarded to
me, as executor of the estate. Among them I find these letters." He
indicated the package on the desk before him.

"Yes!" she repeated, her heart sinking. A cold perspiration broke out
all over her. She wiped her lips with the ineffective bit of lace which
she held crushed in her hand.

Brennan reached over, took up the bundle of letters, and handed it to
her. He knew from the handwriting, from the initials with which they
were signed, from all the attendant circumstances, that she had written
them. "As executor of the estate, Mrs. Rogers," he said slowly, "I feel
that the best use I can make of these letters is to turn them over to
you."

For a moment she hardly grasped his meaning. His grave manner of
speaking had made her believe that some terrible fate overhung her--some
mysterious requirement of the law which she did not realize, or
understand. Now, since it appeared that the only disposition of the
letters that Brennan intended to make was to hand them over to her, she
could scarcely believe that she had understood him aright. "You--you
mean that I am to--to take them?" she said haltingly.

"Yes. Take them, and, madam, if you will permit me to advise you, I
strongly recommend that you lose no time in destroying them."

The color flew to her cheeks at his tone, implying as it did the guilty
nature of the correspondence. It terrified her to think that this man
had it in his power to destroy her utterly, merely by saying a few words
to her husband. Yet he could not have any such intention, else why
should he advise her to destroy the evidence of her folly, her guilt?
She took the letters with trembling fingers and thrust them into her
handbag. "I will destroy them at once," she said faintly, but very
eagerly, hardly daring to look at him.

The further conversation between them was short. Mr. Brennan informed
her that he would be happy to advance her any money she might need,
pending the legal formalities attendant upon the administration of the
estate. She thanked him with downcast eyes, but assured him that she
would not require any. The thought of touching any of West's money
horrified her. Her one concern had been to keep the knowledge of their
mutual love from Donald--this, she felt, was now accomplished. To the
money she did not at this time give so much as a single thought. On her
way up-town she made a sincere effort to analyze her feelings. Why had
West's death not affected her more deeply? Why had the most important
feature of the whole affair been her desire to keep the truth from
Donald? The answer came, clear and vivid. It was Bobbie. She feared the
destruction of her home on his account. It was love for him that had
caused her to repent of her promise to West to go away with him, even
before the latter had much more than started on his way to Denver.

The thought pursued her all the way home. When she arrived, Bobbie had
finished his luncheon and was just going out with Nellie. She went up to
the boy and clasped him in her arms. "Dear little man!" she said as she
kissed him, then noticed, in her sudden thought of him, how pale and
thin he looked. "Run along now, dear. The more fresh air you get, the
better."

After the child had gone, and she was alone, she took the letters
Mr. Brennan had given her, drew from her bureau drawer those she had
received from West, and, without looking at any of them, proceeded to
make a bonfire of them all in a tin basin in the kitchen. It seemed
hard to destroy his letters. They had meant so much to her when she
had received them. For a moment she was tempted to read them all through
for the last time, but the fear that, should she do so, she might
weaken in her intention to destroy them stopped her. Donald must never
know--Donald must never know. These letters were the only proof in the
whole world of her wrong-doing. She applied a match to the mass of paper
with trembling fingers, and, with tears in her eyes, watched the flames
mount and crackle, the sheets blacken and fall to soft gray dust.

In a short time the little funeral pyre--it seemed to her the funeral
pyre of the past--with all her hopes and fears, her guilt and her love,
had crumbled to a tiny pile of ashes. She threw them out of the window
and watched them blow hither and thither in the eddying currents of
wind. When she had closed the window, it seemed to her that she had also
closed the door upon the past. Before her the future lay bright and
smiling. She did not admit for a moment to herself that its brightness
might be a reflection from Billy West's gold. The very thought would
have made her shudder. Nevertheless, the knowledge that one has half a
million dollars in the bank is apt to lend a brightness to the future,
no matter how clouded the immediate present may be.




CHAPTER XIII


It took Edith Rogers many weeks to make up her mind to spend any of
William West's money, and then she did it on account of Bobbie. Her
mother had used every effort to convince her that she was acting like a
fool in not launching out at once upon a career of wild extravagance,
but the thought of her love for West, the folly she had contemplated,
the latter's sudden and tragic death, all filled her with horror. The
money lay idly in the bank, and she could not bring herself to touch it.

With the coming of the hot weather, however, she began to listen to her
mother's arguments with a more willing ear. Bobbie was clearly not well.
His cough, product of a March cold, still hung on in spite of all her
efforts. His appetite was failing, his cheeks pale and wan. She felt the
desirability of getting him away from the oven-like city at once, and
one evening broached the subject to Donald.

"Don't you think, dear," she said, "that I ought to take Bobbie to the
seashore?"

Donald looked up quickly. "I do, indeed," he said. "I've thought so for
some time."

"Then why haven't you said anything about it?"

"I was waiting for you, dear. I know how you have felt about using this
money that West left you, and I hesitated to suggest it on that
account."

"Do you think I ought to use it?"

"I can see no reason why you should not. His wish was that you should
have it. He wanted you to enjoy it, otherwise he would not have left it
to you. I regretted the poor old chap's death quite as keenly as you
did, but for all that I cannot see why you should feel so strongly about
this money."

Edith knew very well that he could not see why she felt as she did, nor
had she any intention of allowing him to do so. "Very well," she replied
quietly. "I think I'll look for a cottage somewhere along the Sound
to-morrow. That would be much nicer than staying at a hotel, and you
could come down every week end. In fact, Donald, I don't see why you
couldn't just as well give up business altogether, and spend the summer
with us. In the fall we might go abroad."

He frowned at this. "I couldn't think of it, dear," he replied. "I've
got my practise to keep up and the business in West Virginia to look
after. I shouldn't care to live on you, you know." He smiled, and,
coming over to her, patted her head affectionately. "It's very good of
you, Edith, to want me with you, and I should enjoy it more than I can
tell you, but I couldn't give up my work, my independence. You wouldn't
respect me if I did."

She did not attempt to argue the question with him. Perhaps in her heart
she felt that he was right. "Mother is coming up to-morrow morning," she
said. "I think I'll try New London. I was there one summer for a month
when father was alive, and I have never forgotten how lovely it was.
Mother knows all about it. We'll run up there to-morrow and see what we
can find."

Led by Mrs. Pope, the expedition in search of a cottage by the sea was
an unqualified success. Edith had had in mind a small bungalow--a tiny
house with a view of the water, but Mrs. Pope was burdened with no such
plebeian ideas. To her money-loving mind a cottage such as befitted her
daughter's newly acquired wealth consisted of a picturesque mansion of
some eighteen or twenty rooms, with a private bathing beach, extensive
grounds, garage, stables, and a retinue of servants.

She had some little difficulty in finding what she wanted. Edith
remonstrated with her continually but she was not to be balked. She told
the real-estate agent to whom they had gone on their arrival that her
daughter was prepared to pay as high as five hundred dollars a month,
for the proper accommodations, furnished, and she refused quite
definitely to consider anything that did not front on the water.

There were but three places answering her description that were
available. The first Edith thought perfect, but her mother dismissed it
at once. "Quite too small, my dear," she remarked, with up-turned nose.
"And I never could endure a house with no conservatory."

The second place had a conservatory, it seemed, but Mrs. Pope found the
plumbing antiquated, the number of bathrooms insufficient, and the
furnishings not at all to her taste.

"We shall entertain a great deal," she informed the overpowered
real-estate man, who was mentally trying to adapt Mrs. Pope's
extravagant ideas to her anything but extravagant clothes. Edith
wondered whom they were going to entertain, but forebore asking her
mother at this time.

The third place withstood even Mrs. Pope's attempts at criticism, and
Edith fell in love with it at once. It was not quite so large as they
had wanted, her mother remarked, but it might do. Edith was very sure
that it would do. The house, a long, low, shingled affair, with many
timbered gables, was partly overgrown with ivy. Climbing roses, in full
bloom, embowered the wide verandas. The gardens were filled with
handsome shrubbery and well-kept flower beds. There was a stable, a
greenhouse, and a little boathouse and wharf. The lawns were immaculate,
the furnishings within artistic and costly. The agent explained that Mr.
Sheridan, the banker, who owned the house, had left unexpectedly for
Europe the week before, and the place had just been placed on the
market. Mr. Sheridan had intended to occupy it himself until the last
moment, but his wife had been taken ill, and was obliged to go to one of
the Continental baths to be cured. The price was two thousand dollars
for the season, and would have been a great deal more had the place been
put on the market a month earlier. Two parties had looked at it
already, and it was not likely to remain unoccupied very long.

"We'll take it," said Mrs. Pope promptly. "We'll move in on Monday." She
began to plan aloud the disposition of the various bedrooms.

Mr. Hull, the agent, on the way to town, suggested the necessity of
executing a lease and making a deposit to bind the bargain. "My daughter
will give you a check for the first month's rent in advance," said Mrs.
Pope loftily. "You have your check-book with you, my dear, I hope?"

Edith had. Her mother had insisted upon her taking it when they left the
house. The first check she made against the income which William West's
half-million of capital was piling up to her credit at the bank was one
for five hundred dollars to the order of Thomas Hull, agent. She signed
it with trembling fingers.

Once the plunge was taken, however, the rest seemed easy. On the journey
home Mrs. Pope mapped out a campaign of shopping that made her
daughter's head whirl, but she had ceased to object. One thing she
insisted upon, in addition to her mother's never-ending list of
clothes, and that was a pony and cart for Bobbie. It had been the
constant desire of his childish heart, ever since he had ridden in one
the summer before at Brighton. Mrs. Pope approved the cart. She also
suggested an automobile.

When Edith told Donald of the result of their trip that night his face
became grave, but he said little. "It is your money, dear," he contented
himself with observing, "but if I were you I would not allow my mother
to influence me too much. She has foolishly extravagant ideas. There is
no use in burdening yourself with a mansion and a house full of servants
just because you can afford it. The air isn't any sweeter, the sun any
brighter, because of them. I should have preferred a more modest
establishment myself, but I suppose it's too late to change matters now.
I hope you have a wonderful summer, and that Bobbie and yourself get as
well and strong as I should like to see you. I can't be with you except
on Saturdays and Sundays, but no doubt your mother and Alice will keep
you company."

"Yes. They will be with me, of course. Mother says she is looking
forward to the happiest summer of her life. She hopes, too, she says, to
entertain a great deal."

"Entertain? Whom?"

"Why, all her old friends. And I'm going to have some of mine down, too,
and Alice has already invited Mr. Hall to spend a week or two with us.
He is coming east for his vacation."

Donald raised his eyebrows. "I don't mind the opinions of other people
as a rule," he remarked, "but how do you propose to explain our sudden
wealth?"

Edith had not thought of that aspect of the matter. "I shall tell them
the truth," she answered, but the suggestion bothered her for many days
thereafter. She by no means intended to tell her friends the truth. Such
of them as had already heard the news had congratulated her upon her
good fortune, with a secret wonder that West had left the money to her
instead of to Donald, but Mrs. Pope, with characteristic bluntness, had
set this right. "Poor, dear Mr. West had always been in love with my
Edith," she said. "He'd have married her, if it had not been for Donald.
He hadn't anyone else to leave his money to, and, of course, he left it
to Edith. He was a noble young man. We owe him a great deal."

Edith shuddered as she listened, but could say nothing. Once she
ventured the remark that Mr. West had been Donald's lifelong friend, but
her mother would have none of it. "Pooh!" she said. "It was you he cared
for, my dear. Anyone with half an eye could see that. Didn't he spend
all his time with you, right up to the time he died?" After that Edith
ceased to remonstrate. She felt that in this direction she was treading
on dangerous ground.

Once launched upon a career of spending, Edith soon came to acquire the
habit, as any other habit may be acquired, if dutifully persisted in. A
few weeks before she would have stood aghast at the mere thought of
paying fifty dollars for a hat. Now she bought costly hand-made lingerie
dresses with the calm assurance of one whose bank-account is increasing
at the rate of a thousand dollars a week, and signed checks in an
off-hand manner that seemed as natural to her as though she had never
haggled over a bargain counter, or searched the columns of the daily
papers for opportunities at marked-down sales.

She failed to satisfy her mother, however. That estimable lady seemed to
think that Edith's wealth was measured only by the number of checks in
her check-book, and criticised her daughter loudly for her petty
economies. "Don't buy those cheap shoes, Edith," she would remark. "It's
quite impossible to get anything fit to wear for less than ten dollars a
pair." Or, "Ready-made corsets, my dear, are an abomination. I insist
that you go at once and be measured for half a dozen pair that will
really fit." Edith drew the line at such extravagances, and very nearly
precipitated a row. "Let me alone, mother," she said. "I know what I
want, and, after all, it is my money we are spending, not yours." My
money! The irony of the thing did not occur to her. She bought Donald a
new gold watch-chain, with match-box, cigar-cutter, knife, pencil and
seals, all of gold, attached. When she presented it to him, she felt
disappointed at his lack of enthusiasm, and wondered why he did not wear
it. The reason was simple--as simple and homely as Donald himself. He
detested jewelry, and contented himself with the leather fob initialed
in gold which Edith had given him, years before, upon a birthday. He had
loved this, because she had saved and denied herself to get it for him.
The other, somehow, meant nothing to him.




CHAPTER XIV


Emerson Hall was a young civil engineer, who had pushed his way to the
front in his chosen profession because he had both energy and ability.
He had been graduated from Columbia some year or two later than Donald,
and had at once left New York for Chicago, where he had entered the
employ of a large contracting company. Sheer hard work had forced him to
the front, and he was now one of the concern's most trusted men.

Alice Rogers he had met, some time before, at a commencement hop, and he
had straightway fallen in love with her. Being in New York but seldom,
he had seen very little of her, but the impression she had made upon him
persisted, and their courtship, carried on largely by means of an
extensive correspondence, had progressed so favorably that Mrs. Pope
felt obliged to place him under the ban of her displeasure. Alice,
however, paid little attention to her mother's objections. She had a
very clear idea of what she wanted in the world, and what she wanted
she determined to get. Emerson Hall was one of the things she wanted,
and she bent all her energies to the task of making that young man
conclude that life without her to share it would be but a barren waste.

Pursuant to her intentions, Alice had written to Mr. Hall, inviting him
to spend his vacation with them at New London. She had asked Edith's
permission, and the latter had granted it gladly. The latter had never
met Mr. Hall, but she felt as though she almost knew him, both because
he had been an acquaintance of Donald's and because Alice talked about
him so much. Then, too, she felt that she owed him some recompense for
his services at the time of West's death. He had gone to the hospital,
in answer to Alice's wire, only to find that West had died some three
days before. This information he had wired to Alice the following day.

The two girls looked forward to his coming with delight. The extensive
entertaining which Mrs. Pope had planned had failed to materialize. She
found that, after dropping from her visiting-list the friends of her
poverty, there remained but few among the elect whose acquaintance she
might claim, and these, it seemed, were mostly away for the summer.

Hence the two girls were somewhat lonely in the big and stately house,
and Edith found that the time between Monday morning, when Donald
departed for the city, and Saturday afternoon, when he returned, hung
heavily upon her hands.

She had no housekeeping details to occupy her--Mrs. Pope had insisted
upon a competent housekeeper; her duties were confined to signing
checks, her pleasures, to enjoying Bobbie's delight in his surroundings.
His pony cart, the boat she had got for him, all his new experiences,
made the child feel that he had suddenly entered heaven itself. His
cough, his pale cheeks, his fretful nights were a thing of the past. He
lived the life of a little savage and health flowed in upon him
accordingly.

Mrs. Pope did not share her daughter's loneliness. The atmosphere in
which she now lived and moved charmed her. With Alice and Edith at her
side, a houseful of expensive and competent servants to gratify her
slightest wish, with Donald on hand only over the week ends, she felt
that her cup of blessedness was once more filled to the brim.

It was late Saturday afternoon. The Sound lay sparkling in the hot
August sunshine. Mrs. Pope came into the handsomely appointed hall of
their new home, and sank heavily into a padded-leather chair. After all,
she felt, this was indeed life in its fullest sense. She fanned herself
languidly with a lace fan, regarding her elaborate gown, meanwhile, with
much satisfaction. She glanced up as Edith entered the room, looking
very lovely in a costume of white lace.

"Has Alice come back from the station yet, mother?" inquired Edith.

"Not yet, my dear. I'm waiting for her now. I suppose I am expected to
welcome this young Hall--though I can't say I want to. I wish Alice had
not invited him. If she would take my advice, she would send him about
his business. Four thousand a year! Pooh! a beggar!"

"Well, mother, now that we have asked him, we must make him welcome. How
do you like my dress?" She came around in front of her mother's chair.

Mrs. Pope observed it critically through her gold lorgnon. "Oh, it will
do, my dear," she replied. "I should have preferred the Irish point."

"But, mother, it was five hundred dollars."

"What of it? Why shouldn't you look as well as possible? Of course,
Donald would never care, but there are others. I heard several people at
the hotel say last night that you were the best-looking and the
best-dressed woman there."

"I don't care what they said, mother," replied Edith, selecting a rose
from a jar on the table, and putting it in her bosom. "I'd rather please
Donald."

Mrs. Pope sniffed audibly. "Oh, very well, my dear," she observed. "Have
your own way. It's some satisfaction, at least, to know that you can buy
a dress when you feel like it, without having to account to your husband
for it. My poor, dear J. B. always gave me a most liberal allowance. I
never could dress on less than three thousand a year."

"Well, mother, you know you did manage to get along on much less, the
last few years."

Mrs. Pope assumed a deeply hurt expression. "Edith," she exclaimed
irritably, "it is most unkind of you to remind me of my temporary
poverty. Before my poor, dear J. B. died--"

"Frightfully hot this evening, isn't it?" Edith interrupted.

The mother glared at her daughter in annoyance. "Where's Donald?" she
suddenly asked.

"In his room, mother."

"Didn't he get here on the five-o'clock train?"

"Yes."

"Then why doesn't he come downstairs? I hope he bought the afternoon
papers."

"They're in the library. Donald says the trip down was terribly hot and
stuffy. He's changing his things."

Mrs. Pope snorted. "If he would spend the summer down here with you, as
a husband ought, instead of staying in town, fooling with that
engineering work of his, he wouldn't have that hot trip to make every
Saturday."

"Nonsense, mother!" replied Edith. "Donald is perfectly right. I
wouldn't want him to become an idler, living on his wife. He has too
much spirit for that."

"Then if he must stay in town, why doesn't he get a decent place to
live? I don't think it looks well for him to be staying at that cheap
little flat, now that you have plenty of money to take your proper
place in society."

"He likes the old place. He says he was happy there. He thought he might
as well stay on till the lease expired."

"Well, there's no accounting for tastes. If you are satisfied, I see no
reason why I should object." Mrs. Pope began to fan herself vigorously.
"I can get along very well without him."

Mrs. Rogers went to the door and looked down the long, shady drive.

"Alice seems to be gone a long time. I hope the machine hasn't broken
down."

"The train is probably late. They generally are on this road. What room
are you going to give Mr. Hall?"

"I thought I'd give him the one over the library," said Edith, as she
resumed her chair. "It has a lovely view of the Sound. I know he'll be
glad enough to see it again after being West over six months."

Mrs. Pope snorted indignantly. "I wish he had stayed there," she
grumbled. "I cannot imagine what Alice sees in him to rave about."

"Donald tells me he's a very bright fellow. He knew him in college. She
might do a great deal worse."

"Not much. Why can't she pick out a man of means, like poor Mr. West
was? Think of what we owe that poor young man!"

"Don't, mother!" Edith cried. "Please!"

She rose and went to the fireplace, her face convulsed with emotion.

"Why is it, Edith, that you always seem annoyed whenever I speak of Mr.
West? You don't show proper feeling. Think of all you owe him. I don't
see how you can let a day pass without thanking him from the bottom of
your heart for all the happiness he has given you."

"I appreciate it very much, mother." Edith's voice trembled--there was a
trace of a sob in it.

"You certainly do not act like it," pursued her mother relentlessly.
"Every time I mention his name you change the subject."

Edith turned, her face flushing. "Can't you see," she cried, "how it
hurts me? I don't want to be reminded of his death every minute of the
day. God knows, I wish he were alive again!"

"There's no use in wishing that, my dear," remarked her mother. "God, in
His wisdom, orders all things for the best." She glanced about the
richly furnished room with a satisfied smile.

Edith was about to reply, when the afternoon stillness was broken by the
sound of wheels upon the gravel road, accompanied by the honk of an
automobile horn. She hurried to the door, and, as she did so, Alice
appeared, accompanied by a heavily built young fellow in blue serge,
carrying a suit-case. Mrs. Pope rose.

"Well, mother, we're here at last," cried Alice. "The train was fifteen
minutes late." She turned to the man behind her. "Mother, you know Mr.
Hall."

"My dear Mr. Hall, I'm so glad to see you!" said Mrs. Pope effusively,
as she offered the newcomer her hand.

Mr. Hall shook hands. He was a genial, whole-souled sort of a fellow,
and, as he turned to acknowledge his introduction to Edith, she felt an
instinctive liking for him. He was telling Mrs. Pope how glad he felt to
be East again, after six nights in a sleeping-car.

"Yes," he rattled on, in his breezy way, "I've come all the way from
'Frisco. We're building some docks there. Ever been in 'Frisco, Mrs.
Rogers?"

"No," replied Edith, "though I've always wanted to go."

"Great place. Nothing like it this side of the Rockies. Wide-open town,
I can tell you."

"Do you like that kind of a town, Mr. Hall?" asked Mrs. Pope grimly.

"Do I? Well, rather. Chinatown's got anything I ever saw wiped right off
the map. Great!"

"Indeed?" The amount of reproof that Mrs. Pope could put into that
single word exceeds belief. "I should hardly suppose any respectable
person would want to visit such places."

"I'm afraid I'm not respectable, Mrs. Pope. I'm only honest," laughed
Hall, as he turned to Edith. "I looked for your husband on the train,
Mrs. Rogers. Hoped I might be lucky enough to run across him."

"He came earlier. He's dressing now. I'm expecting him down at any
moment."

"Dressing!" ejaculated Mr. Hall, with a wry face. "Whew! I'm afraid I'll
disgrace the party. I didn't bring my evening togs. Somehow, I'd got
the idea from your sister that you were roughing it down here. She wrote
me you had taken a cottage--" He looked about the stately hall with a
broad smile. "Some cottage!" he observed.

"Don't bother about not dressing, Mr. Hall. Mr. Rogers generally wears
flannels, hot nights like this. Shall I show you to your room?"

"Let me do so, Edith," said Mrs. Pope, puffing forward importantly.
"And, really, I'm going up, anyway."

She swept up the staircase, with their guest meekly following in her
rear.

"Dinner at seven," called Alice, after them.

"Well, Edith, how do you like him?" she asked, when they were alone.

"He's awfully breezy, isn't he? I imagine he's very sincere and
straightforward."

"Emerson's as straight as they make them. No foolishness about him.
We're engaged--almost, that is. Don't let on to mother."

"Engaged! Not really! When did he ask you?"

"Coming up from the station."

"He certainly didn't lose any time," observed Edith, laughing. "Did you
accept him?"

"Of course not. Now he'll have to do it all over again. To-night,
perhaps, down on the rocks. I shouldn't think of accepting a man in an
automobile. It isn't romantic enough."

"Didn't he feel discouraged?"

"Not a bit. You couldn't discourage Emerson with a pile-driver.
Anyway--I guess he understood." She smiled quietly to herself.

"I thought," Edith said, somewhat nervously, "that he seemed rather
surprised at the way we are living here. I suppose he wonders where all
the money is coming from."

"I suppose so. He did seem a bit overcome, when he saw the auto. Asked
me if Donald had struck a gold mine."

"A gold mine! Alice! He doesn't know anything about the--will, does he?"
Mrs. Rogers seemed troubled, her face had lost its animation, her eyes
took on a hunted look.

"I don't think so," replied her sister, "but why shouldn't he?"

"I'd rather he didn't. It might look--well, sort of queer--and then,
Donald might not want him to think--"

"To think what?" interrupted Alice sharply.

"Oh, nothing! I suppose he'll have to know, some time. Only it seems,
somehow, to make Donald look sort of cheap--don't you see?"

"No, I don't," said Alice bluntly. "There is nothing to be ashamed
of--at least, nothing that anybody knows anything about. You seem to be
getting awfully considerate of Donald lately."

"Perhaps I'm only just beginning to find out what a splendid fellow he
is."

"Well, if you are, I'm glad of it, but I shouldn't get up any more
excitement about this money if I were you. It will look suspicious."

"Did Mr. Hall ever write you anything more about--about Mr. West after
that telegram we sent him?"

"No, never. You remember the answer he sent the next day, telling us
poor Billy was dead. He's never mentioned the matter since. You know he
left Denver shortly after that."

"Yes, I remember. I wonder if he could know anything."

Alice looked disgusted. "Don't be absurd, Edith," she said. "How could
he? How could anybody? For heaven's sake, don't get yourself all worked
up about nothing. I'm the only person in the world, outside of yourself,
that knows anything about your affair with Billy West, and I certainly
am not going to say anything. I wouldn't have Emerson know for the
world. He might change his mind about me."

"Alice!" exclaimed her sister. "That's an awful thing to say."

"Well, it's true, isn't it? I don't mind his knowing that Billy left you
the money. I think he ought to know that. But when it comes to his
knowing why he left it--I draw the line. Of course, he couldn't blame
me, but if he thought that my sister was living on the money left her by
her--well, I don't want to hurt your feelings, Edith, but he might not
care so much about becoming one of the family."

Edith shrank away from her sister, her face quivering. "You say that to
me--you, who advised me to take it!"

"Don't try to blame it on me, Edith. I advised you to keep your mouth
shut, and not make things any worse than they were. I advise you to do
the same thing now."

"So that you can go on enjoying the fruits of my wrong-doing." Mrs.
Rogers looked at her sister scornfully--defiantly.

"For heaven's sake, don't get so melodramatic. The thing's past. Why not
forget it?"

"Can you forget it? You are ashamed to let the man you love know about
it, for fear he might not want to marry you--not want to marry you, on
account of me."

"You take the thing too seriously, Edith. You never told me much about
your affair with Billy West, and I never asked you. Every family has a
skeleton in its closet. Most of them are lucky if they haven't several,
but they don't make a practice of parading them before the public. What
on earth do you want to talk about this thing for? It can't do any good
now."

"Because I'm sick of living this lie. I've a great mind to tell Donald
everything."

"You are getting just plain, ordinary dippy, Edith. You ought to take
something for it. Do you know what he would do?"

"He couldn't do anything that would make matters worse than they are."

"He couldn't? You think he couldn't? Well, I'll tell you what he would
do. He'd make you give up every cent of this money so quick it would
make your hair stand on end."

"Alice! What do you mean?" Mrs. Rogers was horror-struck. This phase of
the matter had evidently not occurred to her.

"I should think it was plain enough. He couldn't do anything else. If
you didn't do as he wished, he would leave you. He might do it, anyway.
He isn't the sort of a man who would stand for any foolishness, kind as
he is. You know that. You'd lose either your husband or your money. Then
where would you be?"

"Donald would never do a thing like that."

"Of course he would. Any man would, who had a grain of self-respect.
Then you'd have the pleasure of giving up all this"--she waved her hand
about the room--"and going back to that wretched hole in Harlem, and
doing your own cooking, while Bobbie plays on the sand pile on the
corner lot, and pretends he has a pony cart with a soap box. You would
enjoy that, wouldn't you? Oh, of course you would!"

"Don't! Don't!" cried Edith, with a shudder. "I could never stand
it--never!"

"Furthermore," pursued her sister, "Emerson would be bound to know. He's
seen this place, and wouldn't understand what it all meant, if you gave
it up. He probably would have no further use for me. I'm sorry for you,
Edith, but you have got us all into this situation, and you haven't any
right to upset it--at least, not now. Wait until Emerson and I are
married, at any rate."

Edith was on the verge of tears. "I ought to have told him long ago,"
she wailed. "In the very beginning. Now it's too late. If he knew the
truth, he might never forgive me."

"I wouldn't take any chances, if I were you," observed Alice dryly.

"And Donald has been so fine, so strong, so splendid," sobbed her
sister. "I never realized before all that he has been to me. I can't
tell you how I admire him."

"Very likely. It's a great deal easier for a woman to realize her
husband's good points when she has thirty thousand dollars a year than
when she hasn't thirty cents."

"Yes, I suppose it is," said Mrs. Rogers, drying her eyes. "I guess I'll
have to make the best of it."

"That's sensible, Edith. Nothing else to do. Now I think I'll go up and
dress. What's on for this evening?"

"We might go to the hotel for an hour or so. There's a dance. After that
you and Mr. Hall can take a walk along the beach. That will give him
another chance," she added, with a meaning smile. "Mother isn't at all
favorable."

"I know it. She thinks Emerson hasn't money enough. She's right, too;
he hasn't. But I guess he will have, some day. I'm willing to take
a chance, anyway. You know, Edith, I'm very fond of mother, but I
don't intend to let her interfere between Emerson and myself. As a
mother-in-law I can see her weak points. I've never said so before,
but I believe she is responsible for nine-tenths of the trouble
between Donald and yourself."

"What trouble?"

"Oh, your discontent and everything. You would never have thought
of running away with Billy West if she hadn't sympathized with you
all the time. When I get married I'm going to live as far away as
possible--somewhere where I shall see mother about once in six
months. I don't propose to have her making any trouble in my domestic
arrangements." She started toward the staircase. "I've barely time
to dress. Hello, Donald!" she said, as she met her brother-in-law
descending the stairs. "How's everything?"




CHAPTER XV


Donald Rogers looked worried, although he tried not to show it. He
glanced about the hall eagerly.

"Where's Bobbie?" he inquired.

"Having his supper, dear. He was out driving when you came. They drove
over to the lighthouse to try his new pony. You can't imagine how
delighted he is with it. I'm trying to keep him out of doors as much as
possible. He looks like another child already. The sea air is just what
he needs."

"Great, isn't it?" Donald said. "I don't wonder he feels better. You are
looking very charming yourself to-night, Edith. You're gaining weight."

"I've gained eight pounds since we've been here. I shouldn't have
believed it possible, but I weighed myself the day we came just to see.
I wish you would take a few weeks off, and have a good rest--you don't
look yourself. What's the matter? Business?"

"Yes. Things aren't going very well."

She came up to him, and put her hand affectionately upon his arm.

"After all, Don," she said, looking at him fondly, "it doesn't make so
much difference--now."

"Just as much as ever, dear," he said, taking her hand. "You know how
I feel about this money. I'm glad, for your sake, and Bobbie's, but it
isn't mine, and I can't forget it."

"Everything I have is yours, dear--everything! You know that."

"Thank you, Edith. I appreciate it even if I can't take advantage of it.
I want to succeed on my own account--I can't stop work just because my
wife happens to be a rich woman. You wouldn't respect me if I did that.
I'll win out, all right. You believe that, don't you?" He looked at her
eagerly.

"Of course I do," she replied, patting his hand. "I know you will. I
only wish you would let me make it easier for you. It spoils all my
happiness, not to be able to do so."

"I don't see what you could do, Edith, more than you are doing."

"How _is_ business, Donald?"

He began to walk gloomily up and down. "The work at the office is all
right," he said presently. "It's that confounded glass plant that
worries me. We haven't enough working capital, and can't seem to borrow
any. The worst of it is, there's a payment due on the property September
first, five thousand dollars. You know the condition of the
money-market, I suppose. The papers are full of it."

"You mean about the stock-market?" asked Edith timidly.

Donald threw himself into a chair. "Yes," he replied, "that and the
Western Securities decision, and the failure of the Columbian Trust
Company. Things look pretty bad. The banks are afraid to lend a dollar
without gilt-edged security. Just my luck! Any other year things would
have been different. You remember I was afraid of this, in the spring.
I spoke to Billy West about it."

"Why shouldn't I lend you the money?" said Edith, coming over and
standing by his chair.

"I couldn't let you do that, dear," he replied, looking up at her.

"But why? You know I have over twenty thousand dollars lying idle in
the bank--interest, not principal. You must let me lend it to you. How
much do you want?" She went over to a desk in the corner and drew a
check-book from one of the drawers. "Please, Donald. It will be such a
pleasure to me." She looked at him in eager expectancy.

"I can't accept it, Edith. I want to stand on my own feet. Now that you
have all this money, I'm doubly anxious to do it. I don't want to be
just Mrs. Rogers' husband."

"You could never be that, dear. I want you to do all you say--can't you
see that's one reason I'm so anxious to help you? We will make it a
business transaction--you can give me a mortgage, or whatever you call
it, just as if you were borrowing from some hard-fisted old miser. I
have a perfect right to invest my money in a glass factory, if I please.
You wouldn't owe me anything." She paused, smiling.

"You are a great financier, Edith," laughed her husband. "You have
discovered the art of borrowing money without owing it."

"Don't laugh at me, Donald," she protested. "I'm in earnest. I want you
to take it--just to oblige me. You will--won't you, dear?"

"Would you think just as much of me?" he asked, evidently revolving the
matter carefully in his mind.

"How can you ask me such a question? It would be a mighty poor sort of
a world, if we couldn't help one another over a hard place, once in a
while."

Donald rose from his seat, and went over toward his wife. "I didn't
intend to speak of this, Edith," he said, "but now that I have--perhaps
poor Billy would be glad, if he knew. I'll take it--but as a loan only,
mind you, and with proper security."

At this reference to West, Edith shivered slightly and turned away to
hide her feelings. "How much do you need?" she asked in a strained
voice. "Fifteen thousand?"

"Oh, no. Ten will be ample. But it isn't necessary to bother about it
now. Wait until I go back to town."

"No, Don. You might change your mind. You'd best take it now." She
hurriedly began to write out a check. "You can send the mortgage, or
note, or whatever it is, down to me--that is, if you really want to do
it that way."

"I certainly shouldn't think of doing it any other," said Donald.

Edith rose, and, going up to her husband, put the check in his hand.
"Here, Donald," she said. "I hope this will fix everything all right.
If it does, it will make me very happy."

"Thank you, Edith," he remarked simply, putting the check in his pocket.
"I shall never forget this,--never. You have been very good to me. I
only hope I shall not have to keep it long."

"Don't thank me, Donald. Just consider it a little loan from a dear
friend." He put his arm about her, and drew her to him. "God bless you,
dear, you and poor old Billy. How I wish he were here to enjoy it all."
He kissed her lovingly, then started in surprise. "Why, Edith, you are
crying," he exclaimed. "What's the matter, dear? There's nothing wrong,
is there?" He smoothed back the hair from her forehead tenderly.

"Nothing," she cried, as she escaped from his embrace, and, going over
to the desk, put the check-book back into the drawer, which she locked.

As she did so, they both turned at the sound of someone descending the
stairs. It was Hall.

"Hello, Hall! Glad to see you." Donald went up to their guest with
outstretched hand.

"Rogers!" exclaimed the latter, shaking Donald's hand vigorously. "You
look just the same as you did back in ninety-five. How are you?"

"Pretty well. How are things in the West?"

"Oh, about as usual--too much politics, and not enough rain."

Donald laughed.

"Sit down, Mr. Hall," said Edith. "I must go and see to dinner. I'll be
back presently." She started toward the door.

"I hope you are not making any extra preparation on my account," Hall
exclaimed.

"Oh--no--nothing unusual," Edith laughed. "We are going to treat you as
one of the family."

"That will make a hit with me, Mrs. Rogers," said Hall, joining in her
laugh.

"I thought it would," she cried, as she left the room.

"How would a high-ball strike you, eh?" asked Donald.

"Right where I live."

Donald led the way to the veranda. "Suppose we sit out here. It's a bit
cooler, I think. There's some whiskey on the table."

"All the comforts of home, I see. Nice place you've got here, Rogers."
He seated himself comfortably in a wicker lounging chair.

"Yes, very." Donald's voice had a peculiar note--he felt the irony of
the situation. "Shall I pour you out a drink?" he asked, going to the
table.

"Thanks, old man. Here's to you!" Hall raised his glass. "Nothing like
the seashore, after all, in the summer for health and happiness. How's
your little boy?"

"Great. Growing like a weed." Donald took a chair opposite his guest and
drew a cigar-case from his pocket. "Have a cigar?"

"No, thanks; not before dinner. I'll light a cigarette, though, if you
don't mind." He took out a box of cigarettes and offered it to his host.
"Have one?"

"Thanks." Donald put his cigar-case back into his pocket, and took a
cigarette. "I understand," he said, "that you are with the Pioneer
Construction Company of Chicago."

"Yes. I've been with them for several years. Made me chief engineer last
year."

"Good work! Ought to be a splendid job. Keeps you moving about a good
deal, though, doesn't it?"

"Yes. More than I like. I've pretty well covered the West, this past
year. Meet a lot of Columbia men, off and on. I like 'Frisco. Wonderful
place. Dennett, ninety-six, is in business there. You knew him, didn't
you?"

"Slightly. He was in the class below me."

"And Walker, ninety-five. Remember him?"

"Tall fellow? Wears glasses? Yes, I remember him. Very bright man. How
long did you stay in 'Frisco?"

"Two months. Finished up a job in Denver before that."

"Denver? That's where poor Billy West died. He was a ninety-five man.
You knew him, didn't you?"

"Slightly. Great friend of yours, wasn't he?"

"Yes, I thought everything of him. His death was a terrible shock."

"So sudden, too. He was ill only a few days. Appendicitis, they told
me."

"Yes. He died right after the operation."

"I was in Denver at the time; but I didn't think to look him up. Didn't
even know he was sick until I got your telegram."

"My telegram?" Donald looked at his guest in sudden surprise.

"Well, perhaps not yours, exactly. Miss Pope wired me that he was sick,
and asked me to find out how he was. I supposed it was on your account."

"Miss Pope?"

"Yes. Your sister-in-law."

Donald's surprise and confusion were painfully evident. "I--I--don't
understand why she should have wired. I didn't even know he was sick,
myself."

"_She_ must have known it," replied Hall, a trifle uneasily. "I went to
the hospital at once. They told me he had been dead several days."

"Strange," muttered Donald. "I can't see why she should have wired."

"Perhaps Mrs. Rogers asked her to do so. She didn't know me, herself,
you know."

"You went to the hospital, you say?"

"Yes. He had been buried by that time, poor chap. I had a talk with the
nurse who attended him."

"Did he suffer much?"

"No, not physically, that is. They told me he worried terribly over his
illness. Died raving about some woman."

"Some woman? That's strange."

"Why so? Most men do, don't they?"

"West didn't. He never cared much about women."

"He must have, from what I heard."

"Why so?" Donald shifted uneasily in his chair.

"It's a queer story. I suppose the nurse ought not to have told me, but
she must have thought I was a very dear friend of his. It seems he was
terribly in love with some married woman here in New York--wrote to her
every day, almost--up to the last. I understand she did to him, too."

"A married woman?" cried Donald, in astonishment. "I don't believe it. I
knew Billy West intimately. He had scarcely any woman friends. It's
hardly likely he could have been carrying on such an affair without my
knowing it. I saw him every day, almost."

Hall took out his cigarette-case and lighted a fresh cigarette. "I don't
know," he replied. "That's what the nurse said. She used to read him
her letters. They had arranged that she was to leave her husband, and
she and West were going to run away together--to Europe. He'd gone out
to Denver to close up his affairs, and turn all his property into money.
They had everything arranged to go as soon as he returned to New York.
That's what made it so hard for him to die."

Donald gazed at the face of the man opposite him with horrified
intentness. "Who was she?" he asked suddenly.

"I haven't the least idea. I didn't ask the nurse, and she probably
didn't know. It was the strange outcome of the affair that interested me
particularly. I wonder if you heard it."

Donald looked puzzled. "I don't know what you mean," he said slowly.

"Well, it was like this: West, I understand, was worth a lot of money."
Hall leaned forward in his chair, and addressed his host impressively.
"The day before he died," he said slowly, "he called in a lawyer, and
made a will, leaving every cent he had in the world to the woman he was
in love with."

Donald Rogers allowed his half-smoked cigarette to drop unheeded to the
floor. He started forward in his chair, his face flushed, his whole
appearance that of a man who had suffered a sudden and terrible shock.
"It's a lie!" he gasped hoarsely, then sank back in horror.

A look of amazement spread over Hall's face. "Pardon me, old man," he
said slowly. "I didn't suppose you'd feel so strongly about the matter,
or I should never have mentioned it. I only know what the nurse told
me."

Donald recovered himself with an effort. He tried to stem the tumult
that surged through his brain. "Excuse me, Hall," he said weakly.
"It--it was a great shock." Then he began nervously to light another
cigarette.

Hall looked at him in astonishment. "Yes," he said vaguely. "It
surprised me a good deal, too. I guess it's true, though. The nurse
would have had no reason to lie about it. I've often wondered what sort
of a man this woman's husband must have been, to let her take the
money--if he did. Pretty cheap skate, to stand for a thing like
that--don't you think?"

"If he did," repeated Donald mechanically, and, fumbling in his pocket,
drew forth the check which his wife had given him a short time before.

"Thought you might have heard about it," continued Hall, as he finished
his drink.

"No." Donald's voice was strained--he was vaguely groping in his mind
for some solid ground in the chaos that surrounded him. "I should have
known, but I did not," he continued; then began slowly to tear the check
into bits.

"Women are the devil, aren't they?" said Hall, as he rose and began to
walk about the spacious veranda. "Perhaps her husband never even knew."

Donald rose, and, going to the railing, dropped the pieces of the check
in a shower upon the rose bushes beneath. "He never knew," he repeated
mechanically.

As he spoke, Edith appeared in the doorway. "Dinner is almost ready,"
she announced gaily. "Haven't the others come down yet?"




CHAPTER XVI


Donald Rogers had given eight years of his life to working for the
welfare of his wife and his little boy. He was a man of one idea, and to
that he bent his every effort. It may be that, in his devotion to the
future, he had neglected the present, but the thought that Edith, the
woman whom he had trusted and believed in all these years, could be
unfaithful to him had never crossed his mind. The very idea seemed
monstrous--as he looked up and saw her sweet, familiar smile, he felt
that he must be the victim of some weird and horrible mistake.

Edith, her face flushed and happy, beamed upon them from the open
doorway. Hall was the first to speak.

"Not yet, Mrs. Rogers," he said, then looked curiously at Donald, as he
noted the latter's silence.

"I suppose you two have been having a nice, long talk about your college
days?" said Edith, glancing from Hall to her husband.

"Yes, in a way. As a matter of fact, Mrs. Rogers, we were talking about
poor old Billy West." He turned to Donald as he spoke, and failed to
observe the look of horror that crossed Edith's face.

"Billy West?" she cried, with a gasp, as she started back, her eyes big
with fear.

"Yes. You remember I went to see him in Denver that time--after your
sister wired me--but I was too late."

Donald interrupted him. His voice sounded harsh and unreal. "Tell Mrs.
Rogers what you have just told me," he said.

Hall looked from one to the other in surprise. He had evidently been
treading on strange ground--he was unable to see his way clearly.
"Why--I--well, to tell you the truth, Mrs. Rogers, I was gossiping a
bit--something I don't often do. I heard a curious story about West
while I was out in Denver, and I was just telling your husband about
it."

"Go on!" cried Donald hoarsely.

"It wasn't anything," said Hall nervously. "Perhaps I shouldn't have
mentioned it at all. They told me at the hospital that he had left his
entire fortune to some married woman in New York with whom he was madly
in love."

Edith groped blindly forward. Her whole world had come clattering down
in ruin about her head. She grasped the back of a chair with both hands,
and tried to recover her self-control. "Yes," she gasped. "I--I know."

Hall saw her agitation, but did not in any way understand its cause.
"Pardon me, Mrs. Rogers; I'm sorry," he faltered, then turned to Donald.
"I say, old man," he said, "won't you please take me out and kick me
gently around the block? I feel that I am making all kinds of an ass of
myself--gossiping here like an old woman."

Donald stepped suddenly forward. "Mr. West's death was a great shock to
us both, Mr. Hall. Mrs. Rogers has never got over it. You can
understand, of course."

He came to her rescue almost unconsciously, protecting her from the
breakdown which now seemed inevitable. She stood clutching the back of
the chair, her face twitching with emotion, afraid to look at her
husband, afraid to look at Hall, her eyes upon the distant blue of the
Sound. The blow had fallen--she knew that tragedy stood at her side,
ready to strike her down. The tenseness of the situation was momentarily
relieved by the appearance of Mrs. Pope and Alice.

"Are we late, dear?" asked her mother, puffing heavily out on the
veranda.

Edith did not answer; she scarcely seemed to hear. Alice went up to Hall
with a smile.

"I dressed in fifteen minutes," she announced gaily. "What have you been
doing with yourself?"

"Making an ass of myself, as usual," he muttered; then looked toward
Mrs. Rogers.

"What do you mean?" Alice inquired as she followed his glance. "What's
the matter, Sis?" she asked, going up to Edith, and putting a hand on
her arm.

The other tried to smile. "Nothing, dear; nothing," she said, her voice
sounding far off. "Mr. Hall said something he thought made me feel bad,
but it wasn't anything--not anything at all."

"What do you mean, Mr. Man, by saying mean things to my little sister?"
demanded Alice playfully, shaking her finger at Hall.

His reply was interrupted by Mrs. Pope. "How long before dinner, Edith?"
she inquired. "It's almost seven now."

"It will be a little late, mother. Perhaps ten minutes yet," Edith
managed to say. She glanced timidly at her husband, but his stern,
impassive face contained no message that she could read.

"Then I needn't have hurried, after all," exclaimed Alice, in an
aggrieved tone. "How would you like to take a look at the grounds before
dinner, Emerson?"

"There's hardly time, my dear." Mrs. Pope's manner was severely
disapproving.

"Oh, yes, there is." She took Hall by the arm, and moved toward the
steps. "Come along, Emerson."

"I will accompany you, Alice," said her mother, hastily joining them.
She evidently intended to keep Alice and the despised possessor of only
four thousand a year under her watchful eye.

"Won't you and Donald come too?" asked Alice sarcastically as she left
the porch.

Donald regarded her without interest. He scarcely heard what she said.
"No, we will wait here," he replied; then looked searchingly at his
wife.

"Call us when dinner is ready," Alice flung back at them over her
shoulder, as she and Mr. Hall disappeared around the corner of the
veranda, Mrs. Pope puffing along in their wake, like a fussy little
tugboat under full steam.

Edith was the first to break the silence. "Donald!" she faltered, her
voice breaking pitifully; then took a step toward him.

"Is this story true?" he demanded.

"Wait, Donald--wait!" she cried. "Don't judge me harshly."

"Is this story true?" he repeated, his face drawn with anger.

She continued to approach him, her arms held out in piteous appeal.
"Donald--what do you want me to say?"

Donald's expression turned to one of bitter anguish. The denial he had
half-hoped for, in spite of Hall's story, was not forthcoming. In every
word, in every gesture, his wife showed her guilt.

"My God, I can't believe it!" he groaned. "Why did you do this thing?"

"Don't ask me any more--don't! Can't you see it's all past and gone?"

"No! It has only just begun. Were you in love with him? Don't lie to
me!"

"Donald--I--I--really wasn't. I--" Her voice choked with sobs; she was
unable to meet his searching gaze.

"I don't believe you."

She came near to him, her look, her manner, her every movement an appeal
for forgiveness. "Donald!" she cried. "I--I--only thought I was. It
wasn't true. I never loved anyone but you--don't you see that I am
telling you the truth?"

"You've got to tell me the truth." His voice was stern--implacable. "Did
West ask you to leave me, and go away with him?"

"Donald--dear--don't!" she cried wildly. "Let me explain!"

"Answer me!" he demanded angrily.

"Yes." The word was scarcely audible through her sobs.

Donald passed his hand unsteadily across his eyes and turned away. It
seemed unbelievable. West--his bosom friend--the man he would have
trusted with his life. "The scoundrel! And I trusted him so!" he
groaned, then looked again at his wife. "Did you agree to go?" he
demanded.

"I did not know what I was doing--I was mad. Oh, Donald--forgive
me--forgive me!" She put her hand on his arm, the tears streaming down
her face.

"Did you agree to go?" His voice was even harder and more peremptory.

"Yes," she whispered, "I did."

The bitterness of it all almost overcame him. He loved her very deeply.
"How could you?" he moaned. "How could you?"

She saw his momentary weakness, and, woman-like, took quick advantage of
it. "Donald," she cried, through her tears, "Donald! Forgive me! I
agreed in a moment of madness. I have tried so hard, all these months,
to be worthy of you--of your love. Can't you believe me?"

"You would have gone," he said bitterly. "You would have gone!"

"Donald! I--"

"Don't deny it. I know it is true. What did he go to Denver for?"

"To sell his property--to--"

"To sell it out, so that he would be free to go away with you," he
interrupted hotly. "He died raving over your daily letters, and left you
every cent he had in the world. Does that look as though you had changed
your mind?" He turned from her with an expression of disgust. "What a
fool you have made of me!" he cried.

"Donald! Listen to me. You must!"

"No! I'll do the talking now. Did you know he had made his will in your
favor?"

"No!"

"Why did you wire to find out how he was?"

"Because he was sick, and I was worried about him. I hadn't heard a word
from him for three days. I knew nothing about the money until that awful
night when the lawyer came."

"And you took it! In spite of all--you took it. You accepted this man's
money!"

"Donald--I couldn't help it--I was afraid."

"Afraid of what?"

"Afraid to refuse it, for fear you would not understand--for fear you
would suspect--and think terrible things about me."

"For fear I might find out the truth," he flung at her angrily. "For
fear you would not be able to hoodwink me, as you had in the past. For
fear I might know how disloyal and unfaithful and untrue you had been to
me."

His words, and the way he spoke them, roused in her a sudden anger.
"Yes, if you wish to put it that way," she cried defiantly. "For fear
you would no longer love me, when I had come to know that your love was
the only thing I wanted in all the world."

"And to keep my love," he exclaimed bitterly, "you were willing to stoop
to that--to accept this man's money."

"Oh--my dear--my dear! I didn't want his money--I didn't want it! Won't
you believe me?"

"You took it."

"I had to take it. There wasn't anything else I could do."

"You could have given it away--you could have come to me, and told me
the truth--anything but this."

"Could I have done any more good with it by giving it away than I have
by keeping it? Think of what I have been able to do for my mother--my
sister--our boy. Don't you see? It wasn't for myself I wanted the money.
You will believe that, won't you?"

"No! You have always wanted money. You never lost an opportunity to tell
me how much I failed to give you. Now you've got it"--he glanced
bitterly about him--"at the expense of your honor. You've lied to me,
and tricked me, and made a fool of me, and now you've got it; and, to
crown it all, you were even willing to let me share in it. You gave me
that check, knowing all this." He raised his hands in helpless fury. "My
God! What a humiliation!"

Edith looked at her husband in a frightened way. "If he were alive
to-day he would be glad to know that he had helped you," she said
pathetically, seeking some adequate answer to his accusations. Her
choice was an unfortunate one--it only increased his rage.

"Stop!" he fairly shouted. "Don't dare to say that to me! Do you think I
would accept anything from him?--this man I loved and trusted and
honored as a friend--this man that crept into my home and tried to ruin
me--to take from me everything I held dear in the world--this liar--this
hypocrite--this crook--to help _me_! God! You must have fallen pretty
low to think that I would accept help from your _lover_!"

Edith cowered before his biting scorn. "Oh! How can you--how can you?"
she sobbed. "I did not love him."

"I would respect you more if you had. You might have been honest with
him, at least, if you couldn't be with me. No--you did not love him. You
turned from me, and gave yourself to him because he had money! _Money_!
_Money_! You--you--God, I can't say the word! Don't you know what they
call women who sell themselves for money?"

She flushed darkly at his words. "Don't dare to say that to me!" she
cried. "I may have been disloyal--I may have intended to leave you--but
I never wanted his money--never--not for myself. It was for the others."

"Look at yourself," he interrupted. "Your clothes--your jewels--this
place! Has all this been for others? Haven't you enjoyed it? Isn't it
the very breath of existence to you? What sort of a woman are you,
anyway?"

"You are cruel, brutal!" she cried, dashing the tears from her eyes.
"You have no right to say such things to me. I took this money because I
couldn't refuse it. If I had given it away, you would have suspected. I
had begun to see what a terrible mistake I had made--I wanted to keep
this thing from you--because I loved you."

"Why didn't you tell me the truth--then--then--not leave me to find it
out now? You knew if you told me about this money, you would have to
give it up, and you thought you could deceive me."

"No--no, it isn't true!"

"It is true. You thought you could buy your fine clothes, your luxury,
your happiness at the expense of my honor--and you have done it. What do
you suppose Hall will think of all this when he knows the truth?"

"Why need he know anything about it?"

"Good God! Haven't you any sense of decency--of right? Do you suppose
for a moment I am going to let things go on like this?"

"Donald! What are you going to do?" she asked. "Remember what all this
means to others. Forgive me, and let us forget."

"Don't say that again!" He took a step toward her threateningly. "I
don't want to hear it. Give up every cent of this money, now--at once!
Put on your cheap clothes, your home-made hat, your pride--if you have
any left. They will look better on you than what you are wearing now. Go
back to your cooking--your housework. It will be time enough then to
talk about forgiveness."

She shrank from him, her hands clutching nervously at her bosom. After
all, even she herself had not realized how horrible the thought of her
old life had become to her, now that she had tasted of the new. She
shuddered before the sordid vision. "You can't mean it--you can't!"

"You dare say that?" he demanded; then became suddenly silent, and
looked toward the door.

Edith followed his glance, and saw Bobbie standing on the threshold, his
nurse behind him.

"Papa!" cried the little fellow, rushing up to his father with
outstretched hands. "Have you seen my new pony?"

Donald put out his arms, and took the child to his heart. "Bobbie--my
dear little boy!" he cried, as he kissed him.

"Mamma got him for me yesterday," the child prattled on. "He's brown,
and has a shaggy mane, and I like him ever so much better than the old
one. I've named him Billikins, because he has such a funny face. Won't
you come and see him?" He caught his father by the hand, pulling him
toward the door.

"I can't come now," said Donald, resisting him. "He's asleep by this
time. We'll see him to-morrow."

"And we'll go in swimming, papa. I've learned a lot since you were here
last week. I can keep up dog-fashion." He capered about, illustrating
with his arms. "Mamma's going to get me a pair of white wings. Aren't
you, mamma?" He turned to his mother for confirmation.

"Yes, dear," she said, with tears in her eyes.

"And, papa, I've got a sailboat. Patrick is showing me how to sail it.
Will you come to-morrow?"

"Yes, Bobbie," his father answered mechanically.

"I wish you would stay here every day. I don't want to ever go back to
the nasty old city. Why don't you, papa?" He took his father's hand
again. "I want to show you where Patrick and me found a lot of clams
yesterday."

"Yes, dear." Donald's voice was scarcely audible. There were tears in
his heart, if not in his eyes.

Edith came over to the child, and put her hand upon his curly head.
"Kiss papa good-night, dear. It's time you were in bed."

"I don't want to go to bed." The boy looked at his father appealingly.
"Papa, mayn't I stay up a little longer?"

"Why, Bobbie, you always go to bed at seven o'clock."

"Not nights when papa comes, mamma."

The nurse took a step forward. "Come, Bobbie, that's a good boy," she
coaxed, and held out her hand.

The tumult in Donald Rogers' brain ceased. His face took on a look of
determination; it was evident that he had arrived at a decision. He put
his arm about the child's shoulder. "Fannie, wait in the dining-room,"
he said. "I will call you when I want you." The nurse turned and went
into the house.

"Donald--what are you going to do?" Edith looked at his set face, and a
great fear entered her heart.

"Go over to that desk, and write what I tell you," he demanded sternly,
pointing to the writing-table in the hall.

"What--what do you mean?" Her voice trembled with fear, but she made no
move to obey.

"Do what I tell you," he said harshly.

"No! First I must know what I am to write."

"You refuse?"

"Donald," she cried piteously, "you can't mean to ask me to give up
everything--not now. Wait, dear--for Bobbie's sake. No one has any claim
on this money. I'll give it all to you, to do with as you like, but I
want Bobbie to have this summer. Don't you see how well he looks--how
brown and well and strong? I can't let him go back to the city in all
this heat--I can't!" She was pleading now--desperately--for the sake of
her boy.

"Will you do as I say?" he asked ominously.

The thought of the thing nerved her to sudden resistance. "No!" she
declared angrily. "Not that way. You are asking more than you have any
right to ask. I have been foolish, weak, disloyal, and I regret it most
bitterly. You can do what you please, to me, but you shall not revenge
yourself upon my boy. This money is mine. It was left to me by a man who
loved me dearly. I am not dishonoring either him or you by using it to
make others happy. You want me to sacrifice my mother's happiness, my
sister's, my child's--all to satisfy your sense of pride. Now that
someone else is able to do something for me you resent it because you
cannot do it. You have no right to ask me to throw aside this wonderful
opportunity for doing good. What would you have me do with this money?
Give it away? To whom, then, should I give it, if not to those who are
closest and dearest to me? What you ask is selfish. You only want to
satisfy your man's pride, your so-called sense of honor. What is your
sense of honor to me, when the welfare of my child is at stake? Do what
you like, think what you like, but don't ask me to give up this money,
for I won't do it--I won't--I won't!" She stood facing him, her hands
clenched, her face flushed with passionate determination.

Donald looked at her in amazement. He had thought, after the discovery
of her disloyalty, that she would accept his forgiveness at any price.
"What you have just said," he exclaimed slowly, "shows me that
henceforth your path and mine lie far apart. I did not think that you
could have said such things, that you could have so far forgotten your
sense of honesty and right. Even after all that has happened, I thought
that you still loved me."

"I do--I do--and you know it."

"No," he said bitterly, "you do not love me. A woman who loves her
husband would live on crusts, and go in rags, and beg from door to door
before she would sell herself for a few miserable dollars. What if you
did have to give up your expensive dresses, your fine house, your
automobiles? Is that anything, compared with giving up your husband's
love? Do you think I want my child to owe his health, his happiness, the
bed he sleeps on, the nurse who cares for him, the food he eats, the
very clothes on his back, to the scoundrel who tried to ruin me, who
tried to deal me a deadlier blow than if he had stabbed me in the back
with a knife? What if your home was poor, and simple, and plain? What if
it had no luxuries, no purple and fine linen? At least, it was honest;
at least, I could hold up my head in it, and feel that it was all mine,
that I was a man. Do you think I can do that here? Do you expect me to
look about at all this luxury, and say to myself: God bless the man who
stole my wife's love from me, and gave me this in return? There may be
men in the world who would take what you offer, and be glad of it, but I
thank God I am not one of them. As long as you are my wife, what you
have comes from me--do you understand, from me--and, whether it be much
or little, for better or worse, you shall accept what I have, and make
the best of it!"

Edith looked at him for a long time. She found no words with which to
answer him. "Very well," she said, at last, slowly. "At least I have my
child." She put out her arms. "Come, Bobbie," she said.

Her husband swept the boy to him. "Get out of my way!" he cried roughly,
as she attempted to intercept him; then started down the steps of the
veranda.

"Donald!" she shrieked. "My God--what are you going to do?"

He paused on the steps. "I'm going to New York," he cried. "You can live
on the price of your shame, if you want to. I and my boy shall not!" He
dashed down the steps, and out toward the entrance to the grounds, the
child held closely to his breast.

"Donald! Donald!" she screamed after him. "Come back! Come back!"

He went on, not heeding her cries, and, as the bells on the yachts in
the harbor marked the hour of seven, she crumpled up upon the veranda
floor, clutching at the arm of a chair as she fell; and lay there, a
pathetic, sobbing figure, until her mother and sister found her, some
ten minutes later.




CHAPTER XVII


When Alice Pope and the others returned from their walk in the garden
they did not at first see the crumpled-up figure on the veranda floor as
they came up the steps. Suddenly Hall started back with an exclamation,
then ran over to the prostrate woman and lifted her in his arms.

"It's Mrs. Rogers," he cried. "Quick, some whiskey. She's fainted."

Alice poured out some of the spirits from the decanter on the table and
gave it to him. "What can have happened?" she gasped, looking about.
"Where is Donald?"

"He must be inside. He was here only a moment ago." Mrs. Pope took one
frightened look at her daughter's white face, then rushed into the hall,
calling loudly for her son-in-law.

They carried the unconscious woman into the house and placed her upon a
big lounge in the hallway. Mrs. Pope was still waking the echoes of the
place with her cries.

In a few moments Edith opened her eyes and looked about. "Donald," she
gasped, "come back--come back."

"Where has he gone, Edith?" her mother demanded sharply. "I left you
together."

Mrs. Rogers continued to gaze, frightened, at the others as they crowded
about her. She dared not speak--dared not tell them the truth of what
had happened. "We--we had a quarrel," she moaned. "Let me go to my
room." She struggled to her feet.

"But--my child--what is the matter? What has Donald said or done to you?
Why has he left you like this? He never did have any consideration for
you, but this is unpardonable. Where is he?" She glared about, eager to
pour out the vials of her wrath upon her son-in-law's head.

Edith staggered up, and made for the stairway. "He's--he's gone to New
York. He took Bobbie with him--We had a frightful quarrel--Oh--I can't
tell you any more." Sobbing loudly, she ran up the stairs.

The others looked at one another in amazement. Only Alice understood,
and she but vaguely. How had Donald found out? What had been said? She
bethought herself of his talk with Hall, and turned on that young man,
a dangerous glitter in her eyes.

"What did you say to Donald?" she demanded.

A look of astonishment overspread Mr. Hall's usually placid countenance.
The whole affair seemed absurd and meaningless to him, nor could he see
wherein he had been at fault. "We were talking about--about our college
days. I--I mentioned some story about Billy West--I don't understand--"

Alice cut him short. "Never mind, Emerson. It isn't your fault. They
probably quarreled about something else. You and mother go in and have
your dinner. I'll go up and have a talk with Edith."

Alice's talk with her sister was short and to the point. Edith, between
sobs, told her what Mr. Hall had said, and what, as a consequence,
Donald had demanded--that she give up West's money.

"Are you going to do it?" Alice asked.

"Oh--I don't know--I don't know." Her sister tossed about on the bed
where she had thrown herself, moaning as though her heart would break.

Alice regarded her thoughtfully. "I told you what he would do," she
remarked at length. "I don't blame him. But, after all, he might be a
little less unreasonable--just now, too, when Emerson and I are about to
be engaged. It's a shame! Why didn't you humor him--say you would give
the money to mother, or something like that? He has no right to make
such a tragedy of the matter. Why not wait a while and see what he does?
He may reconsider, and come back."

"He never will--he never will."

"Well, then--it's up to you to decide which you want more--him, or the
money. It doesn't look as though you could have both. Take my advice and
go to sleep. Your mind will be clearer in the morning. I'll have
Richards bring you up some toast and tea. Now I'm going to see what I
can do to set this thing right with Emerson."

All the next day Edith lay in bed, tortured by the most agonizing
thoughts. At one moment she would decide to go to Donald and beg his
forgiveness, with all thoughts of the money cast to the four winds. At
the next, she would recoil before the hideous prospect of giving up all
that her life now held, and going back to the drudgery of her former
existence. It was a difficult position for any woman to be in, she
wailed to her mother, who sat beside her, alternately blaming Donald,
and reproaching Edith for not having at once denied the whole affair.

"Why didn't you laugh at Mr. Hall's story?" she demanded. "Some
hysterical tale of a nurse. Bah! I told you he was a fool. What right
has Donald to object, I should like to know, if you did encourage Mr.
West a little? I can't see anything so terribly wrong in that. You
didn't do anything wrong, did you?" She became furious when Edith
mumbled her denials. "The man is mad. He thinks he owns you, body and
soul. Mr. West was worth a dozen like him. He could appreciate a woman's
wants and needs. The idea of demanding that you give up what rightfully
belongs to you--just to please his whims. I'd let him understand that he
couldn't treat me as though I were a piece of property. What has he ever
done for you, that you should be so grateful and obedient? Made you live
like a servant. Don't think of going to him. I forbid it. You are my
child, and I have some rights. Let me talk to him. I'll go up to town
to-night, and tell him what I think of him. I've been waiting to do so
for some time. As Alice suggests, if he objects to your keeping this
money, promise to give it to me. I'll see that none of it is spent on
him, since it seems to hurt his pride so. His honor dragged in the mud!
Absurd! This honor he talks so much about isn't going to pay your bills,
and make your life worth living, is it? Selfish, my dear! That's the way
with all men. They want everything, and are willing to give nothing.
Even my poor, dear J. B., kind as he was, never understood me
thoroughly. He seemed to think that I should humor him, and wait on him,
just as though I hadn't any wifely rights at all. I tell you, Edith,
husbands nowadays are getting to expect entirely too much. If they give
you something to eat, and a place to sleep, they seem to think that they
have done all that is required of them. I wouldn't stand it, for one. I
told your father he would have to give me what I was accustomed to, or
I'd leave him. That's the way to treat a man, my child. Don't let Donald
think you are a doormat."

Edith scarcely heard her mother's words as they rumbled on. Only one
suggestion seemed good to her, and that was the latter's plan to go to
New York and see Donald. She felt too ill, too greatly unnerved, to do
so herself, and she was not yet ready to sacrifice all the material joys
of her existence to bring about a reconciliation. Perhaps some
compromise might be effected. At least her mother's visit would show
Donald that she was ready to meet him on some common ground, whereas to
ignore him altogether would but widen the breach between them. She
consented, therefore, to her mother's going, and wrote a little note to
Donald, begging him to forgive her, and to return to New London at once.
Meanwhile her mother hastened away to prepare herself for the fray.

Alice came in early in the afternoon, and told her that Mr. Hall had
proposed and that she had accepted him. "I don't know just what Emerson
thinks," she said. "He hasn't mentioned the matter since, but I believe
he half-suspects the truth. I've told him nothing, of course, except
that you and Donald have had a quarrel, but that everything will be all
right. He's acted so nicely about it all, though, that I think I'll tell
him the truth. He's going up to town with us this afternoon. Oh, yes, I
am going, too. Mother is likely to make a mess of everything. You know
how she goes on, when she once gets started. I'm sure I'd better be on
hand to steady her a bit. Donald is in no humor to be trifled with."

"No," murmured her sister; "he isn't. I never heard him speak so before.
It was terrible."

Alice drew her mouth into a mirthless smile and regarded Edith
critically. "I don't believe you know Donald as well as I do," she
remarked at length. "You've always thought him quiet, and mild, and
easy-going. You've even complained to me that he had no backbone--that
he didn't master you. You once said you'd have cared for him more, if he
had. You're like lots of women, Edith. You think because a man loves
you, and treats you tenderly, he's weak. You'd rather be beaten than
petted, I guess. Well, Sis--you've made a big mistake. Donald has always
been like clay with you, because he loved you, but I guess the fire that
you've started in him has burnt him hard. Don't imagine you can pull any
wool over his eyes now. He's likely to give you the surprise of your
life." She went over to the dressing-table and began to arrange her
hair. "Emerson is going to take mother and me to dinner as soon as we
get in town, and then we're going up to the apartment--about eight, I
think. We won't be back until to-morrow."

"Oh--if you could only bring Bobbie back with you!"

"Not likely, Edith. Donald loves that child with the love of a strong,
silent man, and he'll never give him up."

"But he's mine--mine."

"Not a bit more than he is Donald's. In fact, I rather think he has the
law on his side, if you come to that."

Edith renewed her sobbing. "I don't know what to do--I can't let him
stay there in town, in all the heat. It would kill him."

"Oh, no, it wouldn't. Bobbie isn't as frail as all that. Of course he'd
be better off here, but I guess he'll survive."

"Then you do advise me to give up the money?" Edith's voice held a note
almost of anger.

"Not at all. I advise you to give it to mother. That will satisfy
everybody--especially mother."

"And you, I suppose," remarked Edith petulantly.

"Oh--I don't care a rap. I'm too happy, thinking about Emerson, to care
about money. All that I ask is that you patch things up somehow, so as
to avoid a scandal." She turned to go. "Just suppose, Edith, that Donald
had been on the point of leaving you with some other woman, and the
woman had died, and left him a fortune. Would you like to spend any of
it? Think it over. Good-by, now. We've got to hurry, to make that
train."

Mrs. Pope looked in for a moment on her way downstairs. "Cheer up, my
dear," she said. "Don't let this thing worry you into a spell of
sickness. I'll arrange everything. I'm going to let Donald see that he
isn't the only one to be considered in this matter. The greatest good of
the greatest number--that's my policy. I won't have any high-flown
theatrical nonsense spoil your life."

"Mother," Edith called after her, "please be careful what you say." Mrs.
Pope paid no attention to her. The militant-looking feather upon her
large black hat wagged ominously as she strode down the stairs. "Idiot!"
she muttered to herself. "Why can't he act like a sensible human being?"

Left to herself, Edith started once more the treadmill of thought which
whirled around and around in a circle, and left her always just where
she had begun. No matter how she strove to justify Donald in his anger,
the dread specter of poverty grinned at her through all her arguments,
and her resolutions fled. She looked about the room. The rose pink
velvet carpet, the soft white bearskin rug beside the bed, the lovely
wall paper, the exquisite hangings, the graceful mahogany furniture, all
called to her compellingly. One of the maids, entering soft-footed,
brought her some bouillon and the breast of a chicken, on a silver tray.
The servant moved about noiselessly, pulling down the shades to shut out
the afternoon sun. Edith drew her clinging silk night-dress about her
throat, and sat up.

"Will madam have a glass of sherry?" the maid asked, as she removed an
immense bunch of roses from the low wicker table, and placed the tray
upon it.

Edith thought she would. Somehow, she was beginning to feel better. Her
mother, with Alice's assistance, would doubtless arrange everything
satisfactorily. After all, she had done no wrong. She ate the chicken
with considerable relish and sent the maid for some fruit. How different
all this was from the dingy, ill-smelling little apartment of the past,
where half her life was spent over the gas range. It all seemed very far
away from her, as she sank luxuriously back among the pillows and picked
up a book she had been trying to read.

The book proved dull and uninteresting. In a little while she fell
asleep. As she lay there, her firm round throat exposed, her lips, red
and full, slightly parted over her small white teeth, she looked very
alluring--very beautiful. The maid coming to the door, closed it softly,
and went downstairs to discuss the scandal of Mr. Rogers' disappearance
with Patrick and Fannie and the other servants. Over the whole house
brooded the hot white silence of a mid-August day.




CHAPTER XVIII


It was close to midnight when Donald Rogers, with Bobbie asleep in his
arms, reached the door of his apartment in One Hundred and Tenth Street.
The little fellow had protested at first against this unexpected
journey, but was too tired to give the matter much thought, and soon
slipped away into the land of dreams, where he found himself gaily
sailing his pony cart, which, strangely enough, seemed to resemble a
sailboat, with the pony sitting beside him in a very dignified manner,
acting as crew.

Donald himself spent a sleepless night. The cruel revelation of the
treachery to which he had been subjected at the hands of his best
friend, and, crowning this, the knowledge that his wife had been equally
untrue, left him like a man shipwrecked on an island of desolation, with
no one to whom he could turn for help or sympathy. He had trusted Edith
implicitly--had given her the best there was in him all these years; and
now it seemed that nothing but a cup of bitterness was to be his reward.
The minutes dragged as though they were hours, and it seemed as though
the dawn would never come. But at last the wretched night was over, and
morning found him in the little kitchenette, trying painfully, with
unaccustomed fingers, to prepare breakfast for Bobbie and himself.

Most of the day he spent with the child, wandering through the park, his
thoughts never far removed from the tragic moments of the evening
before. What would Edith do? was his incessant thought. He felt sure
that she would come to him because of Bobbie, but he was by no means
certain, realizing her innate vanity, that she would consent to give up
the money which West had left her, in return for his forgiveness. On no
other condition, however, would he treat with her. On this point he was
fully determined.

The dusk of evening found Bobbie and himself dining solemnly together in
a little restaurant at which he had been in the habit of getting his
meals during the hot weather.

On their return to the apartment, Donald, avoiding Bobbie's questions as
far as he could, regarding his mother's absence, sent the little fellow
to his room, and sank into his accustomed seat by the desk, staring
moodily into space. The sound of the buzzer in the kitchen, announcing
that the janitor was ready to remove the garbage, brought him back with
a sudden shock from his dreaming, and he began to realize his utter
loneliness. He picked up a paper, and made an ineffectual attempt to
read; but for some minutes was unable to concentrate his mind on the
page before him. Presently there emerged from the maze of type the
flaring headline:

 DIVORCED AFTER TEN YEARS' MARRIED
 BLISS.

 WIFE GETS CHILDREN--HUSBAND A
 SUICIDE.

He threw down the paper with a curse, and strode impatiently up and down
the room, glancing from time to time at his watch. A faint voice from
the bedroom door caused him to pause.

"Papa," it said.

He turned and saw Bobbie standing in the doorway. "Why don't you go to
bed, Bobbie?" he exclaimed, almost irritably, but his manner changed as
he observed the pathetic, appealing little figure. The child had taken
off his blouse, and wore only his little undershirt and his shoes.

"Won't you take off my shoes, papa? I got them all tied in knots." He
glanced reproachfully down at the cause of his trouble.

With a great pain gripping at his heart at the helplessness of the
child, Donald came quickly forward, and, seating himself, placed the boy
on his knee.

"We'll soon fix that, little man," he said, as he began to remove the
shoes.

"Papa--where is mamma?"

"She's in the country, dear."

"When is she coming?"

"I don't know, Bobbie," he responded, with a heavy sigh. In his interest
in the child he had for the moment almost forgotten the absence of his
wife.

"Is she coming to-night, papa?" the little fellow continued tremulously.

"No, Bobbie, not to-night."

"Why isn't she, papa?" And then, after a short interval of puzzled
reflection: "She belongs here, doesn't she?"

"She can't come to-night, my child. And you must be a good little
fellow, and not ask papa any more about it. Now, it's time you went to
sleep," he concluded, as he finished his task.

"Papa, are you angry with mamma?"

The childish question hurt him to the quick. "Don't bother your little
head about it, my child. You wouldn't understand. Remember that she is
your mother, and you must love her always."

"I do, papa. She got me my pony, and my boat, and lots of things. I wish
she was here right now."

"You must be patient, dear, and go to sleep quietly, like a good boy.
To-morrow I will get a nice, kind lady to take care of you."

"I don't want a nice, kind lady. I want my mamma. She always hears me
say my Now-I-lay-me."

"Your what?" he asked, not understanding.

"My Now-I-lay-me-down-to-sleep. That's my prayers. She always hears me
say them when she comes to kiss me good-night."

He looked away, with a sudden rush of pain. There were tears in his
eyes now. "Of course. Bobbie--I--I understand," he faltered.

"She said I must never, never skip, for the Lord would know, and be
angry."

"Let me hear you, dear."

"Do you know prayers?" The child looked at his father in wonder. "I
didn't know men knew prayers."

"Yes, Bobbie. Sometimes they do. Go ahead."

The child folded his hands, and stood at his father's knee. "If I don't
remember it all, you must tell me," he continued.

"Very well, dear; I will." The tears were coming fast now.

"'Now I lay me down to sleep, I pray the Lord my soul to--to--'" The
quavering little voice halted.

"'Keep,'" his father supplied.

"'Keep. If I should die before I wake, I pray the Lord my soul to take.
Amen.'" He looked at his father expectantly. "You didn't say, 'Amen,'
papa. Mamma always says it."

"'Amen,'" repeated Donald gravely, as he kissed the boy's tousled head.

"Do you think, papa, if I pray the Lord to send mamma back, she will
come?"

"I think she might, dear. When you go to bed, you must wish that she
will just as hard as you can."

"And then to-morrow she will be here?" cried the child eagerly.

"I--I hope so, dear. Are you ready now?" He rose and led the little
fellow toward the bedroom door.

"Yes, papa. I'm not afraid now. Good-night." He put up his face to be
kissed.

"Good-night, dear." The father kissed him almost reverently, and, after
the door was closed, stood for a long time gazing at it--his face
twitching. Then he threw himself into a chair, rested his arms upon the
desk, and buried his face in his hands, in a paroxysm of sobbing. It was
the first time in many years that Donald Rogers had cried.

It was some ten minutes later that he was roused by the ringing of the
door-bell. He rose, crossed to the door, and opened it, to admit Mrs.
Pope and Alice.

Mrs. Pope advanced into the room with her accustomed air of ruffled
dignity. "Donald--what does all this foolishness mean?" she inquired.

"I don't understand you," he answered shortly. "What do you want here?"

"Can you have the audacity to ask me that? I am here to protect my
daughter's rights."

"Did she send you?" he asked quietly.

"I do not need anyone to send me when my child's happiness is at stake.
What does this outrageous conduct mean?"

"Mother! For goodness sake, be a little more polite," interjected Alice.

"Alice, be quiet!" Her mother regarded her with stern disapproval. "This
is no time for mincing matters." She turned angrily to her son-in-law.
"Do you intend to answer my question?"

Donald regarded her with a dislike he took no pains to hide. "I owe no
explanation of my conduct to you," he said.

"Sir, do you think a mother has no rights?"

Again Alice interrupted. "Mother--wait--please." She stepped between
them. "Edith is suffering very much, Donald."

"So am I," he remarked grimly.

"Then why don't you stop it?" Mrs. Pope was not to be put off. "What do
you mean by dashing out of the house like a madman, kidnaping your
child, and disgracing us all before a stranger? It's outrageous!"

"Disgracing you! What about my disgrace?" Donald turned from her and
addressed himself to Alice. "Alice," he asked, "does your mother know
why I left New London? Do you?"

"Yes--I--know what Emerson said."

Again Mrs. Pope interrupted. "I know that you accuse my daughter of
carrying on a love-affair with Mr. West," she cried. "I don't believe
it--but what of it? What if she did? You did precious little for her,
goodness knows. Now that she has a little happiness, you want to take it
away from her, just because you didn't give it to her. You ought to be
ashamed of yourself!"

"I'll settle this matter with my wife--not with you." Donald's voice
showed his irritation at her interference.

"Poor child! My poor child! Why will you not listen to reason?"

"I don't care to discuss the matter any further. Our ideas are too
different on some subjects." He went over toward the desk, turning his
back upon the others.

Mrs. Pope, however, refused to be turned aside. "I should hope they
were," she asserted doggedly. "I didn't come here to discuss the matter,
either. I came to ask you to come back to New London with Bobbie at
once."

"What you ask is impossible," said Donald, without turning. "I shall
never go back there again."

"What! After taking the house for the summer? What will everyone think?"

"It makes no difference to me what they think. It is what I think that
concerns me now."

"You always did think of no one but yourself. Do you expect my daughter
to spend the summer there alone? Can't you see that it is out of the
question?" Mrs. Pope was shaking with rage.

"No," cried Donald, turning on her angrily. "I do not expect her to
spend the summer there alone. I expect her to return here to me."

"To return here!" exclaimed Mrs. Pope, aghast. "To spend the summer in
this place! Are you mad?"

"No--I am not. Sometimes I think money has made you so."

Mrs. Pope paid no attention to his words. She was too busy trying to
grasp the full purport of what she had just heard. "What can you be
thinking of?" she cried. "Spend the summer here--in this tenement--with
thirty thousand dollars a year?"

Donald regarded her coldly. "My wife will not have thirty thousand
dollars a year if she returns here," he said. "She will have what I am
able to give her, and no more."

"Then what on earth will she do with her money?"

"I intend that she shall give it to charity."

"Charity! Doesn't charity begin at home? If you are mad enough to
deprive her of it, she must give it to Alice and to me."

"Never--with my consent. That would be the same as if she had it
herself."

"Half a million dollars! To charity! I shall use every effort to prevent
her from making such a fool of herself. I insist that she give the money
to Alice and me."

"Count me out, mother," exclaimed Alice, with a short laugh. "Emerson
wouldn't let me touch a cent of it. He told me so."

"Does Mr. Hall know about this?" asked Donald suddenly.

"Of course he does. How could he help it? Do you suppose I could keep it
from him, after what you did last night? Edith in hysterics--you and
Bobbie gone--mother carrying on like a chicken with its head off. What
could you expect?"

"And he refuses to let you have any share in this money?"

"I don't believe he'd marry me, if I had. Emerson's mighty independent.
He says he has enough for both of us, and what he hasn't we'll do
without."

"God bless him!" said Donald earnestly. "He's a man!"

"He's a fool," Mrs. Pope exclaimed angrily; "as big a one as you are."

Her words, her manner since entering the room, had slowly been causing
Donald to lose his temper.

"No!" he blazed out, facing her. "You are the one who is a fool. What
have you been drumming into your daughters' heads for years? Money!
Money! Nothing but money! You would put up your children at auction, and
sell them to the highest bidder, just for money. You come here and blame
me for all this trouble, and you haven't sense enough to see that it is
all your fault, and yours alone. Ever since Edith and I were married you
have talked to her of nothing but my poverty, my shortcomings, my
failures. You have preached discontent to her until she was ready to
fall in love with the first man who came along with a little more money
than I had. You are the cause of all this trouble--you, and nobody else.
Don't come here and talk to me about my conduct. Try to be a little more
careful of your own."

Mrs. Pope took out her handkerchief and applied it gently to her eyes.
"And is this the thanks I get, after all these years?" she said
tearfully. Then she turned to Alice: "Are you against your poor sister,
too?"

"No, I'm not. I want to see Edith happy, and I don't think she ever will
be as long as she keeps a cent of this money. I know I advised her to
keep it in the first place. I thought she could do lots of good with
it. So she could, if Emerson hadn't put his foot in it. As it is, I
don't see anything for her to do but give it up."

"You've changed a good deal, it seems to me," remarked her mother
stiffly.

"I have. I've talked it over with Emerson."

"Emerson! Pooh!" Mrs. Pope gave an indignant snort.

"Never you mind about Emerson," said Alice with spirit. "He and I are
going to find happiness in Chicago, in our own way. I know you don't
like him, so perhaps it's just as well we are going to live a thousand
miles off."

Mrs. Pope began to weep audibly. "Of all the thankless tasks," she
groaned, "a mother's is the worst. Here I've spent twenty-five years in
raising you girls, living for you, waiting on you, slaving for you; and,
now, you turn on me like this. It's a shame--that's what it is--a shame!
When my poor, dear J. B. was alive--"

"Never mind about that now, mother. We didn't come up here to have a
family row. Let's see if we can't fix up this trouble between Donald and
Edith." She turned to her brother-in-law with a look of deep concern.
"Mother insisted upon this interview, Donald. I told her it would do no
good."

"Not if Donald insists upon making beggars of us all," Mrs. Pope
interrupted tearfully.

Alice took no notice of her interruption. "You got Edith's note?" she
continued.

"Yes."

"Are you going to her?"

"No. She must come to me. You can tell her so. But I insist upon seeing
her alone." He glanced significantly at Mrs. Pope.

"I shall not inflict my company upon you any longer, Mr. Rogers,"
exclaimed the latter indignantly. "Good-night!" She swept toward the
door. Alice followed her.

"Good-night, Donald," Alice said, as she left the room. "I hope you and
Edith will come to some sort of an agreement. Remember Bobbie."

Left alone, Donald went slowly over to the chair in which he had been
sitting, and, stooping, gathered up Bobbie's little shoes and stockings,
and placed them gently within the bedroom. Then he began to pace
endlessly up and down the floor.




CHAPTER XIX


On the following morning Donald Rogers determined to go down to Mr.
Brennan's office and have a talk with him. As the executor of West's
estate, as well as Mrs. Rogers' attorney, he felt that the lawyer might
be able to suggest a basis for an understanding of some sort between
Edith and himself. Bobbie he took to his own office and left in the care
of his draughtsman. The child was delighted, and spent the morning
drawing ships and dogs and many other things upon a great sheet of
cardboard with which the latter provided him.

Mr. Brennan was luckily in. Perhaps he suspected the object of Donald's
visit--at any rate he received him at once, dismissed the stenographer
who had been taking notes at his side, and waved his caller to a chair.

"Glad to see you, Mr. Rogers," he began. "How is Mrs. Rogers? I trust
she is enjoying her stay at the seashore."

"Mrs. Rogers is very well." Donald nervously began to light a cigar,
fumbling with the matches awkwardly in his agitation. Now that he was
with Mr. Brennan, he felt at a loss to know how to begin.

"Let me see. You are at New London, are you not? Beautiful old place. I
spent a summer there, once. You go down for the week ends, I presume."

Donald ceased his efforts to light the cigar, threw the box of matches,
which Mr. Brennan had handed him, upon the desk, and looked up.

"Yes. I was there on Saturday. I left Saturday night. I had a
disagreement with Mrs. Rogers. That's what I came to see you about."

Mr. Brennan raised his eyebrows, put on his glasses slowly, and
inspected his caller with deliberate care. "I'm very sorry to hear it,
Mr. Rogers," he said. "Nothing serious, I trust?"

"I'm afraid it is--very."

"Hm-m. Dear me! And what can I do in the matter?"

"You are a friend of both Mrs. Rogers and myself. I want your advice. I
want you to see her--to talk to her."

"What's the trouble?" Brennan sat back in his chair, prepared to listen,
with a grave suspicion in his mind as to the cause of Donald's heavy
eyes and careworn face.

"Before I can discuss the matter with you, Mr. Brennan, I want to ask
you one question."

"Yes? What is it?"

"Do you know why West left his money to my wife?"

"My dear sir. That is a very peculiar question. How should I know?"

"You were the executor of his will."

"Undoubtedly. Yet I fail to see what that has to do with it."

"You must have seen his papers--his letters." Donald looked at the
lawyer intently. "Answer me frankly, Mr. Brennan. Do you know?"

"Surely, Mr. Rogers, you can hardly expect me to answer such a question,
even granting that I could do so."

"Why not?"

"As executor of Mr. West's will, it is certainly not my business to
discuss the reasons which may have prompted him to make it."

Donald rose and went over to the lawyer. "Mr. Brennan," he cried, "don't
try to quibble with me. I have asked you a plain, blunt question. You
are under no obligation to answer it, of course, but, until you do so,
we can proceed no further."

"I always supposed it was because he was very fond of her," ventured the
lawyer uneasily.

"Fond of her! Yes! But how, Mr. Brennan? How?"

"They were very old friends, were they not?"

"Were they nothing more?" Donald leaned over the desk and fixed his eyes
keenly upon those of the man opposite him. He felt the blood surging to
his temples. "Why don't you answer me, Mr. Brennan?" he went on, as the
lawyer dropped his eyes. "Were they nothing more?"

His searching questions began to annoy the lawyer. "Why do you ask me
such a question, Mr. Rogers?" he snapped.

"Only to find out how much you know. Mrs. Rogers has confessed
everything to me. You can do her no harm by telling me the truth, and
you will make it much easier for us to go ahead. Do you know?"

"Yes," Brennan answered at length, in a low voice.

"How?"

"All the letters your wife wrote to West came to me along with his other
papers."

Donald recoiled in bitterness of spirit. However certain he had been of
Edith's guilt, he still hoped that Mr. Brennan, in some way, might
disclose mitigating circumstances, facts of which he himself was not
cognizant, whereby her affair with West might present an appearance less
damning.

"My God!" he muttered. "And you read them?"

"Yes. I considered it my duty to examine all his papers."

"How did you know they were from my wife?"

"By her initials, signed to them--by the handwriting."

"And you have known this all these months, and said nothing?" Donald
strode to the window and looked out. The North River, quivering in the
hot sunlight, was a clutter of barges, tugs and ferry-boats, but his
eyes, blurred with tears, saw nothing. Presently he turned. "Where are
those letters now?" he asked.

"I do not know. I gave them to Mrs. Rogers. I advised her to destroy
them. I presume she has done so."

An angry light crept into Donald's eyes. "You had no right--" he began
hotly.

Mr. Brennan raised his hand. "You are in error, Mr. Rogers. I had every
right. The letters belonged to your wife, by law. Mr. West left her
everything he possessed."

"What did she say to him?" He strode excitedly toward the desk. "Tell
me, man. Can't you see what it means to me?"

"They were the letters of a weak, foolish woman, Mr. Rogers--not a bad
one--of that I am sure."

"Not a bad one? You mean--?"

"I mean, Mr. Rogers, that whatever your wife may have intended to
do--however far she may have intended to go--West's death saved her from
the one step which the world considers unforgivable."

"I hope you are right--God knows I hope you are right."

"I am sure that I am. Now tell me what has happened."

"I have left my wife. I have left her, and taken my boy."

"Well--now that you have taken that step, what do you propose to do
next?"

"I don't know. That is what I want to discuss with you. It is a terrible
situation. I scarcely know which way to turn. She has sent me a letter,
asking me to see her. I have agreed to do so--to-day. What I shall say
to her I do not know. Within the past forty-eight hours I have had every
good and kind and generous impulse within me shattered and destroyed.
The friend that I loved and trusted has betrayed me. The wife for whom I
would have given my life has proven disloyal--false. My self-respect is
gone. My home is a wreck. The money that keeps it up comes from a man
who did his best to ruin me." He began to walk about, distracted, his
voice choking with feeling. "Is it any wonder that I feel bitter? Is it
any wonder that I do not know what to do?"

The lawyer removed his glasses and considered them carefully for a long
time. The problem was indeed a serious one.

Presently he spoke. "The first consideration, of course, is your child."

"I know it. I have taken him from his mother. He wants her--needs her.
Have I the right to deprive him of her love?"

"Not unless she has proven herself unworthy of it."

"Hasn't she? Is a woman who is unfaithful to her husband--who is willing
to live on the money given her by the man who made her so--is such a
woman fit to bring up a child--to teach him to be straightforward, and
honest, and good?"

"You use strong terms, Mr. Rogers. As I said before, I do not believe
your wife has been unfaithful to you."

"I do not refer to any specific act. Unfaithfulness is not alone a
physical thing. She has fallen in love with another man. She has agreed
to abandon her husband, and run away with him. She was willing to
sacrifice even her child, by robbing him of his father. In one week
more, but for this man's death, she would have done all these things. Is
not such a woman unfaithful? Is not that enough? Could any one act have
made her more so? If your wife were to do these things, would you not
call her unfaithful?"

"You refuse to forgive her, then?"

"No. I do not refuse to forgive her. I have told her that I am ready to
do so, on one condition."

"What is that condition, Mr. Rogers?"

"That she give up this man's money."

"Has she agreed?"

"No. She has refused."

"Why do you insist on that?"

"Is it possible that you do not understand? What else can I do? If she
returns to me, it must be with clean hands."

"You ask a great deal, Mr. Rogers. It seems to me that your chances for
happiness would be a great deal better, if you were to let her keep this
money."

"Man--do you realize what you are saying? Isn't there a greater question
at stake than just my happiness? Isn't it right? Isn't it her duty?
Isn't it necessary to her own self-respect? I cannot see how she could
hesitate for a moment."

"Then you do not understand women. There are not many of them, situated
as she is, who could resist the temptation of thirty thousand dollars a
year."

"Then you defend her, Mr. Brennan. I did not expect it from you. I had
hoped you would see her--talk to her--show her what a terrible mistake
she is making."

The lawyer rose, and began to walk up and down in deep thought. All his
life, he had been concerned with the one idea, the one duty--that of
preserving for his clients every dollar that the law allowed them. Money
in a way had become almost sacred to him. Other points of view seemed
foolish, quixotic. "I'm a cold-blooded, practical man, Mr. Rogers. Life
as I have seen it has not made me sentimental. Lawyers rarely are. Half
a million dollars is a large sum of money. It means freedom from all the
wretched, grinding cares of existence, that fret out one's soul. Few
things in life make much difference, after all, if one has a comfortable
bank-balance. You ask your wife to give up all that this money means,
and come back to poverty--comparatively speaking at least. It is a hard
question for any woman to decide--a mighty hard question."

"You are wrong. You judge from the cynical, money-getting standpoint of
Broadway. There are bigger and finer and nobler things in the world than
money. It's the right of the thing that counts."

"Perhaps it is, Mr. Rogers, but most women don't look at things that
way. They are creatures of impulse. Logic is not their strong point. You
expect too much of your wife. I have known a great many women--in my
time--and my experience is that the best of them have their price." He
noticed Donald's dissenting gesture, but waved his interruption aside.
"Don't misunderstand me. I do not necessarily mean in a wrong way. It
may be a title, or a million, with some--with others the price of a
meal, or a lodging for the night. The man who expects too much of women
is bound to be disappointed. Let your wife keep this money. With it she
will be happy--contented. Without it, she will be miserable. She has
tasted the pleasures of wealth--now--and her old life will seem doubly
distasteful to her. Don't be unreasonable. Remember that after all, she
is, like most women, a good deal of a child."

Donald took up his hat, and his face showed the disappointment he felt.
"Mr. Brennan," he said, "I'm sorry I can't think as you do. I was
brought up to know the difference between right and wrong, and I haven't
forgotten it. It would be impossible--absolutely impossible--for me to
share in any way in this money, or to let my boy do so. On that point I
am determined."

Brennan looked grave, and regarded Donald with cynical compassion. "I'm
sorry to hear it, Mr. Rogers. In that case I do not see that I can be of
any service to you."

"Then you won't undertake to see Mrs. Rogers, and convince her of her
mistake?"

"I do not think it will have any result. You are very young yet, Mr.
Rogers. You look at this thing entirely too seriously."

Donald turned away with a great sense of bitterness, of injustice, in
his heart. "My God!" he cried. "How can you say such a thing? There is
only one way to look at it, and that is the right way. In your heart,
you know it. Don't you suppose it would be the easiest way, for me to
take this money? Isn't there every reason why I should? My wife--my
child--my business interests, all urge me to accept it--to make of
myself that most contemptible thing in the world--a man who is willing
to live on a woman--to share with her what she has got from her lover.
You know what they call such creatures. You know that no decent,
self-respecting man could do what you have advised me to do. I value
my wife--my home, more than most men do--I have given them the best I
had in me--but one thing I value even more than them, and that is my
self-respect. I have not made a great success in life, in a material
way, but what I have made, I have made honestly. I have always been able
to look the world squarely in the face, without feeling ashamed, and I
propose to keep on doing so. Advise my wife as you please. Her mother
and sister are with you. But I want you to understand--the whole lot of
you--that she need not expect me to forgive her, and take her back, so
long as she keeps a dollar of this man's money, for I won't do it--by
God, I won't do it!" He flung angrily toward the door.

Mr. Brennan stared at him for a moment, then reached out his hand.
"Mr. Rogers," he said, "your views may not be practical, and they
may not bring you happiness, but, by God, sir, I respect you for
them. Good-day."

Donald went back to his office like a man who has met a crushing blow,
but met it undaunted. He found Bobbie, tired of his pencil and paper,
looking out of the window at the boats on the river, and wailing for
his mother.

The father disposed of his mail while the boy played about his desk,
gave his assistant a few instructions, and, with Bobbie holding his
hand, once more started up-town. On the way, he bought the child
some little chocolate cigars, thereby lulling him into temporary
forgetfulness of his mother's absence. Life seemed all of a sudden
to have become very gray and bitter.

One ray of light, however, pierced the overshadowing gloom. Forbes, his
partner in the glass-plant venture, had wired Donald from Parkersburg
that he had succeeded in securing from some bankers there the necessary
money to tide over the crisis in the company's affairs. Several large
orders had come in also. It appeared certain that they would be able
to weather the storm. The good news seemed trifling, somehow, in his
present state of mind, but it was something, and for the moment he felt
grateful.




CHAPTER XX


Edith Rogers came to see her husband, probably less inclined toward
the sacrifice upon which he insisted than she had been when he left
her the Saturday before. Her heart had ached to see her boy, but she
felt a growing resentment toward Donald, for what she felt was his
hard-heartedness. Her feelings in this direction had been fanned to a
flame by the arguments of her mother, who had succeeded in persuading
her that what Donald asked was unreasonable and wrong. She knew that the
affair between West and herself had not gone to the ultimate lengths
that Donald evidently suspected--she did not stop to consider that in
all else but this one thing she had been utterly faithless, and that
even this step she would have taken, had not death intervened and saved
her. Being a woman, she could not put herself in Donald's place, and
understand the brutal way in which his feelings had been outraged by
the treachery of the two persons on earth whom he had most loved
and trusted--his wife and his friend. Hence it was in no spirit of
repentance that she entered the little room in which she had spent so
many weary hours, but rather as one who came to demand her rights.

Her mother had returned from New York furious with Donald, and
determined to use every means in her power to prevent a reconciliation
between him and Edith. Her carefully detailed description of the
reception which her son-in-law had given her, a description which lost
nothing by reason of the fury into which Mrs. Pope had succeeded in
working herself, made Edith realize fully that Donald was very much in
earnest, and not at all likely to return to her, however long she might
wait for him to do so.

There was clearly but one thing to do: she must go to him, and endeavor
to show him the cruelty, the unreasonableness, of his attitude.
Something in the firm stand which he had taken compelled her admiration;
even while it dealt a blow to her pride. She had never known Donald to
be like this before--he had always humored her, always been apologetic,
regretful because he was unable to gratify her every desire. She longed
for the moment to come, when she might see him and Bobbie again, and
determined to use every power of attraction she possessed to bring him
to her way of thinking. It had been easy in the past--her tears, her
reproaches, had usually brought him contritely to her feet.

Mrs. Pope, in her anger, attempted to dissuade Edith from this
intention. "I shouldn't go near him, my dear," she said, her eyes
snapping. "Let him stay there alone for a week or two, with Bobbie to
look after. That will bring him to his senses." Edith, however, would
not listen to her. "I shall go, mother," she said. "After all, Donald
has been pretty badly treated. I never should have acted as I did. I
mean to do my best to let him see that I care for him just as much as I
ever did. Of course, he must be reasonable, too. I'm not going to give
up this money. He ought not to ask it."

Alice had been listening to the conversation between her mother and
sister in gloomy silence. Mr. Hall had decided to move to the hotel for
the remainder of his stay, and she was annoyed to think that all her
plans had been upset. "What's the use of deluding yourself, Edith," she
remarked pointedly. "Donald will make you give up that money as sure as
fate. I never saw him so angry."

"Alice, you talk like a fool," said her mother. "How can he make her
give it up? He's hardly likely to use a club."

"Wouldn't be a bad idea," Alice flung at them, as she left the room.
"Edith has needed one, for some time." Mrs. Pope was aghast. "Sometimes,
Edith," she confided to the latter, "I think Alice is losing her mind."
Edith was not so sure. She had always had great faith in her sister's
judgment, and the latter's remark worried her.

There was one way, she concluded, and only one, to deal with Donald. She
must make herself as attractive, as alluring, as possible. When she
dressed herself, the following afternoon, for her trip to the city, she
put on her most becoming gown, her most effective hat. She prepared
herself with the greatest care. Her maid spent most of the forenoon
getting her ready, manicuring her nails, washing and drying her hair,
massaging her face, doing everything, in fact, that might be done to
enhance her physical charms. She knew she had always been a beautiful
woman--she was sure, when she glanced at herself in the cheval glass in
her bedroom, that she had never appeared to greater advantage. It did
not occur to her that she might make a better impression upon her
husband in the sober garb of repentance. She wanted to attract him, to
charm him, to force him to desire her so greatly that he would make any
sacrifice in order to bring her to his arms.

In all this she showed her lack of understanding of Donald's character.
Everything she wore, from her dainty _suede_ slippers to her costly hat,
she owed to West. The jewels she wore had been purchased with his money.
The gold purse which dangled so carelessly from her wrist, accompanied
by an array of pencils, vanity boxes and fashionable gew-gaws, his
wealth alone had made possible. Had she but appreciated it, everything
about her was calculated to send Donald into a storm of rage, rather
than to attract him and bring him submissively to her feet.

Mrs. Pope nodded proudly as her daughter came down the stairs. "You look
stunning, dear--a wife of whom any man might be proud. Don't give in an
inch. You have right on your side, and it only requires a little courage
to win." She settled herself comfortably in her chair. "Would you mind
ringing for Richards, my dear? I must have a refreshing drink of some
sort. This heat is positively unbearable."

The ride to town was hot and uncomfortable. Edith, on her arrival, went
at once to a hotel near the station and ordered dinner. She did not feel
particularly hungry--she was too nervous and excited for that; but she
felt the need of something to sustain her throughout the trying ordeal
which, she knew, lay before her. Then, too, she had at least two hours
to wait, before eight o'clock, at which time she felt that Donald would
have finished his dinner and be ready to receive her.

She drove up-town, after her meal, in a taxicab, and arrived at the
Roxborough a little before eight. The tawdry entrance to the place, with
its imitation marbles and imitation palms, sent a shiver of apprehension
through her. God, to come back to a place like this! It was not to be
thought of. In this frame of mind she ascended in the elevator, and in a
moment stood before the doorway to their apartment. Everything seemed
the same--even the crack in the tinted plaster to the left of the door,
the smell of gas and cooking, the flickering gas jet in the hall. She
realized their familiarity, yet she might have been away for ages, so
far removed from her present life did they seem.

Donald opened the door, and quietly closed it after her, welcoming her
with grave politeness.

"Donald!" she cried, as he came toward her. "Where is Bobbie?"

"In his room," he replied.

"I want to see him."

"He's asleep."

He gazed at her exquisite pongee gown, her costly hat, the lace coat she
carried upon her arm, and frowned.

"How could you take the poor child away like that? It must have broken
his heart to leave all his things--his pony, and his boat, and all. Is
he well? Have you taken good care of him? You know how careful I always
am about what he has to eat."

Donald's frown deepened. "Bobbie is very well," he said slowly. "It
seems to me there is a bigger question between us than that."

"Can there be any bigger question than Bobbie?" she asked.

He gazed at her for a few moments in moody silence. "Did you come here
to tell me that?" he presently asked.

"No, Donald. I came to ask your forgiveness."

"You know the conditions under which I will discuss the matter," he
interrupted.

"Yes. You blame me for taking this money. You want me to give it up.
Don't you know that all I have done has been for him?" She glanced
significantly toward the door of the bedroom.

Donald stood for a moment in silence. He felt in this woman no sense of
sorrow, of repentance, but only a stubborn insistence upon what she
considered her rights.

"Was it for him that you agreed to abandon your home, your husband, and
run away with another man?" he asked bitterly.

She reproached him, pleading with her eyes, her voice.
"Oh--don't--don't!" she cried. "Can't you forgive me? Can't you?"

"Not until you show yourself worthy of forgiveness. You belong to him as
long as you accept his money."

She came up to him, her hands outstretched. "Donald!" she cried. "That
is what I want to talk to you about. I have been a very foolish woman.
I have done things that I can never forgive myself for as long as I
live. I am bitterly--bitterly--sorry. If it were not for our boy, I
would go away, and never trouble you again. I have been a miserable
fool, and I cannot blame you if you hate and despise me. I threw away
everything that was dear to me for nothing--nothing! Now I know that it
is your love and my boy's that I want more than anything in the world.
But, Donald, what has this money to do with what I have done? Will it
make it any the less wrong, to give it up? If you are really willing to
give me another chance, can't you do it without bringing this question
of money into the matter? Can't you do it because I am sincerely,
honestly repentant; because I love you, and want your love, your
forgiveness so much--so very much?" She put her hand upon his arm, and
there were tears in her eyes. "Donald, listen to me, please--won't you?"

"If you had come here in the same poor things you wore before all this
happened," he said, turning coldly from her, "it would be easier for me
to forget. What do you mean by flaunting this man's money in my face,
with your jewels--your finery?" He looked at her, and a feeling almost
of disgust crept over him. "Can't you see that everything about you
reeks of him?"

"Oh, Donald," she cried, "don't be angry with me--please don't. I didn't
think about my clothes--indeed, I didn't." She seemed unable to
understand that it was not her clothes he objected to, but what they
represented.

"You mean you did not think about my feelings. You never do think about
the things that count."

She turned away from him, sobbing. "Oh, don't! How can you say such
things to me? Isn't it the repentance of my heart that counts?"

"If there were any real repentance in your heart," he said, "you would
put those things from you as though they were polluted." He began to
walk up and down the room, unable to contain his anger.

Edith saw that upon the one point--that of West's money--he was
inflexible. She looked up with an air of resignation. "Very well," she
said suddenly. "I will do as you ask. I will give up this money. I will
never touch another penny of it as long as I live, but I want it put
aside for Bobbie."

"Never!" he cried angrily.

He had thought, when she began to speak, that she had yielded; her
concluding words told him that she was only quibbling.

"Donald, you can't mean what you say. Think of his future!"

"I don't want to argue the question," he exclaimed impatiently. "You
know perfectly well I will never consent to what you ask. It's
contemptible."

Again she began to sob. "How can you be so cruel? How can you?" she
moaned.

"Isn't it true?" he replied indignantly.

"It doesn't make any difference how you hurt me--I know I deserve
it--but you shall not take this chance away from my boy. It isn't right!
it isn't fair! Hurt me all you want to, revenge yourself upon me to the
best of your ability, but don't take it out on him. I am fighting for
his happiness, and I intend to give it to him."

"Then you are going about it in a very strange way. Let him grow up and
go out into the world with clean hands and a clear conscience; let him
know that truth, and right, and honor are more important than all the
money in the world, and I'll answer for his happiness."

"He need never know," she began.

"You know, and I know. I refuse to degrade myself, even for his sake."

"There is nothing I would not do for his sake."

"Nothing! The very first thing is to give up this shameful inheritance,
and you refuse to do it."

"It is for his sake that I refuse."

Donald turned away from her. There seemed no use in trying to appeal to
her sense of right.

"Donald," she began again, "if you will not let Bobbie have the money,
then give it to my mother."

"No, I won't do it, and I have told her so. Even your sister, it seems,
has decency enough to see that I am right."

"If Alice had been married eight years, and had a child, she might feel
differently."

"I hope not," he said, without looking at her.

Edith threw herself disconsolately into a chair. "You make everything so
hard--so very hard," she cried. "Is there nothing I can say that will
move you? Is your business in West Virginia nothing to you? Tell me,
Donald, are you willing to see that fail?"

He turned on her, indignant. "I did not think you would come here and
taunt me with that! Let it fail--a thousand times; let every cent I have
in it go, rather than owe its success to him!"

"How can you be so bitter?"

"Haven't you done enough to make me so?"

"If this business does fail, what then?"

He swept his hand about the room. "This," he said. "Whatever I
have--however little it may be--as long as it is honest."

She followed his gaze and shivered, as though the place chilled her.
"And you expect me to come back to such a life?" she asked bitterly.

"If you come back at all--yes."

"To cook, and scrub, and scrape, and save, and wear out my life like a
servant! Ugh!" She shuddered.

"So it was yourself you were thinking of, after all," he cried
scornfully. "After what you have done, you ought to thank God for the
chance."

She got up and approached him, holding out her hands appealingly. "Oh,
Donald--Donald!" she cried. "Please don't make me do this--please
don't. I can't stand it--indeed, I can't."

"I do not make you do it," he answered her. "I do not even ask you to do
it. You know the conditions under which you can return here. Do as you
please."

"Can't you show a little generosity? I had hoped to come to you and talk
over our affairs in a friendly spirit."

"There is nothing to talk over. You know your duty. There is only one
question, and that question is, are you going to do it?"

She stood for a long time, as though unable to make up her mind.
Suddenly she put the whole thing aside. "It is too big a question to
decide off-hand," she said, walking away from him, her hands clenched.
"Donald--" she turned--"I want to see Bobbie." She took a step toward
the bedroom door.

Donald stepped in front of her, blocking the way. "No!" he cried
passionately. "No!"

"Donald! Don't!" she exclaimed, alarmed at his manner.

"You cannot come in here."

"I cannot see my own child? You dare tell me that?"

"Yes. You shall not see him. You shall not go near him, until you agree
to do as I say."

"You shall not do this!" she cried, her eyes blazing. "It is
wrong--wrong!"

"Then come to your senses."

"Is it possible that you could be so cruel?" she asked slowly. "Is it
possible that you could deprive that innocent child of his mother's
love?"

"It is you who are depriving him of it--not I."

"Have you thought what it will mean, if you do this thing? Don't you
know that it will break his heart? Night after night he will cry for
me--for his mother--and you cannot comfort him, and all through the long
days he will want me, and ask for me, and will not understand. You talk
about giving him truth, and right, and honor. What are those things to
him, compared to a mother's love? You shall not come between me and my
boy--you shall not--you shall not!" She concluded with a burst of
hysterical sobbing, then again started toward the bedroom. "Open that
door!" she demanded. "Open it, I say! I want my boy!"

Donald did not move. "No," he said quietly. "Bobbie stays here with me."

"You cannot take him from me. The law will not allow you." Her face
blazed with angry defiance.

"I am not taking him from you. Your home is here. It is the best that I
can provide. If you are not satisfied with it--if you leave it--you
leave me and your child as well. No law can give him back to you."

She had grown furiously angry by this time. "Do you think you can force
me to do as you wish through my love for my child?" she cried.

"I am not trying to force you to do anything," he replied. "You came
here. I did not ask you to come. Whether you stay or not depends
entirely upon yourself. The decision is yours."

She turned quickly to the chair, and picked up her coat and purse.

"Very well," she said bitterly. "If you can be determined, so can I. I
shall demand my child in court. We shall see who has the better right to
him."

"You would not dare."

"You shall see." She started toward the door.

"You are making a terrible mistake," he warned her.

She paused, turning to him. "No," she said slowly. "It is you who are
making the mistake. I came here with nothing but love, and sorrow, and
regret in my heart. You have turned them all to hate, with your
cruelty--your brutality. You have tried to hurt me through my love for
my little boy, and I hate you for it--I hate you!" She swept toward the
door, weeping hysterically.

"I have asked you to do nothing but what is right, and you know it."

"No--I do not know it. Is it right to keep me from my child? Is it right
to ask me to sacrifice his whole future? If that is right--I want none
of it." She placed her hand upon the door-knob, and turned it. Donald
followed her, an ominous look in his eyes. "Edith--where are you going?"
he demanded.

"I am going back to New London. If you have any regard for me, if you
have any regard for your child, you will come to me there." She threw
the door open, and stood upon the threshold.

Donald approached her still more closely. "If you go out of that door,
you go out of my life forever," he said sternly. "I shall never come to
you--of that you may be sure."

"Very well--you--you brute!" she cried, and turned to go.

"Stop!" he cried, springing toward her.

"No. You have gone too far." She swept into the hall.

He took her roughly by the arm. "Come back here," he cried, beside
himself with fury. "Since you say I am a brute, I will act like one." He
pulled her forcibly into the room and slammed the door.

"Don't," she cried, resisting him. "Oh! You are hurting me--Donald!" She
looked at him in wonder.

"Be quiet!" he said. "I am not hurting you half so much as you are
hurting me. I have told you what you must do, and you have got to do
it."

"What do you want with me?" she cried, still struggling with him. "Let
go my arm--let go of me, I tell you! I want to go! Oh!"

"You shall not go."

"I will! You have no right to keep me here."

"Be quiet, I say." He forced her toward the center of the room.

She burst into tears. "How dare you treat me like this?" she cried. "How
dare you? Are you mad?"

"If I am, it is you who have made me so," he said, in a fury. "You talk
about love, and repentance, and you come here and insult and humiliate
me with every word you say--with everything about you. Whom do you have
to thank for that dress, that coat, those diamonds, that jeweled purse,
and the money in it? West! West! West!" He swept upon her a look that
made her eyes fall. "I tell you I won't have it--do you understand? I
won't have it!"

She stared at him in absolute amazement, and, with her wonder there came
a feeling of admiration, almost, at his mastery of her. Never before, in
all the eight years of their married life, had she seen him as he was
now--never before had he dominated her. She felt a child in his grasp,
and in some strange way her anger began to leave her, and a sense almost
of gladness at this primitive method of dealing with the problem which
confronted them swept over her.

"Donald," she called softly to him. "Donald!" but he did not hear her.

"You are my wife--mine, do you hear?" he cried, then tore from her arm
the jeweled purse, and flung it violently from him. "Take off those
things--take them off! The sight of them insults me!" He grasped the
lace coat she held over her arm, and threw it aside. "He gave you this
necklace--damn him!" he cried, tearing it from her neck, and throwing it
upon the floor.

She looked up at him, amazed. "Donald--listen to me--please!" she cried.

He paid no attention to her. "Do as I tell you," he commanded. "Take off
that stuff--take it off!"

She tremblingly removed from her fingers a diamond and ruby ring, and
another of pearls, which her mother had persuaded her to buy.

"Give them to me." He took the rings, and hurled them across the room.

"Donald, how can you treat me like this?" she protested weakly.

"I shall treat you as I like. Henceforth I am master in this house."

"You have no right--" she began.

He took her by the arm, and flung her to the floor. "Get down on your
knees," he said, "and thank God that you have your husband, and your
child, and a roof above your head."

She looked up at him in wonder. He seemed no longer the kind and patient
husband whom she had held in secret contempt because of what had seemed
to her his lack of force--of spirit. Here was a man who meant to be
obeyed.

"And, when you have done so," she heard him saying, "ask Him to help you
to be worthy of them. God knows you need it." He stood over her, looking
down at her with fierce determination.

She caught his glance, and her eyes fell. "You--you won't let me go?"
she faltered.

"No. Your place is here, and here you shall stay. I have stood all of
this folly that I intend to stand."

She buried her face in the pillows of the couch beside which she was
kneeling, and lay thus for a long time, shaking with sobs. Into her mind
had come a new emotion--a new understanding of her love for her
husband. Always before he had failed to master her, to make her feel
that in the conjunction of their two lives he was the dominant spirit,
willing even to govern her by force, when force seemed necessary to her
welfare. What had changed him so? What had caused him to keep her here,
at his side, against her will? What, indeed, but his love for her? She
knew it was that, knew that, had he been indifferent to her, he would
have let her pass from his life without lifting a hand to prevent it. A
fierce joy rose within her heart that this man desired her so
greatly--that he held her, as the primitive man held his women, by the
right of might. She wanted all the luxuries that had come to her--wanted
them still, but, compared with the joy of realizing that Donald still
loved her, they seemed as nothing.

So he had held her--meant to hold her, against everything in the
world--against even herself, and her own folly. She rejoiced in the
thought, and her sobbing ceased. After all--he--he and her little
boy--were more to her than anything that money could buy. Had Donald
temporized with her--allowed her to keep the money that had come to
her, she knew in her heart that she would have secretly despised him,
that in the end she would have ceased to love him. It seemed good to be
home again--good to be alive. She had always wanted someone to rule
her--she felt strangely humble, knowing her own weakness. Presently she
raised her head, and found him standing beside her. With a swift, eager
movement she grasped his hand.

"I'm so--very--very glad!" she sobbed, unable to keep back her tears. "I
did not--want--to go. I never--never--want to--go away from you--again."
She looked up, her eyes shining. "Donald--do you--still care for--me--a
little?" she asked, in a quavering voice. "Do you?"

Donald's sudden burst of rage had gone. He stood looking at her with a
deep sadness in his eyes. After all, she seemed so much a child. "Do you
think I would take the trouble to keep you here, if I did not?" he
asked.

She began to sob violently. "Donald--forgive me--forgive me!" she cried.
"I shall--never go away from you--and--Bobbie--as--long--as--I live."

[Illustration: "YOU--YOU WON'T LET ME GO?" SHE FALTERED]

He looked down, not understanding this sudden change in her. "I have
kept you here for the sake of our boy," he said slowly, "and here you
must stay. But, for your sake and mine, independent of him, you must
answer me one question. Were you West's mistress?"

She started to her feet, and dashed the tears from her eyes. "No!" she
cried. "Before God--no! I was just as bad, I know, for I intended to be,
but that one thing I had not done."

"Are you telling me the truth?"

"Oh, Donald, I am--I am!" she cried hysterically.

"Then there is still a chance for you, and for me," he said, his face
lighting up with sudden joy.

"Donald!" she cried; "Donald!" and tried to smile through her tears. As
she spoke, the door of the bedroom opened, and she heard a childish
voice. "Mamma!" it said, and Bobbie rushed up to her, and threw his arms
about her.

She reached down and clasped him to her breast. "My darling--my
darling!" she cried, as she kissed him.

"Mamma--I'm so glad you've come. I had such awful dreams. I dreamed
that you and papa were fighting, and I came and called, and you wouldn't
listen to me."

"Never mind, precious. It's all right now," she said, soothing him.

"Papa told me if I prayed very hard for you to come back, you would--and
you _did_, didn't you, mamma?"

"Yes, dear," she said; then looked toward her husband, and smiled
happily.

"And you won't ever go away and leave me any more, mamma?"

"No, Bobbie--never more." She rose, and, tearing off her hat, flung it
carelessly aside, then went up to her husband, holding out her hands.
"Donald," she said, "I am ready to do anything you wish--anything." She
appeared very happy, and looked at him with a new and almost girlish
embarrassment.

He held out his arms, and took her to his heart. "Edith!" he said; then
softly kissed her hair.

                              THE END.




 TITLES SELECTED FROM
 GROSSET & DUNLAP'S LIST
 May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list.


=HIS HOUR.= By Elinor Glyn. Illustrated.

A beautiful blonde Englishwoman visits Russia, and is violently made
love to by a young Russian aristocrat. A most unique situation
complicates the romance.

=THE GAMBLERS.= By Charles Klein and Arthur Hornblow. Illustrated by C.
E. Chambers.

A big, vital treatment of a present day situation wherein men play for
big financial stakes and women flourish on the profits--or repudiate the
methods.

=CHEERFUL AMERICANS.= By Charles Battell Loomis. Illustrated by Florence
Scovel Shinn and others.

A good, wholesome, laughable presentation of some Americans at home and
abroad, on their vacations, and during their hours of relaxation.

=THE WOMAN OF THE WORLD.= By Ella Wheeler Wilcox.

Clever, original presentations of present day social problems and the
best solutions of them. A book every girl and woman should possess.

=THE LIGHT THAT LURES.= By Percy Brebner. Illustrated. Handsomely
colored wrapper.

A young Southerner who loved Lafayette, goes to France to aid him during
the days of terror, and is lured in a certain direction by the lovely
eyes of a Frenchwoman.

=THE RAMRODDERS.= By Holman Day. Frontispiece by Harold Matthews Brett.

A clever, timely story that will make politicians think and will make
women realize the part that politics play--even in their romances.

_Ask for complete free list of G. & D. Popular Copyrighted Fiction_

GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




 TITLES SELECTED FROM
 GROSSET & DUNLAP'S LIST
 May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list.


=A CERTAIN RICH MAN.= By William Allen White.

A vivid, startling portrayal of one man's financial greed, its wide
spreading power, its action in Wall Street, and its effect on the three
women most intimately in his life. A splendid, entertaining American
novel.

=IN OUR TOWN.= By William Allen White. Illustrated by F. R. Gruger and
W. Glackens.

Made up of the observations of a keen newspaper editor, involving the
town millionaire, the smart set, the literary set, the bohemian set, and
many others. All humorously related and sure to hold the attention.

=NATHAN BURKE.= By Mary S. Watts.

The story of an ambitious, backwoods Ohio boy who rose to prominence.
Everyday humor of American rustic life permeates the book.

=THE HIGH HAND.= By Jacques Futrelle. Illustrated by Will Grete.

A splendid story of the political game, with a son of the soil on the
one side, and a "kid glove" politician on the other. A pretty girl,
interested in both men, is the chief figure.

=THE BACKWOODSMEN.= By Charles G. D. Roberts. Illustrated.

Realistic stories of men and women living midst the savage beauty of the
wilderness. Human nature at its best and worst is well portrayed.

=YELLOWSTONE NIGHTS.= By Herbert Quick.

A jolly company of six artists, writers and other clever folks take a
trip through the National Park, and tell stories around camp fire at
night. Brilliantly clever and original.

=THE PROFESSOR'S MYSTERY.= By Wells Hastings and Brian Hooker.
Illustrated by Hanson Booth.

A young college professor, missing his steamer for Europe, has a
romantic meeting with a pretty girl, escorts her home, and is enveloped
in a big mystery.

_Ask for complete free list of G. & D. Popular Copyrighted Fiction_

GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




 TITLES SELECTED FROM
 GROSSET & DUNLAP'S LIST
 May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list.


=THE SILENT CALL.= By Edwin Milton Royle. Illustrated with scenes from
the play.

The hero of this story is the Squaw Man's son. He has been taken to
England, but spurns conventional life for the sake of the untamed West
and a girl's pretty face.

=JOHN MARCH, SOUTHERNER.= By George W. Cable.

A story of the pretty women and spirited men of the South. As fragrant
in sentiment as a sprig of magnolia, and as full of mystery and racial
troubles as any romance of "after the war" days.

=MR. JUSTICE RAFFLES.= By E. W. Hornung.

This engaging rascal is found helping a young cricket player out of the
toils of a money shark. Novel in plot, thrilling and amusing.

=FORTY MINUTES LATE.= By F. Hopkinson Smith. Illustrated by S. M. Chase.

Delightfully human stories of every day happenings; of a lecturer's
laughable experience because he's late, a young woman's excursion into
the stock market, etc.

=OLD LADY NUMBER 31.= By Louise Forsslund.

A heart-warming story of American rural life, telling of the adventures
of an old couple in an old folk's home, their sunny, philosophical
acceptance of misfortune and ultimate prosperity.

=THE HUSBAND'S STORY.= By David Graham Phillips.

A story that has given all Europe as well as all America much food for
thought. A young couple begin life in humble circumstances and rise in
worldly matters until the husband is enormously rich--the wife in the
most aristocratic European society--but at the price of their happiness.

=THE TRAIL OF NINETY-EIGHT.= By Robert W. Service. Illustrated by
Maynard Dixon.

One of the best stories of "Vagabondia" ever written, and one of the
most accurate and picturesque descriptions of the stampede of gold
seekers to the Yukon. The love story embedded in the narrative is
strikingly original.

_Ask for complete free list of G. & D. Popular Copyrighted Fiction_

GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




 TITLES SELECTED FROM
 GROSSET & DUNLAP'S LIST


May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list

=THE SIEGE OF THE SEVEN SUITORS.= By Meredith Nicholson. Illustrated by
C. Coles Phillips and Reginald Birch.

Seven suitors vie with each other for the love of a beautiful girl, and
she subjects them to a test that is full of mystery, magic and sheer
amusement.

=THE MAGNET.= By Henry C. Rowland. Illustrated by Clarence F. Underwood.

The story of a remarkable courtship involving three pretty girls on a
yacht, a poet-lover in pursuit, and a mix-up in the names of the girls.

=THE TURN OF THE ROAD.= By Eugenia Brooks Frothingham.

A beautiful young opera singer chooses professional success instead of
love, but comes to a place in life where the call of the heart is
stronger than worldly success.

=SCOTTIE AND HIS LADY.= By Margaret Morse. Illustrated by Harold M.
Brett.

A young girl whose affections have been blighted is presented with a
Scotch Collie to divert her mind, and the roving adventures of her pet
lead the young mistress into another romance.

=SHEILA VEDDER.= By Amelia E. Barr. Frontispiece by Harrison Fisher.

A very beautiful romance of the Shetland Islands, with a handsome,
strong willed hero and a lovely girl of Gaelic blood as heroine. A
sequel to "Jan Vedder's Wife."

=JOHN WARD, PREACHER.= By Margaret Deland.

The first big success of this much loved American novelist. It is a
powerful portrayal of a young clergyman's attempt to win his beautiful
wife to his own narrow creed.

=THE TRAIL OF NINETY-EIGHT.= By Robert W. Service. Illustrated by
Maynard Dixon.

One of the best stories of "Vagabondia" ever written, and one of the
most accurate and picturesque of the stampede of gold seekers to the
Yukon. The love story embedded in the narrative is strikingly original.

_Ask for compete free list of G. & D. Popular Copyrighted Fiction_

GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




 TITLES SELECTED FROM
 GROSSET & DUNLAP'S LIST
 REALISTIC, ENGAGING PICTURES OF LIFE


THE GARDEN OF FATE. By Roy Norton. Illustrated by Joseph Clement Coll.

The colorful romance of an American girl in Morocco, and of a beautiful
garden, whose beauty and traditions of strange subtle happenings were
closed to the world by a Sultan's seal.

THE MAN HIGHER UP. By Henry Russell Miller. Full page vignette
illustrations by M. Leone Bracker.

The story of a tenement waif who rose by his own ingenuity to the office
of mayor of his native city. His experiences while "climbing," make a
most interesting example of the possibilities of human nature to rise
above circumstances.

THE KEY TO YESTERDAY. By Charles Neville Buck. Illustrated by R.
Schabelitz.

Robert Saxon, a prominent artist, has an accident, while in Paris, which
obliterates his memory, and the only clue he has to his former life is a
rusty key. What door in Paris will it unlock? He must know that before
he woos the girl he loves.

THE DANGER TRAIL. By James Oliver Curwood. Illustrated by Charles
Livingston Bull.

The danger trail is over the snow-smothered North. A young Chicago
engineer, who is building a road through the Hudson Bay region, is
involved in mystery, and is led into ambush by a young woman.

THE GAY LORD WARING. By Houghton Townley. Illustrated by Will Grete.

A story of the smart hunting set in England. A gay young lord wins in
love against his selfish and cowardly brother and apparently against
fate itself.

BY INHERITANCE. By Octave Thanet. Illustrated by Thomas Fogarty.
Elaborate wrapper in colors.

A wealthy New England spinster with the most elaborate plans for the
education of the negro goes to visit her nephew in Arkansas, where she
learns the needs of the colored race first hand and begins to lose her
theories.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




 A FEW OF
 GROSSET & DUNLAP'S
 Great Books at Little Prices


THE MUSIC MASTER. By Charles Klein. Illustrated by John Rae.

This marvelously vivid narrative turns upon the search of a German
musician in New York for his little daughter. Mr. Klein has well
portrayed his pathetic struggle with poverty, his varied experiences in
endeavoring to meet the demands of a public not trained to an
appreciation of the classic, and his final great hour when, in the
rapidly shifting events of a big city, his little daughter, now a
beautiful young woman, is brought to his very door. A superb bit of
fiction, palpitating with the life of the great metropolis. The play in
which David Warfield scored his highest success.

DR. LAVENDAR'S PEOPLE. By Margaret Deland. Illustrated by Lucius
Hitchcock.

Mrs. Deland won so many friends through Old Chester Tales that this
volume needs no introduction beyond its title. The lovable doctor is
more ripened in this later book, and the simple comedies and tragedies
of the old village are told with dramatic charm.

OLD CHESTER TALES. By Margaret Deland. Illustrated by Howard Pyle.

Stories portraying with delightful humor and pathos a quaint people in a
sleepy old town. Dr. Lavendar, a very human and lovable "preacher," is
the connecting link between these dramatic stories from life.

HE FELL IN LOVE WITH HIS WIFE. By E. P. Roe. With frontispiece.

The hero is a farmer--a man with honest, sincere views of life. Bereft
of his wife, his home is cared for by a succession of domestics of
varying degrees of inefficiency until, from a most unpromising source,
comes a young woman who not only becomes his wife but commands his
respect and eventually wins his love. A bright and delicate romance,
revealing on both sides a love that surmounts all difficulties and
survives the censure of friends as well as the bitterness of enemies.

THE YOKE. By Elizabeth Miller.

Against the historical background of the days when the children of
Israel were delivered from the bondage of Egypt, the author has sketched
a romance of compelling charm. A biblical novel as great as any since
"Ben Hur."

SAUL OF TARSUS. By Elizabeth Miller. Illustrated by Andre Castaigne.

The scenes of this story are laid in Jerusalem, Alexandria, Rome and
Damascus. The Apostle Paul, the Martyr Stephen, Herod Agrippa and the
Emperors Tiberius and Caligula are among the mighty figures that move
through the pages. Wonderful descriptions, and a love story of the
purest and noblest type mark this most remarkable religious romance.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

1. Minor changes have been made to correct typesetters' errors;
otherwise, every effort has been made to remain true to the author's
words and intent.

2. In the advertising pages at the back of the book, titles were
underlined. These titles are enclosed between equal signs (example:
=SCOTTIE AND HIS LADY.=),



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BRUTE***


******* This file should be named 36551.txt or 36551.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/6/5/5/36551



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

