The Project Gutenberg EBook of Chickamauga, Useless, Disastrous Battle, by 
Smith D  Atkins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Chickamauga, Useless, Disastrous Battle

Author: Smith D  Atkins

Release Date: July 6, 2011 [EBook #36639]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHICKAMAUGA ***




Produced by Jeannie Howse and friend, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  Chickamauga.
  Useless, Disastrous Battle.








  Talk by Smith D. Atkins. Opera
  House, Mendota, Illinois, February
  22, 1907, at invitation of
  Woman's Relief Corps, G.A.R.


When the Civil War came in this country forty-seven years ago, I was a
young lawyer in Freeport, with not a particle of military schooling,
and not the slightest inclination for military life. But when our good
President, Abraham Lincoln, made his first call for three months'
volunteers in April, 1861, I enlisted as a private soldier, and when
mustered out at the end of three months, I again enlisted as a private
soldier, resolved that I would serve in the army until the rebellion
was crushed. Promotions came to me very rapidly. I always had a larger
command than I believed myself capable of handling.

On August 16th, 1863, when the movement of the Army of the Cumberland
began from Winchester and Dechard in middle Tennessee against the Army
of the Confederacy under Bragg at Chattanooga, I was not, as a matter
of course, informed of the plans of the campaign, for I held only the
rank of a colonel of a single regiment, and a boy at that, attached to
Wilder's Brigade of Mounted Infantry, armed with Spencer repeating
rifles, the best arm for service in the field ever invented, better
than any other arm in the world then or now, so simple in its
mechanism that it never got out of order, and was always ready for
instant service.

All the world knows now that the object of the campaign was the
capture of Chattanooga. I am not an educated soldier; I am not capable
of making any technical criticism of military campaigns; my opinions
possess no military value; I know nothing of grand tactics, and very
little of any kind of tactics; since the war I have made no critical
study of that campaign. I am averse to such studies; when the war
ended I tried to put behind me everything connected with the war, and
devote my whole attention to the duties and pursuits of peace; I would
not talk about, or read about the Civil War. I placed in my library
many volumes of campaigns in which I was engaged, but I would not read
them. By accident one day I took up a little volume, "Hood's Advance
and Retreat" over ground with which I was familiar, and read it with
intense interest, and I afterward read with interest many volumes
concerning the war.

When the advance of the Army of the Cumberland began it was the desire
of General Rosecrans, commanding the Army of the Cumberland, to
confuse and mislead Bragg, commanding the Confederate Army. In that he
was signally successful. Sending a portion of his army, cavalry,
infantry and artillery, across the Cumberland mountains into the
valley of the Tennessee north of Chattanooga to threaten that city
from the north, he led his main army across the Tennessee at
Bridgeport, Tennessee, and Caperton's Ferry, Alabama, and crossing the
mountains into Lookout Valley, swung his army to the south and west of
Chattanooga, rendering the occupation of that city untenable by Bragg
with his line of supplies threatened in his rear. From my slight
acquaintance with famous military campaigns I believe that the display
of grand tactics by Rosecrans fairly rivals that of anything in
history, and was as brilliant and successful as the famous campaign of
John Churchill, the Duke of Marlborough, before the battle of Blenheim
in 1704.

Instead of commenting on the campaign of the Army of the Cumberland
against Chattanooga, which I freely grant that from a technical
military point of view I am incapable of, I prefer to dwell upon the
movements of my own regiment in that campaign.

In the afternoon of August 16th, 1863, my regiment, attached to
Wilder's Brigade, moved out from Dechard, and climbed the Cumberland
Mountains to University Place, and crossing into the Sequatchie
Valley, climbed and crossed Walden's Ridge, reaching Poe's Tavern in
the Tennessee Valley, twelve miles north of Chattanooga, on the 21st
of August; on the 22nd, Wilder and his brigade went to a point north
of Chattanooga to directly threaten that city, while my regiment went
to Harrison's Landing, threatening to cross at that point fifteen
miles north of Chattanooga. We found the enemy in earthworks on the
edge of the river on the opposite bank, with quite a heavy fort on the
hills back from the river, mounting three guns en barbette. Our
Spencer rifles carried over the river easily, nearly a mile wide, and
the Confederates were kept closely within their rifle pits by our
sharpshooters.

For a bullet from a rifle to travel a mile takes a long time. Let me
illustrate that. The Confederate officer of the day, with his sash
across his shoulder, came riding down to the river from the
Confederate fort, and was soon kneeling under a box elder tree on the
bank of the river, and I said to my adjutant standing by me, "What is
he doing?" but I had hardly asked the question, when a blue puff of
smoke told me that he was shooting at us; Adjutant Lawyer stepped
behind a tree, when the bullet from the Confederate rifle passed over
my head, and through the side of the house by which I was standing,
wounding one of my soldiers inside of the house, the first soldier in
my regiment to be struck with rebel lead. If you see a man shooting a
rifle at you a mile away, you will have abundant time to dodge before
the bullet reaches you; if you can dodge behind a tree, as my Adjutant
did, you will be safe; but if you are in the open you may as well
stand still, for you are as liable to dodge in front of the bullet as
away from it.

On the 24th of August I returned to Harrison's Landing with my
regiment and two 10-pound rifled guns of Lilly's Indiana Battery,
under a Lieutenant. He was a volunteer officer, but a studious one,
and had mastered the science of artillery firing. I placed the two
guns on the bluff on our side of the river, and ordered the Lieutenant
to open fire at the Confederate fort, probably about two miles away,
when I rode on to the bank of the river, opposite the Confederate
fort, where I could plainly see the effect of the artillery firing. I
waited an hour for the guns to open, but they didn't, and I rode back
to see about it. He had cut down some trees to get a plain view of the
Confederate fort, dug holes for the trails of the guns, and there they
stood, pointing at the sky, and the Lieutenant stood there steadily
eyeing the Confederate fort, with its three guns, en barbette, a brass
gun in the center and a steel gun each side of it. I yelled at him to
know why he didn't fire, and he replied, without taking his eyes from
the fort, "I am waiting for some one to stand up on the parapet of the
fort; I have an instrument here (a flat piece of brass full of holes
of different sizes) by which I can tell the exact distance in yards if
some one will stand up; with another instrument I know the elevation,
just how much lower that fort is than where my guns stand." I replied,
"Perhaps no soldier will ever stand up," and he answered, "Oh, yes,
there will," and almost immediately said, "There. I have got it," and
while he kneeled upon the ground to figure out the problem, and cut
his shells, and load his guns, I dismounted and went down the bluff
immediately in front of his guns until I found a place from which I
could plainly see the Confederate fort, and, adjusting my field glass,
hoped to see the effect of his shots; but I was enveloped in smoke
when he fired, and could see nothing. But we learned the effect of his
scientific firing a few days afterward when we captured a copy of the
Daily Chattanooga Rebel, printed on wall paper, Henry Watterson, now
the distinguished editor of the Louisville Courier-Journal, publisher,
that said the Yankee artillery at Harrison's Landing at the first
fire dismounted the brass gun in the Confederate fort, and killed four
men. No one showed himself about that fort afterwards, and, although
he continued firing, more to make a noise and worry Bragg at
Chattanooga than anything else, the Confederates made no attempt to
reply to our artillery. Those two shots by him, scientifically fired,
after he knew the elevation and distance, hit the mark and did the
business. Roosevelt says, "It is the shots that hit that count;" that
is true. One center shot is worth forty shot at random. That is why
Dewey, in Manilla Bay, sunk the Spanish fleet. I spent several days, a
few years ago, at Fortress Monroe, in Virginia, and all the forenoon
of each day listened to the firing of heavy guns by the battleships of
our navy at targets, when it cost five hundred dollars for every shot
fired. The absolute accuracy of scientific firing is an astonishment.
I have seen a man fire sixteen shots at a target one even mile away,
and hit the bull's eye every shot, and he declared that he could hit
it every time for a hundred shots. Our navy is made up of volunteers;
it is expensive to educate them, but they make the best gunners in the
world, and if we keep a navy at all, it is the greatest economy to
keep it always in a state of the highest efficiency.

Our country has, and always will, depend upon patriotic volunteers in
time of need. I read in an English magazine that an Englishman on one
of Dewey's ships in Manilla Bay noticed that the gunner's lips moved
as if he was saying something after each shot. He crowded up close to
him, and every time the gun was fired the gunner said "Cash." The
Englishman told the captain of the ship about it, who said the
explanation was easy--that gunner before he enlisted in the navy was a
dry-goods clerk, and always said "Cash" when a transaction was
completed. The soldiers who saved the Republic were citizen soldiers,
the best soldiery in the world, and it will always be so while the
Republic shall endure.

On September 4th, 1863, my regiment was ordered to join Wilder, north
of Chattanooga, and on reporting to Wilder I found that my regiment
was ordered to report to General Thomas to be used by General
Rosecrans for scouting purposes, and immediately ascended to the top
of Walden's Ridge, a continuation of Lookout Mountain, on the north
side of the Tennessee River, and from that elevation I looked for
hours with my field glass into the deserted streets of Chattanooga,
and became convinced that Bragg had evacuated that Confederate
stronghold. Crossing the Tennessee River on the pontoons at
Bridgeport, I reported to General Thomas, and in person to General
Rosecrans at Trenton, twenty miles from Chattanooga, on the west side
of Lookout Mountain, on the forenoon of September 8th, 1863, and gave
General Rosecrans my reason for believing that Chattanooga had been
evacuated by Bragg, and nothing left there but his cavalry to curtain
his movements. I told General Rosecrans I had found a cow-path on the
west side of Lookout Mountain, four miles from its head, that cattle
could go up onto the mountain, and offered to send a body of the
Ninety-Second men onto the mountain by that cow-path, and drive the
enemy's cavalry from off the mountain, demonstrating that Chattanooga
was evacuated, and by the order of General Rosecrans I did so, and
again reported to him in person at Trenton about 9 o'clock on the
evening of September 8th, 1863, and was ordered by him to take the
advance into Chattanooga on the morning of the 9th of September, 1863.
Crossing the nose of the mountain on the Nashville road early on the
morning of September 9th, I found the enemy's cavalry holding the
road, and my regiment was driving them over the mountain when Wilder's
Brigade battery from Moccasin Point on the north side of the Tennessee
began throwing its shells onto the mountain, enfilading my line of
skirmishers, and I was compelled to fall back. It was decidedly
disagreeable to be fired upon by the artillery of the brigade to which
my regiment belonged. How to communicate with Wilder and stop that
firing was a difficult problem, and I thought the only way to do so
would be to have some one swim the river; but that would occasion long
delay. A little boy, a stranger to me, said he had served in the
signal corps, and could send a message by tying his handkerchief to
two hazel sticks, and when he was ready, standing on a jutting rock
where he could be seen by Wilder's men across the river, he inquired
what message, and I said, "Ninety-Second Illinois," and he had not
long been waving his flag, spelling out the words, when Wilder's men
on the north side of the river set up a great cheer, and, knowing they
would no longer fire upon us, we pressed forward, driving the
Confederates before us and off the mountain, and at 10 o'clock a.m.
the flag of the Ninety-Second Illinois Volunteers was floating from
the top of the Crutchfield House, the first Union flag to float in
Chattanooga since Bragg's army occupied that place.

I had brought to me every person I could find, and sent word back to
Rosecrans that Bragg had evacuated the city and fallen back beyond
Chickamauga with the intention of giving battle as soon as his
reinforcements came from Lee's army in Virginia.

Now, keep this date carefully in mind, September 9th, 1863, while the
battle of Chickamauga was not begun until ten days after that, on
September 19th, 1863. I believed then, and I believe now, that General
Rosecrans could have put the Army of the Cumberland into Chattanooga
by the evening of September 10th, 1863, without the loss of a man or a
wheel. I know that he could have done that, and the battle of
Chickamauga, with its awful loss of life, have been wholly avoided. It
was a useless battle, and because it was useless and disastrous
Rosecrans was relieved from the command of the Army of the Cumberland,
and was never again restored to favor as an army commander. These
views are not new; they were entertained and expressed by me at that
time, and I have entertained them ever since, and never hesitated to
express them. The battle of Chickamauga was a useless battle, the
broken and shattered Army of the Cumberland driven from the field and
cooped up and nearly starved to death in Chattanooga, that Rosecrans
was in full possession of on September 9th, 1863, and which might have
been held by him with his full army intact, with abundant force to
protect his line of supplies, and where he never could have been or
would have been assaulted by the Confederate army. That was my
deliberate judgment at that time, and, it will be, in my opinion, the
deliberate judgment of history. My opinion may not be worth much,
because I am technically not an educated soldier. Neither was John
Churchill, the Duke of Marlborough, the greatest soldier England ever
produced, an educated soldier. He was absolutely without any military
education whatever when he was placed at the head of the English army.
Common sense is often quite as valuable as technical military
knowledge, and by every rule of common sense, Rosecrans should have
occupied the evacuated city of Chattanooga when he became in full
possession of it on September 9th, 1863, and have avoided entirely the
bloody and disastrous battle of Chickamauga.

My orders from General Rosecrans were to enter the city of
Chattanooga, obtain all the information possible concerning the
evacuation by Bragg, and to return to him with my regiment. When I was
ready to start back the road was filled with Crittenden's corps of the
Army of the Cumberland, that followed me into Chattanooga, and when
just ready to return I was ordered by General Crittenden to go up the
Tennessee River to Fire Island, ten miles, and enable Wilder with his
brigade to cross. I told Crittenden of my order to return to General
Rosecrans, but he gave me positive orders, and I obeyed, driving small
parties of the Confederate cavalry before me until I reached a famous
grape plantation eight miles north of Chattanooga, where I learned
that Wilder's Brigade was already crossing the river; putting my
regiment into camp I rode forward to communicate with Wilder, and was
by him positively ordered to march with his brigade the next day,
which I did, camping at night at Grayville, almost directly east of
Chattanooga, and during the night I received positive orders to report
with my regiment to General Rosecrans at La Fayette, Georgia, and
moving before daylight on September 11th I struck the Confederate
pickets about two miles north of Ringgold. Sending word back to Wilder
I dismounted my regiment, when the enemy mounted and moved out to
charge my line--waiting until they were close upon me my repeating
Spencer rifles halted their charge and turned it back. Then they
formed in two lines to renew the charge when Wilder came up with a
section of 10-pound rifled cannon, and opened immediately. Instantly
the artillery fire was answered, but not a shot came near us; firing
again with our artillery, instantly came the response. We did not know
it then, but Crittenden's troops were approaching Ringgold from the
west and we from the north, and it was Crittenden's guns we heard,
while Forrest retreated through Ringgold gap. Had Crittenden's troops
and Wilder's Brigade been acting in concert, General Forrest and his
cavalry would have been captured at Ringgold. Sending out a company on
the La Fayette road, the enemy was found in strong force at the
Chickamauga River, and my regiment marched to Rossville, reaching
there after dark. Confident that Rosecrans was in Chattanooga, and not
in La Fayette, I sent officers to Chattanooga before daylight on the
12th of September, but they did not return to me, and an hour after
daylight I took the road to La Fayette, striking the enemy in strong
force at Gordon's Mill on the Chickamauga. I was without corn for my
animals, and finding a cornfield I fed my horses and filled the
nose-bags with corn, and was just about to cross the river with my
regiment when I received a written order from General Rosecrans to
send my regiment to the foot of Lookout Mountain and report in person
to General Rosecrans at Chattanooga, which I did, and was ordered to
find Thomas somewhere on Lookout Mountain, and marching all night down
the mountain I communicated with Thomas at daylight on September 13th,
and sent word to General Rosecrans at Chattanooga. During the day my
regiment followed General Thomas down the mountain on its east side at
Dug Gap. On the 14th, 15th, 16th and 17th of September with my
regiment I scouted the country between Dug Gap and Gordon's Mill,
finding the crossings of the Chickamauga always heavily guarded by the
enemy. I was never ordered to scout south and east of the Chickamauga
River. I never knew why. No Union soldiers ever were sent by Rosecrans
south of that river so far as I know. The woods were full of Rebel
spies pretending to be deserters, and by the order of General
Rosecrans none of them were arrested or interfered with in any way, as
Rosecrans believed that Bragg's army was disintegrating and going
home, and General Rosecrans thought that the Rebel spies were
deserters from Bragg's army. They were not. They were well and strong,
and well clothed, and such men seldom desert from any army. I never
could understand the infatuation of a Union General who by his own
official orders filled his camps with spies from the forces opposing
him.

Early on the morning of September 19th, 1863, the Army of the
Cumberland began its race for Chattanooga, where that army might have
been and should have been safely placed ten days before that time. In
that race the Army of the Cumberland was attacked in flank by Bragg's
army. The Army of the Cumberland would repulse the enemy at some
point, and immediately move on toward Chattanooga. All day long it was
a continuous race. At about 10 a.m. my regiment was ordered by General
Rosecrans to take position and rest in a field southeast of Widow
Glenn's house, and putting my regiment in the field, I sent out a
skirmish line into the woods in my front, and captured a prisoner from
the Confederate skirmish line that was found west of the La Fayette
road. The prisoner was brought immediately to me. He was a Virginia
boy, badly frightened at first, but he soon told me that he belonged
to Longstreet's corps from the Virginia Army, and detailed to me how
he came by cars, where they disembarked, and how they marched to the
battlefield. I took the prisoner, the first one captured from
Longstreet's corps, to General Rosecrans at his then headquarters at
Widow Glenn's house, and told him that I had a prisoner from
Longstreet's corps, when Rosecrans flew into a passion, denounced the
little boy as a liar, declared that Longstreet's corps was not there.
The little boy prisoner was so frightened that he would not speak a
word. In sorrow I turned away, and joined my regiment. Rosecrans found
out that Longstreet's corps was there.

Shortly I was ordered to march rapidly toward Chattanooga, and I
suppose a mile or so northeast of Widow Glenn's house I met General
Joseph J. Reynolds, who told me that King's Brigade of his division
was broken by the enemy, and ordered me to dismount and try to stop
the enemy that was pouring through our lines, which I did, and the
Ninety-Second, with their Spencer rifles, easily, on three occasions,
drove the enemy back in its immediate front as they emerged from the
woods east of the La Fayette road; but they swarmed by my right flank
in great force, and I was compelled to withdraw. I found thousands of
Union troops in disorder floating off through the woods toward
Chattanooga, but I sought and found the left flank of the Confederate
troops that had broken through our lines, and reported to Colonel
Wilder at Vinings, and was ordered by him to put my regiment in line
dismounted on the left of his brigade.

During the night of the 19th of September Rosecrans withdrew McCook's
corps on his right, and formed a new line on the low hills southwest
of Widow Glenn's, Wilder withdrawing his brigade and forming a new
line south of McCook's corps; but my regiment mounted before daylight
covered the entire front of Wilder's Brigade, ordered to fall back to
the new line when pressed by the enemy.

Daylight came; with it white flags in our front where the Confederates
were burying their dead. An hour after daylight I discovered a heavy
column of the enemy, in column of companies doubled on the center,
slowly and silently creeping past my left flank toward the left flank
of McCook's corps. I repeatedly sent him information of the approach
of that heavy column of the enemy, but he testily declared that there
was no truth in it, and refused to send a skirmish line of his own,
that he might easily have done, and found out for himself. When
Longstreet's corps sprang with a yell upon the left flank of McCook's
corps, the line in my front advanced, and I retired to join Wilder as
ordered. McCook's corps was wiped off the field without any attempt at
real resistance, and floated off from the battlefield like flecks of
foam upon a river. His artillerymen cut the traces, and leaving the
guns, rode away toward Chattanooga. The rout of McCook's corps was
complete. I found Wilder, who proposed to charge through Longstreet's
corps with his brigade, and join Thomas on Snodgrass Hill, but Charles
A. Dana, Assistant Secretary of War, rode up and ordered Wilder not to
make the charge, declaring the battle was lost, and ordering Wilder to
Chattanooga by the Dry Valley road. Lingering long on the field,
taking up the Union hospitals at Crawfish Spring, and taking with him
the abandoned artillery of McCook's corps, Wilder sullenly retired,
followed by a light force of the Confederate cavalry.

The heroic conduct of Thomas on Snodgrass Hill saved the Army of the
Cumberland from total rout and defeat, but that gallant soldier with
his jaded but brave troops sought safety in flight to Rossville Gap
under the cover of the friendly darkness of the night.

The useless battle had been fought, the useless sacrifice of thousands
of brave men of the Army of the Cumberland had been made, and the
shattered remnant of the Army of the Cumberland in Chattanooga, where
the entire army might have been and ought to have been on the evening
of September 10th, 1863, without the loss of a man or a wheel.

I cannot linger to tell how Hooker and Howard came from the Army of
the Potomac to rescue the Army of the Cumberland from its terrible
plight: how the Army of the Tennessee hastened under Sherman from
Vicksburg, of the battle above the clouds by Hooker's brave soldiers,
or how the brave men of the Army of the Cumberland, without orders and
against orders, sprung forward, up, and up, and up, for three hundred
feet to the very mouths of the Confederate cannon belching grape and
canister in their faces, sweeping Bragg and his Confederate Army off
from Missionary Ridge. It is a magnificent story that the surviving
soldiers of the grand old Army of the Cumberland will not cease
telling while life lasts.

The volunteer soldiers were not only brave always, but they were
sensible always. They complained very loudly when they had a right to
complain, and they submitted to every hardship without complaint when
there was necessity for it. Let me illustrate that. After the battle
of Chickamauga my regiment was sent north of Chattanooga, on the north
side of the river, to guard the river for forty miles. We were without
rations for animals or men, living on a few grains of corn gathered
from the rubbish left in the fields where all the corn had been taken
long before, and unripe chestnuts, that we had to cut down the
chestnut trees to gather. But we had a pack mule train, seventy-five
mules with pack-saddles, and I sent the train over the mountains to
bring rations from Bridgeport for the men of my regiment. One night we
heard that the pack mule train loaded with rations was encamped on the
mountain above Poe's Tavern, and would be down in the morning about 10
o'clock. That was joyful news for the men of my regiment. But at 8
o'clock the next morning I received a letter from General Garfield,
Chief of Staff of the Army of the Cumberland, ordering me not to take
one ration from the train, but to send the train on to Chattanooga. I
gave the information to the men of my regiment. Did they complain? No.
Not one man made one word of complaint. When the train came along
about 10 o'clock, without any order of any kind, the men of the
Ninety-Second lined up by the side of the road, swinging their hats
and cheering when their own rations went by and onward toward
Chattanooga, where their brave comrades of the Army of the Cumberland
could not get green chestnuts to eat. That was the kind of men that
composed the volunteer Army of the Union who saved the Republic.

Some of them are here tonight. They compose your Grand Army post here
in Mendota. Honor them while yet you may, for, in only a few years
more, the last one of that Grand Army will have gone beyond the dark
river.

But the young men of today are as patriotic as the young men of 1861,
and if the time ever comes when the Republic is in danger they will
spring to arms and repeat the heroic deeds of their fathers, and the
Republic will last "until the sun grows cold, and the stars are old,
and the leaves of the judgment book unfold."


[Illustration]


       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                   |
    |                                                           |
    | Page 6: "ad hit the bull's" replaced with                 |
    |         "and hit the bull's"                              |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Chickamauga, Useless, Disastrous Battle, by 
Smith D  Atkins

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHICKAMAUGA ***

***** This file should be named 36639.txt or 36639.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/6/3/36639/

Produced by Jeannie Howse and friend, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
