The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Scapegoat, by Richard Maples

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Scapegoat

Author: Richard Maples

Release Date: July 13, 2011 [EBook #36719]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCAPEGOAT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Dianna Adair and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











THE SCAPEGOAT

By RICHARD MAPLES

     _Who would not have pity for a poor, helpless victim?
     Nobody--except another poor victim!_

Illustrated by WEISS


The old guy didn't have a chance. All he could do was shield his head
with limp arms and moan, while this other fellow--a young, husky
six-footer--gave him a vicious, cold-blooded beating.

"Hey, there!" I yelled indignantly. "Cut it out!"

But the kid kept belting away, as if he were methodically working out on
a fifty-pound training bag. Finally, the old man sagged to the pavement.
Then this hoodlum began to kick him.

I'm not a hero. I'm a newspaper man whose job it is to look at things
objectively. But I know right from wrong.

My one punch caught the young bruiser back of the ear and spilled him on
the ground. He lay there for a moment, then rolled over. Even by the
street light, it was easy to see his eyes were glassy.

It gave me lots of satisfaction. I'm not a big man--just compact--but I
take care of myself. I don't drink or smoke and I exercise regularly.
The result is I can handle myself in the clinches.

The kid sat up and pushed himself unsteadily to his feet. I could see
now that he was a college boy. The red sweater with the terrycloth
border and the white pants with a shortened left leg were a dead
giveaway.

"Listen here," I said roughly, "you nuts? Beating up an old man!"

He appeared to be desperately searching for an explanation--something to
say. Then, abruptly, without having uttered a sound, he reeled away and
shambled hurriedly down the street.

My first inclination was to give chase. But the old man groaned and I
turned to help him. That was when I had it--a virtual brain storm.

This whole episode, I could see, was a perfect answer to the damnable
criticisms leveled at my series on juvenile delinquency. More than that,
it was an absolute vindication!

       *       *       *       *       *

Barely an hour ago, I'd had to sit at a meeting and take it on the chin
from twenty of the town's leading lights who designated themselves The
Committee for the Protection of Youth. The outfit was, of course,
politically inspired. It had obviously been started by the Mayor and his
gang as a means of torpedoing Jones, the publisher of my paper. Jones,
you see, had become politically ambitious himself.

Since I was the star on Jones' team, they piled on me. Some of the nicer
things said about my articles were that they constituted filthy
muckraking, were a pattern of irresponsible lies, and were designed
principally to smear the incumbent politicos. The children of the town,
they cried, were being sacrificed to ruthless ambition.

It wouldn't have been so bad if Jones had stuck by me. But he cut and
ran. Discretion, he had whispered to me from behind a pudgy hand, was
the better part of valor. Then he told them he would discontinue the
articles.

Now I had first-hand proof of a particularly brutal bit of delinquency.
A cruel assault on a poor, helpless old man! Furthermore, I was the hero
of the incident!

Bending down to see how seriously the old man had been hurt, I asked,
"What happened, Pop? Was he trying to rob you or something?" He didn't
answer.

[Illustration]

I looked around for help, but the street was deserted. The best thing, I
decided, was to take him home. There Nan, my wife, could patch him up
while I found out what had happened. I bent down again and pulled him to
his feet. He staggered. I put one steadying hand on his shoulder and
gripped his wrist with the other. My spine went cold.

It was his flesh. Not so much that it felt like rubber--but the chill.
Here we were in the middle of a heat wave, the thermometer nudging
ninety, and the old guy's wrist is like an icicle!

For a second, it threw me. Then I thought of shock. That might explain
it. And Nan, having been a nurse, would be the one to know.

I started the old man walking. "See if you can make it to my house," I
urged. "It's just around the corner."

Nan switched on the porch light when she heard us on the steps. Opening
the door, she drew back with a little shriek. The old man was pretty
gruesome-looking at that. But it wasn't just his blood-covered face and
matted white beard.

There was something spiderish about him. He was angular, and dark, and
skeletal. His eyes, deep-set and brooding, seemed to crouch under his
shaggy, jutting brows.

"Take it easy, honey," I said. "The old guy just needs some patching
up."

       *       *       *       *       *

She recovered quickly and helped him into the house. After we'd eased
him into the easy chair by the fireplace in the living room, she turned
to me, worried. "Were you in an accident?"

I gave her the story and she looked at me sharply, but didn't speak. She
went into the bedroom and came back with blankets and medicine bottles.
Tucking the blankets around the old man's legs, she said, "But I don't
understand why you were walking. You went to the meeting in Jones' car.
Why didn't he bring you back?"

I didn't answer. The old man had closed his eyes and his breathing was
becoming very shallow. "Look at him," I said. "Is he all right?"

"He's sleeping. Why don't you answer my question?"

"Jones didn't bring me home because I had words with him and walked away
in a huff."

"Over the meeting?"

"Partly." I explained about the meeting and how Jones had back-tracked
when the going got rough. "After all, it was his idea to build
circulation with sensational articles and to use them to attack the
present administration. But when there's a showdown, he acts like a
scared rabbit. And that's what I told him."

"I'm glad," Nan said, her face brightening. "What did he say to that?"

"He gave me a lot of bull about it being a mistake to pick on people's
children and how we should stick to old standbys like red-light
districts and dope trafficking."

Nan slapped the iodine on the table. "Some nerve! What did you tell
him?"

"I told him he was jerking the rug from under me and that I'd be damned
if I'd write a bunch of warmed-over tripe. Then I walked away."

"You finally quit!"

Until then, I don't think I'd ever realized just how much Nan hated my
work. Of course, off and on, we'd really had some knock-down drag-outs,
but I'd never considered them serious. Oh, we often talked about my
going into teaching physical ed. It had been my intention ever since
college. Some day I'd actually do it.

I shook my head. "No, honey, I didn't quit."

"But you're going to?"

I shrugged in a gesture of helplessness. "How can I? An unprovoked
attack against a poor old man is dynamite. It puts me in the driver's
seat. I can write an article that will make every mealy-mouthed
hypocrite who spoke against me tonight eat his words."

       *       *       *       *       *

The fire in her eyes died. "It's always something," she said wearily.
"Year after year, you've come up with one reason or another to stay in
the rotten business. And what does it amount to? Mud-slinging! I'm
beginning to think you like it!"

She'd never come out so bluntly and, deep down, I felt my resentment
pressing like the sharp edge of a coiled spring. Originally, getting
into the newspaper game had been a sort of fluke. Majoring in physical
ed at college, I often covered the various sports events for the campus
paper. One day, a big-time scandal broke, involving gamblers and one of
the teams, and I found myself in a perfect spot to do an exclusive for a
city paper. My stuff was run verbatim under a by-line and afterward
picked up by the wire services.

Later, with a trick knee keeping me out of the war, I managed to talk
myself into a job with the newspaper that had run my expose. I was
goaded by a feeling that I ought to be doing something bigger than
teaching children how to play games.

From the very start, I discovered I had a peculiar talent. If I found
myself anywhere near a skeleton in a closet, I could plainly hear its
rattle. Before long, my reputation was firmly established.

Nan, whom I'd met at college, knew of my ambition to teach and began
planning toward that end as soon as we married. She started what she
called a quitting fund. This was to stake a move to a small town where
her uncle was principal of the high school. He was supposed to help me
get a foothold in the new career.

But then Tommy was born and there were bills to pay. After that there
were other reasons, like car payments. By the end of the war, the
teaching plans were no longer discussed, and Nan and I had drawn so far
apart that even the bickering between us had ceased.

Finally, when Tommy was about ten, she suddenly let me have it.

It seems the kid was running around with a tough crowd. She wanted to
get him away from the city. He needed the fresh air and the decent,
normal home-life of a small town, she said. And she meant every word of
it.

Luckily, Jones had come along right about then and offered me a job on
his newspaper, back in the old home town. He had an idea he could drive
the opposition paper out of business by featuring yellow journalism at
the local level. That's where I came in. With my ability to make the
news bleed, he figured he could cinch it. For that reason, he was
willing to double my present salary. So I accepted.

Nan, of course, was furious, even though I pointed out the extra dough
meant we could start planning again. She didn't calm down until I
promised to quit the job after six months.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yes, it was always something. She was right enough about that. But she
had no right to make such an issue of things. I started to tell her
that, then stopped. Maybe she was picking a quarrel to make me forget
about the old man and the story. I threw a fast block into my
resentment.

"Honey," I said, "don't be unreasonable. Remember this job with Jones
was supposed to get Tommy away from the city, and the extra dough was
all part of that big plan for the teaching business."

"What plan?" she flared. "There never was a plan except to pamper your
vanity! Big-shot Potter, the whiz-bang newspaperman! That's all you've
ever been interested in!"

I had to take a deep breath to keep from yelling back at her. "You're
not being very fair about this. I did it all with you and Tommy in
mind."

Her voice lowered. "Is that so? Well, how about the promise to quit in
six months? We've saved the money. What marvelous thing do you have in
mind for me and Tommy now?"

That _hurt_. As a matter of fact, I'd been quite enjoying the stint with
Jones. My series on juvenile delinquency had just about doubled
circulation and that gave me a deep sense of accomplishment. Then, too,
writing the stuff against the Mayor and the rest of the town's
big-wigs--in keeping with Jones' political ambitions--nurtured a feeling
of power that was very satisfying.

Frankly, the meeting earlier that evening had set me down harder than I
cared to admit. Now, with every chance for a comeback, Nan wanted me to
pass!

"Listen," I snarled, "so it's hot. So don't take it out on me!"

Her fists bunched and the color drained from her face. Knowing the
signs, I could tell this was going to be a lulu.

But the door flew open and Tommy came clomping through the hallway and
into the front room. He's a big kid for his age, mentally and
physically. He spotted the old man right away.

"Gol_lee_!" he breathed excitedly. "Who's the creep?"

"Never mind," Nan said, quickly recovering her composure. "He's had an
accident. Just get some money from your father and go to the drugstore
for more bandages. I'll need them."

I gave him a buck and he ran out the kitchen way, slamming the back door
so hard, the whole house shook.

The old man's eyes flickered open. He looked at me first, then at Nan.
"Well," he said in a peculiar muffled tone that suggested he was
speaking through an obstruction like a fencing mask, "isn't this cozy!"

I immediately threw a lot of questions at him. His name, he said, was
Ashe--just plain Ashe. He couldn't remember any other name. He couldn't
remember why he'd been beaten up, nor what had led up to it. He was very
confused. He thought maybe it would all come back to him later. However,
he did remember my rescuing him and he appreciated that very much.
Hearing him say so gave me a nice, tingling glow. I invited him to stay
for dinner and he accepted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nan objected. "There's only salad," she wailed. "It was too hot to
cook."

"Salad's fine," I told her.

"Oh, Ted, please!"

"Listen here," I said coldly, "I've invited Ashe to stay and he's
accepted. Why all the fuss?"

She gave me a hurt look, turned, flounced into the kitchen. I started to
follow, thinking I'd made a mistake in being so brusque. Then I thought,
the heck with it. Let her take it any way she wanted.

Sweat was plastering my shirt and pants to me like a skindiver's outfit.
I needed a shower. I told Ashe to rest easy and went into the bathroom.

When I came out, Tommy had returned. He and the old man were busily
gabbing. Nan, standing by the kitchen door, frantically signaled me to
join her. In the kitchen, she backed me against the sink. "Get him out
of here!"

"Why?" I asked, startled.

"There's something wrong with him."

"Wrong?"

"He gives me the willies."

"It's just the heat," I scoffed.

"If you must know, he--he leered at me! While you were in the shower. It
was awful!"

"Nan, do you think that kind of yarn is going to stop me from writing
about what happened tonight? It won't. And you can make up your mind I'm
keeping the job. When I get through with the people in this town,
they'll know they've been dealing with Edward Potter!"

Tight-lipped, she went to the refrigerator for the supper.

As soon as we'd sat down, Ashe began to talk. He kept it up through the
entire meal. He'd been everywhere and done everything, to hear him tell
it. Tommy, listening bug-eyed, kept asking questions. It sort of got me.
The hero of the affair, to my own son, was Ashe!

It was Nan who finally blew the whistle.

"Mr. Ashe," she said, her voice honed to a razor-edge, "I'm sure Ted
would be much more interested in knowing what led up to the fight
tonight--or are you still confused?"

There was a beat of three while he studied Nan carefully. Then he said,
"It's quite apparent, Mrs. Potter, that you've absolutely no use for me.
This shows discernment. Most likely, with a woman's instinct, you've hit
upon at least part of the truth. Because of that, it might be wise to
lay all my cards on the table. But I warn you, it will be hard to
believe."

"That," said Nan, leaning back with a gleam of triumph in her eyes,
"I'll bet on!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was hard to believe, all right. So hard, in fact, that I thought he
was just pulling Nan's leg.

He said he'd come from another world, outside our solar system, where
people existed in a kind of liquid state, bouncing about, for the most
part, like large water-filled bladders. They were, however, capable of
taking almost any shape their superior minds willed. They could flatten
and drift about in the water, or they could inflate and rise in the air.
They could even become facsimiles of other living things, taking on the
shape, texture and coloration, a capability which aided greatly in their
main function of traveling as missionaries of goodness amongst the
peoples of the Galaxy. For they were perfect--as perfect as angels.

As he talked, Nan's face got redder and redder. Finally, when I couldn't
keep from snickering, she jumped up, grabbed her empty plate and headed
for the kitchen.

"Don't rush off, honey," I said innocently.

She stopped at the kitchen door and glared at me. "I guess I know when
I'm being kidded!"

"But," said Ashe in his cold, dry purr, "I'm not kidding."

It seemed to me the joke had gone far enough. "Don't tell me," I said
sarcastically, "that you're a missionary to Earth!"

"No," he admitted. "I'm here because I was banished."

"Oh. A sort of fallen angel!"

"Exactly."

Another chill scurried along my spine. It was his tone of voice more
than anything. But then, too, his eyes had a dull, black humorlessness
about them.

Nan returned to the table and sat down. I noticed a band of perspiration
mustaching her upper lip. Indeed, I seemed to have grown much hotter
myself.

Irritably, I said, "Ashe, it's too damn warm for games. If you don't
want to explain what happened this evening, that's your privilege. But,
as you know, the story means a lot to me. And I did stick my neck out
for you!"

He held up a gnarled hand. "One moment, my boy. Let me finish."

So he finished. And the rest of the story was even nuttier.

He was a throwback, he said with quiet pride. The perfection which had
taken his people countless years to attain was wiped out the moment he
came into being. They'd tried to reform him, but there was something
fundamental about his evil--as if it were an essence.

As a last resort, they'd put him into one of their wonderful machines
and thrown the switch. At that agonizing instant, he'd imagined himself
to be water scraping over the edge of a sharp rock. Then he'd come to,
drifting through space. And, much later, he'd touched Earth. Once
landed, he'd taken on many shapes, through the years--mainly, however,
of people who'd died.

       *       *       *       *       *

Even as he talked, I was carefully sliding my chair back. If I could
reach the phone in the hallway without being noticed, it would be
fairly simple to get help. But he saw what I was doing and laughed.

"Edward," he said, "I know you don't believe me, but stick around until
I prove it."

What happened next almost made me sick to my stomach. His face, which
had been as wrinkled as a fielder's mitt, all of a sudden took on the
appearance of a disturbed reflection in a pool of water. His flesh began
to writhe like a tangled mass of earthworms. Thirty seconds after it
began, he'd sloughed off thirty years. Even his beard, which had been as
white as shower-room tiling, became a fierce, dead black.

I heard Tommy pipe, "Gol_lee_!" and Nan sigh--only it sounded more like
a groan. I shook away the dazed feeling and it was immediately replaced
by a great excitement.

"Listen here," I said hoarsely, "this story will set the whole country
on its ear. With my by-line on it!"

"Oh, Ted," Nan cried, "don't let him take you in! It's a trick.
It's--it's mass hypnotism or something."

"The trouble with you," I said, "is you don't believe even what you see
with your own eyes!"

The next day, I went to see Jones. We'd decided--Ashe and I--upon a
course of action. The existence of Ashe was to remain a secret, but I
was to keep my job with the paper at all costs. Then we could sit back
and wait for the opportune moment to spill it, a time when we had the
best angle and were positive Ashe wouldn't be labeled a hoax.

Driving to the plant, I was tense enough to snap. It was not entirely
from the unabated heat, either. I didn't like the way Ashe had acted
during the latter part of the evening.

Naturally I had felt disappointment at not being able to reveal his
presence. But what rankled most was the guy's colossal gall. Okay, so
I'm childish, only I just don't like to have someone gobble up my share
of the dessert.

He'd also borrowed all the cash in the house and then demanded I draw on
my bank account. I quickly discouraged that. But the topper was his
forcing Nan and me to sleep on the couch while he used the bed. He said
his bruises still hurt, even though they weren't visible.

       *       *       *       *       *

My mood didn't improve when Jones kept me waiting for over an hour.
Surprisingly enough, he was in good spirits. As I entered the office, he
indicated one of the leather chairs and said with a laugh, "Sit down,
Ted. I've got some good news."

My opinion of him the previous evening obviously hadn't been taken very
much to heart. Sourly, I told him, "As a publisher, you should know that
good news is no news."

The smile left his face. Then, with a visible effort, he forced it back.
"You have something there, Ted. You certainly have. But point of view is
important, also. You see, they've arrested a gang of kids for
shoplifting. One of them is Tommy, your son."

I jumped up. "Arrested Tommy!"

"Now wait, Ted. Don't go off half-cocked. It's a break. Don't you see?
You can cover delinquency with the lid off now. You'll be writing as a
parent in the same boat with other parents...."

I could still hear his frantic noises after I'd slammed the door behind
me and run the length of the corridor.

At the police station, I had the distinct feeling they'd been waiting
for me. I knew most of them, especially the big red-headed guy who
beckoned me into a rear office. His name was Thompson--Detective Emanuel
Thompson. He always looked as if he wore a football uniform under his
dark blue suit. My articles had roasted him plenty. He handled juvenile
delinquency cases.

"Well, Mr. Potter," he greeted me, smiling tightly, "we meet under
unfortunate circumstances."

"Can the phony sympathy," I said. "You're not the type. Just let me see
my boy."

He used a red-and-blue handkerchief to wipe the dampness from his beefy
neck. "I think we'd better have a little talk first."

"I got no talking to do. This is a lousy frame-up against me and the
paper. Get my son out here and do it fast!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He put the handkerchief away, sighed and reached for the phone.

It really got me when Tommy came into the room. He'd been crying; his
face was streaked, and he looked scared and forlorn.

"Son," I said, finding it difficult to keep the rasp out of my voice,
"if you've got a hat, put it on and let's go."

Thompson pulled out his handkerchief again and carefully lowered himself
into the chair behind the desk. "You don't seem to understand, Mr.
Potter. Your boy is in trouble. He's been identified as leading a gang
of kids who spent most of the morning shoplifting in stores all over
town."

"That's bull," I said. "How could my boy do a thing like that? He's only
twelve. Who identified him, anyway?"

"The shopkeepers and the other members of the gang."

       *       *       *       *       *

For one awful moment, I felt a great cavity of doubt. "Son," I asked,
"what's this all about?"

Tommy's face creased with fear and tears brimmed his eyes. "It was
Ashe," he quavered.

"Ashe?"

"Yes. I told him about the gang."

"Gang?"

"The Red Skulls."

"What the heck are you talking about?"

"Some of the fellows got together and built a hut for a club-house over
on the garbage dump. We call ourselves the Red Skulls. I was made
leader. I'm called the Skull Cap."

"Why haven't I heard about this?"

"You never asked, Dad. I tried to tell you one night, but you were
hurrying to get to that road-house on the turnpike. You said you had a
big lead on juvenile delinquency."

"Well, you certainly didn't try very hard," I said angrily. "What was
this gang's purpose?"

"Oh, different things. One of the fellows has a .22 and we hunt rats.
Then--"

"Go on."

"That's all."

"You started to say something else."

He kicked at the floor. "Aw, gee!"

"Let's have it!"

"We smoked."

"Smoked!"

He nodded.

"And what else?"

"That's all. Honest!"

Thompson said, "What about shoplifting?"

"No," sniveled Tommy. "That was Ashe. He wanted me to talk the gang into
shoplifting, but I wouldn't. Then he changed himself to look like me and
talked the fellows into it when I wasn't around. I only know about it
because I ran into them after they'd been in a store...."

Thompson gave me a funny look. "Who's this Ashe he keeps talking about?"

I started to tell him. Then I got a sudden mental flash of how idiotic
it would all sound. "The boy," I said evenly, "is beside himself because
of all he's been through. It's time to call a halt to this farce. I'm
going to hire myself some legal talent."

He shrugged. "Suit yourself."

Tommy grabbed my arm and cried, "Please don't leave me, Dad!"

I pulled away from him, feeling as if I'd dropped him off a cliff.

Right outside the station, I met Nan. She was pale and breathless. Jones
had phoned the news. She wanted to go to Tommy immediately.

I guided her to the car and pushed her inside. "Listen here," I said
tensely, "for once, don't make a fuss. Just help me find Ashe. He's the
one who can free Tommy."

       *       *       *       *       *

She began to laugh. "That's a hot one!" she gasped. "That's really a hot
one!"

I shook her, thinking she was hysterical.

She stopped laughing and swallowed hard. "Ashe is home."

"Home?"

"Blind drunk, with a blonde on his knee."

I tramped so hard on the accelerator that it must have scraped the
ground all the way home. Ashe didn't hear me pull up to the house
because the radio was going full blast. I hit the light switch in the
hallway and the brightness flared against the lengthening afternoon
shadows, spotting him and the blonde on the living room couch.

The blonde looked as if she'd come from a burlesque runway. Ashe dumped
her on the floor and staggered to his feet. He'd changed his appearance
again. Now he looked a strikingly handsome twenty-five. He came forward
to throw a heavy arm around my shoulder.

"Glad to see you, Ted," he mouthed. "Ran out of money. Must have more.
Small loan...."

I put both hands on his chest and pushed. He stumbled back and thudded
against the wall. "The police have picked up Tommy," I said flatly.
"He's been charged with the shoplifting you did today."

He sobered instantly. He jerked the blonde to her feet, booted her out,
slammed the door and came back to me. "Ted, I'm shocked to hear this.
Tell me about it quickly. We must do something right away."

The blonde had begun to howl and scream curses. I could hear doors and
windows opening all the way down the street. "You monster!" Nan spat,
and hurried outside. Presently the girl quieted down.

"Ted," Ashe whispered, "I'm ashamed of myself. Here you befriended me
and all I've done is get you and your family in trouble." He held a
cupped hand over his eyes as if he were shading tears. "Can you possibly
find it in your heart to forgive me?"

I was moved. After all, a poor, homeless alien being couldn't very well
be expected to understand our manners and feelings. Yet this one did.
All because he'd been touched by my friendship.

"Ashe," I said, feeling the the warmth of good will, "I'm happy to hear
you say that. Bygones are bygones. The important thing is springing
Tommy."

"Exactly," he said. "We'll go and explain everything to the police. But
we'll do it in grand style. This is your big show. We must have Jones
and the Mayor. We must have photographers, reporters, television,
radio--everything!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Nan returned. "The girl will be all right. She was just upset."

"Honey," I told her excitedly, "we're about to stand the whole country
on its collective ear. Ashe is going to reveal his identity!"

Nan's face pinched into a look of disgust. "You mean you're trusting
this--this creature again?"

"Sure, honey. Anyone can make a mistake."

"That's right!" she exploded. "You're making one now! Oh, Ted, stop
being such a fool!"

"Listen here," I said, "this is the last two minutes of the game. We're
trying to score before the gun--and you start an argument!"

She began to blubber.

Why must she always be so unreasonable? Why the constant bickering and
tension and unhappiness? I was sick to death of it. I grabbed Ashe's
arm. "Come on," I said, "let's go."

Even outdoors, the air felt hot and clammy. I headed the car for the
plant, figuring I could do my phoning from there as well as pick a crew.
But on Main Street, Ashe spotted a cab and made me stop.

He said he'd better go on ahead. He thought things would work smoother
that way. He could start the ball rolling on the release of Tommy, and I
wouldn't be held up by having to tell people who he was.

I drove on alone. But it was a mistake. People simply didn't believe my
story about an alien being. In various ways and tones of voice, they all
suggested I go home and sleep it off. In desperation, I went up to
Jones' house, even though he'd already told me on the phone that he was
in the middle of a dinner party.

He came up close to me and sniffed my breath.

"Don't worry," I told him. "I never touch it. But maybe I should smell
yours. Anyone who turns his back on the biggest story of all time must
be drunk!"

He jerked the cigar from his mouth and gave me a narrow-eyed, searching
look. "Ted, I just hope for your sake this isn't some kind of a joke."

       *       *       *       *       *

Fifteen minutes later, we pulled up to the police station in a three car
convoy, with a big crew from the paper. I led the group inside, feeling
the excitement grow in me. I marched up to the desk sergeant. "Where is
he?"

The desk sergeant looked startled. "Who?"

Well, he wasn't there. He just wasn't there! It was like getting tackled
two yards from a touch-down by a tackler you hadn't realized was
anywhere near!

Jones pushed forward, chewing agitatedly on his cigar. "Edward, you've
got some nerve, pulling a stunt like this! It's an outrage!"

"Take it easy," I said weakly. "Something's gone wrong."

"It certainly has. You must have gone insane!"

"Listen here! If you don't stick with me on this, I'm all through with
the paper!"

"That suits me fine!"

I watched him leave, trailing cigar smoke. The others followed. My face
burned and sweat trickled down my back and along my sides. I wanted to
hit out at something....

A hand gripped my elbow. It was Sergeant Thompson. "Mr. Potter, you
shouldn't let this get you down. People's kids get in scrapes all the
time. Tomorrow you'll have a talk with the judge and everything will
turn out okay."

I jerked my elbow away. "In other words, you think I'm batty, too!"

"No," he said, gripping my elbow again and starting me toward the door.
"It's been hot and you just need some rest."

"Thompson," I said, dragging myself to a halt, "I know it sounds nuts,
but this Ashe character really exists. Help me find him and you can cut
yourself a slice. It'll be big time!"

The grip on my elbow increased. "Go home, Mr. Potter, and get a good
night's sleep."

"But it's on the level, Thompson. Jones and I busted up. I'm playing on
your team now!"

His face got all flushed. "My job isn't a game and I don't belong to any
team. Get wise, will you? Stay in your own back yard for once. It could
stand a lot of weeding!" He pushed me out the door then--so hard, I
almost fell.

       *       *       *       *       *

Standing there, feeling the heat press in on me, I tried to dope out the
next move. My car was still at Jones' place, so I'd need a cab. I turned
toward the drugstore at the end of the block where I could phone.
Walking along, I recalled Ashe had taken a cab earlier in the evening.
If I could talk to the driver, I might get a lead on his whereabouts. I
walked faster.

I thought of Thompson and his remark about the back yard ... and the
weeds. Again, for the third time, a chill traveled the length of my
spine. I began to run. I ran past the drugstore and all the way home.

They were both in the bedroom. Nan stood in the far corner with her back
against the wall. Her shoulders were scratched and her lip cut. She held
a heavy bookend poised to strike at Ashe, who was in front of her,
moving stealthily forward.

The moment I spun him around, I froze in amazement. I couldn't recognize
him. Then, all at once, I realized I was looking at the spitting image
of myself.

He broke from my grasp and darted to the window. Before I could follow,
Nan had dropped the bookend and flung herself into my arms. "Oh, Ted,"
she sobbed, "I _knew_ it wasn't you!"

I kissed her and gently disengaged her arms. "I've got to get Ashe," I
said.

When I vaulted through the window and circled the house, I spotted him
rushing down the street. I caught him around the corner at the same spot
where I'd first seen him.

I slugged him. Yet I knew it was useless the instant the blow landed. He
felt just like sponge rubber. But I kept hitting him. I didn't bother
listening to his cries and I didn't give a damn that he'd changed
himself back to an old man.

The blow on the back of my neck was so sudden, I didn't feel it. The
only sensation was unbalance, as if I were walking uphill. Then I was
slapped with the sidewalk.

Looking up, I could see he was young, clean-cut and well built. His
long, horsy face was furious. "You crazy?" he yelled. "Beating up an old
man!"

I searched desperately for an explanation--something to say. Then,
abruptly, without having uttered a sound, I reeled away and shambled
hurriedly down the street ... home, to Nan.


--RICHARD MAPLES


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction June 1956. Extensive
research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
publication was renewed.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Scapegoat, by Richard Maples

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCAPEGOAT ***

***** This file should be named 36719.txt or 36719.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/7/1/36719/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Dianna Adair and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
