The Project Gutenberg EBook of Charlie Newcomer, by Wilbur B. Stover

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Charlie Newcomer

Author: Wilbur B. Stover

Release Date: July 14, 2011 [EBook #36732]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLIE NEWCOMER ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Archives and Special
Collections, University Libraries, Ball State University
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









  _Jno. 3:16._          _Jno. 3:16._
                 OUR
      Missionary Reading Circle.

  SHORT COURSE OF MISSIONARY
  READING FOR COMMON PEOPLE
  YOUNG AND OLD.

    =_What is said of it by many_=:

        "_It will be very beneficial_,"

        "_I would heartily recommend it_,"

        "_I am glad my children are taking it up_,"

        "_I consider the books first class_,"

        "_It's just what I've been looking for_,"

        "_Can safely recommend the books to all_,"

        "_I wish you God-speed_,"

        "_The idea is a good one_."

    For books, address the Librarian,

    For plan and methods, address Secretary.

  JAS. M. NEFF, Lib.,      EDITH R. NEWCOMER, Sec.,
  Covington, Ohio.         Waynesboro, Pa.




  CHARLIE NEWCOMER

  BY
  WILBUR B. STOVER

  JAS. M. NEFF, PUBLISHER
  LIBRARIAN OF OUR MISSIONARY READING CIRCLE
  COVINGTON, OHIO
  1894




PREFACE.


I knew Charlie Newcomer, and I loved him. To me he seemed to have a
bright future. And that other children may be led to take his good
example in uniting with the church while they are yet children, I take
pleasure in telling the story of his life. I have told that story
often from the pulpit, in children's meetings, and I tell it now, in
this way that a larger congregation may be reached.

In the home of Charlie and Bessie's parents at Ringgold, I wrote every
word of this sketch. It is with considerable hesitancy, too, that the
parents allow the facts to be told, since it enters right into their
home life, and since some might misjudge their intention concerning
their children.

May his heart's desire now be realized--to be a missionary.

  W. B. S.

  _Edgemont, Md., Feb. 2, 1894._




CHARLIE NEWCOMER




CHAPTER I.

AT THE RINGGOLD SCHOOL.


"Hurry up Charlie, for as soon as we get our dinner over, we want to
play base-ball, and you're on our side, you know," called one of the
scholars of the Ringgold school to Charlie Newcomer, as he was going
home at noon for his dinner. Charlie's home was only a few rods from
the school house, and on the same side of the road.

"All right, boys, I will," he answered in return, and in a minute more
he was home.

Dinner was not ready when he reached home, for his mamma had been
putting out her washing that forenoon. So he brought the water and
then went to the cellar for the bread and butter while his mamma made
the gravy, and dinner was soon on the table. While they were eating,
Charlie said, "Do you think, mamma, I can get up head this afternoon?
I've studied my lessons very well."

"I don't know, indeed," said his mamma, "you cannot unless some one
above you should make a mistake, and the other scholars are as anxious
to stand well as you are."

"They're awful hard lessons, and surely some one will miss, and I'm
just waiting for a chance like that. You know I hate to be foot," he
continued, "and if I hadn't 'a' missed that day three weeks ago, I
would have been head now."

He had finished his dinner before his mother and little sister, and
was off to school while they were yet at the table.

The boys in the play ground had changed their minds about playing
base-ball, from the fact that some wanted to begin playing right away,
while others wanted to wait for the return of those who had gone home
for dinner. Some wanted to choose new sides, and others wanted to
remain as they had been the day before; and yet others, as they said,
"didn't want to play anyhow," and in the midst of so many voices, they
all went to playing "Drop the handkerchief," girls and boys together.
Charlie was especially fond of playing "Drop the handkerchief," and
when he saw it was that game instead of ball, it did not take long
until he was at it with all his might. Adding his kerchief to those
already afloat, he ran around the large circle never faster.

Grown up people sometimes wonder how it is that children are willing
to play until they are all in a perspiration, but children just as
well wonder at grown up people for working with the same result.

The ringing of the school bell brought the game to a close. Nearly all
of the scholars went at once into the house, while a few lingered on
the porch to get a drink of water and cool off a little before going
in.

How quiet it seems just after all the boys and girls are called from
the play-ground to their books.

The school building at Ringgold is at one end of the town, and the
town is a little, long one, right on the top of a large, long hill. On
either side you can see the mountains, and from Ringgold to the
mountain eastward, even away up on the side of the mountain, are
thousands and thousands of peach trees.

[Illustration: THE RINGGOLD SCHOOLHOUSE.]

Within the school house is work. Class after class is called up to
recite, and in some of them not many changes are made as to the standing
of the pupils. In most of the classes the method of trapping is used.
Whenever any one mis-spells a word or makes a mistake on a problem, the
next one below him has a chance at it; if he misses, the next has a
chance, and so on until the one is found who can make right the error,
then that one traps and goes up above all who have missed.

Ever since Charlie had been absent that one day, he had been working
especially hard to win his accustomed place at the head of his
classes, for whoever missed a day had to "go foot."

That afternoon because the lessons were rather difficult, he hoped to
get near to his old place, if not to reach it altogether. When the
first class was called, his heart beat just a little faster than while
he was preparing his lesson. As he arose from his seat to go, he
breathed a little prayer to God, that he might remember well what he
had just been learning.

Several problems were missed and as many times somebody trapped up. But
not every problem that others had mistaken reached Charlie. One time he
thought he would now trap three, when he himself missed, and another got
it. In trapping, however, the close of the recitation found him "third"
but not "first." And so the class was dismissed for that day.

The last in the afternoon was the spelling class. The teacher
frequently began to pronounce the words on the lower part of the page
first. "Tournament" was the first word to-day. The next was
"constitute." "Coadjutor" was Charlie's first word to spell.
"Inaugurate" was mis-spelled near the foot of the class. "Sumac" was
missed, and the scholars below were eager. "Ducat" enabled the one
above Charlie to trap two. "Joust" was spelled correctly. "Oolite" and
"vocable" were missed several times. The lesson was almost closed.

"Compass," said the teacher.

"Fortnight."

"Revolt." That was Charlie's.

"Caoutchouc."

"C-a-o-u-t-c-h--c-h--can't spell it," said the little man next below
Charlie.

"Next," said the teacher.

"C-a-o-u-t-c-h-o-u-c-e."

"Next."

"C-o-o-c-h-o-o--o-o--."

"Next."

"C-h-o-o--"

"Next," and Charlie began to wish he had been foot now, so he could
get up more than one at a time.

"K-a-u-o-t-c-h."

"Next," and all eyes began to look toward the head of the class, for
the unfortunate word was sure to go there.

"Caoutchouc," again pronounced the teacher, clearly. The bright little
girl at the head of the class was a good speller, but hearing so many
efforts, she became confused with the word, and although spelling
slowly at it, she missed it.

"Next."

"Caoutchouc, is it, teacher?"

"Yes, sir."

"C-o-u-t-c-h-o-u-c."

"Next."

"C-o-u-t-c-h-a-o-u-c."

"Next," and every kind of a way was given to spell that word. It
passed on down the class to Charlie. He was waiting, not a little
anxiously for it.

"C-a-o-u-t-c-h-o-u-c caoutchouc," and he marched up head with a smile
that showed gladness for himself, and love for those in the class at
the head of which he now stood.

Some words more and the lesson was recited.

"Charlie," said Earl Rinehart after the bell rang, and they were
passing out of the door, "I was glad you got that word right."

"Why so, Earl?"

"Because I'd rather have you head than any one else, even if I do have
to be second or third."

And having crossed over the stile, five of them joined in a row and
ran a footrace down the little hill, past Bell's and Newcomer's, on
down the road,--save one, who turned off to the right quickly and
hurried into the house to tell his mamma of his good fortune in the
spelling class.




CHAPTER II.

A SUNDAY AT WELTY'S CHURCH.


The sun was shining brightly on Sunday morning, and all was still and
quiet in Ringgold and the country round about. Charlie had buttoned
his sister Bessie's shoes, and they both were now sitting on the back
porch of their home, talking.

Their papa was in the front room reviewing his Sunday school lesson,
and their mamma was re-arranging some things in the kitchen. It was
not time to go yet, but the carriage was standing at the gate and the
horse was in the stable, harnessed.

"Bessie," said Charlie, "don't you wish you were going to be baptized
to-day!"

"Why, Charlie, you know I'm too little," said Bessie.

"How old do you think you ought to be first, anyhow!"

"Oh, I don't know."

"I was just thinking about how nice everything is this morning, and I
wonder how it was in the garden of Eden."

"Children, are you ready for Sunday school? Papa is hitching up."

"All right, mamma, we're coming," they answered, and were off together
very soon.

On the way to church, no one had much to say. Charlie was sitting on
the front seat with his papa, and he was the driver too, while Bessie
and mamma sat on the second seat.

The church is down in the valley between the long Ringgold hill and
the mountain to the east, and by the time they reached it, several
other carriages were already there. The superintendent of the Sunday
school had just gotten there a short time before, and all who were
there were gathering in to spend a little while in singing before time
for Sunday school to begin. The first hymn they sang that morning was

    "Jesus, when he left the sky,
    And for sinners came to die,
    In his mercy passed not by
      Little ones like me."

and all the other verses.

After they sang them they all kneeled down and the superintendent led
in an earnest prayer. Then they read the lesson, verse about, and the
teachers began work with their classes.

Grown-up people sometimes think the Sunday school is just for the
children, and even here at Welty's there were some who seemed to think
that way, and the Sunday school consisted mostly of children.

[Illustration: WELTY'S MEETING-HOUSE.]

Charlie's teacher took his class to the one end of the church, into
an adjoining room, where they could learn so much better, not being
annoyed at all by the talking of the other classes. Here in this
little room, teacher and class regularly study the Word of God for a
half hour every Sunday.

A half hour seems but a short time, and indeed it is, but that is only
the recitation period, and that is long enough for such as have
studied the lesson well. It takes a good while to tell what we don't
know, but not very long to tell what we do know.

Sunday school was over and five minutes later church services began.
Nearly all the scholars remained for church. Several ministers were
there, and the one who preached talked about the love of God for
everybody. He said God loved boys and girls as well as men and women.
He loved bad people and good people. He even loved heathen people, and
He wants every one everywhere to love Him in return. He said God
wants all of us to serve Him, and if we do not serve Him, we can not
love Him. He said, too, that the more we serve Him, the happier we
are, and the less we do for Him, the more unhappy we are.

He talked about prayer, too. He said some Christians pray and some
Christians do not, and how that the best Christians always pray the
most.

The preacher was an old man whose beard was already gray with the
labors of many years, and everybody said it was a good sermon.

After the meeting there was no haste to go home. Every one seemed
desirous of staying there and shaking hands and talking a while. The
superintendent nearly always tried to get several to accompany him
home, so that they might spend the afternoon together. All the members
of that church did in the same way. The children were out on the
grass talking with each other and waiting until parents and friends
were ready to start for home.

Charlie was among the last to leave, and as he and his papa walked out
to the carriage, where mamma and Bessie were waiting for them, he
said, "I don't know why I like church so well, papa, I just wish it
would last all day."

His papa said, "Before you could walk we always took you with us to
preaching." "I'm glad you did," answered Charlie, as he ran to untie
the horse before his papa was quite there.




CHAPTER III.

TRYING TO FIND SOMETHING.


One day a little fellow was seen walking back and forth on the road
from the store to his home, looking serious, and with eyes close upon
the ground. A wagon going by, the man called out, "Charlie, what are
you doing?"

"Oh, I lost something, and I'm just trying to find it."

And he kept hunting a long while between his home and the store to
find whatever it was he had lost. His mamma had sent him to the store
to get some groceries for her. He received the change into his hand, a
nickel, and coming home he lost it. His mamma thought he could not
find it, but he continued seeking until he did.

"Mamma, I found it," he came in saying, "I knew I could. You thought I
couldn't, now you might give it to me." His mamma laughed and then
asked him to bring in some water. After he had set the bucket of water
on the table he said, "What do you think I was thinking about when I
was hunting for that five cents?"

"I can't tell, son."

"Well, mamma," he said, "I would like to be a Christian, can't I? I
would like to be baptized soon."

His mamma always prayed that her children might grow in grace as they
grow in years, but this was unexpected. She answered: "I am glad you
think about that, Charlie, but you are too young now."

"How old must one be first?"

"Well, that varies a good deal, I know."

"I'm _nine_ years old."

"Yes, I know."

"Ain't nine old enough?"

"But you must think about it more, Charlie."

"More! I've been thinking about it a long time a'ready."

"Well I'll talk to papa about it, and we'll see what he says. You know
we want you always to do right," said his mamma, and he got his
magnet, and put pins together and magnetized a needle, and made it
swim, and point north and south.

That night after both children were asleep, their parents talked a
good deal about what Charlie had said.

"Charlie wants to unite with the church."

"He does? When did he say so?"

"Just to-day, and he is in deep earnest about it, too. I don't know
what to think, hardly."

"I hardly think he realizes fully, what he wants to do."

"Poor little fellow, what do you think I had better tell him?"

"I don't know. Suppose he should come and then not hold out. You see
that would be bad."

"Yes, and then, papa, what wrong has he done?"

"That's so."

"But you remember four years ago when a certain lady was here on a
visit, how she happened to express her unbelief in God. No one thought
the children heard a word of it. Charlie was gone in a moment, we
thought to play, when he brought in the Bible and laid it on her lap
and said, 'Read that, it will tell you what to do.' I always did think
Charlie would be a Christian very early in life."

"Yes, I am glad for it, too,--but I guess we'd better wait a while
anyhow, and see if he really wants to come," said his papa, and the
matter was dropped, and other things were talked about.

Several days passed by till the subject was brought up again. Then
Charlie said:

"Nine years; old enough to go to school, old enough to do work, old
enough to do good or bad, and not old enough to be baptized. Mamma, I
do wish I could."

"Charlie, you never did anything bad."

"Must I do something bad before I can join the church?"

"No, no, but you're so young, you don't need to yet."

"Well, I can't see--" he said, and then, with tears in his eyes, he
took Bessie by the hand, and went down across the lot to the old apple
tree, where they had a swing and spent often many happy hours.

In a day or two after that, Charlie mentioned at the table, his desire
to be a child of God. "I am sure I would hold out," he said, "and if I
couldn't I'd be just where I am now. But I could, for Jesus helps,
don't He?"

Then nothing more was said for several months about his becoming a
child of God. It seemed as if he had forgotten his desire to find
something of heaven so young.

The summer was over. All the peaches on the side of the mountain and in
the valley had been gathered. The leaves of the trees were yellow and
golden, and many had already found their resting place upon the ground.
Charlie and Bessie had both been going to school for six weeks already.
It was Saturday. There was to be preaching at Welty's that day, and a
love-feast in the evening. Charlie had been thinking about the
thirteenth chapter of John and the fifteenth, and when all were about
ready to go to the meeting he said, "Now, if you had let me join the
church last summer, when I wanted to, I could have enjoyed this meeting."

"Why, my dear boy," said his mamma, "you can enjoy it anyhow, can't you?"

"No," said he, "not as I'd like to."

And they all four got into the carriage and started off to the
meeting, not saying very much.




CHAPTER IV.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS.


Services continued longer one Sunday than usual, and after the meeting
was over quite a number of those who had come a distance, upon
invitation, decided to stop with others who were not so far from home.
Two carriages drove over to the big spring. The Newcomers went with
the Sunday school superintendent, and others went elsewhere.

This manner of visiting after the meeting on Sunday, is sometimes a
good thing and sometimes it is not. It is good if the occasion is used
for the spiritual benefit of those concerned. Sunday is the Lord's day.

In the afternoon, at the superintendent's house, the conversation
drifted about on the various phases of religious life, church work,
Bible study, educational work, the conversion of children, missionary
work, books, papers, and present day life.

The little folks were out somewhere, engaging themselves as they saw
proper. Sometimes they came into the room and remained a short time,
then out they would go all together.

Charlie remained, however. There may have been _two_ boys who
preferred to stay in the house.

Toward evening Charlie came to one of those who had been talking with
the rest, and leaning over on his knee, he wanted to ask some
questions. He had been hearing and not saying anything, and now he
wanted some things explained.

"Tell me," he said, "how old is old enough to join the church."

"That varies, Charlie, according to the intelligence and teaching of
the child. Some are more fit when they are ten years, than others at
twenty."

"Well, but, am I old enough?"

"I think so, don't you?"

"Yes, I do, but another thing. Does an education make a person good?"

"No, it will make you better if you are good, but if a bad man gets
education, that doesn't make him good."

"Then is it any use to study so hard to get a good education?"

"Why certainly."

"Tell me."

"Education, Charlie, is just development. You know what development
means?"

"Yes sir."

"Well, development gives strength."

"You have noticed that large tree out in the orchard. It was only a
chestnut once, but now it is developed. That tree is only an educated
chestnut. Which is stronger,--the chestnut tree or the little
chestnut?"

"The tree, of course," said he, "but I heard some one say, I think it
was just last Sunday, that education spoils some people."

"The right kind of an education will never spoil any one."

"I'm going to get a good education. Papa and mamma said they'd help
me, but I want to earn the money myself, and then go a long time."

"And then you'll be a missionary won't you?"

"Could I?"

"You can if you choose."

"What must I do?"

"You must be a good Christian at home, and do all you can for Jesus
now. Whoever is not good at home is the same away from home. Do things
so people will all love you. If your associates and acquaintances do
not love you, it is not likely the heathen will, and love is a great
deal of the missionary's preparation. And give. If you have not much,
give a little, and if you have more, give proportionately. But it is
not all in giving. There is more even in living for the Lord, and just
letting one's self be all His."

Charlie seemed to be thinking of something else then, and he spoke out
in earnest:

"Doesn't the Bible say we ought to send missionaries everywhere in the
world?"

"It says we must '_Go_', yes."

"Were there heathen fifty years ago?"

"Yes."

"Well, then why didn't we send lots of missionaries fifty years ago? I
wish I could go."

"Do you want to know, Charlie, how you can tell if you can be a
missionary when you are a man?"

"Yes sir," said Charlie.

"Be a little missionary now. Be a Christian. Get new scholars to come
to Sunday school. Live for other people all you can. One little person
quit eating candy, and gave the money for the Lord, another bought a
dozen eggs and raised chickens and sold them for the Lord. A little
farmer boy raised potatoes on a little corner of land his papa said he
could have, and then sold them for missionary money, and there are
many other ways."

"Oh, I know, I know what I'll do!" said several at once. "I'm so
thirsty."

"So am I." "No, wait." "Come on."

"We can all do something, then, can't we? I'm dry too."

And the one who was answering questions, together with for six little
people, who had gathered around him, went out under the grape arbor,
and down by the row of evergreens to the spring, and they all drank
heartily from the old tin cup.

An hour later all the visitors had their faces turned toward home, and
the children were thinking about being little missionaries at home.




CHAPTER V.

A CHILD OF GOD.


A good many months had passed since Charlie lost the nickel between
the store and his home. He had often spoken about his desire to be a
real Christian. He was going to school every day, and had more than
the average of school-boy-liveliness.

Several years had passed since he and one of the little Sunday school
girls swinging in the shade of the old apple tree, had each promised
the other to begin to be a Christian while they were young in years.
The little girl was first to fulfil her promise, and was now an active
little member of the church, praising God by her daily life. He
thought more of her for her decision, but he himself was not yet a
member of the church, and was already twelve years old.

Brother Early had been preaching every night in Waynesboro for several
weeks. A good many people, who lived not too far away from Waynesboro,
often drove in to attend the meetings. Charlie was usually on hand, an
attentive listener.

On the way home one Sunday night Charlie broke the monotonous rumble of
the carriage by asking, "Mamma, do you think I'd be saved if I'd die?"

And his mamma answered, "Well Charlie, indeed I don't know what to
tell you," and no one said anything further for a moment, which seemed
ever so long.

"What do you say about it, papa?" continued Charlie in a very earnest,
pleading tone of voice.

"You have asked a pretty hard question," said his papa. "Just at this
time of your life we cannot know. God is just, and may be you'd be
saved--may be not." After several minutes, which seemed almost like
hours, as the carriage moved slowly up the hill, his mamma, ever
anxious about her boy, as all mammas are, said, "Why do you ask such
questions, Charlie?"

"Well, mamma," he answered, "I can't stand it any longer. My heart
pretty near breaks when we are at meeting. I do wish I could join the
church."

Now, his parents had talked the matter all over by themselves, and they
had decided to allow Charlie to come at this time, if he really wanted
to, and they would also encourage their son. When he had thus spoken,
they told him the words that his boyish heart had been aching to hear
for already so long a time, that he should "come now," if he wished.

The next evening Charlie lost no time in publicly coming out on the
Lord's side.

"Brother Oller," said he, "I'm coming. It's decided. I want to be
baptized and live a Christian."

The aged elder stooped to the eager boy before him, and tenderly
answered, "Well, Charlie, the Lord bless you. The lambs are always
welcome in the flock. I hope you will be able to be a valiant soldier
for Christ. The Lord bless you, my dear boy."

On the way home that night, Charlie's heart was glad within him. How
different it was from the night before. He was soon to be a soldier
for Jesus. It did not seem to take long at all to go home, and the
hills did not seem so steep, and the night did not seem so dark. He
could now see the bright side of life, better than ever before.

While his papa was out at the barn, putting away the horse and
carriage, Charlie was talking to his mamma in the house.

"I wish now we had family worship. Mamma, why don't we have family
worship, anyhow?"

"Well, I don't know, Charlie, just why we don't," said mamma.

"Well, mamma, papa ought to have it. Other members do, don't they?"

"I guess papa feels a little timid about leading in prayer," said his
mamma. "That's all the reason I know."

"Well, I tell you, I'll do my part. I'll take my turn always, if we just
can have family worship every day. Won't you ask papa? I think he will."

Sunday was the day for baptism. Two of the brethren came on a visit to
examine those to be baptized, before the day for baptism, to learn if
they were ready for the holy ordinance, and if they were willing to
take the New Testament as the rule of faith and practice, and to walk
in harmony with the church.

[Illustration: THE STREAM BELOW THE BRIDGE.]

Charlie's answers were clear and well-defined. The brethren had
quite a pleasant visit with him, and they went away feeling that
children were very fit subjects for the church, "for of such is the
kingdom of heaven."

There were thirteen baptized that day, and a large number of people
witnessed the scene. It seemed, as we read about it in the Bible, like
apostolic times, as one after another was led down into the stream of
water near the bridge, and was there buried in baptism.

When Charlie arose from his knees, while they were yet in the water,
the minister, Brother Price, greeted him with a kiss.

After the baptisms, all the people soon went away to their homes, but
of all that number, thirteen went away feeling the joy of having
entered into a blessed experience, which they had not known before.

That Sunday night the voice of prayer was heard in the home of the
Newcomers. Family worship was a daily service there from that time on.
Every evening before going to bed the little family would sing a hymn,
read a portion of Scripture, and then all kneel down together and
pray. And Charlie, true to his promise, and but a boy, yet a
_Christian_ boy, would always take his turn, in reading, in leading in
prayer, and in closing with the Lord's prayer.




CHAPTER VI.

A SATURDAY AT HOME.


After we are once six years old, the most of us have to spend more
days, as children, in the school than out of it; and whether Saturday
does us very much good, I do not know. The lessons are nearly always
not as well prepared on Monday as on other days, for too much time to
prepare is about as bad as too little. And then, too, we sometimes
forget over Sunday, what we have studied for Monday; but, it is better
not to know the lessons on Monday, than to study them on Sunday.
Sunday is the Lord's day. The best way of all, however, is to study on
Friday and Saturday nights, and then get up a little earlier on Monday
morning and review before school time.

Saturday is an off day generally. Girls have a good deal of work to do
about the house and boys have a good deal to do about the barn, and
sometimes they have to work pretty hard.

Charlie had finished his chores as soon as he could that day and was
in the house.

Bessie was very busy fixing her dollies' dresses, for she had five
dollies, and they always were so hard on their clothes.

"Boys will be boys," grown up people often say, and Charlie oftentimes
would give vent to his boyish nature by just teasing whoever would be
teased. He teased Bessie a good deal, and mamma too. He made Dash, his
dog, stand in the corner.

He would hide in the evening when his papa came home, until he would
hear what he would say upon missing him, then come out from behind the
stove, behind the door, or under the table, laughing heartily.

On this particular Saturday, Charlie was through with his work, and
while he was helping his mother a good deal in the house, he took to
teasing her.

Presently she said, "Charlie, don't do that, for it is not right."

He said nothing to this correction, but went quietly out of the house.

After a little while he came hurriedly in again saying: "Mamma, you
said I was doing wrong. I went out to the barn, and crawled up into
the hay mow, and I prayed to God to forgive me, for I don't want to do
wrong. Will He forgive me, mamma, and will you?"

"Certainly I will forgive you, Charlie, and God will too. Try not to
do it any more," answered his mother, as she was wondering if she had
not spoken too harshly to her boy.

Some schoolmates came in then and they all went down to the swing
under the apple tree, where they had a good time together.

After they all had a turn swinging, they played "catcher" around the
house, and "hide and seek," and other games as all children know. At
about five o'clock the little visitors all went home.

Some men passed along the road talking very loud and swearing. One of
them had been drinking. Charlie and Bessie were looking at their mother
as she was doing some evening's work when, in a very thoughtful mood,
Charlie said: "Mamma, don't you wish you'd 'a' never had any children?"

"No, Charlie. Why?" said she.

"Well, so many people are so bad,--swearing and getting drunk. Suppose
I should turn out that way. Really, I wish I'd die while I'm little."

"So do I," said Bessie.

"Why children, children, you must not talk that way. What would your
papa and I do?" said their mother, almost choking on her words, for
Charlie had said that a number of times before. "Who made you?" she
asked.

"God" they answered.

"Well then," continued their mamma, "you ought to want to live as long
as you can, so you could serve Him more. He wants us to do all the
good we can."

Both children went into the sitting room, and Charlie got his little
account book and figured up how much money he had on interest, and how
much the interest was, and counted how much he had in his bank, and
then added it all up together. "Bessie" he said, "when I get big I'm
going to go to college and pay my own way. See if I don't." Then they
played together till they got into a little difficulty, and both ran
out to "tell mamma" all about it.

That night Bessie did not go to sleep as soon as usual. 'Twas the same
the night before. She seemed troubled. Her mamma thought she was
sick. Presently Charlie suggested, "Mamma, I'll bet I know what's the
matter with Bessie."

"Well, why don't you tell me, Charlie? I do want to know," said their
mamma.

"Bessie wants to join the church," he replied, and his little sister
began crying in earnest, and soon cried herself to sleep.




CHAPTER VII.

CHARLIE'S LAST DAYS.

    "They who seek the throne of grace
    Find that throne in every place;
    If we live a life of prayer,
    God is present everywhere."


That much dreaded disease, scarlet fever, was the unwelcome visitor to
many homes. Bessie was taken by it. While she was ill, Charlie was
kept from school, lest other children should take it of him. Often he
would steal over to the school house during school hours, and peep in
at the window, unobserved, to learn who stood first in his classes. He
often watched the spelling class as they stood up in recitation, could
tell each pupils' standing, but he himself dared not enter. Those
were long, long weeks for Charlie, that Bessie's illness continued.
She grew very, very sick. Sometimes it seemed her little life was
suspended on a silken thread,--a touch might cause it to snap, and she
would be gone forever.

Children converted are children still. Charlie was a boy, although a
Christian. Often he came softly into the house, and when he would meet
his mamma out of the sick room, he would say, "Don't you wish you had
left Bessie be baptized when she wanted to? Suppose she should die."
And his poor mother, almost broken down with care for her little girl,
was made sick at heart by questions like that.

On the doctor's daily visit Charlie met him at the gate, and would tie
his horse for him, and then come with him into the house.

Bessie had lain ill already four weeks. On Tuesday morning the doctor
tied his horse himself and came in alone. Charlie was sick. The doctor
said to him, "Well, Charlie, you've got it now. Does it scare you?"

"No sir, it don't scare me," he said, "but I hope I won't have to be
sick as long as Bessie."

Both were soon hanging in the balances, Bessie in one room, Charlie in
another. Charlie wanted to be taken over into Bessie's room, that they
both might be sick together.

Day and night the two little patients were closely watched. Charlie
was heard making a noise, and they listened to catch the voice. He was
suffering great pain but humming the tune in the hymnal, number
118,--not saying the words, but just humming the tune. Often he would
ease his pain with this heaven medicine. Twice he was heard to speak
distinctly. Once he said "Lord" and again it was "heaven." His lips
would move but no sound was heard. The sound was heard in heaven, I
suppose. Angels responded to the call of that little child of God. On
Friday morning, even before the rays of morning light began to come,
his spirit was borne away to be with Jesus in the heavenly land.

In the morning Bessie's papa was sitting by her bedside, looking sadly
on the little form of his only child. "Papa," she said "why don't you
have the door open in Charlie's room? He'll be so lonely with the door
shut." But he made no reply. "Papa," she continued "why do you stay
here with me? Take care of Charlie. I'm afraid he's going to die."

Little by little her papa told her then, all about it, and she bathed
her fevered pillow with her tears.

The doctor came. He knew the fact without being told, and he sat down
and wept.

Sunday, Charlie's little form was laid away to rest in the cemetery
at Waynesboro. And at the same time when that sorrowful little company
were journeying thither, the little readers of the _Young Disciple_
were reading his letter all over the land. The letter is given below,
but we will add the date, not the date that it was written, but the
date it was read, the date of his burial.

His life is closed in this world, but the influence of it will go on
forever. Three dates will tell the story of that life.

        Birth, March 31, 1880.

      Second Birth, Nov. 27, 1892.

    Borne to glory, March 10, 1893.


THE LETTER.

  Ringgold, Md.

  March 12, 1893.

    Our family consists of a dear kind papa and mama, sister Bessie
    and myself. We all attend church and Sunday-school regularly. Our
    Sunday school has closed for this season, but will open again in
    the spring. Papa and mamma and myself are members of the Brethren
    church. I am twelve years old. I am studying hard to get a good
    education, and I hope to grow up to be a good man; and when Bro.
    W. B. Stover goes to India, I feel as though I would like to go
    out to him in his missionary work. I will close now by asking an
    interest in the prayers of all the faithful.

  Charlie Martin Newcomer.




CHAPTER VIII.

BESSIE.


Four weeks after the close of the life of her little brother, Bessie
was able to be out of bed and around about the house once more. With
the return of her health grew her anxiety for the church. And in a
comparatively short time, Bessie was received into the church by
baptism. She was but a mere child, 'tis true, and that is what she is
yet. But what is to be done with the children? Is the church not for
them? Did Christ not die for them? Does "all the world" exclude
children? What does "in" signify, in "bringing up children in the
Lord?" What does "come" mean, when the Savior says "Suffer the
children to come unto me, and forbid them not"? and what is the
meaning of those last three words?

In the Antietam church were a good many good Christians who looked
rather doubtfully on the question of children in church. The little
girl spoken of in the beginning of chapter five was the first of the
children in that congregation to join the church. Others followed, and
when Charlie died _in the church_, all were so much rejoiced in his
triumphant faith, that the matter was practically no longer a question
at all. Very many little Christians now bring blessing to the
congregation, and they are often the best in the family to which they
may belong.

I questioned Bessie the other day to learn more of her present
position, now that she is in the church. I will give to all, the
benefit of her good answers.

"How old are you, Bessie?"

"Ten years."

"Some people think ten years is too young to be a member of the church."

"I don't think so."

"Why?"

"Because I think they can do right just as good as older people."

"When were you baptized?"

"Last summer in July."

"How do you know that you love Jesus?"

"Because,--well, I just know it."

"Suppose sometime you should sin, then what?"

"I'd just pray to God to forgive me."

"Are you sure He'd forgive you?"

"Yes sir. The Bible says so."

"How does it come you did not want to wait till you grew up, like many
others do?"

"Because I might die and not be saved."

"Suppose at school some of the other scholars tease you, then what?"

"I wouldn't say nothing."

"How long did you want to join the church before last summer?"

"O, I often thought about it. I was under conviction a good while."

"What does it mean to be under conviction?"

"Well,"--and I saw that I had asked a harder question than I thought.
After thinking a moment she said, "I just feel like crying all the time."

"What about, Bessie?"

"About things I done wrong."

"What things?"

"O well, little things in school. I'd get angry sometimes, and do
wrong things at home, and I was not very good, and-and--I wanted Jesus
to forgive me."

"What did you want to be baptized for?"

"For the remission of my sins."

"How did you learn to give that for the reason?"

"I read it in the Bible."

"Are you sure, Bessie, you realize what you're doing?"

"Yes sir."

"How often do you pray?"

"Every evening and often in the day time."

"Do your parents have family worship?"

"Yes sir."

"What part do _you_ take?"

"We all read verse about, and then papa and mamma take turn about in
leading in prayer, and I always close with the Lord's prayer."

"Didn't any body coax you to join the church?"

"No sir. Charlie and I used to talk about it a good many times when we
were by ourselves. That was before either of us was converted."

"Now, then, are you happy, Bessie?"

"Yes sir."

"What are you going to do when you grow up?"

"Be a seamstress, I guess. I'd like to be a missionary if I could."

"Do you realize a change of heart?"

"Yes sir."

"How does it seem?"

"It seems nice."

"But, think well, and tell me several points wherein you are different
now from what you were before you became a Christian."

"I feel more happier, and--and--I love Jesus more, and--He loves me
more, and--and--I don't want to do any wrong things, and--"

"What would you be willing to do for the Lord?"

"Most anything."

"Suppose the church should ask you to do something you did not want to
do?"

"I'd just do it."

"What part of the Bible do you like the best?"

"The New Testament."

"Why?"

"'Cause it tells more about Jesus."

Then Bessie added that she likes that about green pastures, and at
once repeated the entire twenty-third psalm.

Children in the church is no late idea. Children, I mean, not babes
nor infants. Polycarp, who afterward was bishop of Smyrna, and a
martyr, was converted in the year 80, when he was nine years old.

Justin Martyr says many, in early days, became disciples in childhood
and were uncorrupted all their lives.

Matthew Henry, whose commentary is so highly regarded by all Bible
students, was converted in his eleventh year.

Isaac Watts, whose hymns abound in all hymn books, was converted in
his ninth year.

Bro. James Quinter was converted when he was 17 years old, and was
called to the ministry at 22, and the present secretary of our General
Mission Board was converted at the age of 12. And I doubt not, many
among our best workers were converted very early in life.

Yesterday I received a letter from a little child just entered upon
her ninth year. She says:--"Dear brother Stover, I can answer your
letter and say I am on the Lord's side. How happy I am, how I would
like for you to have been here when I was baptized. I could hardly
wait till the time came. I have got what I have been wishing for two
years, and that is to work for the Lord. I go to prayer meeting, and
always try to have a verse.

  "---- ----."

Children, too often, do not receive all the credit they deserve in
some directions. In a little book on the "Conversion of children" the
following incident is given. A father was reproving his son for not
giving attention to the sermon.

"Father, I heard all the minister said."

"I do not believe it. You were gazing all over the church during the
service."

"But, father, I heard all the minister said."

"I cannot believe it, for it seemed to me you hardly looked at the
preacher; your eyes were oftener fixed upon the rafters than the pulpit."

"But, father, I did hear all he said, and I can tell it to you."

"Let me hear you try it."

He then began and astonished his father by giving the text, the heads
of the sermon, and _much_ that was in it.

"I declare, you did hear the sermon after all."

"I told you I did, father, and now I can tell you exactly how many
rafters there are in the roof, for I counted every one of them during
the sermon!"

The Lord Jesus told Peter to feed His sheep, but before that He said,

    "FEED MY LAMBS."


THE END.




Transcriber's Note


  * Spelling and punctuation errors have been corrected.

  * Text enclosed between equal signs was in bold face in the
  original (=bold=).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Charlie Newcomer, by Wilbur B. Stover

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLIE NEWCOMER ***

***** This file should be named 36732.txt or 36732.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/7/3/36732/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Archives and Special
Collections, University Libraries, Ball State University
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
