Project Gutenberg's The Mountains of Oregon, by William Gladstone Steel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mountains of Oregon

Author: William Gladstone Steel

Release Date: July 16, 2011 [EBook #36746]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MOUNTAINS OF OREGON ***




Produced by Pat McCoy, Greg Bergquist and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









TRANSCRIBER NOTES:

    Italic type is indicated by the use of underscores (_).
    Other changes are noted at the end of the text.



[Illustration:

    C. F. ADAMS.
    O. C. YOCUM.
    J. M. KEENE.
    C. H. GOVE.
    N. W. DURHAM.
    W. G. STEEL.
    J. M. BRECK, Jr. ]




    THE

    MOUNTAINS

    OF OREGON

    BY

    W. G. STEEL,

    Fellow of the American Geographical Society.


    PORTLAND, OREGON:
    DAVID STEEL, SUCCESSOR TO HIMES THE PRINTER,
    169-1/2 Second Street.

    1890.




    COPYRIGHT, 1889, BY W. G. STEEL.




    PREFACE.


This little volume has not been written with the expectation of
accomplishing a mission, or even attracting general attention, but
simply to put into permanent form a small portion of information that is
constantly appearing in newspaper articles. Such information usually
comes from abler pens than mine, but it is all the more pity that it is
not in proper shape for future use. If it amuses, entertains or
instructs those who peruse it, its aim will be accomplished, and its
author satisfied.

There is, however, a word of explanation due for the manner in which it
is arranged. It was not begun with the intention of publishing a book,
but in response to numerous requests received for descriptions of Crater
Lake and Mt. Hood. As it was impossible at the time to answer them
satisfactorily, it was decided to print a letter on each subject, and
issue as a small pamphlet. Before this was accomplished the discovery
was made that the space allotted was entirely inadequate, so, acting on
the advice of friends, this form was adopted; too late, however, to
prevent the present arrangement.

                                                              W. G. S.




     CONTENTS.




                                                                  PAGE

    Crater Lake                                                     12

    Exploration Department, Oregon Alpine Club                      73

    Game Protective Department, Oregon Alpine Club                  77

    Illumination of Mount Hood                                       3

    Josephine County Caves                                          34

    Mount Rainier                                                   55

    Night on the Summit of Mount Rainier                            43

    Oregon Alpine Club                                              67

    Oregon Alpine Club, Constitution                                69

    Oregon Bibliography                                             85

    Our Mountains in War                                            40

    Photographic Department, Oregon Alpine Club                     79

    Preface                                                          1

    Presidents of the Oregon Alpine Club                            82

    Statement of Rev. Peter Stanup                                  57

    Thoughts on the name Tacoma                                     59

    Topical Index                                                  109

    What They Signify                                               52




     ILLUMINATION OF MOUNT HOOD.


Mount Hood is located in the Cascade range in Oregon, twenty-five miles
south of the Columbia river. It is about twelve thousand feet high, and
is visible over a large part of the State. Above an elevation of five
thousand feet it is covered with perpetual snow. It stands sixty miles
east of Portland, a monument of beauty, and the pride of Oregon. In the
spring of 1885 the idea originated of illuminating it with red fire. An
effort was made to carry this into effect on the following 4th of July,
but failed for the reason that, instead of staying with it over night, a
system of clock work and acids was devised, which was perfectly willing
to do the work assigned, but an ugly avalanche came along at four
o'clock in the afternoon, broke the bottles of acid and set the whole
thing ablaze. In 1887, the Celebration Committee of Portland, decided to
make the trial, and placed the matter in charge of the writer, who was
accompanied by N. W. Durham, correspondent of the _Oregonian_, O. C.
Yocum, photographer, Dr. J. M. Keene, J. M. Breck, Jr., C. H. Gove and
Chas. F. Adams. More agreeable, determined and competent associates I
never met. Breck was a cripple, finding it necessary at all times to
walk with a crutch, yet, a better mountain climber is hard to find.

Everything being placed in readiness, we left Portland at 6 o'clock A.M.,
Friday July 1st, and reached Government Camp at 5 o'clock in the
afternoon of the second. From this point, the mountain rises to the
north in all its beauty and grandeur, with timber line apparently within
a few rods, instead of four miles, the actual distance. Here the wagons
were left, and two horses were packed with blankets and provisions, and
our journey was resumed as soon as possible. It was necessary to cross
two small streams, over both of which the bridges had fallen, so we were
compelled to carry logs and fill in until it was possible to get the
horses over. About nine o'clock, finding that we could not reach timber
line, it was decided to camp on some friendly rocks near at hand. Here
we found the trees thickly covered with a long, dry moss, which afforded
excitement for the evening, for, no sooner had the inner man's longings
been supplied, than lighted matches were applied to the moss, which
blazed furiously until it died out in the distance, simply for the want
of material. The scene, while it lasted, was indeed brilliant, and
accompanied by a roar that seemed but the echo of thunder. Already
exhausted, after three hours plodding through snow knee deep, we sank to
rest and slept soundly until four o'clock. At five we were on our way,
somewhat surprised to see that the snow remained as soft as on the
evening before. In addition to the difficulty of sinking each step
nearly to our knees, each man was loaded with fifty pounds of blankets,
provisions or red fire, while three tugged savagely at a heavily loaded
toboggan. At noon we lunched at timber line. It was hardly a sumptuous
repast, but answered every requirement, there being canned Boston brown
bread and beef tea, mixed with snow and seasoned with smoke. Not a
dainty dish, to be sure, but "the best the market afforded." After lunch
we dragged our weary way along, among other difficulties encountering a
bitter cold wind, blowing directly from the summit with fearful
velocity. Slower and slower we moved, until three o'clock, when two men
fell in their tracks utterly exhausted. Here was a "pretty kettle of
fish." Barely seven thousand feet up, with five thousand feet more
above, and only one day in which to climb. It was finally decided to
make camp on the nearest rocks, abandon all idea of reaching the summit,
then, on the day following, find the best place possible for the
illumination. Two thousand feet above timber line we camped on rocks,
over which the cold wind swept, penetrating to the very marrow. Of
course it was impossible to have a fire, and at night it was necessary
to pile large stones on our blankets to keep them from sailing down the
mountain. Hats and a few other things were anchored in like manner.

The "Glorious Fourth" was ushered in, clear and cold, while a patriot in
the party, not to be outdone by Uncle Sam, saluted the rising sun with a
deafening round of fire cracker artillery. At five o'clock we started on
our upward march. Every thing was left behind except one hundred pounds
of red fire, three overcoats and a few crackers. At 11:30 A.M., bare
rocks were found to the west of the summit, in what was considered a
good location, and at an altitude of about ten thousand feet. Here our
burdens were cast at the foot of the cliff, and all hands, except Keene
and myself, returned to Government Camp. By noon the wind had died down
entirely, and the day became very pleasant. While waiting at this lonely
station for the appointed hour of illumination, a panorama was spread
before us, of a scope and magnificence that cannot be appropriately
described, but must be seen to be appreciated. Yes, and it remains for
those who love the beautiful and grand sufficiently to scale mountains,
to toil on day after day, patiently waiting for the time that is sure to
come, when the glorious pages of Nature will be unrolled before them.
Then,

    "It seems by the pain of ascending the height,
    We had conquered a claim to that wonderful sight."

The scene embraces millions of acres of land in Eastern Oregon,
extending from the Cascades to the Blue mountains, a distance of over
one hundred and fifty miles. The entire range of the Cascades lies
before us, showing the foothills of both Eastern and Western Oregon, and
the increase in height toward the center. For miles upon miles to the
south, cross ranges, running from east to west seem piled one upon the
other, and to their tops is added a covering of snow, changing the
solemn, otherwise unbroken, dark green, to a variegated picture, not
only of grandeur, but beauty. To the left of the centre stands
Jefferson, similar to Hood as seen from Portland. Next come the Three
Sisters to the left of Jefferson, while still further stands Snow Butte.
Almost in front of Jefferson is Washington, while to the right
McLaughlin looms up in southern Oregon, two hundred and fifty miles
distant. Changing the view to western Oregon, we see Mary's Peak over
one hundred miles southwest. The Willamette valley can be seen through
its entire extent of many miles, while here and there we catch glimpses
of the river flowing on to the lordly Columbia. Along the western
horizon extends the Coast Range, while in one little spot the mountains
break way and give us a vista of the ocean. In the immediate foreground
lies the base of old Hood, white with snow for five thousand feet below
us. To witness a scene like this many a man would circle the globe;--and
yet, imagine a sunset upon it. At 5:30 P.M. clouds drifted from the
north and hung on the points of the range a mile below. Slowly the sun
sank to rest, while the clouds hovering over the western horizon became
brighter and brighter, until it seemed that the very gates of heaven
were thrown wide open, and over a scene of unrivaled grandeur was spread
another of marvelous magnificence. As if Nature was not even yet
satisfied with such dazzling beauty, suddenly the smoke that had
gathered far below us, shutting out the great Columbia, was drawn aside
and the waters of that river seemed, through the thin smoke remaining,
like a stream of molten gold, visible in an unbroken line, winding from
the mountain to the sea a distance of one hundred and fifty miles.
Then, too, as we looked, just beneath the setting sun, the Pacific ocean
came to view, while the sun was setting in the mouth of the Columbia,
reflecting its ruddy glare in the ocean and river at one and the same
time. To the right could be seen Cape Disappointment, while to the left
Point Adams showed with equal clearness. So closed the day and the night
came on.

Far above the few clouds that lurked beneath us, threatening the success
of our experiment, the atmosphere was so perfectly clear that we thought
its equal had never been seen. Promptly with the departing day the full
moon arose in all its beauty, changing the day's brilliance to a subdued
halo of glory. About seven o'clock the wind blew furiously, almost
carrying us from the rocks to the snow beneath. Although clad for a land
of wintry blasts, it was necessary to pace back and forth, swinging our
arms and jumping to keep warm. At eight o'clock the wind died down, and
we became comfortable without exercise. Our spirits were low, however,
for it seemed that the entire country was covered with a thick veil of
smoke, and our labor was to be in vain. Suddenly at 9:30 we saw a red
light in the direction of Portland. It was the signal for a complete
revolution in our feelings. We danced for joy. Yes, we screamed and
halloed until we were hoarse. Did all sorts of silly things, for now we
_knew_ our fire would be seen. Following the first light came another,
and still others, and in our mad excitement we took a handful of red
fire and burned it on a rock. "Thereby hangs a tale."

The members of our party at Government camp were gathered around a
cheerful fire telling bear stories and waiting patiently for the
appointed time, when they were startled by a brilliant light from the
mountain, showing through the trees in front of them. Instantly they
scattered, every member forgetting his companions in a wild scramble for
a good view. In this sudden stampede, one member, who is hard of
hearing, climbed a tree, where he remained until the others began to
assemble. As one of the drivers, a hardy son of Erin, passed the tree
and heard a rustling in the branches, he glanced up, saw a large, dark
object, took it for a bear and gave the alarm. Instantly all hands
gathered around the tree, every one armed with a club, which he swung
like the arms of a windmill, at the same time shouting for some one else
to get a gun. The man up a tree, not understanding why the commotion
should extend so long after the burning of red fire, started to go down,
but, was met with such a lively rain of clubs that he beat a precipitate
retreat. At this point, a gun arrived and every fellow wanted to shoot
the bear. Bruin, at last comprehending the situation, chimed in with:
"You fellows let up with your durned foolishness, will you."

Soon after the red fire and rockets at Portland were noticed, others
were seen at Prineville, seventy-five miles to the southeast, and also
at Vancouver, W. T. These were watched with the most intense interest,
until the time arrived to make our own novel show. The red fire was
placed in a narrow ridge about ten feet long, and at right angles with
Portland. Holding my watch before me, promptly at 11:30 we applied the
match with the result as shown by the following account in the
_Oregonian_ of the next day:

"The celebration closed with the illumination of Mount Hood, the
grandest and most unique event of the day. Precisely at 11:30, the time
appointed, just as the fireworks display was over, a bright red light
shone away up in the clouds above the eastern horizon, which was greeted
with cheers from the thousands congregated on the bridge, wharves,
roofs, boats on the river and on the hills back of town, and with
vigorous and long-continued whistling from every steamboat on the river.

"The mountain had been plainly visible all day, but toward evening a
curtain of mist and smoke shut off the view at the base, and as twilight
fell, the curtain rose higher till at last only the very peak could be
seen, and as night came on, even that disappeared from view. Many gave
up all hope of seeing any sign from the mountain. But many thought that
the obstructions to a view of the summit were very slight, and if the
party had reached the peak, the light from one hundred pounds of red
fire would be able to pierce through them, and so it proved. It lasted
exactly fifty-eight seconds. This was the most novel and the highest
illumination ever made, and was seen the farthest and formed a fitting
close to the celebration of 1887."

Immediately after the illumination we started down the mountain,
following our previous trail in the snow. Just after midnight, while
lunging through the snow, we suddenly lost our footing and were no
little astonished to find that we had fallen into a crevasse. It proved
narrow and shallow, however, and all things considered, we extricated
ourselves with remarkable celerity and passed on down the mountain side,
only to get lost in the timber below, and wander around until daylight,
when we found camp and soon after were homeward bound.




     CRATER LAKE.

    ONE OF THE WORLD'S GREAT NATURAL WONDERS.


A trip to Crater Lake is, to a lover of the grand and beautiful in
nature, an important event, around which will ever cluster memories of
unalloyed happiness, thoughts of little adventures and weird experiences
that go to make life worth living. It is situated in the northwest
portion of Klamath county, Oregon, twenty-two miles west of north of
Fort Klamath, and about eighty miles northeast of Medford, which is the
best point to leave the Oregon & California railroad. The Jacksonville
and Fort Klamath military road passes the lake within three miles, and
the road to the very walls of it is an exceptionally good one for a
mountainous country, while in near proximity may be found remarkably
fine camping grounds.

The Indians of Southern Oregon have known of it for ages, but until
recently none have seen it, for the reason that a tradition, handed down
from generation to generation, described it as the home of myriads of
sea-devils, or, as they were called, Llaos; and it was considered
certain death for any brave even to look upon it. This superstition
still haunts the Klamaths. While a few of the tribe have visited it,
they do so with a sort of mysterious dread of the consequences. It was
discovered by a party of twelve prospectors on June 12th, 1853, among
whom were J. W. Hillman, George Ross, James Louden, Pat McManus, Isaac
Skeeters and a Mr. Dodd. These had left the main party, and were not
looking for gold, but having run short of provisions, were seeking
wherewithal to stay the gnawing sensations that had seized upon their
stomachs. For a time hunger forsook them, as they stood in silent
amazement upon the cliffs, and drank in the awe of the scene stretched
before them. After partaking of the inspiration fostered by such weird
grandeur, they decided to call it Mysterious, or Deep Blue Lake. It was
subsequently called Lake Majesty, and by being constantly referred to as
a crater lake, it gradually assumed that name, which is within itself so
descriptive.

At times when gazing from the surrounding wall, the skies and cliffs are
seen perfectly mirrored in the smooth and glassy surface over which the
mountain breeze creates scarce a ripple, and it is with great difficulty
the eye can distinguish the line dividing the cliffs from their
reflected counterfeits. The lake is almost egg-shaped, ranging northeast
by southwest and is seven miles long by six in width. The water's
surface is six thousand two hundred and fifty-one feet above sea level,
and is completely surrounded by cliffs, or walls, from one thousand to
over two thousand feet high, which are scantily covered with coniferous
trees. To the southwest is Wizard Island, eight hundred and forty-five
feet high, circular in shape, and slightly covered with timber. In the
top is a depression, or crater--the Witches' Cauldron--one hundred feet
deep and four hundred and seventy-five feet in diameter. This was
evidently the last smoking chimney of a once mighty volcano. The base of
the island is covered with very heavy and hard rocks, with sharp and
unworn edges, over which scarcely a score of human feet have trod.
Farther up are deep beds of ashes, and light, spongy rocks and cinders,
giving evidence of intense heat. Within the crater, as without, the
surface is entirely covered with volcanic rocks, but here it forms one
of the hottest places on a clear day in August, it has ever been my lot
to witness. Not a breath of air seems to enter, and the hot sun pours
down upon thousands of rocks and stones that reflect his rays with an
intensity that seems to multiply beyond conception. Here, however, we
determined to lunch--and did--but one such experience will last a long
time. Directly north of the island is Llao Rock, a grand old sentinel,
standing boldly out on the west side of the lake and reaching up over
two thousand feet perpendicular. From the top of it you can drop a stone
and it will pass down and grow smaller and smaller, until your head
begins to swim and you see the stone become a mere speck, and fade
entirely from view; and at last, nearly half a mile below, it strikes
the unruffled surface of the water and sinks forever from sight in the
depth of a bottomless lake.

There is probably no point of interest in America that so completely
overcomes the ordinary Indian with fear as Crater Lake. From time
immemorial, no power has been strong enough to induce him to approach
within sight of it. For a paltry sum he will engage to guide you
thither, but, before you reach the mountain top, will leave you to
proceed alone. To the savage mind it is clothed with a deep veil of
mystery, and is the abode of all manner of demons and unshapely
monsters. Once inhabited by the Great Spirit, it has now become the
sheol of modern times, and it is certain death for any proud savage to
behold it. This feeling has, to a certain extent, instilled itself in
the mind of such whites as have made it their Mecca, until every stray
log that floats upon the water is imagined to possess life, and may
possibly be a monster. Exaggerated accounts of different points have
been given and implicitly believed without a question or reflection. It
has been claimed that the crater was eight hundred feet deep, while by
actual measurement we found it to be scarcely a hundred. The island was
said to be fifteen hundred feet high, but an accurate measurement placed
it at just eight hundred and forty-five feet.

From Allen Davey, Chief of the Klamath tribe, I gleaned the following in
reference to the discovery of Crater Lake:

    A long time ago, long before the white man appeared in this region
    to vex and drive the proud native out, a band of Klamaths, while
    out hunting, came suddenly upon the lake and were startled by its
    remarkable walls and awed by its majestic proportions. With
    spirits subdued and trembling with fear, they silently approached
    and gazed upon its face; something within told them the Great
    Spirit dwelt there, and they dared not remain, but passed silently
    down the side of the mountain and camped far away. By some
    unaccountable influence, however, one brave was induced to return.
    He went up to the very brink of the precipice and started his camp
    fire. Here he laid down to rest; here he slept till morn--slept
    till the sun was high in air, then arose and joined his tribe far
    down the mountain. At night he came again; again he slept till
    morn. Each visit bore a charm that drew him back again. Each night
    found him sleeping above the rocks; each night strange voices
    arose from the waters; mysterious noises filled the air. At last,
    after a great many moons, he climbed down to the lake and there he
    bathed and spent the night. Often he climbed down in like manner,
    and frequently saw wonderful animals, similar in all respects to a
    Klamath Indian, except that they seemed to exist entirely in the
    water. He suddenly became hardier and stronger than any Indian of
    his tribe because of his many visits to the mysterious waters.
    Others then began to seek its influence. Old warriors sent their
    sons for strength and courage to meet the conflicts awaiting them.
    First, they slept on the rocks above, then ventured to the water's
    edge, but last of all they plunged beneath the flood and the
    coveted strength was theirs. On one occasion, the brave who first
    visited the lake, killed a monster, or fish, and was at once set
    upon by untold numbers of excited Llaos (for such they were
    called), who carried him to the top of the cliffs, cut his throat
    with a stone knife, then tore his body in small pieces, which were
    thrown down to the waters far beneath, where he was devoured by
    the angry Llaos--and such shall be the fate of every Klamath
    brave, who, from that day to this, dares to look upon the lake.

My first visit to Crater Lake was in 1885, at which time the thought was
suggested by Capt. C. E. Dutton, of having the lake and environs drawn
from the market. Promptly acting on the suggestion, my friend, Hon.
Binger Hermann, was sought and a movement started looking to the
formation of a National Park. In response to a petition forwarded to
Washington and ably advocated by Congressman Hermann, the United States
Geological Survey, under Capt. Dutton, was ordered to examine the lake
and surroundings during the summer of 1886. In this expedition it was my
good fortune to have charge of the sounding, which afforded me a
pleasure unsurpassed in all my mountain experience.

That an idea may be had of the difficulties to be overcome, suffice it
to say, boats had to be built for the purpose in Portland, transported
to Ashland, three hundred and forty-one miles by rail, and carried from
there to the lake on wagons, one hundred miles into the mountains,
where they were launched over cliffs one thousand feet high.

On the first day of July, I boarded the train for Ashland, where I met
Capt. Dutton, and we were joined immediately afterward by Capt. Geo. W.
Davis, one of the most eminent engineers of America, and ten soldiers.
On the 7th, we started for the lake, preceded by Capts. Dutton and
Davis, who were followed by a four mule team, bearing a first-class lap
streak boat, which in turn was followed by three double teams, horsemen
and pack train. Of our largest boat, the Cleetwood, we all felt justly
proud, as it was certainly a beautiful model, four-oared, twenty-six
feet long and competent to ride almost any sea.

When passing through Phoenix, the typical and irrepressible critic
came to the surface, in the shape of a lean, lank, awkward, ignorant
country boy of, say, eighteen summers. With hands in his pockets, he
aided the single suspender delegated to hold his breeches in place, and
when shifting a monstrous chew of tobacco over his tongue, informed his
audience (of half a dozen small urchins) that "That 'ere boat won't live
in Crater Lake half an hour if a storm comes up. It ain't shaped right.
Jist see for yourself how sway-backed it is. It must have been made by
some feller as never seed a boat afore." This brings to mind the fact
that a critic is a person who finds fault with something of which he is
densely ignorant.

The entire distance from Ashland--ninety-seven miles--was accomplished
by slow, easy marches, every precaution being taken to provide against
a mishap, and no incident occurred of special importance. Soon after
reaching the foothills, we encountered sliding places and short turns in
the road. As the wagon containing the Cleetwood was top heavy and
coupled twenty feet long, it was impossible to turn on an ordinary
curve, hence it became necessary at times to drive as far as possible,
then let ten or fifteen men lift the hind end of the wagon around by
main strength. When a sliding place was reached, the men would hang on
the upper side, or attach ropes to the top and hold it, thus preventing
an upset. On Tuesday we succeeded in reaching the foot of the last
grade, and on Wednesday morning began the ascent. Here was the rub. The
hill is about a mile and a half long, very steep, sliding, rocky, and
filled with roots and stones, added to which were great banks of snow,
packed solid by constant thawing. Progress was slow and tedious, a
roadway having to be cut in places, while men with picks, axes and
shovels dug up rocks, cut down trees and shoveled snow, besides building
up or cutting down one side of the roadway. At 10 o'clock on Wednesday
the 14th, the boats were landed on the walls of the lake, having
traveled four hundred and forty miles from Portland, with scarcely a
scratch to mar the paint.

Thursday morning the work of launching was commenced by covering the
bottom of each skiff with inch boards, firmly secured, as also a shield
in front of the bow. They were carried to the lowest place to be found
in the cliffs, probably about nine hundred feet, vertical measurement,
where a canyon descends at an angle of thirty-five or forty degrees,
when a three-quarter inch rope was attached and in turn passed around a
tree on the summit, where a man was stationed to manage it, directed by
signals below. One was lowered at a time, accompanied by four men to
guide and handle it. Besides this, men were stationed at different
points to signal to the top, and thus regulate the paying out of rope.
Every effort was made to send all loose stones on ahead, to prevent
accident from above, yet, before the first boat had proceeded three
hundred feet in its descent, a boulder came rolling from near the summit
with increasing velocity, and before any one realized the danger, had
struck a rock in near proximity and bounded over the skiff, passed
between the men and within an inch of one fellow's head. Before the
descent was completed, the boards were torn from the first boat; but
extra precaution was taken with the second one. About two-thirds of the
way down a perfect shower of rocks came tumbling from a cliff to the
left, but, strange as it may seem, they either bounded over or around
the men and boat, so that no damage resulted. At three o'clock the first
skiff reached bottom somewhat scratched, but not injured in any manner.
The second one was placed in the lake entirely uninjured at six o'clock
P.M.

Our tents were pitched in a beautiful spot. In the immediate foreground
to the north lies the lake with its twenty odd miles of rugged cliffs
standing abruptly from the water's edge. To the left is Wizard Island,
on the top of which rests the Witch's Cauldron, or crater, like a great
flat top; beyond stands Llao Rock, solemn, grim and grand, over two
thousand feet perpendicular, while still beyond stands Mt. Thielsen, the
lightning rod of the Cascades. Just to the east of the lake is Mt.
Scott, partly covered with snow, while close to the camp on the east, is
a high cliff known as Cathedral Rock, running far down to the right and
at last disappearing below the tree tops. To the south the scene was
varied by a wide range of mountain tops, stretching far away to
California, chief among which is snow-capped and beautiful Pitt. Just to
the left the rough mountain view is changed to a charming plain, in the
midst of which is a broad expanse of water, which proves to be Klamath
Lake, about thirty miles distant. Thursday evening, dark and threatening
clouds were suddenly seen to approach from this point, accompanied by
vivid flashes of lightning and loud peals of thunder. A few large drops
of rain had fallen, when there was a sudden outburst of joy in camp, as
every one glanced at the sides of Cathedral Rock, which were suddenly
illuminated by a light of deep orange. To the west, the sun was slowly
sinking to rest, when a glowing light spread itself over the dark
clouds, which became brighter and still brighter. Looking beyond a scene
of unparalleled magnificence was spread before us. Through the center
hung long fleecy clouds lighted to a deep orange, while above, like a
great curtain, was spread a belt of olive green. Here and there were
tints of crimson, the delicacy of which no artist could approach. Above
and parallel with the horizon stretched a long rift, in clouds rendered
marvelously rich in gold and garnet, through which the blue sky beyond
was visible, slightly obscured by light, fleecy clouds of silver. During
all this magnificent sight the electric storm raged in the south with
unabated fury, flashes of lightning and peals of thunder adding
solemnity to a scene of wonderful brilliance.

The 16th was spent in preparing the Cleetwood for her final plunge over
the cliffs in search of water. A sled was made of very heavy timbers, on
which she was placed, keel up, then lashed and braced in every
conceivable manner until, in fact, she seemed a part of the sled itself.
Guy ropes were placed on each corner to guide it, in connection with a
heavy handspike. Saturday morning the actual work of launching began, by
sliding the boat over a snowdrift in a canyon that slopes to the lake at
about an angle of fifty degrees. The cliff is probably one thousand feet
high at this point. The sled was attached by block and tackle to a tree
on the summit and lowered nearly half way, when the bearing was shifted
as far down as possible and a new start taken. Leaving the summit at
7:30 A.M., it required the most persistent work and constant care of
fifteen men eight hours to reach the lake. In the bottom of the canyon
flows a stream of water that contributes very materially to the danger
of such an undertaking, as constant slides of rocks are thus caused.
When the bottom seemed to be reached it was found that there still
remained a sort of jump-off, or slide, into the water, perpendicular and
about fifteen feet high. The water, at this point is very deep, and the
question arose, "How shall we launch the boat now that we have got it
here?" It was simply turned right side up again, lashed to the sled and
let partially down with the bow thrown out as far as possible. It was
held securely in this position while one of the men climbed aboard, cut
the lines and she shot forward in fine style, not shipping a gallon of
water, although the bow was almost submerged to start with. The moment
the launching was complete there was a cry of unrestrained joy sent up
from all present, and our shouts were answered from the cliffs by waving
of hats and blowing of fog horns. With one impulse the cry was raised,
"Now for the island!" and in an incredibly short space of time both
skiffs and the Cleetwood were headed that way. With four men at the oars
we soon reached our destination, and then returned to camp, where a
bountiful repast awaited us.

Every precaution was taken to clear the canyon of loose rocks,
nevertheless a few rolled down, but were successfully dodged until the
boat was actually in the water, immediately after which a small bowlder
came down with terrific force. Capt. Davis stood directly in its course,
and not seeing it the other members of the party shouted to him to
"lookout." It being impossible for him to run, he jumped under the
framework, or sled, hanging where the boat left it, and laid flat on the
ground, just as the stone struck a rock and the upper end of the frame.
It then struck Capt. Davis in the back, but its force had been so broken
that it did no harm further than to make the spot feel sore.

The day after launching the Cleetwood, nine members of our party made
the circuit of the lake on a sort of casual observation, or tour of
inspection. The scenery was grand to a degree far beyond our most
sanguine expectations. Four strong oarsmen soon brought us to Llao Rock,
and as we gazed in silent wonder at its rugged sides, reaching nearly
half a mile above us, for the first time did we realize the immensity of
such a spectacle. Never before did I fully understand the meaning of
figures when they run up into the thousands of feet, vertical
measurement. Beyond Llao rock we found a beautiful little bay, and
beyond it a larger one, probably one mile long by a quarter of a mile
deep. Here we stopped for lunch, and when landing were surprised to find
a long line of dead moths, of large variety, washed up by the waves, and
in such numbers that the air was laden with an unpleasant odor,
apparently about a first cousin to a slaughter house. We also found here
a narrow beach of small gravel running almost the entire length of the
bay, while further out in the lake, the bottom is composed of sand. As
this point had not only never been named, but probably was never before
visited by human beings, we decided to christen it Cleetwood Cove.
Passing on our journey, it was soon seen that the cliffs on the north
side are not so high as those to the south. In several places it
appeared that good trails could easily be made to the water's edge, over
which a person might almost ride horseback, and in one place, without
any grading whatever, a good pack train could descend with comparative
ease. About 2 o'clock a thunder shower came suddenly upon us just as two
beautiful grottos appeared in view. Into one of these the boat was run,
where we were entirely beyond the reach of rain. It proved to be about
thirty feet deep and twenty wide, with an arched roof probably eight
feet above the water, while the rocky bottom could be distinctly seen
ten feet below the surface. So perfect was its form that it almost
seemed the hand of man had hewn it from the solid rock. Beyond it
towered an immense cliff, very high, with broken, rugged sides,
picturesque and sublime, which I insist on naming Dutton Cliff, in honor
of Capt. Dutton, who has done and is doing so much to make Crater Lake
justly famous. This point may be known from the fact that it lies
directly opposite Llao Rock, and between the two lowest places in the
lake's walls. Immediately north of Dutton Cliff, the elements have worn
the sides of the mountain, leaving a harder substance, alternately
colored red and yellow, resembling the mansard roof of a cottage, while
in one place, tall red chimneys stand aloft, making, all in all, such a
scene that Cottage Rock could scarcely be improved on for a name. Lying
between the two points above referred to, a break in the wall was
found, that is almost perpendicular, but certainly does not exceed five
hundred feet in height. This is by far the lowest point in the walls.

No time was lost in getting our soundings under way. The first was made
about one hundred yards from shore. It was supposed that we might
possibly find as much as one hundred feet of water, but, as the lead ran
out, our excitement grew with each succeeding hundred feet, until over
one thousand two hundred feet were out. At one thousand two hundred feet
the machine stopped, and our pent-up feelings exploded in one wild yell
of delight. For a number of days the soundings were continued. The
greatest depth recorded was one thousand nine hundred and ninety-six
feet, which, making allowance for stretch of wire, would give two
thousand and eight feet. Of the whole number made, eighteen are over one
thousand nine hundred, thirteen over one thousand eight hundred, eleven
over one thousand seven hundred, fifteen over one thousand six hundred,
and nineteen over one thousand five hundred. It was found that at the
bottom of the northeastern end lies a plain of several square miles,
almost perfectly level, while south of the center is a cliff about nine
hundred feet high, and west of the center seems to be cinder cone,
nearly one thousand two hundred feet in height, with a crater in the
center two hundred and fifty feet deep. Its summit is six hundred feet
below the surface of the water.

On one occasion our party took five pounds of red fire, which we
intended to burn on the summit of Wizard Island, but owing to the fact
that the air was so filled with smoke as to destroy the effect, our plan
was changed, and we took it to Rogue River Falls on our return. Here we
met quite a number of hardy mountaineers, and at 9 o'clock left camp for
the falls, about one mile distant. The night was very dark, and a weird
sort of a scene it was as we climbed over logs and rocks, lighting our
way by tallow candles and a lantern that flickered dimly. At last the
bank of the stream was reached, and while the noise of the rushing
waters was intense, nothing could be seen but the dim outline of
something white far down below us. At this point, the walls are
perpendicular, and one hundred and eighty feet high. They are also solid
rock from top to bottom. Directly opposite where we stood, Mill Creek
falls into Rogue River (one hundred and eighty feet), and this is what
we came to see. In order to get the benefit of the red light, it was
necessary for some one to climb down to the water. This duty fell to a
stranger in the party, who made the descent during the day, and myself.
He led the way carrying a dim lantern, and I followed as best I could.
The rocks are covered with a remarkably thick layer of moss, which is
kept very wet by the rising mist. The path, if such it might be termed,
led along the sides of the cliff at an angle of about 45 degrees. As we
cautiously climbed from rock to rock, it was a sort of feeling of
intensified interest that overcame us, when we realized that a single
misstep would precipitate us to the rocks below--and, worst of all,
possibly we "never would be missed." The bed of the stream was reached
at last, and the fire ignited close to the falls. Ye gods! What a
transformation! Suddenly, the canyon, which could not be seen before,
was as bright as day, lighted by a fire so brilliant that we could not
look upon it. Crimson air and crimson water, crimson walls and crimson
everywhere. No magician of the Arabians ever conjured up by a stroke of
his wand a spectacle more sublime. It was one of transcendent beauty,
upon which the human eye seldom rests, and when it does its possessor is
spellbound by the bewildering vision. One almost loses the power of
speech in the desperate struggle to see and comprehend the scene, and
before it is realized the light dies away and darkness reigns supreme,
rendered ten-fold more dense by the splendor of so magnificent a
tableau.

Near the base of Dutton Cliff stands a solitary rock, probably one
hundred feet high, by two hundred in length and nearly the same breadth,
that, while not seen by the present generation of Indians, is
nevertheless known to them, and is a special object of superstitious
dread. They consider it as a peculiarly ferocious monster, but are
unable to describe its characteristics. It stands in the lake entirely
alone and about fifty yards from shore. Standing on the cliffs, five
miles to the west and looking across the lake, this strange rock is
plainly visible in the sunlight its rugged peaks reaching aloft, giving
it the appearance of a full rigged ship at anchor. Should a cloud pass
before the sun, as the shadow strikes the rock it will pass from view as
effectually as though it had ceased to exist. While sounding the lake in
1886, I caused a party of topographical engineers to be landed here for
observations, but it was so rugged that the most diligent search failed
to reveal a level place large enough to accommodate the tripod attached
to their instruments, and we were compelled to resort to a point on
shore for the purpose. I have never learned its Indian name, but among
the whites it is known as the Phantom Ship.

To those who enjoy the noble sport of hunting, the vicinity of Crater
Lake is especially attractive. Great numbers of deer, bear and panther
roam through the timber in fancied security, inviting the keen eye and
steady nerve of the sportsman. Although passionately fond of such sport
myself, the grandeur and sublimity of the surroundings so overcame me
with desire to see and prosecute our explorations, that I forgot my love
for a running shot, in an inordinate desire to climb over the cliffs and
view the wonderful place from every conceivable point. My companions
were no less affected, and the result was that we ran out of meat and
applied to a native sheep herder for mutton chops. He scowled upon us
for a moment, then informed our spokesman that "when he butchered he
never saved the heads."

While running a line of soundings from Llao rock to Vidae cliff across
the lake one day, a strong wind sprung up from the south accompanied by
black clouds and a storm seemed imminent. We had proceeded about three
miles across, when we were suddenly startled by a loud noise, as though
a multitude of men were savagely beating tin pans. In a very few minutes
the southwestern cliffs became white and we could plainly see the "color
line" advancing to the north, until all the cliffs to the west seemed
covered with snow. To add to so strange a sight, a good-sized water-fall
began pouring over Llao rock, and falling to the lake two thousand feet
below. Within half an hour from the beginning of the storm, the
water-fall ceased, the cliffs became dark again, the wind shifted to the
northwest and drove millions of hailstones upon us, sufficiently large
to make us wince when struck--especially when struck all over with no
possible means of escape.

The only accident to any of our party during the sojourn, befel a highly
respected mule attached to the Topographical Engineers Corps. One day as
the party passed along the east side of Dutton Cliff, progress seemed
almost blocked by high precipices. A point was found overlooking a
yawning chasm, where a large tree had fallen and lodged. By throwing in
stones and brush, a sort of trail was made to terra firma beyond the
backbone of the mountain. Over this the pack train was passed safely,
except a mule that was blind in one eye. He bore a reputation for
dignity and sobriety that any well-to-do mule might envy. However, when
just at the point which, above all others, should have received his
undivided attention, he became gay and festive, and as a consequence,
fell part way over the precipice. By dint of hard labor, he was drawn
back, but little the worse for wear, his pack was removed and he again
started across. Again, however, he became frisky, and pitched head-long
over a rocky precipice five hundred feet high. As his limbs mixed with
those of the trees below, the thoughts of the spectators above were:
"There goes all that is mortal of Croppy, who climbed to the top of Mt.
Shasta, but died in a lonely canyon, by his own hand in a fit of
temporary insanity. Let him R.I.P."

One day while at work on the lake, my attention was called to what
seemed to be a tall, full-bearded man standing on the southern portion
of Llao Rock's summit. One foot was placed a little forward of the other
and the knee bent slightly but naturally, while before him stood a gun.
His hands were clasped over the muzzle as he gazed intently to the
north. Just behind him stood a boy, apparently about fifteen years of
age. They seemed entirely too natural not to be flesh and blood, and
yet, persons at that distance would not be visible to the naked eye, as
we were two miles out on the lake. Day after day, as our work
progressed, their position remained the same, and, in the absence of a
better explanation, we decided them to be trees.

Crater Lake is but a striking memento of a dread past. Imagine a vast
mountain, six by seven miles through, at an elevation of eight thousand
feet, with the top removed and the inside hollowed out, then filled with
the clearest water in the world, to within two thousand feet of the top,
then place a round island in one end eight hundred and forty-five feet
high, then dig a circular hole tapering to the center, like a funnel,
one hundred feet deep and four hundred and seventy-five feet in
diameter, and you have a perfect representation of Crater Lake.

It is hard to comprehend what an immense affair it is. To those living
in New York City, I would say, Crater Lake is large enough to have
Manhattan, Randall's, Ward's and Blackwell's Islands dropped into it,
side by side without touching the walls, or, Chicago or Washington City
might do the same. Our own fair city of Portland with all her suburbs,
from the City Park to Mount Tabor, and from Albina to Sellwood
inclusive, could find ample room on the bottom of the lake. On the other
hand, if it were possible to place the lake, at its present elevation,
above either of these cities, it would be over a mile up to the surface
of the water, and a mile and three-quarters to the top of Llao Rock. Of
this distance, the ascent would be through water for two thousand feet.
To those living in New Hampshire, it might be said, the surface of the
water is twenty-three feet higher than the summit of Mt. Washington.

[Illustration:

_1. Rogue River Falls, 180 feet high._

_2. Vidae Cliff, Crater Lake, over 2,000 feet high._

_3. A point on Vidae Cliff._]

What an immense affair it must have been, ages upon ages ago, when, long
before the hot breath of a volcano soiled its hoary head, standing as a
proud monarch, with its feet upon earth and its head in the heavens,
it towered far, far above the mountain ranges, aye, looked far down upon
the snowy peaks of Hood and Shasta, and snuffed the air beyond the reach
of Everest. Then streams of fire began to shoot forth, great seas of
lava were hurled upon the earth beneath. The elements seemed bent upon
establishing hell upon earth and fixing its throne upon this great
mountain. At last its foundation gave way and it sank forever from
sight. Down, down, down deep into the bowels of the earth, leaving a
great, black, smoking chasm, which succeeding ages filled with pure,
fresh water, giving to our day and generation one of the most beautiful
lakes within the vision of man.

In conclusion I will say, Crater Lake is one of the grandest points of
interest on earth. Here all the ingenuity of nature seems to have been
exerted to the fullest capacity, to build one grand, awe-inspiring
temple, within which to live and from which to gaze upon the surrounding
world and say: "Here would I dwell and live forever. Here would I make
my home from choice; the universe is my kingdom, and this my throne."




     JOSEPHINE COUNTY CAVES.


On Friday evening, August 24, 1888, S. S. Nicolini of Ragusa, Austria,
E. D. Dewert of Portland, and the writer boarded the south-bound train
for Grant's Pass, intent on a few days' outing. This town of Grant's
Pass was so named for a pass in the mountains several miles south,
where, in early days, the silent hero camped for the night.

Early Saturday morning my head was banged up against one end of our
sleeping car, an instant after hearing the shrill whistle sounding down
brakes. As soon as possible I got on the outside and found the engines
standing within a few feet of a yawning chasm where a bridge had been.
Now, however, seven bents had been burned away and a terrible railroad
accident was averted by the quick eye of Engineer Elliott, who saw the
fire as we turned the curve and stopped the train almost instantly.

At Grant's Pass, H. D., M. M. and F. M. Harkness joined us, and we
started for the Josephine County Caves, about thirty miles due south, in
the Siskiyou mountains. For twenty miles the trip was made over a very
good road by wagon. At this point it became necessary to pack our things
on two horses and walk over a trail into the mountains. On a hot day,
this portion of the trip is very laborious, owing to the fact that it
is up the steep mountain side about two-thirds of the way, and down an
equally steep incline the remainder. We arrived at our destination a
little before noon on the 27th, and found two openings, one above the
other, and about one hundred yards apart, on the south side of a deep
canyon. When out hunting a few years since, Elijah Davidson, of Williams
Creek, found a bear and chased it into the lower entrance, thus
discovering the caves.

Each entrance is high enough to admit a person without stooping, and is
probably about eight feet wide. At noon we entered the upper cave. For a
few feet the floor inclined inward; we then descended a ladder for about
six feet, and found ourselves in a passage way eight feet wide by an
equal height, which changed, however, at every step. Now it would be
wider, and now narrower, now higher, and now lower. Walls, ceiling and
floor were composed of solid rock. To describe them, appropriately would
simply be to use a gift made divine by inspiration. No man can behold
them, then impart to others an accurate idea of their appearance. Soon
after entering we were compelled to progress on hands and knees, then
stood upright in chambers ten feet high, the walls of which were white.
Stalactites were first seen here, and involuntarily we cast sly glances
around to discover the bodies of kings preserved beneath such droppings
in "King Solomon's Mines." We wandered from place to place, from chamber
to chamber, dragging ourselves through passage ways barely large enough
to admit a human body, while with toes and fingers we worked along, or
stood in the midst of rooms that reached far above us. Now we see a
beautiful pool of clearest water, surrounded by a delicate crystal
formation in the shape of a bowl. In color it is as white as the driven
snow, while each crystal is oblong, projecting at right angles with the
main portion for about an eighth of an inch. One peculiarity of these
crystals that disappointed us was the fact that they change from white
to a dull, yellowish color, immediately after being removed from the
caves.

We were extremely anxious to try a new process for taking photographs in
the dark, so Dewert took his camera and acted as photographer for the
party. Owing to the limited space at times and cramped manner of
locomotion it required the services of four men to carry the camera and
accompanying necessities. Having reached a suitable place for a picture,
the camera was first put in position, a board was laid on the top of it
on which a tin reflector was placed, and a little powder called the
lightning flash was then poured on the board in front of the reflector.
At this point the order was given, "Douse the glim," and all lights were
extinguished. The plate was exposed in perfect darkness, the powder was
ignited, and instantly there was a flash of the most intense light. This
light was so brilliant that, for several minutes, it caused in the eyes
a glimmering sensation of light. Several photographs were taken in this
way, which will doubtless prove excellent examples of what ingenuity
can do in the dark.

It would require days of constant work to explore all the passages we
found, whereas our time was limited to that portion of one day after 12
o'clock noon. For this reason we remained in the caves from noon to
midnight, first examining the upper, then the lower one. This difference
exists between them: The one above is possessed of fine stalactite
formations, while below none appear. Instead, however, immense rocks are
piled indiscriminately one upon the other, with great cracks between.
Long ladders were used to climb to the top of the rocks, over the sides
of which yawning pits could be seen that seemed to possess no bottom.
Lack of time alone prevented us from making a thorough investigation,
but I could not resist the temptation to climb over the side of one
friendly rock for a few feet to see how it looked. Down for twenty feet
the space remained unchanged, so that I could easily reach from rock to
rock. It then widened out and I could proceed no farther without ropes,
so I returned to the party. A fine stream of clear cold water flows from
this cave and a strong breeze of cool air rushed forth also. At times in
both upper and lower cave, the wind blew toward the entrance so that it
was impossible to keep the lights burning. No traces of foul air have
been found in either cave.

Before our visit, visions of square chambers filled my mind, only to be
dashed aside when real ones presented themselves, the irregular shape of
which could not well be surpassed. There are no parallel walls, few
straight ones, but corners everywhere. The floor will pitch in all
directions, likewise ceiling and walls. Beautiful views of stalactites
and stalagmites stand out in bold relief against snow white walls. At
the farthest extremity of the upper cave in one direction an immense
chamber presents itself, and should be known as the devil's banquet
hall. It is probably 75 x 150 feet and sixty in height. Great blocks of
rock hang as by a thread from the ceiling, while on every side rocks of
equal size lie in all conceivable shapes. Standing at the point of entry
one looks at the opposite side and sees great cracks, yawning cavities
with open mouths of blackness, dismal shadows, to which flickering
lights give a ghoulish, dance-like appearance. Yes, the devil seems to
be holding high carnival, while his imps would dance the night away.
They bob up and down and swing their arms in fiendish glee, while the
dance goes on forever. None can look therein without seeing these imps
and their antics. The floor recedes rapidly from the entrance, and is
composed of great rocks scattered in confusion. We placed a number of
lighted candles in different places, then climbed to the opposite side
to view them. The shadows had partially disappeared, crevices and holes
in the walls not before seen became suddenly black and excited our
curiosity, so we climbed over high rocks into unknown passages. In a
small chamber on one side we found a beautiful stream of water, falling
several feet into a crystal basin. The walls of the chamber are white,
and the effect by candle-light is very fine.

Midnight found us still employed, but we reluctantly ceased our labors
and withdrew. Without unnecessary ceremony we wrapped our blankets about
us, laid down beneath the stars, and slept the sleep of the just until 3
o'clock, when the dulcet notes of a coyote called us to the business of
the day. Preparations were quickly made for the journey, and at daylight
we were on our way to Grant's Pass, where we arrived at 9 o'clock P.M.




     OUR MOUNTAINS IN WAR.


It is a curious fact that the home of Liberty has always been in the
mountains. The reason for this is, that Nature intervenes every barrier
to prevent conquests, and shields the native mountaineer from onslaughts
of a foreign foe. The ringing words, "Make way for Liberty," could never
have become immortal had it not been for a mountain pass. The memory of
William Tell would not now be cherished by liberty-loving Swiss, were it
not for the friendly crags of the Alps that sheltered him. Here in the
Northwest we are blessed with a wonderful mountain range, extending from
California through Oregon and Washington to British Columbia.

For beauty, grandeur and extent it has no superior; while as a field of
defense, it simply stands unparalleled, and is rich in minerals,
agriculture and commerce. Located at from forty to a hundred miles apart
are the following mountain peaks, covered with perpetual snow: Baker,
Rainier, Adams, St. Helens, Hood, Jefferson, Three Sisters, Pitt and
Shasta. From each of these, convenient points of prominence are visible
in the Coast Range, one or more of which in turn are visible from every
harbor and city as far south as San Francisco. In case of a foreign war
it is one of the possibilities of the Oregon Alpine Club to organize a
sort of Signal Corps, say five hundred men, each of whom would be
thoroughly familiar with every pass, crevasse and crag in the mountains
where detailed for service. With a liberal supply of provisions and
ammunition on each peak, scarcely anything short of a pestilence could
dislodge them. What could a foreign army do around Mt. Hood, for
instance, with fifty resolute men well armed and equipped on the summit.

It has been but a few years since the entire force of the United States
Army was successfully defied by Captain Jack and a dozen Indians in the
Lava Beds; and yet we have here every advantage of the Lava Beds, to
which is added precipices to the north, east and west, while to the
south a narrow passage would permit men to ascend, but it is necessary
to cut every step in the ice; while directly across the base of this
precipitous glacier, a crevasse extends, of unknown depth, which varies
in width from three to forty feet, according to the season. It is
needless to say that every wounded member of the assaulting party would
pay the penalty with his life, for the slightest misstep would hurl him
into the crevasse where "moth doth not corrupt and where thieves do not
break through and steal." Now for the point of this article. Give to the
corps a liberal supply of heliographs and instruct the men how to use
them. In this way a perfect system of communication can be established
by which messages can be sent from point to point in an instant. Say,
for instance, that a hostile fleet was lying at Victoria and a descent
on San Francisco was planned. From a spy within the enemy's lines, the
party on Mt. Baker gathers full particulars, and immediately informs San
Francisco of the contemplated attack, giving full particulars, including
number of ships, men and guns.




     NIGHT ON THE SUMMIT OF MOUNT RAINIER.


Monday, August 14, 1889, Mr. J. Nichols, of Tacoma, and the writer, left
Tacoma for Mt. Rainier, determined, if possible, to reach its highest
point.

The provisions, blankets, alpine stocks (a hickory staff seven feet long
with a steel point at one end), alpine ax and all that was necessary in
making the ascent easy, were taken from Tacoma, while pack horses were
procured at Yelm, a station twenty-five miles south of Tacoma, and from
which the trail leads eastwardly to Mount Rainier. It first follows
river bottoms, then mountains, ridges and river bottoms again, while an
occasional fording of the glacial stream, lends interest to the
ever-changing scenes. We aimed at the end of each day to camp where feed
could be obtained for hard working horses. Darkness coming on as we
reached the first ford, left in some doubt the exact location of the
crossing, so camp was made on the bank of the river with nothing but
oats for our tired horses. Daylight found us fording the river, which
had risen during the night about ten inches, making it quite exciting as
the foaming water splashed the horses' sides, and wet our feet and
ankles.

Stopping at the first place where hay could be had, a stay of nearly two
hours was made for breakfast for ourselves and horses.

From our last night's experience, we decided to carry hay with us and
camp wherever night should overtake us, which was at the foot of a high
mountain our trail led over, and on the bank of the river as before. The
day was uneventful, if we omit mention of the many hornets' nests we
passed through and the four pheasants which fell before the unerring aim
of Nichol's rifle. The pheasants led us to a fitting close of the day in
the shape of pheasants and dumplings, prepared by the writer and
pronounced by Nichols (who, by the way, is an epicure) to be simply _par
excellence_. And here I might add that the writer is a single man.

The end of the third day found us at the Hotel Longmire at Hot Springs,
located on the southwest slope of Mt. Rainier, at an altitude of three
thousand feet, and some five miles from the perpetual snow limit. And no
finer people ever lived than Mr. and Mrs. Longmire, who own and preside
over the hotel and springs. The hotel material was cut by hand out of
the finest grained cedar that ever grew--boards twelve inches wide and
fifteen feet long--as perfect as though sawed.

As a matter of information for those interested, it might be well to say
here that the waters of the springs are positively life-giving. The
writer has visited many mineral springs, and has never seen anything
that will compare with the stimulating and health-giving qualities of
these springs.

But, to resume: we left the springs next morning, with a single pack
horse, expecting to leave the horse at the top of the ridge (eight
thousand feet altitude) overlooking Paradise valley, and, with blankets
on our backs, to make our way to Ewing's camp, ten thousand five hundred
feet above sea level. We reached Paradise valley, and, finding the same
had been so well and truly named, decided to stop till next day and
enjoy some of its beauties. Accordingly, camp was pitched, fire-wood
gathered, and a camp fire built, and a pot of beans placed thereon.
After a light lunch we strolled, enjoying the alpine beauties of the
valley, well named Paradise.

During the afternoon the wind changed to the southwest, and clouds
gradually spread over the firmament. From our experience a year ago on
Mount Hood in a storm, at no higher altitude than we now were, no
thought was given to ascending higher till fair weather and a northwest
wind prevailed. Morning dawned and no indications of good weather. Our
spirits were accordingly depressed. Observing the barometer, we found it
moving quite rapidly in the direction of storm. By noon the sky was
heavily overcast, and an hour later undercast as well.

By 3 o'clock rain began to fall. The wind had already risen to quite a
gale. Re-staking our tent, digging a ditch around the head and sides,
and piling wood and rocks along the edges to keep out the wind and rain,
we crawled into our blankets and awaited developments. Soon the storm
broke upon us with all its alpine fury, and raged during the entire
night. By morning the rain had turned into sleet and snow, the
thermometer, at daylight registering 34 degrees. Shortly the storm
ceased. After some difficulty a fire was started and coffee made.
Sampling our pot of beans, which had boiled at least four hours, we
found them still hard; after an hour more boiling we emptied them on the
ground, having learned that beans are hard to cook at an eight thousand
foot altitude. Our barometer still indicating foul weather, we decided
to start at once for a more congenial climate. Accordingly our shivering
horses (which we had blanketed) were packed and four hours later we were
at the Springs hotel, in a rather moody frame of mind. Tuesday morning
all was clear, the barometer indicated fair weather, and we started
early, reaching the 8500-foot ridge at 1 P.M. Turning our horses loose
to feed upon the succulent grass, we bound our blankets upon our backs
and started for Ewing's camp, altitude 11,000 feet. Evening coming on,
we made camp at 10,500. Clearing away the rocks, leaving a sandy bottom,
we stretched our light, small tent, banking wet sand around the edges to
keep out the piercing wind, which almost invariably blows at high
altitudes. Placing our oilcloth over the damp, cool sand, we soon had a
comfortable bed. For tent poles we used our alpine stocks, one of which
was seven and one-half feet long. Our bed being satisfactorily arranged,
we took notes on the scenery, temperature, etc. A haze hung over the
valleys; in fact, it rose to a height of nine thousand feet. The
rosy-tinted summits of Hood, Adams and St. Helens towered away above it,
however, reflecting the rays of the declining sun.

The chilliness of the temperature, 28 degrees, prevented us from
remaining long outside our tent. Crawling in, we tightly fastened the
flaps and really passed a comfortable night. Twenty minutes after 4 A.M.
found us astir, and at five o'clock we were under way.

We had scarcely as yet taken time to admire the beauties of the scene,
so intent had we been on getting an early start so as to be able to
return before sundown to our blankets and provisions.

We soon had an opportunity to admire the beauties around and below us,
as climbing above eleven thousand feet altitude is productive of sudden
stops for rest and breath.

We expected to reach the summit by noon, at latest; but on account of
the icy condition of portions of the mountain side, it was necessary to
cut steps over quite long stretches. This delayed us more than two
hours. Twelve o'clock came and went and we were not quite to the top of
the "big rock"--a large rock on the south side, the top of which is
about two thousand feet below the summit.

By 1 o'clock we were past the rock several hundred yards. From here to
the summit we crossed eight or nine crevasses. The snow or ice stood in
pinnacles often six and seven feet high.

Three o'clock came and the top was still beyond us. Having no blankets
or provisions, the question now presented itself: Could we make the
summit and back over the dangerous points before dark. Not much talking
was done, however, as breath was too precious; but we still pushed on.

At 4 o'clock we held a council of war and decided that since it was
already so late we could not return before dark, and we would make for
the summit, where steam caverns were said to exist, and where Messrs.
Longmire and Van Trump stayed over night in '83. They found themselves
in the same predicament we were now in, by their determination to reach
the summit. This being settled, we pushed on, turned out of our way by
first one and then another obstacle, until we found ourselves about one
hundred feet, not more, below the summit of the highest western bump or
dome. From this we descended about a hundred feet, and thence across a
level piece of snow about one-third of a mile, to the foot of the main
pinnacle, in which is located the crater.

Some three hundred feet (in altitude) more climbing, over ashes and fine
pumice stone of the outside walls of the crater, and we stood on the
apex of one of the highest mountains in the United States. Mr. Nichols
claims the honor of being the first and only Tacomaite who has reached
the summit.

[Illustration: _1. Snowballing on Mt. St. Helens, July 22d, 1889._

_2. Summit of Mt. Hood, looking West._

_3. Illumination Rock on Mt. Hood._]

It was now 5:10 P.M., the thermometer registering 23 deg. above zero; and
having no blankets, our first business was to find a warm place in
the steam to pass the night. Steam could be seen issuing from a dozen
different places on the inside rim of the crater, say sixty to seventy
feet below the crest.

Writing our names on a card, with a short account of the climb, we
placed it inside of a small box, on which was inscribed, "Oregon Alpine
Club, Portland." This was left on the top of the ridge. We heaped rocks
around it to prevent the wind from blowing it away. We soon found a sort
of semi-spherical opening in the rocks, from which the warm steam poured
forth. Clearing away the rocks, leaving a sandy bottom, we built a wall
of rocks two feet in height to break the wind, and then turned our
attention to looking for canned corned beef.

We were told a can had been left there by Prof. Ingram's party ten days
before. This was soon found, together with a package of French
chocolate, a box of sardines and some cheese. We were already the
possessors of one lemon. As nothing more was needed we got into our den.
Taking a cup found lashed to a rock on the crest of the crater and
filling it with snow we placed it in our oven and soon had plenty of
water.

We ate some lunch, but fourteen and fifteen thousand foot altitudes are
not productive of strong appetites, so we ate sparingly, and being so
completely exhausted soon fell asleep.

About 8 o'clock P.M., we were rudely awakened by what appeared to be a
dash of ice water in our faces and down our necks. The sky being clear
the ice water was explained a few moments later. The wind had arisen and
was drifting dry snow--(eight inches of which had fallen Sunday)--from a
bank about fifteen feet distant, against the sloping roof and walls of
our warm den; thus the snow was turned to water by the time it reached
our faces. To prevent being so rudely drenched again we removed our
coats, which were then wrapped around our heads.

The wind having veered to the west, some anxiety was felt that a storm
might arise before we could return. However, fortune smiled upon us in
our dizzy resting place so far above the clouds, and morning dawned
clear, cold and beautiful.

Upon the first gleams of the sun we made for the ridge for our dry
clothes, which were placed there before retiring to our den the night
before. We had fortunately worn two suits of heavy underclothes, two
pairs of pants and two coats, so we now had dry clothes, and well it was
we took the precaution of removing a suit and placing it out of the way
of the wet steam. Before we could return to our den every vestige of
clothing, including a soft hat, was frozen stiff. The cold seemed to
strike at once clear through. The agility with which we got into our
steam chest would have been amusing to an uninitiated observer. We were
soon warm again, and by slight assistance from each other, our dripping
clothes were soon changed for dry ones. Mounting the ridge of the crater
on the highest side, sunrise observations were taken. The sun appearing
above the eastern horizon tinted Rainier's top with molten silver, while
the country beneath was still wrapped in shade. Not many moments elapsed
till the adjacent mountains, Hood, Adams and St. Helens, one by one in
order named, donned their silvery shields like mighty giants in battle
attitude, defending themselves against the sun, their common enemy. The
effect at this time was grand, indeed, the heavy rains of two days
previous having entirely dissipated the smoke.

Eastward all was clear, while westward, nearly fifteen thousand feet
below, the valleys and lowlands were hidden beneath billowy clouds,
which, like the mountain tops, soon turned from gray to shining silver.

Soon Sol's rays had reached the western horizon. Mountain shadows now
appeared reaching westward to the limit of our vision; the jagged edges
resting on hills and plains and valleys contributed to a changing scene,
the memory of which will last so long as life is given.

Our selfish aim more than attained, we were satisfied and determined at
once to descend to earth, from whence we came. Our determination being
carried out, we reached Hot Springs at 8 P.M., and Tacoma three days
later.

                                                        CHAS. H. GOVE,
                                                Of Oregon Alpine Club.




     What they Signify.


ADAMS, MT.--Called by Winthrop, Tacoma the Second (1853). Named for
President Adams.

Indian name Pat-to, signifying high. This name was applied to snow caps
generally by the Indians.

BAKER, MT.--Named for Lieut. Baker by Vancouver, when discovered April
30, 1792.

Called by Winthrop (1853), Kulshan; possibly the Indian name.

Referred to by the Spanish as Montana del Carmelo.

Called Mt. Polk by the Americans (1846).

BITTER ROOT RANGE.--Same as the Coeur d'Alene mountains.

COFFIN, MT.--Originally used as an Indian burying ground and named by
Lieut. Broughton (1792).

CASTLE ROCK.--Referred to by Lewis and Clark as Beacon Rock (1805).
Subsequently called Castle Rock, because of its appearance.

CASCADES.--Known as President's Range (1846). The mountains were named
for the cascades of the Columbia river.

CAPE HORN.--So named because of the difficulty experienced in doubling
it (1812.)

GOAT MOUNTAIN.--Called Plas (long sound of a) by the Indians, meaning
white. So called because of the white rocks. Mountain goats formerly
abounded in that vicinity, hence the present name.

HOOD, MT.--Discovered by Broughton, October 29, 1792, and named for Lord
Hood of England. General Indian name, Pat-to. An active volcano in 1846.
Same as Mt. Washington of the Americans (1846).

JEFFERSON, MT.--Discovered by Lewis and Clark and named for President
Jefferson, 1806. Same as Mt. Vancouver of the British (1846).

MCLAUGHLIN, MT.--Lat. 43 deg. 30'. Named for John McLaughlin who established
Vancouver, introduced live stock, fruit, vegetables and grain. Same as
Mt. Madison of the Americans (1846). Sometimes called Diamond Peak.

OREGON.--First used by Capt. Jonathan Carver in a book published in
London (1774). The name appeared in the following statement: "The river
Bourbon empties itself into Hudson's Bay; the waters of St. Lawrence;
the Mississippi and the river Oregon, or the River of the West, that
falls into the Pacific ocean at the straits of Anian." Numerous theories
are advanced as to the origin of the name with Carver, but nothing
conclusive is shown on the subject. The original Oregon embraced an
uncertain portion of the entire Northwest (1578), called by the British
New Albion. One portion of it was called New Georgia (1792), and another
(1806), New Caledonia by British traders. The Spanish government
designated the entire country (1790), as "The Coast of California, in
the South Sea."

OLYMPUS, MT.--Was discovered by Juan Perez, a Spanish pilot, and called
El Cero de la Santa Rosalia. Named Olympus by Capt. Mears, July 4, 1788.
Same as Mt. Van Buren (1846).

PUGET SOUND.--Named by Vancouver for his lieutenant, Peter Puget, the
discoverer, May 19th, 1792. Known among the Indians as Whulge, also as
K' uk' lults.

RAINIER, MT.--Discovered by Vancouver in May, 1792, and named for Rear
Admiral Rainier of the English navy. Sometimes called Mt. Tacoma. Called
Mt. Harrison by the Americans (1846). See pages 55, 57 and 59.

ROCKY MOUNTAINS.--Named by the Verendrye brothers (1742). First called
Stony Mountains.

SADDLE MT.--Called by the Indians, "Swallalahoost." Named by Wilkes,
Saddle Mountain (1842), on account of its shape.

ST. HELENS, MT.--Discovered by Broughton of Vancouver's party, October
20, 1792, and named in honor of His Majesty's ambassador at Madrid.
Known among Americans as Mt. Washington (1846), as also Mt. John Adams.
Called by the Indians Lou-wala-clough, meaning smoking mountain.

TILLAMOOK HEAD.--(1806), originally spelled Killamook. Lewis and Clark
refer to it as "Clark's Point of View."

TACOMA, MT.--See Rainier, also pages 55, 57 and 59.




     MOUNT RAINIER.


    U. S. INDIAN SERVICE.

                                     NISQUALLY AND SKOKOMISH AGENCY, }
                                        TACOMA, W. T., Dec. 8, 1886. }

W. G. STEEL, _Portland, Oregon_:

DEAR SIR:--I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
Sept. 21st, making certain inquiries about the change of the name of Mt.
Rainier to that of Tacoma. Upon careful and diligent inquiry among the
Puyallup Indians, I find the following to be the true condition of
things:

There is a general impression that the name Tacoma was the original name
of the mountain among Indians, and that it signified "nourishing
mother," and was so named on account of its being the source of a number
of rivers which head there and flow into the waters of Puget Sound.
This, I find to be entirely erroneous. The Indian word is _Ta-ko-bet_ or
_Ta-ke-man_, the first being the most general pronunciation used among
these Indians, but both words are used, being the different
pronunciation used by the dialects. It means a white mountain, and is a
general name for any high, snow-covered, or white, treeless peak. It is
applied to this mountain by the Indians of this vicinity, because it is
the only, or most prominent one of the kind in the vicinity. They use
the word as we would speak of "The White Mountain," there being but one
near us. In the Skadgit language, the word is a little different, and is
there called _Ko-ma_, and is applied by these Indians to Mt. Baker, it
being the mountain in that vicinity of the kind. The word _Squa-tach_,
or _Squat-letsh_, is a general name for a range of mountains, while
_Ta-ko-bet_ or _Ta-ko-man_ or _Ko-ma_ is the name of the snow covered or
white peaks in the range.

This information I have gained from inquiry of the Indians with whom I
have come in contact and who live near here. I inclose a statement
written out by Rev. Peter Stanup, an educated Indian of the Puyallup
tribe, and who is unusually well informed on such matters.

As to when it was first applied and by whom I am not so well advised;
but from what I do know, I understand that it was first applied to the
mountains by the whites about twelve years ago, and at the same time
that the town of Tacoma was laid out and located by the Northern Pacific
Railroad Company, or some of its attaches. I understand that the attempt
was made by the N. P. R. R. Co. to have the name changed, and that it
still makes strenuous efforts to do so. The people of the town of
Tacoma, and the members of the Tacoma Land Company as well as the R. R.
Co., above named, all try hard to have the mountain called by that name;
while the residents of the other part of the Territory, west of the
Cascade mountains and especially of Seattle, are very much opposed to
the change, and continue to call it by its first name. I think that the
facts are that the name Tacoma is an attempted imitation of an Indian
term applied to any high, snow-covered peak, but which was supposed to
be the special name of this peak, because generally used by the Indians
of this vicinity, and that it was applied to this mountain at the time
the town of Tacoma was located and named by the N. P. R. R. Co., for the
purpose of bringing into note its western terminus.

         Yours Respectfully,

                         EDWIN EELLS,
                            U. S. Indian Agent.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Statement of Rev. Peter Stanup.

_Ta-ko-man_ is a name used by many different Indian tribes of this
Territory, with the same meaning and a slight variation of pronunciation
by each different tribe. It is the name or word from which Tacoma was
derived. It originated among the inland Indians. The meaning of
_Ta-ko-man_ is a high, treeless, white or light colored peak or mound.
The name is applicable to any peak or mound as described, but is
generally used for one that is distinguished, or highly honored. And
_Squa-tach_, to climb, and _Sba-date_ mountain, are mostly used for all
mountains and peaks. The individual name of Mt. Tacoma is _Twhauk_,
which was derived from _Twheque_, snow, and _Swheque ad_. Bright,
clear, cloudless sky. _Ta-ko-man_ is mostly used for the Mt. Tacoma, as
it is held with much respect and esteemed by nearly all the Indians of
the Northwest. The reason for conferring the great honor upon _Twhauk_,
is that the second syllable _ko_, means water, corresponding with the
water, or little lake on top of the mountain, and also in that lake is a
great abundance of valuable shells, from which the Indians made their
nose and ear-rings, and other valuable jewelry.




     THOUGHTS ON THE NAME "TACOMA."


This beautiful name of the city whose rapid and marvellous growth and
development have been unparalleled even in our Western civilization, is
a pure invention. Its very euphony divests it of all claim as the Indian
nomination of Old Mount Rainier, the name conferred by the illustrious
circumnavigator, George Vancouver, borne for a century upon the map of
the world.

Tacoma is a word of extremely modern origin, invented, or used first by
Lieut. Theodore Winthrop, U. S. Army, in his readable book--"Canoe and
Saddle." The writer of these thoughts first heard it late in the
"sixties," when Capt. D. B. Finch, among the pioneers of steam
navigation on Puget Sound, presented a building in Olympia to the Good
Templars, and his gift was christened "Tacoma Hall." Contemporaneously
Tacoma City, now the first ward of Tacoma, was thus named by some
Portland town-builders--Gen. McCarver, Lewis M. Starr and James Steel.
The then leading hotel of Olympia, about the same time, assumed that
title and wore it for several years; but a whole decade passed before
the attempt was made to obliterate the time-honored name of the great
mountain peak of Northwest America, conferred at the first visit of
white men to Commencement Bay in 1792. Late in 1878, a lithograph map
and bird's-eye view of the embryo city of New Tacoma was published under
the patronage of the Tacoma Land Company, entitled--"New Tacoma and
Mount Rainier"--issued in 1880. At that date the name "Tacoma" existed,
but it was not applied to the mountain; nor was it even dreamed that the
town was named from the Indian name of the mountain. The fact is that
the name, "Mount Tacoma," has been recently conferred on the mountain by
white men. A decade back, the name will not be found on the maps of
Washington Territory, and it is to be hoped that the attempt to
obliterate from the map of the world the name conferred by that
illustrious contributor to geographic science, Captain George Vancouver,
R. N., will prove unsuccessful.

When Gen. Hazard Stevens, and that splendid scholar and writer, P. B.
Van Trump, Esq., ascended the grand old mountain, the pronunciation and
spelling of the name which Gen. Stevens, in his narrative, ascribed to
the mountain, was still unsettled. He spelt the word Te-ho-ma. The "h"
being aspirated really represents an Indian guttural grunt without
beauty or even resolving itself into a well-defined consonant.

In the year 1882, the writer was invited to perform the role of orator
on Independence Day at the beautiful settlement called Puyallup. The
committee coupled with the invitation the expressed desire that the
theme should be Puget Sound reminiscences--the early settlement of
Pierce county. He adopted as a starting theme the thoughts suggested by
the words "Tacoma" and "Puyallup," or their origin thus euphonized into
household words of significance and anglicised beauty, bearing but
little resemblance in sound to the half-uttered nasal grunts of the
fish-eating natives of Puget Sound, whose syllables are "without form
and void;" their language, if such it be considered, acquiring meaning
or intensity of signification when accompanied by pantomimic motion,
speaking far more than all their syllabic combinations. Through the
valued assistance of that veteran Indian student and interlocutor, John
Flett, some twenty aged, prominent Indians, who would not deign to talk
other than their own dialect, who despised even the Chinook Jargon, but
adhered to the grunts and syllabic utterances and the pantomime of their
race for the ages before the advent of the Hudson's Bay Company or
American settlers, gathered in the writer's office in New Tacoma, as the
city of Tacoma was then called, and seated on the floor for hours
discussed what they called the mountains and mountain range, its
surrounding and attributes. About half were of the White river bands,
those who originally lived on the sources of the streams issuing from
Mount Rainier. The remainder were Puyallups and 'Squallys, whose
original haunts were near the Sound. The form was to put the writer's
question or wish for information into Chinook Jargon, which was then
translated into the Indian dialect. The old men expressed themselves in
their native utterances. It would be the grossest perversion to call
their answers "words." They were not so couched--at best, strong
syllabic utterances--mere grunts, at times which, with eloquent
pantomime, assumed grand and eloquent thought and meaning, when
translated, to give just expression arising to poetry of ideas, but as a
language, technically so considered, poverty-stricken to the greatest
degree, and without its accompanied earnestness of movement, without a
single attribute of beauty or euphonism.

That interesting study and those comparative views, by old men of the
mountain and the sea, extended through hours; and the writer will never
forget the eloquence of action required and used by those aged natives,
which more than compensated that paucity of syllables or words, which we
call language. No such word of beauty as "Tacoma" could possibly be
coined by them, nor result from any combination of their uttered but
significant grunts, their attempted vocalization of thoughts or ideas.
True, there were syllabic emissions of sound which might be resolved
into words by toning down grunts and inharmonious belchings of thoughts
rather than their legitimate utterances. The manner of conducting that
"interview" was the assumption that the word "Tacoma," or some kindred
appropriate word identified the grand old mountain in their language; in
other words, their attention was invited to the fact, that our people
had been told that "Tacoma" was the native name of the mountain. Then
began the expression by all, in turn, as to the Indian method of
referring to great landmarks, mountains individual and in range, rivers,
etc., when talking with each other. Their views on the information
communicated found expression in several varied, combined characteristic
grunts and shrugs, which were interspersed with some analogous syllables
or utterances from which Indian philologists have resolved words, some
of which have more or less resemblance to some of the syllables embraced
in the word Tacoma, or that word as spelled by different writers. They
then detailed their reasons for so speaking of the mountain or any of
its natural surroundings or physical features. In that colloquy, no two
of those Indians pronounced the same word or used that same guttural
utterance or combination of syllables. All were especially interrogated
as to the snow-capped mountain. All gave the meaning or idea that they
knew as to the cause for a name, by which any other could identify it,
and the significance of the utterances by each adopted in referring to
it.

Each band, not to say each individual, had a peculiar reason for his
name of it, contingent upon color, shape or function. In that interview,
the literal translations of their syllabic combinations appertaining
more or less in sound to the syllables constituting the name
Tacoma--Te-ho-ma, Ta-ko-ber, Tak-o-man, etc., as rendered by the
venerable John Flett, a truthful, skillful and reliable Indian authority
was--"A woman's breast that feeds," a "nourishing breast." To one band,
the shape of the cone suggested the breast shape for a name; to another,
the milky whiteness was a reminder of the source of nourishment; to
another, the color of the streams which flow down from the mountain in
the annual freshets, gave origin to the idea of the generous fountain of
the great milk-white breast-shaped sentinel for ages; while the
Puyallups and 'Squallys, more practical in view, associated the fact
that from the mountain rushed the torrents of white water, resembling
milk, which fertilized the valleys of Puget Sound. While such was the
conversation and speech of those old patriarchs, several of whom had
lived to become octogenarians, communicated as above stated, the writer
is well aware that across the mountain chain, residing in the vicinity
of the mountain, that several bands of the Klickitat nation attach
different meanings for synonymous syllabic combinations approximating in
sound to the combinations referred to used by Western Washington bands,
with shades of meaning more practical, less figurative, less Indian; but
the writer has been content to accept as authority, at all events so far
as the Aborigines of Western Washington are concerned, the result of the
conference of Indian patriarchs convened at his instance in 1882. While
that conference failed to establish that there was such an Indian word
as "Tacoma," or that these Indians had any distinctive Indian names for
"Mount Rainier," or that there was any recognized Indian name known to
the several tribes; yet, the different bands did use such syllabic
utterances, by which they referred to the mountain chain, to the leading
mountain of the chain. That color, shape, and attributed function,
suggested such expression, and that the combination of syllables which
have been so euphoniously metamorphosed into the beautiful word
"Tacoma," when pronounced by them in its native utterances, meant as
herein expressed. The writer, however, finds no warrant for adopting
Tacoma as an Indian word, nor does he believe that such word, or its
approximate, was a name conferred by Indians upon the mountain, or
exclusively recognized as the name of the mountain by the original
natives of this region.

                                                         ELWOOD EVANS.




[Illustration: PRESIDENTS OF THE OREGON ALPINE CLUB.]




     OREGON ALPINE CLUB.

[Illustration]


The Oregon Alpine Club was organized in 1887, and incorporated October
7th of that year. It was originally intended merely as an organization
among half a dozen friends who were in the habit of seeking adventure
and recreation in the mountains.

After considering the matter for a time a meeting, was called, and more
persons attended than were expected. A committee was appointed on rules,
the adoption of which required several meetings, so that when the
organization was completed there were over seventy charter members on
the roll.

The institution grew and its objects increased until a Scientific Staff
was formed and a public museum became an important object. Hon. H. W.
Corbett was elected President, and served until October, 1888, when Hon.
D. P. Thompson was chosen. Mr. Thompson served until the close of 1889,
when a re-organization was effected, as outlined by the subjoined
constitutions. Mr. Geo. B. Markle was at this time elected, and is now
the very efficient President of the Club. The Alpine Club is a public
institution and is deserving of the liberal support of the city and
State. The following is a list of officials, as also the Constitutions
of the Club and its various Departments:




     CONSTITUTION.


OFFICERS.

    _President_,      GEO. B. MARKLE

                            {W. G. STEEL
    _Vice Presidents_,      {W. W. BRETHERTON
                            {JOHN GILL

    _Secretary_,      GEO. H. HIMES

    _Treasurer_,      C. M. IDLEMAN


ARTICLE I.

NAME.

This Association shall be known as the OREGON ALPINE CLUB, and its
subdivisions as the Departments of the same.


ARTICLE II.

OBJECT.

The object shall be the foundation and maintenance of a Public Museum,
and advancement and encouragement of Amateur Photography, Alpine and
Aquatic exploration, and the protection of our game, fish, birds and
animals.


ARTICLE III.

SECTIONS.

There shall be Four Departments, namely, (1) Exploration Department;
(2) Photographic Department; (3) Game Protective Department; and (4)
Museum Department.


ARTICLE IV.

OFFICERS.

SECTION 1. The officers of the Club shall be a President, four Vice
Presidents, Secretary and Treasurer.

SEC. 2. The Presidents of the various Departments shall be _ex-officio_
Vice-Presidents of the Club.


ARTICLE V.

ELECTIONS.

SECTION 1. The officers shall be elected by ballot on the second Friday
of December in each year, a majority of all votes cast being necessary
for election; and shall hold their respective offices until their
successors are elected and qualified.

SEC. 2. Each Department shall elect its own officers.


ARTICLE VI.

The duties of President, Vice-Presidents, Secretary and Treasurer shall
be those usual to such officers.


ARTICLE VII.

DIRECTORS.

SECTION 1. The President, Vice-Presidents and four members shall
constitute the Board of Directors, who will be the managing power of the
Club.

SEC. 2. They shall employ a Curator and provide for his compensation.


ARTICLE VIII.

CURATOR.

The Curator shall be a taxidermist, and shall have full charge of the
Museum and other property of the Club, under the direction of the Board
of Directors.


ARTICLE IX.

MEMBERSHIP.

SECTION 1. There shall be three classes of members, namely, Active,
Associate and Honorary.

SEC. 2. An active member is one who has signed the Constitution, paid
his dues, and been admitted to any of the Departments.

SEC. 3. An Associate member is one who has not been admitted to any of
the Departments.

SEC. 4. Any person may become an Associate member by signing the
Constitution and paying his dues.

SEC. 5. Honorary members shall be entitled to all the privileges of the
Club except voting. Their names shall be proposed at one meeting and
voted on at the next, three-fourths of all votes cast being necessary
for election.

SEC. 6. Any member may be expelled by a two thirds vote of the members
present: _Provided_, That one week's notice has been given at a regular
meeting.


ARTICLE X.

DUES.

SECTION 1. An initiation fee of two dollars shall be charged all persons
joining the Club.

SEC. 2. The dues shall be six dollars a year, payable quarterly, in
advance.

SEC. 3. Any member who shall fail to pay his dues for six consecutive
months, shall have his name stricken from the roll, and be considered no
longer a member: _Provided, always_, One month's notice has been given
him in writing by the Curator.


ARTICLE XI.

All questions in dispute between the Departments shall be referred to
the Directors for final settlement.


ARTICLE XII.

The Oregon Camera Club is hereby incorporated as the Photographic
Department of the Oregon Alpine Club. All members of the Oregon Camera
Club in good standing, becoming members of the Photographic Department
of the Oregon Alpine Club, on ratification and acceptance of this
article by the Camera Club.


ARTICLE XIII.

AMENDMENTS.

The Constitution may be amended by a two-thirds vote of members present:
_Provided_, That one month's notice has been given in writing, at a
regular meeting, and has also been posted in the Club rooms for one
month.


     EXPLORATION DEPARTMENT.


OFFICERS.

    _President_,                    W. G. STEEL

    _Vice President_,               EDWARD CASEY

    _Secretary_,                    M. W. GORMAN

    _Treasurer_,            DR. WILLIS I. COTTEL


     CONSTITUTION.


ARTICLE I

NAME.

This body shall be called the EXPLORATION DEPARTMENT OF THE OREGON
ALPINE CLUB.


ARTICLE II.

OBJECT.

To encourage the exploration of mountains, lakes and rivers, by either
scientists or pleasure seekers, to foster pleasure outings by land or
water, to award appropriate prizes for meritorious outfits for journeys
and cruises, and for speedy trips on land, and swift cruises by water;
and to conserve the handling of gun and sail as an accomplishment, and
incidentally to encourage canoeing as a means to reach wide fields for
research and pleasure, awarding prizes for the handling of the same.


ARTICLE III.

OFFICERS.

The officers shall be a President, Vice President, Secretary and
Treasurer, whose duties shall be those usual to such offices.


ARTICLE IV.

MEMBERSHIP.

SECTION 1. No one shall be competent for membership, except members of
the Oregon Alpine Club.

SEC. 2. It is understood that when the membership of any person ceases
in the Oregon Alpine Club, such person shall cease to be a member of
this Department.

SEC. 3. All propositions for membership shall be in writing.

SEC. 4. Every name submitted for membership, shall be proposed at one
meeting, and voted on by ballot at the next, two-thirds of all members
present being necessary for election.

SEC. 5. Any member may be expelled for conduct unbecoming a gentleman,
by a two-thirds vote of the members present: _Provided_, That one
month's notice has been given at a regular meeting.


ARTICLE V.

DUES.

SECTION 1. An initiation fee of one dollar shall be charged all members,
and the monthly dues shall be twenty-five cents each, payable quarterly
in advance.

SEC. 2. Any member who shall fail to pay his regular dues for six
consecutive months, shall have his name stricken from the roll, due
notice having been given him by the Secretary.


ARTICLE VI.

MEETINGS.

SECTION 1. Regular meetings shall be held on the second Monday evening
of each month, at such hour as shall be agreed upon from time to time.

SEC. 2. Special meetings may be called by the President, or by a call
signed by five members: _Provided_, That such a call shall state the
object of the meeting.

SEC. 3. An annual meeting shall be held on the second Monday in December
of each year, for the election of officers, and such other business not
provided for herein.


ARTICLE VII.

TRUSTEES.

A Board of five Trustees shall be chosen at the annual meeting each
year, who shall have the general management of all the affairs of the
Department.


ARTICLE VIII.

QUORUM.

Five members shall constitute a quorum competent to transact business.


ARTICLE IX.

AMENDMENTS.

This Constitution may be amended by a two-thirds vote of members
present: _Provided_, That one month's notice has been given in writing
at a regular meeting, and a copy of said notice posted in the Club room
for one month.




     GAME PROTECTIVE DEPARTMENT.

[Not Organized.]




     PHOTOGRAPHIC DEPARTMENT.

OFFICERS.

    _President_,                    W. W. BRETHERTON

    _Vice President_,               H. GOLDSMITH

    _Secretary and Treasurer_,      E. E. NORTON




     CONSTITUTION.


ARTICLE I.

NAME.

This association shall be known as the PHOTOGRAPHIC DEPARTMENT OF THE
OREGON ALPINE CLUB.


ARTICLE II.

OBJECT.

Its object shall be to encourage and promote practical Photography, and
to invite and stimulate discussion and investigation of all that
pertains to Photographic science and art.


ARTICLE III.

MEMBERSHIP.

The Department shall be composed of such members of the Oregon Alpine
Club who practice Photography as amateurs, as shall be elected there and
shall be known as active members, and such Honorary and Associate
members as shall be elected by the Department from the members of the
Oregon Alpine Club.

Candidates for election may be proposed for election at one meeting, and
voted on at the same meeting. All applications for membership shall be
voted on by ballot, and it shall require two-thirds of all votes cast to
elect any member.

All professional Photographers who are members of the Oregon Alpine Club
shall be eligible as Associate members, and shall enjoy all the
privileges of the Department except the right of vote or hold office.


ARTICLE IV.

OFFICERS.

The officers of the Department shall be a President, Vice-President, one
or more, a Secretary, and a Treasurer; the offices of Secretary and
Treasurer being held by one member if so desired by the Department.


ARTICLE V.

QUORUM.

The attendance of two officers and three or more members shall be
necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but
the constitution or by-laws shall not be changed except at a meeting
called for that purpose by the Secretary and by a vote of two-thirds of
all votes cast.


ARTICLE VI.

ANNUAL MEETING.

The Annual Meeting of the Department shall be held on the third Friday
of January in each year, for the election of officers and such other
business as may come before the meeting.


ARTICLE VII.

MONTHLY MEETINGS.

The monthly meeting of the Department shall be held on the third Friday
of each month.


ARTICLE VIII.

DUES.

The dues of the Department shall be $3.00 per year, payable to the
treasurer of the Department.




     PRESIDENTS OF THE OREGON ALPINE CLUB.


HENRY WINSLOW CORBETT, the first president of the Oregon Alpine Club was
elected immediately after its organization and served until the close of
1888. He was born at Westborough, Mass., February 18th, 1827, and came
to Oregon, via Cape Horn, with a stock of general merchandise, arriving
at Portland, March 4th, 1851. In 1866, he was elected U. S. Senator and
served six years with credit to himself and honor to his State. He is
one of the wealthiest and most influential men in Oregon. The following
in reference to him is taken from the History of Portland:

"In person, Mr. Corbett is six feet high, straight and spare in figure,
but symmetrically formed. Cautious, cool-headed and decided, he is not
an inviting mark for the wiles of the schemer or impostor, but he is
thoroughly approachable, respectful and considerate toward those whom he
meets, and utterly lacking either in the arrogance of small greatness,
or in the still more objectionable truckling and assumed _bonhommie_ of
the small politician. He is thoroughly dignified, and yet his manners
are so unassumingly easy that one hardly notices them. Indeed he is a
fine type of that well approved manhood in which courtesy, kindness,
dignity, culture, honor and charity are most happily blended. To these
excellences can be added unswerving integrity, honesty of purpose,
purity of thought and act, and those crowning virtues born of an ever
present and controlling moral sentiment. His career shows what can be
accomplished by steady and quiet energy, directed by sound judgment and
high purpose. His name has been associated with numberless successful
enterprises, but not one failure, and he is justly entitled to a
foremost place among those who have created, established and maintained
the commercial and industrial supremacy of Portland."

       *       *       *       *       *

"DAVID P. THOMPSON, one of the most widely known men in our State, was
born in Harrison county, Ohio, in 1834. In his nineteenth year he came
to Oregon, driving sheep across the plains and walking every rod of the
way. Upon his arrival at Oregon City in 1853 he took a job of cutting
cordwood, which lasted through the winter. Soon after he entered upon
the profession of a surveyor, which he followed during several years. In
pursuance of this business he acquired an unequaled knowledge of the
northwestern country, and laid the foundation of his present ample
fortune. He lived at Oregon City till 1876, when he removed to Portland.
In 1879, and again in 1881, he was elected mayor, and gave the city a
vigorous and efficient administration. Mr. Thompson, throughout his
whole life, has been noted for activity and energy. He is a man of firm
and positive character, tenacious of his purposes, active in business
and successful in his undertakings. By appointment of President Grant he
became governor of Idaho Territory in 1875, but resigned the office in
1876. He is now engaged in the banking business in Portland."--(History
of Portland,--Scott.) Mr. Thompson served as president of the Alpine
Club in 1889.

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. GEORGE B. MARKLE is at the present time serving as president of the
Alpine Club. He was born in Hazleton, Lucerne county, Pennsylvania,
October 7th, 1857, and came to Oregon in 1886. His desire to locate in
the west led him to make a tour of inspection, which embraced Kansas,
Nebraska, Colorado, Utah, California, Oregon and Washington. A careful
examination of all this region convinced him that Portland offered the
best inducements as a business point, combined with all the advantages
of an old settled community, and in the fall of 1886 he permanently
located in this city. He immediately became a factor in the busy life
around him, and displayed a business generalship which marked him as a
man of unusual power, and gave him a place among the foremost business
men of the city seldom accorded in any community to one of his years.
With others he organized the Oregon National Bank, of which he is vice
president; also the Ellensburgh National Bank, the Northwest Loan and
Trust Company and the Commercial Bank of Vancouver, being president of
the last three corporations named. He was one of the purchasers of the
Multnomah Street Railway; reorganized the company and ever since has
been its president. He is also president of the Portland Mining Company,
owning the Sunset group of mines in the famous Coeur d'Alene district.
He was one of the leading spirits in organizing the great enterprise of
the North Pacific Industrial Association; purchased the land upon which
to erect the necessary buildings and secured a large number of
subscriptions to its capital stock. He was one of the leading spirits in
the organization of the Portland Hotel Company and is prominently
identified with many other enterprises.--(History of Portland,--Scott.)




     OREGON BIBLIOGRAPHY.


1853.--ADAMS, MT.--Called by Winthrop, "Tacoma the Second,"--(Canoe and
Saddle, page 48).

1889.--Called by the Indians "Pat-to," which signifies standing up high.
With the Indians this was a general term for snow capped mountains.

Located in latitude 46 deg. 12' 14.1", longitude 121 deg. 31' 08.3".

1775.--ADAMS POINT.--Discovered by Heceta and called Cape Frondoso
(Leafy Cape).

1792.--Capt. Gray subsequently entered the river and named it Point
Adams.--(Life on Puget Sound,--Leighton, page 48. Pacific States, vol.
22, page 163).

1792.--ADMIRALTY INLET.--Named by Vancouver for the Board of
Admiralty.--(Life on Puget Sound, p. 155).

1766-9.--ALASKA.--Named by Russians.--(Willamette Valley, page 62). The
name is derived from a Russian corruption of an Aleutian word,
"Alakshak," which signifies Continent, or a large country. The Russian
version of the term was "Aliaska," and it applied only to the prominent
peninsula jutting out from the continent. Made a general term by the
United States.--(Supplement to Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. 1, page
157).

1507.--AMERICA.--First applied to the new world in a work entitled
"Cosmographiae Instructio, etc., in super quatuor Americi Vespucii
Navigationes," written by Marti Waldseemuller, under the assumed name
of Hylacomylus and printed at Saint Die, in Lorraine.--(History of
Oregon and California,--Greenhow, page 48).

1808.--AMERICAN FUR COMPANY organized.--(Burrows' Oregon, page 58).

1846.--APPLEGATE, OR SOUTHERN ROUTE.--Constructed by Jesse
Applegate.--(Pacific States, vol 22, page 642).

1811.--ASTORIA founded by John Jacob Astor, April 12.--(Encyclopaedia
Britannica, vol. 2, page 737. History of the Willamette Valley, page
153).

1813.--Captured by the English and name changed to St.
George.--(Burrows' Oregon, page 63).

1818.--Repossessed by the United States.--(Burrows' Oregon, page 65).

1865.--ATMOSPHERIC RIVER OF HEAT.--General course, effects,
etc.--(Miners and Travelers' Guide,--Muller, page 61).

1792.--BAKER'S BAY.--Named by Broughton for Capt. Baker, of the brig
Jenny.--(Three Years' Residence in W. T.,--Swan, page 129).

1792.--BAKER, MT.--Named for Lieut. Baker, by Vancouver, April
30.--(Vancouver, vol. 2, page 56).

1853.--Called by Winthrop, "Kulshan," presumably because of being the
Indian name.--(Canoe and Saddle, page 47).

1846-8.--Same as Mt. Polk.--(Oregon and California,--Thornton, vol. 1,
page 256).

1868.--The summit is described and illustrated in Harper's Monthly for
November, page 806, by E. T. Coleman.

1869.--Called by the Spanish, "Montana del Carmelo."--(Life on Puget
Sound,--Leighton, page 160).

1842-6.--BARLOW ROAD.--See Indian Trail.

1851.--BATTLE ROCK AT PORT ORFORD.--First trip from here to the
Willamette Valley (with notes by a participant).--(Oregon and
Washington,--Armstrong, page 60).

1792.--BELLINGHAM'S BAY.--Named by Vancouver.--(Vancouver, vol. 2, page
214).

1728.--BEHRING sent out by Russia on a voyage of discovery.--(Barrows'
Oregon, page 22).

1865.--BITTER ROOT RANGE.--Same as the Coeur d'Alene
Mountains.--(Miners and Travelers' Guide,--Mullan, page 63).

1841.--BLANCHET, FATHER.--Visited by Wilkes.--(Wilkes' Narrative, vol.
4, page 349).

1775.--BODEGA, DON JUAN DE LA.--Sailed north to 58 deg. and returning
discovered Bodega Bay in 38 deg. 18'.--(History of Oregon,--Twiss, page 57).

BONNEVILLE.--Named for B. L. E. Bonneville, who explored the Rocky
Mountains in 1832 and visited the Columbia in 1834.--(Pacific States,
vol. 23, page 568).

1792.--BROUGHTON, LIEUT.--Entered the Columbia River, October 20th, and
was surprised to find the brig Jenny, of Bristol, Capt. Baker, lying
there at anchor.--(Three Years' Residence in W. T.,--Swan, page 129).

1792.--BULFINCH'S HARBOR.--Discovered by Captain Gray.--(Oregon and Its
Institutions,--Hines, page 15) See also, Gray's Harbor.

1543.--CABRILLO.--See Viscaino.

1775.--CAPE DISAPPOINTMENT.--Discovered by Heceta, August 15, and called
Cape San Roque. Named Disappointment by Mears, because of his not being
able to make the entrance of the river.--(Life on Puget
Sound,--Leighton, page 48).

1792.--Called Cape Hancock by Gray, but afterwards changed upon hearing
that Mears had already named it.--(Three Years' Residence in W.
T.,--Swan, page 129).

1778.--CAPE FLATTERY.--Named by Captain Cook.--(Three Years' Residence
in W. T.,--Swan, page 120).

1792.--CAPE HANCOCK.--See Cape Disappointment.

1812.--CAPE HORN.--So named because of the difficulty experienced in
doubling it.--(The Columbia River,--Cox, vol. 1, page 118).

1766.--CARVER, CAPT. JONATHAN.--A resident of Connecticut and a soldier
of the Canadian war. Left Boston, by way of Detroit, for the waters of
the Upper Mississippi, and to cross the continent.--(The Oregon
Territory,--Nicolay, page 93).

CASCADE MOUNTAINS.--Named for the Cascades of the Columbia
River.--(American Cyclopedia, vol. 4, page 511. Fremont, page 189).

1846-8.--Same as President's Range.--(Oregon and California,--Thornton,
vol. 1, page 255).

1805.--CASTLE ROCK, called by Lewis and Clarke, Beacon Rock.--(Pacific
States, vol. 23, page 47).

1852.--Coal discovered near Seahome by Capt. Pattle.--(Harpers Magazine
for November, 1869, page 795).

1792.--COFFIN, MT.--Originally used as an Indian burying ground, and
discovered by Lieut. Broughton.--(Vancouver, vol. 3, page 98.--Wilkes
Narrative, vol. 4, page 319).

1775.--COLUMBIA RIVER.--First discovered by Heceta, August 15.

Named by him _Ensenada de Asuncion_, or Assumption Inlet. The north
point was called Cape San Roque, and the south, Cape Frondoso, (Leafy
Cape). In the chart published in Mexico soon after the conclusion of the
voyage, the entrance is, however, called _Ensenada de Heceta_, Hecta
Inlet; and _Rio de San Roque_, River of St. Roc.

While in command of the sloop Washington, in August, Capt. Gray
discovered, and attempted to enter this opening, but the sloop grounded
on the bar and came near being lost; and was also attacked by Indians,
who killed one man and wounded the mate.

Gray was shortly afterward transferred to the Columbia, and on another
cruise entered the river; sailed up it about twenty miles, and bestowed
the name of his vessel upon it.--(Three Years' Residence in W. T., pages
124 to 128.--Pacific States, vol. 22, page 163.--American Cyclopaedia,
vol. 5, page 513).

Many works published before the discovery refer to a river flowing
westward, as "River of the West," "River of Aguilar," "River
Thegays."--(History of Oregon and California,--Greenhow, pages 144-5).

1805.--Called by the Indians "Spocatilicum"--Friendly Water.--(Life on
Puget Sound,--Leighton, page 50). The Indians also referred to it as
Wahn-na, or Big River.

1816.--The bar was first surveyed by Capt. McClellan, of the Col.
Allen.--(Pac. States, vol. 23, page 266).

1846.--Was considered accessible for vessels only three months in the
year.--(The Oregon Territory,--Nicolay, page 42).

1853.--COMCOMLI.--This Indian Chief is spoken of by Winthrop as one
Montgomery.--(Canoe and Saddle, page 77).

1841.--COMMENCEMENT BAY.--Named by Wilkes. (Wilkes' Narrative, vol. 4,
page 479).

1778.--COOK, CAPT.--Sailed along the coast and sighted land at 44 deg.,
March 7.--(Oregon,--Moseley, page 8.--History of Oregon and
California,--Greenhow, page 150).

1779.--Murdered by natives in the Sandwich Islands February
16th.--(History of Oregon and California, page 157).

CORVALLIS.--Of Spanish derivation, and signifies Center of the Valley.
Originally, Marysville.--(Oregon and Washington,--Armstrong, page 18).

1598.--D'AGUILAR, MARTIN.--See Sebastian Viscanio.

1805.--DES CHUTES RIVER.--Called by Lewis, "Towahnahiooks," and by Gass,
"The Kimmooenim."--(Pacific States, vol. 23, page 41).

1775.--DISAPPOINTMENT, CAPE.--See Cape Disappointment.

1786.--DIXON AND POSTLOCK were sent out by the King Georges Sound Co. of
London and arrived at Cooks River in July.--(History of Oregon,--Twiss,
page 61).

1824.--DOUGLAS, DAVID.--The botanist who gave his name to the Douglas
pine (_Abies Douglasii_), and named over one thousand plants, was sent
out by the Royal Horticultural Society of London, and remained ten
years.--(Pac. States, vol. 23, pages 507-8).

1579.--DRAKE, SIR FRANCIS.--Sailed along the coast.--(Oregon,--Moseley,
page 8. History of Oregon and California,--Greenhow, page 73).

FALSE DUNGENESS, see Port Angeles.

1542.--FURRELO, BARTOLEME.--Sailed with two vessels to 41 deg. to
44 deg.--(History of Oregon,--Twiss, pages 26 and 27. History of Oregon and
California,--Greenhow, page 64).

1576.--First voyage made from England to seek a Northwest Passage was
made by Martin Frobisher.--(History of Oregon and California,--Greenhow,
page 77).

1793.--First trip to the Pacific, overland, was made by Sir Alex.
Mackenzie, who reached the sea at 52 deg. 20'.--(History of Oregon,--Twiss,
pages 19 and 20).

1806.--First civilized post, or settlement, west of the Rocky Mountains
was made by the Northwest Co., on Frazer Lake in 54 deg.--(History of
Oregon,--Twiss, page 21).

1810.--First settlement attempted and first house in Oregon built by
Capt. Winship forty miles above the sea on the south bank of the
Columbia.--(Pac. States, vol. 23, page 133. Oregon,--Moseley, page 9).

1814.--First European woman on the Columbia River was Miss Jane Barnes,
who arrived at Astoria on the Isaac Todd, April 17th.--(Pac. States,
vol. 23, page 250).

1827.--First fruit tree in Oregon was planted at Vancouver by John
McLaughlin, who also introduced live stock, vegetables and
grain.--(Pacific States, vol. 23, page 441).

1836.--First steamer to visit Oregon was the Beaver, from England--(Pac.
States, vol. 23, page 600).

1598.--FLOREZ, ANTONIO.--See Sebastian Viscanio.

1812.--FRASER RIVER.--Known among the Indians as Tacoutche-Tesse.

1793.--Supposed by Sir Alex. Mackenzie to be the northern source of the
Columbia.--(History of Oregon,--Twiss, page 19. Pacific Coast, vol. 22,
page 205).

Named for Simon Fraser, who established a post in that region in
1805.--(History of Portland,--Scott, page 16).

1713.--France secretly conveys to Spain all her possessions west of the
Mississippi River.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 19).

1800.--France recovers the western half of Louisiana from
Spain.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 20).

1803.--France sells her claims to the United States.--(Barrows' Oregon,
pages 21 and 210).

1843.--Fremont follows Whitman to Oregon, arriving October
23.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 250).

1786.--Fur trade opened by British merchants between Oregon and
China.--(History of Oregon,--Twiss, page 18).

GOAT, MOUNTAIN.--Known by the Indians as Plas, (white), because of the
white rocks.

1792.--GRAY, CAPT.--Explored the Columbia river twenty-five miles, and
named it.--(The Oregon Territory,--Nicolay, page 39).

1792.--GRAY'S BAY.--Named by Broughton for Capt. Gray, of the
Columbia.--(Vancouver, vol. 3, page 92).

1789.--GRAY'S HARBOR.--First called Bulfinch Harbor, but changed to
Gray's Harbor May 7th.--(Pacific States vol. 22, page 259).

1791.--GULF OF GEORGIA.--Called by Don Francisco Elisa, "Canal de
Nuestra Senora del Rosary," or The Channel of our Lady of the Rosary.

1792.--Subsequently named by Vancouver in honor of the
king.--(Vancouver, vol. 2, page 170.--Life on Puget Sound, page 154).

1846-8.--HARRISON, MT.--See Rainier.

1771.--HEARNE, SAM'L.--An employee of the Hudson Bay Co. succeeded in
tracing the Coppermine river to tide water in 72 deg., and his report caused
the Lords of Admiralty to send Capt. Cook to the Northwest
Coast.--(History of Oregon,--Twiss, page 58).

1775.--HECETA, BRUNO.--Left San Blas for America March 16th. Passed up
the entire coast of Oregon, discovered the Columbia river.--(History of
Oregon,--Twiss, page 567. Oregon,--Moseley, page 8).

1792.--HOOD, MT.--Discovered by Broughton October 29th, and named for
Lord Hood.--(Vancouver, vol. 3, page 107.--N. W. Coast of
America,--Franchere, page 112).

1846-8.--Same as Mt. Washington.--(Oregon and California,--Thornton,
vol. 1, page 256).

1846.--Said to be in a state of eruption.--(Oregon and California, vol.
1, page 336).

1854.--Belden claimed to have ascended it in October, and reported it as
19,400 feet high. He claimed to have ascended as high as possible with
snowshoes, then with ice hooks and spikes. When they reached a point
some 18,000 feet high respiration became very difficult owing to the
rarity of the atmosphere. At length the blood began to ooze through the
pores of the skin like drops of sweat; their eyes began to bleed, then
the blood gushed from their ears. Then they commenced their downward
march. At the point where they commenced the ascent they had left their
pack mules, and two men to guard them. The men went out hunting, and
when they returned found that the cougars had killed two of their
mules.--(Oregon and Washington,--Armstrong, page 38).

(Lying seemed to have been reduced to an art in those days).

1864.--Ascended by Rev. H. K. Hines and the summit described.--(Oregon
and its Institutions,--Hines, page 44).

Known among Indians as Pat-to, or high mountain. This was a general term
for any high snow-capped mountain.

Located in latitude 45 deg. 22' 24.3". Longitude 121 deg. 42' 49.6".

1792.--HOOD'S CANAL.--Named by Vancouver for Lord Hood.--(Life on Puget
Sound, page 155).

1805.--HOOD RIVER.--Called by Lewis and Clarke, La Biche.--(Pac. States,
vol. 23, page 45).

1670.--HUDSON BAY CO.--Chartered May 16th.--(Burrows' Oregon, page 33).

1842-6.--INDIAN TRAIL.--The first pass over the Cascades used by whites
was over the southern flank of Mount Hood. Near it was afterwards made
the Barlow Road, which was named for Barlow, of Barlow, Palmer and
Rector, who were compelled to abandon their trains at the summit and
were rescued by a relief party from the Willamette Valley.--(Pac.
States, vol. 22, page 645).

1846-8.--JACKSON, MT.--Same as Mt. Pitt of the English. In lat. 41 deg.
40'.--(Oregon and California,--Thornton, vol. 1, page 257.)

1806.--JEFFERSON, MT.--Named by Lewis and Clarke for President
Jefferson.--(Pac. States, vol. 23, page 61).

1846-8.--Called by the British, Mt. Vancouver.--(Oregon and
California,--Thornton, vol. 1, page 257).

Located in latitude 44 deg. 40' 26.1". Longitude 121 deg. 48' 59.9".

1810-12.--JOHN DAY.--A Virginian, accompanied the Northwest Co. to
Astoria. He was 6 feet, 2 inches in height--(Pac. States, vol. 23, page
179).

1805.--JOHN DAY RIVER.--Called by Lewis and Clarke, the Lepage.--(Pac.
States, vol. 23. page 41).

1841.--JOHNSON, LIEUT.--Explores the Cascades from Puget
Sound.--(Wilkes' Narrative, vol. 4, pages 418 and 424).

1787.--JUAN DE FUCA STRAITS.--Discovered by Capt. Barclay, of the
Imperial Eagle.

1788.--The entrance was explored by Capt. Meares, in the Felice, and
named by him.--(History of Oregon,--Twiss, p. 19.--Pac. States, vol. 22,
page 197).

1805.--KLICKITAT RIVER.--Called by Lewis and Clarke, Cataract
River.--(Pacific States, vol. 23, page 45).

1833.--KELLY, HALL J.--First called attention to the feasibility of
settling the Pacific Coast by overland emigration. Arrived at Vancouver
this year.--(Pacific States, vol. 23, page 549).

1841.--LAVA formation limited to 48 deg. N.--(Wilkes' Narrative, vol. 4,
page 457).

1792.--LEDYARD leaves Paris for America, under the direction of
Jefferson, to discover the River of the West, but is stopped by the
Russians.--(Miners' and Travelers' Guide,--Mullan, page 53).

1834.--LEE, REV. JASON.--Established the first Mission in the Willamette
valley, ten miles below the present Salem.--(History of the Willamette
Valley, page 208).

1840.--Established a Methodist Mission at the Willamette
Falls.--(Pacific States, vol. 23, page 607).

1805-6.--LEWIS AND CLARKE.--Spent the winter at the mouth of the
Columbia.--(Oregon,--Moseley, page 8).

LEWIS RIVER.--The North Fork was known among Indians as Wicht, and was
considered the main river. The South Fork was known as Wa-co-ko, a Pike,
(fish); also Yac-co, for Yac-co prairies, near Mt. St. Helens.

1789.--MACKENZIE RIVER.--Named for Alexander Mackenzie.--(Zell's
Encyclopedia, vol. 2, page 264).

1793.--MACKENZIE, SIR ALEX.--Reached the Pacific overland, July
22.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 34).

1812.--MCKENZIE, DONALD.--Explored the Willamette Valley one hundred
miles or more.--(Pac. States, vol. 23, page 195).

1818.--McKenzie established Ft. Walla Walla.--(Pac. States, vol. 23,
page 273).

1825.--MCLAUGHLIN, JOHN..--Established Fort Vancouver, introduced live
stock, fruit, vegetables, grain, etc.

Took possession of Willamette Falls.--(Pac. States, vol. 23, pages 441
and 505).

MADISON, MT.--Is the Mt. McLaughlin of the British. Lat. 43 deg.
30'.--(Oregon and California,--Thornton, vol. 1, page 257).

MARY'S RIVER.--Named for an Indian woman, wife of a white man, who had
great trouble in making the crossing. Afterwards applied to Mary's Peak,
because the river rises there.--(Oregon and its Institutions,--Hines,
page 22).

1788.--MEARES, CAPT.--Reached the mouth of the Columbia without
discovering it, July 6th.--(History of Oregon,--Twiss, page 95).

1840.--MEEK, JOE.--Arrived in the Willamette Valley.--(Pac. States, vol.
23, page 456).

1846.--MODOC LAKES.--Discovered by Jesse Applegate.--(Pac. States, vol.
22, page 642).

1823.--MONROE DOCTRINE proclaimed.--(Burrows' Oregon, page 24).

1846-8.--MONROE, MT.--Same as Mt. Shasta--(Ore. and Cal.,--Thornton,
vol. 1, page 257).

1853.--NACHESS PASS.--5000 feet above sea level.--(Narrative of
1853,--Stevens, vol. 1, page 259).

1792.--NEAH BAY.--Called by Vancouver, Poverty Cove, and by the
Spaniards, Port Nunez Gaona.--(Three Years' Residence in W. T.,--Swan,
page 119).

1579.--NEW ALBION.--Named by Drake, who was crowned by the natives as
their king.--History of Oregon and California,--(Greenhow, page 73;
also, page 53 Mountains of Oregon.)

1792.--NEW DUNGENESS.--Named by Vancouver for Dungeness, in the British
Channel, because of the similar appearance.--(Vancouver, vol. 2, page
55).

1883.--NICKEL DEPOSIT in Douglas County.--(Mineral Resources of the U.
S.,--Williams, page 403).

1778.--NOOTKA SOUND.--Discovered by Capt. Cook, and named King George's
Sound, then changed by him to Nootka.--(Voyages of Capt. Cook, vol. 2,
page 270.)

1790.--NOOTKA TREATY.--Formed between Spain and England.--(Barrows'
Oregon, page 14).

1818.--NORTHERN BOUNDARY of the U. S. located at 49 deg. due west to the
Rocky Mountains.--(Burrow's Oregon, page 54).

1843.--NEZ PERCES.--Pierced Nose.--(Fremont, page 181).

1834.--NUTTALL AND TOWNSEND, scientists, arrived at Fort Vancouver with
Wyeth.--(Pac. States, vol. 23, page 577).

1792.--OAK POINT.--Named by Broughton because of finding the first oak
trees there.--(Vancouver, vol. 3, page 100).

1788.--OLYMPUS, MT.--Named by Capt. Meares, July 4th. Discovered by Juan
Perez, a Spanish pilot, and called El Cero de la Santa
Rosalia.--(Narrative of 1853, vol. 1, page 262).

1774.--OREGON.--First used by Capt. Jonathan Carver.--(History of the
Willamette Valley, page 73. See also page 53, Mountains of Oregon).

1846.--Bounded on the north by the 49 deg., on the east by the Rocky
Mountains, on the south by the 42 deg., and on the west by the Pacific
Ocean.--(Oregon and California,--Thornton, page 251).

1846.--Northern boundary first settled by treaty, July 17.--(Barrows'
Oregon, page 282).

1871-2.--Northern boundary finally settled by arbitration.--(Barrows'
Oregon, pages 56 and 318).

1874.--Once inhabited by a great number and variety of pre-Adamite
beasts.--(The Columbia River and Puget Sound,--Nordhoff, Harper's
Magazine for February, page 344).

1818.--Occupied jointly by the United States and England for ten
years.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 55).

1859.--Admitted to the Union with present limits, February
14th.--(Zell's Encyclopedia, vol. 2, page 527. Hill's Annotated Laws of
Oregon, vol. 1, page 77).

1792.--ORFORD, CAPE.--Named by Vancouver for Earl (George)
Orford.--(Vancouver, vol. 2, page 23).

1812-13.--PACIFIC FUR COMPANY.--The plot to rob Astor shown up by an
Englishman.--(History of Oregon,--Twiss, page 24).

1513.--PACIFIC OCEAN.--Discovered by Vasco Nunez de Balboa, governor of
the Spanish colony of Darien, and named by Fernando Magalhaens, or,
Magellan, a Portuguese in the naval service of Spain, because of being
so little disturbed by storms. Spoken of as "Mar del Sur."--(History of
Oregon and California,--Greenhow, pages 48 and 78. Barrows' Oregon, page
2).

1835.--PARKER, REV. SAMUEL.--Sent to Oregon by the American Board of
Foreign Missions.--(Oregon and California, vol. 2, page 22).

1745.--PARLIAMENTARY GRANT.--L20,000 voted by the House of Commons for
the discovery of a northwest passage by a British vessel.--(History of
Oregon,--Twiss, page 58).

1774.--PEREZ, JUAN.--Anchored in Nootka Sound.--(History of
Oregon,--Twiss, page 55).

1846-8.--PITT, MT.--Called at one time Mt. Jackson. (Oregon and
California,--Thornton, vol. 1, page 257).

1792.--POINT ADAMS.--See Adams' Point.

POINT DE LOS REYS.--Named by the Spaniards.--(Vancouver, vol. 2, page
413).

1791.--PORT ANGELES.--Named by Don Francisco Elisa, the Mexican. Called
by Vancouver False Dungeness, because of a similar appearance to New
Dungeness.--(Life on Puget Sound, page 153).

1792.--PORT DISCOVERY.--Named by Vancouver, for one of his
ships.--(Vancouver, vol. 2, page 66).

1841.--PORT GAMBLE.--Named by Wilkes for Gamble, a U. S. Naval
officer.--(Narrative of 1853, vol. 1, page 284).

1869.--Known among Indians as Teekalet.--(Life on Puget Sound, page
156).

1842.--PORTLAND.--Established by A. L. Lovejoy and F. W. Pettygrove, and
name agreed upon by tossing up a cent.--(Portland City Directory for
1872, page 10).

1786.--PORTLOCK, CAPT.--See Dixon and Portlock.

1841.--PORT LUDLOW.--Surveyed by Wilkes, and named for Ludlow, a U. S.
Naval officer.--(Narrative of 1853, vol. 1, page 283).

1792.--PORT TOWNSEND.--Visited by Vancouver, May 8th, and named in honor
of the Marquis of Townshend, who signed Vancouver's instructions. The h
was subsequently dropped.--(Life on Puget Sound, page 155. Stephens'
Narrative of 1853, vol. 1, page 283. Vancouver, vol. 2, page 76).

1853.--Known among Indians as Kahtai.--(Canoe and Saddle,--Winthrop,
page 11).

1854.--Surveyed by the U. S. Coast Survey.--(Stevens' Narrative of 1853,
vol. 1, page 283).

1792.--POSSESSION SOUND.--So named by Vancouver, because he landed there
on King George's birthday, and took possession of the country.--(The
Oregon Territory,--Nicolay, page 53.--Vancouver, vol. 2, page 170).

1792.--PUGET SOUND.--Discovered by Vancouver's lieutenant, Peter Puget,
and so named by Vancouver May 19th.--(Vancouver, vol. 2, page
146.--Narrative of 1853, vol. 1, page 289).

1853.--Known among Indians as Whulge.--(Canoe and Saddle,--Winthrop,
page 11; also among Klalams as K'uk'-luts page 43).

1792.--PROTECTION ISLAND.--Named by Vancouver because of its
advantageous location with reference to the harbor.--(Vancouver, vol. 2,
page 67).

1787.--QUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS.--Named by Dixon.--(Encyclopaedia
Britannica, vol. 20, page 170).

1789.--Capt. Gray sailed round it and named it Washington, for his
sloop.--(Backwoods of Canada and Oregon Territory,--Nicolay, page 38).

1786.--QUEEN CHARLOTTE SOUND.--Named by Wedgboro in August.--(Vancouver,
vol. 2, page 308.)

1841.--RAINIER AND ST. HELENS in activity.--(Wilkes Narrative, vol. 4,
page 440).

1792.--RAINIER, MT.--Discovered by Vancouver on May 8th and named for
Rear Admiral Rainier of the English Navy.--(Vancouver, vol. 2, page 79).

1843.--An active volcano, November 13.--(Fremont, page 193).

1846-8.--Also known as Mt. Harrison.--(Oregon and California,--Thornton,
vol. 1, page 257. See pages 54, 55 and 59. Also Tacoma).

ROCK CREEK, near Mt. St. Helens, known among Indians as "Cut-to" (a sort
of guttural sound on first syllable), which means "swift stream."

1742-3.--ROCKY MOUNTAINS.--Named by Verendrye Brothers.--(History of the
Willamette Valley, page 70).

1798.--RUSSIAN AMERICAN FUR CO. given exclusive privileges.--(Barrows'
Oregon, page 23).

1821.--RUSSIA claims by public decree all of the Pacific Coast north of
latitude 51 deg. This claim was disputed by the U. S.--(Barrows' Oregon,
page 24).

1812.--Russians established at Bodega Bay.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 23).

1820.--Russians establish a fort forty miles north of Bodega
Bay.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 23).

1766.--Russian Fur Companies organized to operate in America.--(Barrows'
Oregon, page 23).

1824.--Russia withdraws to 54 deg. 40'.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 25).

1824.--Russia withdraws from California at the request of the U.
S.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 26).

1697.--RYSWICK TREATY FORMED.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 1. American
Cyclopedia, vol. 14, page 245).

1842.--SADDLE MOUNTAIN.--Called by the Indians "Swallalahoost." Named by
Wilkes, "Saddle Mountain."--(Oregon and Its Institutions,--Hines, page
21).

1805.--SANDY RIVER.--Called by Lewis & Clarke, "Quicksand
River."--(Pacific States, vol. 23, page 48).

1741.--ST. ELIAS, MT.--Discovered by Behring, July 18th.--(History of
the Willamette Valley, page 58).

1792.--ST. HELENS, MT.--Named by Vancouver for His Majesty's ambassador
at Madrid, October 20.--(Vancouver, vol. 2, page 399).

1831.--In a state of eruption.--(Oregon and California,--Thornton, vol.
1, page 256).

1843.--In activity November 13.--(Fremont, page 193).

1846.--Known among Americans as Mt. Washington.--(The Oregon
Territory,--Nicolay, page 109).

1843.--Described when in a state of eruption.--(History of
Oregon,--Wilkes, page 109).

1846-8.--Known also as Mt. John Adams.--(Oregon and
California,--Thornton, vol. 1, page 256).

1852-4.--An active volcano.--(Three years' residence in W. T.,
Swan--page 395. Canoe and Saddle, page 48).

Known among Indians as "Lou-wala'-clough," meaning Smoking Mountain.

Located in latitude 46 deg. 11' 52.3". Longitude 122 deg. 12' 37".

1805.--SAUVIES ISLAND.--Called by Lewis and Clarke, Wapato Island,
because of an abundance of wapatos found there. It subsequently acquired
its name from Jean Baptiste Sauve, a French Canadian, who established a
dairy there after the abandonment of Ft. William.--(Pacific States, vol.
23, pages 48 and 598).

SEATTLE.--Named for an Indian.--(Harper's Monthly for September, 1870,
page 490).

1846.--SHASTA, MT.--Called Pitt by the English, Jackson and Monroe by
the Americans, and Shasta by the trappers.--(The Oregon
Territory,--Nicolay, page 109). (Oregon and California,--Thornton, vol
1, page 257).

1788.--SHOALWATER BAY.--Discovered and named by Captain John Mears, July
5th.--(Mears' Voyages, vol. 1, page 263).

1852.--First surveyed by Lieut. Com. Alden.--(Narrative of 1853, vol. 1,
page 263).

1792.--SKAGIT HEAD.--Named by Vancouver.--(Life on Puget Sound, page
156).

1836.--SLACUM, WM. A.--An agent of the State Department, in the guise of
a private citizen, visited the Columbia and Willamette Rivers.--(Pacific
States, vol. 23, page 602).

SPAIN'S FIRST CLAIM TO OREGON.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 12).

1795.--Spain withdraws from Oregon.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 14).

Spaniards coveted a position in the East Indies, but the Bull of Pope
Alexander III precluded them from sailing eastward, round the Cape of
Good Hope, hence their attempts to go by way of the Pacific.--(History
of Oregon,--Twiss, page 50).

1800.--Spanish territory west of the Mississippi conveyed to
France.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 210).

1814.--Spanish claims conceded to the United States through France and
acknowledged by Great Britain.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 208).

SPELYAH PRAIRIE.--An Indian name, meaning Cayote.

SPIRIT LAKE.--Near Mt. St. Helens. Indian name, Che-wa-tum, meaning
Spirit.

1499-1500.--STRAITS OF ANIAN.--Supposed to have been discovered by
Gaspar Cortereal, who explored the coasts of Labrador, and named by him.
The name possibly signifies Brother. Cortereal had two brothers with
him. In the earliest maps the northwest part of America is called Ania.
Ani, in the Japanese language, signifies Brother.--(History of Oregon
and California,--Greenhow, page 47).

1592.--Purchas claimed in the seventeenth century, in his "Pilgrims"--a
narrative--that a Greek pilot, called Juan de Fuca, in the service of
the Spaniards, had informed Michael Lock, the elder, whilst he was
sojourning at Venice, that he had discovered (1596) the outlet of the
Straits of Anian, in the Pacific Ocean, between 47 deg. and 48 deg., and had
sailed through it into the North Sea.--(History of Oregon,--Twiss, page
18.--History of Oregon and California,--Greenhow, page 87).

1841.--SUNKEN FOREST in the Columbia described.--(Wilkes' Narrative,
vol. 4, page 381.--Burnett's Recollections of a Pioneer, page 136.--The
Oregon Territory, Nicolay,--page 137.--Fremont, page 195).

1841.--SURVEY OF PUGET SOUND finished.--(Wilkes' Narrative, vol. 4, page
479).

TACOMA, MT.--Ta-ho-ma is the Indian name for the Great Spirit who dwells
on the mountains.--(George Baily, in the Overland Monthly for Sept.,
1886, page 268).

1853.--Called by the Indians, Tacoma, a generic term also applied to all
snow peaks.--(Canoe and Saddle,--Winthrop, page 44).

TACOMA THE SECOND.--See Mt. Adams.

Tamanous is the name of the Great Spirit supposed to dwell on this
mountain.--(Canoe and Saddle, page 131). Tacoma the Less--(Canoe and
Saddle, page 280). Each fiery Tacoma.--(Canoe and Saddle, page 286). The
eruptions of the Tacomas.--(Canoe and Saddle, page 287). Tacoma, the
Nourishing Breast. Tahoma, almost to Heaven.--(Life on Puget
Sound,--Leighton, page 39). Red Tamahnous, Love.--(Life on Puget
Sound,--page 41), Black Tamahnous, Hate, Anger.--(Life on Puget Sound,
page 114).

1841.--TENINO MOUNDS.--Described.--(Wilkes' Narrative, vol. 4, page
415).

1848-9.--TERRITORIAL GOVERNMENT.--Granted, covering all the original
Oregon.--(Barrow's Oregon, page 335. Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. 17,
page 825. General Laws of Oregon, page 52).

THE DALLES.--Stone pavement, or trough, or gutter.--(Pacific States,
vol. 23, page 44).

1788.--TILLAMOOK BAY.--Known as Murderers' Harbor and Quicksand
Bay.--(Pacific States, vol. 22, pages 188 and 198).

1806.--TILLAMOOK, OR KILLAMOOK HEAD.--Called by Clarke, Clarke's Point
of View.--(Pacific States, vol. 22, page 164, and vol. 23, page 58).

1792.--TONGUE POINT.--Named by Broughton.--(Vancouver, vol. 3, page 86).

1805.--Called by Lewis and Clarke, William.--(Pacific States, vol. 23,
page 53).

1834.--TOWNSEND, JOHN K.--A member of the Philadelphia Academy of
Natural Science, arrived at Vancouver with Wyeth, Sept.
16th.--(Townsend's Narrative, page 169. Pacific States, vol. 23, page
577).

TROUT LAKE.--Near Mt. St. Helens. Known among Indians as Qual-i'-as,
meaning Trout.

1806.--UMATILLA RIVER.--Called by the Indians, "Youmalolam."--(Pacific
States, vol. 23, page 64). Named for the Umatilla tribe of Indians.

1832.--UMPQUA FORT.--Built by John McLeod for the Hudson's Bay
Co.--(Pacific States, vol. 23, page 521).

1792.--UNITED STATES' CLAIMS TO OREGON.--1st, right of discovery; 2d, by
the Louisiana purchase; 3d, by prior explorations; 4th, by prior
settlements.--(Barrows' Oregon, pages 213, 216, 217 and 219).

1713.--UTRECHT TREATY.--Between France and England.--(Barrows' Oregon,
page 18).

1846-8.--VAN BUREN, MT.--Same as Olympus.--(Oregon and
California,--Thornton, vol. 1, page 257).

1826.--VANCOUVER, FORT.--Established by John McLaughlin, and

1849.--As a United States military post.--(Pacific States, vol. 23,
pages 437 and 439).

1792.--VANCOUVER ISLAND.--Named by Vancouver, Quadra and Vancouver
Island.--(Vancouver, vol. 2, page 357).

1598.--VISCAINO, SEBASTIAN.--Reached a headland at 42 deg. to which he gave
name of Cape Sebastian. The smallest of his three vessels, however,
conducted by Martin d'Aguilar and Antonio Florez, doubled Cape Mendocino
and reached 43 deg. where they found the mouth of a

1543.--River which Cabrillo has been supposed to have
discovered.--(History of Oregon,--Twiss, page 53).

1818.--WALLA WALLA, FORT.--Established by McKenzie.--(Pacific States,
vol. 23, page 273).

1805.--WAPATO ISLAND.--See Sauvie's Island, also--(Pacific States, vol.
23, page 593).

WASCO.--Horn Basin.--(Pacific States, vol. 23, page 44).

1853.--WASHINGTON TERRITORY formed March 2d.--(American Cyclopedia, vol.
12, page 560. Zell's Encyclopaedia, vol. 2, page 527).

1805.--WASHOUGAL RIVER.--Called by Lewis and Clarke, Seal
River.--(Pacific States, vol. 23, page 48).

1792.--WHIDBY'S ISLAND.--Named by Vancouver for one of his officers who
explored it.--(Vancouver, vol. 2, page 180).

1805.--WHITE SALMON.--Called Canoe River by Lewis and Clarke.--(Pacific
States, vol. 23. page 45).

1836.--WHITMAN, DR. MARCUS, arrived at Vancouver in September.--(History
of the Willamette Valley, page 213).

1842.--Started on his famous ride to Washington, October 3d, to prevent
our government from abandoning Oregon.--(Barrow's Oregon, page 166).

1843.--Saved by a mule.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 170).

1843.--Returns from Washington, September 4th, accompanied by 200 wagons
and 875 immigrants.--(Barrows' Oregon, page 250).

1847.--Murdered by the Indians in November.--(Barrows' Oregon, page
320).

1841.--WILKES, CHARLES,--DRAYTON, R. R. Waldron and two other men
visited the Willamette Valley on a scientific campaign.--(Pacific
States, vol. 23, page 673. Wilkes' Narrative, vol. 4, page 341).

1829.--WILLAMETTE FALLS taken possession of by McLaughlin, and a saw
mill established.--(Pacific States, vol. 23, page 505).

1806.--WILLAMETTE RIVER.--Part of it called by the Indians
Multnomah.--(Pacific States, vol. 23, page 60).

1843.--WINDS, peculiarity of, in the Columbia River.--(Fremont, page
190).

1834.--WORK, JOHN.--explored the Umpqua region.--(Pacific States, vol.
23, page 527).

1832.--WYETH, NATHANIEL J.--Arrives at Vancouver.

1834.--Arrives there second time, September 16th. Established Fort
William and a Salmon fishery on Wapato Island on his second trip.

1837.--Returns to Oregon again and sells Forts William and Hall to the
Hudson's Bay Co.--(Pacific States, vol. 23, pages 564, 592, 594 and
598).

YAQUINA BAY.--Probably named for Yaquina, a female Indian chief.--(Life
on Puget Sound, page 174).

1805.--YOUNG'S BAY.--Called by Lewis and Clarke, Meriwether
Bay.--(Pacific States, vol. 23, page 54).

1792.--YOUNG'S RIVER.--Named by Broughton for Sir George Young of the
Royal Navy.--(Vancouver, vol. 3, page 90).




     Topical Index.




    A

    Adams, C. F., 3.
      --Mt., 40, 47, 51, 52, 85.

    Admiralty Inlet, 85.

    Alaska, 85.
      --Alakshak, 85.
      --Aliaska, 85.

    Alden, Lieut. Com., 103.

    America, 85, 95.

    American Bd. of Frn. Msns., 89.
      --Fur Co., 86.

    Ania, 104.

    Applegate, Jesse, 86, 97,
      --Route, 86.

    Astoria, 86.

    Astor, John Jacob, 86.

    Atmospheric, River of Heat, 86.


    B

    Baker, Capt., 86, 87.
      --Lieut., 52, 86.
      --Mt., 40, 42, 52, 56, 86.

    Baker's Bay, 86.

    Barclay, Capt., 95.

    Barlow,
      --Palmer and Rector, 94.
      --Road, 87.

    Barnes, Miss Jane, 91.

    Battle Rock, 87.

    Beacon Rock, 52, 88.

    Beaver, Steamer, 91.

    Behring, 87, 102.

    Belden, 93.

    Bellingham's Bay, 87.

    Bitter Root Range, 52, 87.

    Blanchet, Father, 87.

    Board of Admiralty, 85.

    Bodega, Bay, 87, 102.
      --Don Juan de la, 87.

    Bonneville, B. L. E., 87.

    Bourbon River, 53.

    Breck, J. M. Jr., 3.

    Bretherton, W. W., 69, 79.

    Broughton, Lieut., 52, 53, 54, 86, 87, 88, 92, 93, 98, 106, 109.

    Bulfinch's Harbor, 87, 92.


    C

    Cabrillo, 87, 107.

    California, 21, 40, 84, 102.

    Canal de Nuestra del Rosary, 92.

    Cape Disappointment, 87, 90.

    Cape Flattery, 88.

    Cape Frondoso, 85, 89.

    Cape Hancock, 88.

    Cape Horn, 52, 82, 88.

    Cape Mendocino, 107.

    Cape San Roque, 87, 89.

    Cape Sebastian, 107.

    Canoe River, 108.

    Carver, Capt. Jonathan, 53, 88, 98.

    Cascade Range, 3, 6, 21, 52, 56, 88, 94, 95.

    Cascades of the Columbia, 88.

    Casey, Edw., 73.

    Castle Rock, 52, 88.

    Cataract River, 95.

    Cathedral Rock, 21.

    Clark's Point of View, 54, 106.

    Cleetwood, 18, 19, 22, 23, 24.
      --Cove, 25.

    Coast of Cal. in South Sea, 54.

    Coeur d'Alene Mts., 52.

    Coffin, Mt., 52, 88.

    Coleman, E. T., 86.

    Columbia River, 3, 7, 8, 52, 87, 88, 91, 92, 93, 95, 96, 103.

    Comcomli, 89.

    Commencement Bay, 59, 90.

    Cook, Capt., 88, 90, 93, 97.

    Cooks River, 90.

    Coppermine River, 93.

    Corbett, Hon. H. W., 67, 82.

    Cortereal, Gaspar, 104.

    Corvallis, 90.

    Cosmographiae Instructio, 85.

    Cottel, Dr. Willis I., 73.

    Crater Lake, 12, 13, 15, 17, 18, 25, 29, 31, 32, 33.

    Cut-to, 101.


    D

    d'Aguilar, Martin, 90, 107.

    Davey, Allen, 15.

    Davidson, Elijah, 35.

    Davis, Capt. Geo. W., 17, 18, 25.

    Day, John, 94.
      --River, 95.

    de Balboa, Vasco Nunez, 99.

    Deep Blue Lake, 13.

    Deschutes River, 90.

    Dewert, E. D., 34, 36.

    Diamond Peak, 54.

    Dixon, 90, 100, 101.

    Dodd, Mr., 13.

    Douglas, David, 90.

    Drake, Sir Francis, 90.

    Durham, N. W., 3.

    Dutton, Capt., C. E., 17, 18, 25.
      --Cliff, 25, 28, 30.


    E

    Eels, Edwin, 57.

    El Cero de la Santa Rosalia, 54, 98.

    Elisa, Don Francisco, 92, 99.

    Ensenada de Asuncion, 89.

        "     "  Heceta, 89.

    Evans, Elwood, 65.

    Exploration Department, 71.


    F

    False Dungeness, 90, 99.

    Felice, The, 95.

    Finch, Capt. D. B., 59.

    Flett, John, 61, 63.

    Florez, Antonio, 91, 107.

    Fraser River, 91.
      --Simon, 92.

    Frazer Lake, 91.

    Fremont, 92.

    Frobisher, Martin, 91.

    Furrelo, Bartoleme, 91.


    G

    Game Protective Department, 77.

    Gill, John, 69.

    Goat Mountain, 53, 92.

    Goldsmith, H., 79.

    Gorman, M. W., 73.

    Gove, Chas. H., 3, 51.

    Government Camp, 4, 6, 9.

    Grant's Pass, 34, 39.

    Gray, Capt., 85, 87, 88, 89, 92, 101.

    Gray's Bay, 92.
      --Harbor, 92.

    Gulf of Georgia, 92.


    H

    Hall, Fort, 109.

    Harkness, H. D., M. M., and F. M., 34.

    Harrison, Mt., 54, 92, 101.

    Hearne, Sam'l., 93.

    Heceta, 87, 88, 93.

    Hermann, Hon. Binger, 17.

    Hillman, J. W., 13.

    Himes, Geo. H., 69.

    Hines, Rev. H. K., 94.

    Hood, Lord, 53, 93, 94.
      --Mt., 3, 7, 10, 33, 40, 41, 45, 47, 51, 53, 93, 94.
      --River, 94.

    Hood's Canal, 94.

    Hudson's Bay, 53.
      --Co., 61, 93, 94, 106, 109.

    Hylacomylus, 86.


    I

    Idleman, C. M., 69.

    Imperial Eagle, The, 95.

    Indian Trail, 94.

    Ingram, Prof., 49.

    Isaac Todd, The, 91.


    J

    Jack, Capt., 41.

    Jackson, Mt., 94, 99, 103.

    Jefferson, 95.
      --Mt. 6, 7, 40, 53, 94.

    John Adams, Mt., 54, 103.

    Johnson, Lieut., 95.

    Josephine County Caves, 34.

    Juan de Fuca, 95, 104.


    K

    Kahtai, 100.

    Keene, Dr. J. M., 3, 6.

    Kelly, Hall J., 95.

    Killamook Head, 54, 106.

    Kimmooenim, 90.

    King George's Sound, 97.
      --Co., 90.

    Klamath, Ft., 12.
      --Indians, 12, 15, 16, 17.
      --Lake, 21.

    Klickitat Indians, 64.
      --River, 95.

    Ko-ma, 56.

    Kukluts, 54.

    Kulshan, 86.


    L

    La Riche, 94.

    Lake Majesty, 13.

    Ledyard, 95.

    Lee, Rev. Jason, 95.

    Lepage, The, 95.

    Lewis & Clarke, 52, 53, 54, 88, 94, 95, 102, 103, 106, 107, 108, 109.

    Lewis River, 96.

    Llao Rock, 14, 21, 24, 25, 30, 31, 32.

    Lock, Michael, 104.

    Longmire, 44, 48.

    Louden, James, 13.

    Lords of Admiralty, 93.

    Louisiana, 92.

    Lou-wala-clough, 54, 103.

    Lovejoy, A. L., 100.

    Ludlow, 100.


    M

    Mackenzie, Sir Alex., 91, 96.
      --River, 96.

    Madison, Mt., 53, 96.

    Magalhaens, Fernando, 99.

    Mar del Sur, 99.

    Markle, Geo. B., 68, 69, 84.

    Mary's Peak, 7, 96.
      --River, 96.

    Marysville, 90.

    McCarver, Genl., 59.

    McClellan, 89.

    McKenzie, 107.
      --Donald, 96.

    McLaughlin, John, 53, 91, 96, 107, 108.
      --Mt., 7, 53, 96.

    McLeod, John, 106.

    McManus, Pat., 13.

    Meares, Capt., 54, 87, 88, 95, 96, 98, 103.

    Meek, Joe, 96.

    Meriwether Bay, 109.

    Mill Creek, 27.

    Mississippi River, 53, 92, 104.

    Modoc Lakes, 97.

    Monroe Doctrine, 97.
      --Mt. 97, 103.

    Montana del Carmelo, 52, 86.

    Montgomery, 89.

    Murderer's Harbor, 106.

    Multnomah, 108.

    Mysterious Lake, 13.


    N

    Nachess Pass, 97.

    Nea Bay, 97.

    New Albion, 53, 97.

     "  Caledonia, 53.

     "  Dungeness, 97, 99.

     "  Georgia, 53.

     "  Tacoma, 60, 61.

    Nez Perces, 98.

    Nichols, J., 43, 44, 48.

    Nickel deposit, 97.

    Nicolini, S. S., 34.

    Nootka Sound, 97, 99.
      --Treaty, 97.

    Northern boundary of U. S., 97.

    Northwest Co., 91, 94.
      --Passage, 91, 99.

    Norton, E. E., 79.


    O

    Oak Point, 98.

    Olympus, Mt., 54, 98, 107.

    Oregon, 3, 40, 54, 82, 83, 84, 91, 92, 93, 98.
      --Alpine Club, 40, 49, 51, 67, 69, 82.

    Orford, 99.


    P

    Pacific Fur Co., 99.
      --Ocean, 99.

    Paradise Valley, 45.

    Parker, Rev. Sam'l., 99.

    Parliamentary Grant, 99.

    Pattle, Capt., 88.

    Pat-to, 52, 85, 94.

    Perez, Juan, 54, 98, 99.

    Pettygrove, F. W., 100.

    Phantom Ship, 29.

    Photographic Department, 79.

    Pitt, Mt., 21, 40, 94, 99, 103.

    Plas, 53, 92.

    Point Adams, 8, 85, 99.

      "   de los Reys, 99.

    Polk, Mt., 52, 86.

    Pope, Alexander III, 104.

    Port Angeles, 99.

     "   Discovery, 100.

     "   Gamble, 100.

    Portland, 3, 4, 7, 8, 17, 19, 32, 34, 49, 59, 82, 83, 100.

    Portlock, Capt., 91, 100.

    Port Ludlow, 100.

     "   Nunez Gaona, 97.

     "   Townsend, 100.

    Poverty Cove, 97.

    Possession Sound, 100.

    President's Range, 52, 88.

    Protection Island, 101.

    Puget, Peter, 54, 100.
      --Sound, 54, 55, 59, 60, 61, 64, 95, 100.

    Purchas, 104.

    Puyallup, 60.
      --Indians, 55, 56, 61, 64.


    Q

    Quadra and Vancouver's Island, 107.

    Qualias, 106.

    Queen Charlotte Islands, 101.
      --Sound, 101.

    Quicksand Bay, 106.
      --River, 102.


    R

    Rainier, Mt., 40, 43, 51, 54, 55, 59, 60, 61, 64, 101.
      --Rear Admiral, 54, 101.

    River Aguilar, 89.

      "   of the West, 53, 89, 95.

      "   Thegays, 89.

    Rio de San Roque, 89.

    Rock Creek, 101.

    Rocky Mountains, 54, 91, 101.

    Rogue River, 27.
      --Falls, 27.

    Ross, Geo., 13.

    Royal Hort. Soc. of London, 90.

    Russian American Fur Co., 101.

    Ryswick Treaty, 102.


    S

    Saddle Mountain, 54, 102.

    San Blas, 93.

    Sandy River, 102.

    Sauvie, Jean Baptiste, 103.
      --Island, 103, 107.

    Sba-date, 57.

    Scott, Mt., 21.

    Seahome, 88.

    Seal River, 107.

    Seattle, 57, 103.

    Shasta, Mt., 31, 33, 40, 97, 103.

    Shoalwater Bay, 103.

    Siskiyou Mountains, 34.

    Skagit, 56, 103.

    Skeeters, Isaac, 13.

    Slacum, Wm. A., 103.

    Spelyah Prairie, 104.

    Spirit Lake, 104.

    Spocatilicum, 89.

    Squallys, 61, 64.

    Squa-tach, 56, 57.

    Squat-utsh, 56.

    Stanup, Rev. Peter, 56, 57.

    Starr, Lewis M., 59.

    Steel, James, 59.

    Steel, W. G., 55, 69, 73.

    St. Elias, Mt., 102.

    Stevens, Gen. Hazard, 60.

    St. George, 86.

    St. Helens, Mt., 40, 47, 51, 54, 101, 102, 106.

    St. Lawrence River, 53.

    Stony Mountains, 54.

    Straights of Anian, 53, 104.

    Sunken Forest, 105.

    Survey of Puget Sound, 105.

    Swallalahoost, 54, 102.


    T

    Tacoma, 43, 51, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 105.
      --The Less, 105.
      --The Second, 52, 85, 105.
      --Mt., 54, 55, 58, 60, 105.
      --Land Co., 56, 60.
      --Ta-ho-ma, 105.
      --Ta-ke-man, 55.
      --Ta-ko-ber, 63.
      --Ta-ko-bet, 55, 56.
      --Ta-ko-man, 56, 57, 58, 63.
      --Tamanous, 105.
      --Te-ho-ma, 60, 63, 64.
      --Twheque, 57.
      --Twhauk, 57, 58.

    Tacoutche, Tesse, 91.

    Teekalet, 100.

    Tenino, 105.

    The Dalles, 106.

    Thielsen, Mt., 21.

    Thompson, Hon. D. P., 67, 83.

    Three Sisters, 7, 40.

    Tillamook Head, 54, 106.

    Tongue Point, 106.

    Towahnahiooks, 90.

    Townsend, John K., 98, 106.

    Townshend, Marquis, 100.

    Trout Lake, 106.


    U

    Umatilla River, 106.

    Umpqua, 108.
      --Fort, 106.

    U. S. Claims to Oregon, 106.

    Utrecht Treaty, 106.


    V

    Van Buren, Mt., 54, 107.

    Vancouver, Capt., 52, 54, 59, 60, 85, 86, 89, 92, 94, 97, 99, 100,
        101, 102, 103, 107.
      --Fort, 9, 53, 91, 95, 96, 98, 107, 108.
      --Island, 107.
      --Mt., 53, 94.

    Van Trump, P. V., 48, 60.

    Verendrye Brothers, 54, 101.

    Vidae Cliff, 29.

    Viscanio, Sebastian, 107.


    W

    Wa-co-ko, 96.

    Wahn-na, 89.

    Waldseemuller, Marti, 86.

    Waldron, R. R., 108.

    Walla Walla, Fort, 96, 107.

    Wapato Island, 103, 107, 108.

    Wasco, 107.

    Washington, 40, 84, 101, 107.
      --Mt., 7, 32, 53, 54, 102.
      --Sloop, 89.

    Washougal River, 107.

    Wedgboro, 101.

    Whidby's Island, 107.

    White River Indians, 61.

    Whitman, 92, 108.

    White Salmon, 108.

    Whulge, 54, 101.

    Wicht, 96.

    Wilkes, 54, 90, 100, 102, 108.

    Willamette, 7, 94, 95, 96, 103, 108.

    William, 106.
      --Fort, 103, 108, 109.

    Williams Creek, 35.

    Winship, Capt., 91.

    Winthrop, Theodore, 52, 59, 86, 89.

    Witches Cauldron, 13, 21.

    Wizard Island, 13, 21, 27.

    Work, John, 108.

    Wyeth, Nathaniel J., 98, 106, 108.


    Y

    Yac-co, 96.

    Yaquina Bay, 109.

    Yelm, 43.

    Yocum, O. C., 3.

    Youmalolam, 106.

    Young's Bay, 109.
      --River, 109.

    Young, Sir George, 109.


       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber Notes:

    Punctuation corrected without note.

    page 19: "sidling" changed to "sliding" (When a sliding place
    was reached).

    page 19: "sideling" changed to "sliding" (very steep, sliding, rocky).

    page 36: "acompanying" changed to "accompanying" (and accompanying
    necessities).

    page 42: "imimmediately" changed to "immediately" (and immediately
    informs San Francisco of the contemplated attack,).

    page 48: "decended" changed to "descended" (we descended about).

    page 59: "Cotemporaneously" changed to "Contemporaneously"
    (Contemporaneously Tacoma City,).

    page 64: "Klikitat" changed to "Klickitat" (several bands of the
    Klickitat).

    page 91: "pages" changed to "page" (page 250).

    page 99: "Portugese" changed to "Portuguese" (a Portuguese in the
    naval service of Spain).

    page 101 and 105: "Brittanica" changed to "Britannica"
    (Encyclopaedia Britannica).

    page 102: "embassador" changed to "ambassador" (His Majesty's
    ambassador at Madrid).

    page 104: "dicovered" changed to "discovered" (that he had
    discovered).

    page 111: "Nea" changed to "Neah" (Neah Bay).

    page 112: "Waldscemuller" changed to "Waldseemuller"
    (Waldseemuller, Marti).





End of Project Gutenberg's The Mountains of Oregon, by William Gladstone Steel

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MOUNTAINS OF OREGON ***

***** This file should be named 36746.txt or 36746.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/7/4/36746/

Produced by Pat McCoy, Greg Bergquist and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
