The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twenty-Five Years in the Rifle Brigade, by
William  Surtees

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Twenty-Five Years in the Rifle Brigade

Author: William  Surtees

Release Date: July 19, 2011 [EBook #36778]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY-FIVE YEARS IN THE ***




Produced by Steven Gibbs, Moti Ben-Ari and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.









    TWENTY-FIVE YEARS
    IN
    THE RIFLE BRIGADE.

    BY THE LATE
    WILLIAM SURTEES,
    QUARTERMASTER.

    WILLIAM BLACKWOOD, EDINBURGH; AND
    T. CADELL, STRAND, LONDON.

    MDCCCXXXIII.


    EDINBURGH:
    PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE AND COMPANY, PAUL'S WORK, CANONGATE.




    TO
    MAJOR-GEN. SIR ANDREW F. BARNARD,
    K.C.B. and K.C.H.
    AND THE OFFICERS OF THE RIFLE BRIGADE,
    THESE REMAINS OF MY DECEASED BROTHER
    ARE MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED,
    BY THEIR OBLIGED AND MOST
    OBEDIENT SERVANT,
    JOHN SURTEES.




PREFATORY NOTICE.


The Author of the following Narrative entered the Army in early life. He
commenced his military career in 1795, as a private soldier in the
Northumberland Militia; and in the following year he volunteered into
the Pompadours. In this regiment he first faced the enemy, during the
expedition to Holland under the Duke of York. On getting his discharge
from the Pompadours, in 1802, he again entered the service as a private
in the Rifle Brigade, to which he was attached for a period of
twenty-five years. From his steady conduct, and ardent love for his
profession, he was soon advanced from the ranks, and, after various
intermediate steps, was appointed Quartermaster; a situation which he
held as long as he continued in the corps, enjoying the respect and
esteem of his brother officers of all ranks, as is amply testified by
the letters which form the Appendix to this volume.

Though, as Quartermaster, the Author was not called by duty to join in
battle, yet he lost no opportunity of entering the scene of action, or
of placing himself in a favourable situation for observing what was
passing. It is unnecessary to enumerate the arduous services of the
Rifle Brigade from 1802 to 1815. During the whole of that period the
Author was actively engaged with his corps.

The Narrative is faithfully--indeed literally--printed from the Author's
MS. as he left it at his death. The critical reader may therefore detect
various inaccuracies which, had life been spared to the Author, would
probably have been corrected; but he will find much to approve, and,
hackneyed as Narratives of the Peninsular War have become, he will also
find much that is new. There is no embellishment in the style of the
Author's composition, but there is a quiet Defoe-like sincerity and
simplicity characteristic of his pages, and a strain of unaffected
piety, that is very pleasing; and the scenes and descriptions which he
gives, though sometimes singularly chosen, and reported quite with a
manner of his own, are on the whole portrayed with strong graphic
effect. One word, however, before closing,--our Author is never vulgar.

A severe pulmonary affection compelled him to quit his corps in 1826. He
retired to Corbridge, his native village, where he arrived on the 24th
of October in that year, and continued there, respected and beloved, and
constantly engaged in acts of benevolence, till the period of his death,
28th May, 1830.

    _November 23, 1832._




CONTENTS.


    CHAPTER I.
                                                                  PAGE.

    Birth and Parentage--Enters the Militia--Volunteers into the
    Line--Joins the army destined for Holland--The troops embark at
    Deal--Land at the Helder--Laxity of discipline--March for
    Schagen--Detachment under Sir Ralph Abercromby sent to surprise
    Hoorne--Hoorne surrenders,                                        1

    CHAPTER II.

    The Russian Allies carry Bergen--Allow themselves to be
    surprised, and the whole army forced to retire to their former
    position--Skirmishing in the vicinity of Old Patten--The
    Russians endeavour to force their way back to Bergen--The
    Russian and British forces joined--The enemy forced to abandon
    Egmont-op-Zee--Alkmaar surrenders--The troops advance to Egmont
    Binnen--Skirmishing--General engagement--The Enemy
    repulsed--The Forces retire to Zaand Wyck--Armistice
    concluded--Return to England,                                    13

    CHAPTER III.

    Arrive in England--The Pompadours embark for Ireland--Arrive at
    Kinsale--Privations in Ireland in 1800--Peace concluded--Our
    Author resolves to return home, but ultimately volunteers into
    the Rifle Corps or 95th--Embarks for England, and joins his
    Regiment at Sussex--Is promoted,                                 35

    CHAPTER IV.

    Made Pay-sergeant--Moral Reflections--Wreck of a Dutch East
    Indiaman--Reduced Officers--War with France in 1803--Encampment
    at Thorncliffe under the command of General Sir John
    Moore--Encampment broke up, November 1804--Embark for Germany,
    October 1805--Vicissitudes at Sea--Land at Cuxhaven--March to
    Bremen--Outposts established--Retrograde movements, in
    consequence of the defeat of the Allied Forces at
    Austerlitz--The Allied Forces evacuate Germany--Re-embarkation
    of the troops--The Rifle Corps, or 95th, land at Yarmouth,       45

    CHAPTER IV.*

    Our Author made Quartermaster-Sergeant of the 2d battalion,
    which he joins at Feversham, Kent--Expedition to
    Denmark--Embark at Deal--Land at Vedbeck, Zealand--Partial
    Engagements--Siege of Copenhagen--A division under Sir Arthur
    Wellesley advance to Kioge--Copenhagen capitulates--Amnesty
    between the Danish forces in the Island of Zealand, and the
    British--The British evacuate Denmark--Embark at
    Copenhagen--Arrive in the Downs--Land at Deal,                   59

    CHAPTER V.

    Our Author marries--The Battalion to which he belongs ordered
    to join the Expedition fitting out for Corunna--Movements of
    the Army in Spain--Return to England,                            73

    CHAPTER VI.

    Volunteering--Farther Promotion--Embarks for Portugal, with two
    Companies of the Second Battalion--Debark at Cadiz--Advance to
    the Isla--The French occupy all the adjacent Towns, except
    Cadiz and Isla--Cannonading--Spanish Army--Detachment of the
    Allied Army sent round by Gibraltar and Chiclana, to take the
    Enemy in the rear of his works, and compel him either to fight
    or abandon them--Come up with a portion of the Enemy in the
    vicinity of Veger--Bravery of the British--The Enemy repulsed
    with great loss, but, from the apathy and misconduct of General
    La Pena, and the Spaniards under his command, the French are
    allowed to retain their Works in the vicinity of Cadiz,          99

    CHAPTER VII.

    The 2d Battalion of the Pompadours ordered to proceed to
    Portugal--Our Author visits England--Returns to Portugal, and
    joins his Regiment at Rodrigo--The Army move towards
    Badajos--Siege of Badajos--Badajos surrenders--Insubordination
    among the Troops--Quelled by the prompt measures of Lord
    Wellington,                                                     128

    CHAPTER VIII.

    The Army leave Badajos on the 11th of April, and move into
    quarters near the river Agueda, where they remain, till the
    11th of June--Advance towards Salamanca, which, with the
    exception of three Forts, the enemy had evacuated--The Forts
    invested--The main bodies of both armies bivouack within a mile
    and a half of each other, in the vicinity of Monte Rubio and
    Morisco--The Forts of Salamanca surrender--The main body of the
    Enemy retire to Tordesillas--Movements of the Army,             153

    CHAPTER IX.

    Preparations for the Field--Amusements in winter
    quarters--Grand Review--Advance of the Army in pursuit of the
    Enemy--Come up with their rearguard in the vicinity of Hornilla
    de Camino--Skirmishing--Encounter with the 1st Brigade of the
    Enemy, who are beaten, and forced to retreat--Our Army advance
    in pursuit--An affair between the rearguard of the Enemy and
    our 4th Brigade--Vittoria--General Engagement--The Enemy
    defeated--Remarks,                                              185

    CHAPTER X.

    Advance in pursuit of the Enemy--Our Forces retreat, in order
    to counteract Soult's movements for the succour of
    Pamplona--Total defeat of Soult in the several Actions near
    Pamplona--Our Forces again advance--Come up with the retreating
    Enemy at the Bridge of Yanzi--The Enemy take up a position,
    behind Vera--A considerable body of the Enemy attached at the
    Pass of Echallar, and forced to retreat,                        214

    CHAPTER XI.

    The Author, from a mistake, loses his Servants for a few
    days--A Feast of Death--A Feast of Life--Fighting near St
    Sebastian--Singular instance of Spanish Bravery--St Sebastian
    is captured, but no Details given, the Author not having been
    present--Attack of the Pass of Vera,                            232

    CHAPTER XII.

    The British Army advance farther into France--Pass the
    Nive--Soult's Plans baffled--Two or three battalions of the
    Nassau and Frankfort regiments come over from the
    French--French Politesse--Threatened Attack by the
    French--Battle of the Nive--Account of the Basques,             253

    CHAPTER XIII.

    The Author's Battalion quartered in Aurantz on 3d January
    1814--The cantonments at Aurantz broke up on the 16th February,
    and the Campaign of 1814 commenced--Farther Advance into
    France--Skirmishing with the Enemy--Military Manoeuvres--Battle
    of Orthes--Defeat and Pursuit of the Enemy--Succession of
    Attacks on them--They are driven from their Position in and
    near Tarbes--Skirmishing at Tournefoile--The Enemy retire
    towards Toulouse,                                               269

    CHAPTER XIV.

    The British Army cross the Garonne--Advance on
    Toulouse--Prepare for the Attack--The Attack--Spaniards driven
    back--Battle very hot--French completely defeated--Soult
    evacuates Toulouse, and tardily adheres to the Bourbons,        295

    CHAPTER XV.

    Author's happy state during 1813 and 1814--Character of the
    veritable French--British distributed over the
    Country--Civility of the Inhabitants of Grissolles--Amusements
    in quarters--The British prepare to quit France,                308

    CHAPTER XVI.

    Author's Battalion embark for England--Land at Plymouth--Expect
    to be again ordered on Foreign Service--Order received--Embark,
    with other Troops, for America--Land at Pine Island,            322

    CHAPTER XVII.

    Proceed to attack the Enemy, and capture one of their
    picquets--Advance in search of a Bivouack--Alarmed by shots in
    front--Fired on by an American schooner--Captain Hallen
    severely attacked--Manoeuvres on both sides--Ruse of the
    Enemy--Fighting continues--Enemy repulsed at all
    points--Courage of the British--Battery brought into
    play--Activity of the Enemy,                                    339

    CHAPTER XVIII.

    British Army told off into Brigades--Advance, and are hotly
    received--Heroism of a young Artillery Officer--We take up a
    fresh position--The Enemy work incessantly in raising an
    extensive breastwork--Two Batteries erected, from which our
    heavy Ship Artillery are brought to bear against it, but
    without effect--The Enemy also place their Ship Guns on
    Batteries--Colonel Lambert arrives with the 7th and 43d
    regiments--Preparations for a grand attack on the Enemy's
    lines, which entirely fails, and the British are repulsed with
    great loss,                                                     357

    CHAPTER XIX.

    Bravery and Success of Colonel Thornton--Negotiation for leave
    to transport the Wounded across the River--Insult offered to
    the British--They retreat--Our Army embark, and determine to
    make an Attack upon Mobile--Proceed in the direction of Mobile
    Bay--A Brigade detached to reduce Fort Boyer--The Fort
    surrenders, the garrison becoming Prisoners of
    War--Intelligence of a Treaty of Peace being concluded at
    Ghent--Cessation of Hostilities,                                378

    CHAPTER XX.

    Ratification of the Treaty of Peace--Exchange of Prisoners--Our
    Troops Embark for England--When off the coast of Ireland,
    receive Intelligence of Bonaparte's escape from Elba--The
    Author and his Battalion reach the Downs, and proceed to
    Thorncliffe--Embark for France--Arrive at Paris, and occupy the
    Champs Elysees--Review of the Russian Guards--Russian
    Discipline--British Troops reviewed--Accident to Prince
    Blucher--Amusements in Paris--The Allied Forces, except the
    Army of Occupation, leave Paris--The Author's Battalion embark
    for England--Reach Dover, and return to Thorncliffe--He obtains
    leave of absence, and visits his Family--His Battalion ordered
    to Ireland--Sets out to join it, accompanied by his Wife, who
    dies three days after they reach Dublin--His Battalion
    reduced--Joins the first Battalion at Gosport, which is ordered
    to Scotland--Arrive at Leith, and march to Glasgow--The Author
    returns home in ill health--His Father dies--Joins his
    Battalion again--Winters at home--His Battalion ordered to
    Ireland--Joins it at Belfast--They occupy different stations
    during the Whiteboy Insurrection--Six companies of his
    Battalion ordered to Nova Scotia, but the Author remains with
    the other four companies--He is shortly ordered to proceed to
    Nova Scotia--His health declines--Returns home in consequence,
    takes advantage of Lord Palmerston's Bill, and retires on full
    pay,                                                            401

    APPENDIX.--TESTIMONIALS.--No. 1. From Lieutenant-Colonel
    Duffy--No. 2. From Major Travers--No. 3. From Officers of the
    2d Battalion--No. 4. From Lieut.-Colonel Ross, C.B.--No. 5.
    From Lieut.-Col. Smith, C.B.--No. 6. From Officers of the 1st
    Battalion Rifle Brigade--No. 7. From Colonel Norcott, C.B.--No.
    8. From Lieut.-Col. Fullarton, C.B.--No. 9. From Lieut.-Col.
    Balvaird--No. 10. From Major-General Sir A. F. Barnard,
    K.C.B.--No. 11. From Major Logan--No. 12. From Lieut.-Col.
    Beckwith, C.B.--No. 13. From Lieut.-General the Hon. Sir Wm.
    Stewart, G.C.B.--No. 14. From Major Eeles--No. 15. From
    Major-General Sir T. S. Beckwith, K.C.B.,                       425




TWENTY-FIVE YEARS IN THE RIFLE BRIGADE.




CHAPTER I.

     Birth and Parentage--Enters the Militia--Volunteers into the
     Line--Joins the Army destined for Holland--The Troops embark at
     Deal--Land at the Helder--Laxity of discipline--March for
     Schagen--Detachment under Sir Ralph Abercromby sent to surprise
     Hoorne--Hoorne surrenders.


I was born on the 4th of August, 1781, in the village of Corbridge, in
the county of Northumberland; of parents who may be said to have been
among the middle classes, my father being a tradesman. They gave me such
an education as was customary with people of their station in life; viz.
reading, writing, and arithmetic. My mother having sprung from a pious
race, was the first to implant in my mind any sense of religion; indeed,
it is to the spiritual seed sown in my heart by her during my youth,
that I am indebted, under God, for having been brought, many years
afterwards, to consider my ways, and to turn to Him. Nevertheless, being
naturally of a sensual and wicked disposition, I, as might be expected,
spent a dissolute youth, which often caused great pain and uneasiness to
my good and pious mother. But I did not continue long under the paternal
roof; for, having from my infancy a great predilection for a military
life, I embraced almost the first opportunity that offered, after I
became sufficiently grown, to enter into the militia of my native
county. I enlisted on the 15th of November, 1798, being then little more
than seventeen years of age. I entered this service with the
determination that, should I not like a soldier's life, I would then,
after remaining a few years in it, return home; but, if I did like it,
to volunteer into the line, and make that my occupation for life. It
will readily be believed that this undutiful step affected deeply my
excellent parents; for though my father was not _then_ a religious man,
he had a heart susceptible of the tenderest feelings; and I really
believe that no parents ever felt more deeply the combined emotions of
tender regret at my leaving them so young, and for such a purpose, and
at the disgrace which my wayward conduct had, as they imagined, brought
upon myself. But though evil in itself, God overruled it for good to me,
and, I trust, to them also. I would here remark that the life of a
soldier was by no means considered in my native village, at that time,
as at all creditable; and when I sometimes in my boyhood used to exhibit
symptoms of a military inclination, I was often taunted with the then
opprobrious expression, "Ay, thou likes the smell of poother,"
intimating thereby that I was likely to disgrace myself by going for a
soldier.

I left my family in much grief in the beginning of 1799, and marched
with several other recruits to join my regiment at Chelmsford in Essex,
where we arrived in about a month, and where I began my military career.
I always liked a soldier's life, consequently I did not suffer from many
of those parts of it which are so unpleasant to those of a contrary
disposition; and, as I took pleasure in it, I of course made more
progress in acquiring a knowledge of my duty than some others who set
out with me. I was early placed in the first squad, an honour which I
considered no trifling one in those days,--but none of us finished our
drill; for, in July of the same year, an order was issued, permitting
such men as chose to extend their services, to volunteer into the line,
in order to recruit the army then destined for Holland. We had
previously marched from Chelmsford to Colchester, a distance of
twenty-one miles, which march was to me, I think, the severest I ever
underwent; for being young, and totally unaccustomed to any thing like
it, the weight of the musket, bayonet, accoutrements, and knapsack,
appeared, towards the latter end of the march, to be almost intolerable;
but I kept up, although excessively tired. This will show how necessary
it is at all times to accustom troops, destined for service, to move in
such order as they will be expected to do when they take the field--for,
if unaccustomed to the carriage of the knapsack, and to frequent marches
with it for exercise, they will be utterly unable to perform any
movement against, or in the face of an enemy, with that celerity
necessary to ensure success. I volunteered, with several of my comrades,
into the 56th regiment, or Pompadours, so called from their facings
being Madame Pompadour's favourite colour, and we set off (carried in
waggons to accelerate our movements) for Canterbury, which we reached in
two days and one night, having travelled without making a halt; and
there we joined the skeleton of our regiment, just then returned from
the West Indies, where twice, during the war, it had been nearly
exterminated by disease.

In a few days after our arrival, a selection was made throughout the
volunteers for fit subjects for the light company, when, fortunately,
both myself and William Sutherland (who had been in the same company
with me in the militia, and who, from our names and size being so nearly
similar, had always stood next me in the ranks) were chosen for this,
in my mind, honourable service. I felt not a little proud at my
advancement, as I considered it, (and as I believe the generality of
soldiers consider it,) to be made a light-bob.

The regiment had not at this time either arms, appointments, or
clothing; but, being in a few days sent off to Barham Downs, where the
army for Holland was assembled and encamped, we soon after were supplied
with the necessary equipment, and commenced without delay to drill and
get the men in readiness for embarkation. At this time the flank
companies of all those regiments destined for Holland were separated
from their battalions, and formed into what are termed flank battalions.
That in which my company was placed consisted of eleven light companies,
the command of which was given to Lieut.-Col. Sharpe, of the 9th
regiment, an experienced and gallant veteran, who had commanded a
similar battalion in the eastern district, under the Earl of Chatham.
The grenadier battalion was composed of an equal number of grenadier
companies, and belonged to the same regiments to which ours belonged.
Before our arrival on Barham Downs, the first division of the
expedition, under Sir Ralph Abercromby, had sailed; and we soon after
were called out to fire a _feu de joie_ for their capture of the Dutch
fleet, and their having effected a landing and gained a victory near the
Helder. Nothing could be more brilliant than our display upon this
occasion appeared to me--we were nearly 20,000 strong, I imagine, and,
being formed in one extensive line, the firing of the _feu de joie_
produced a fine effect. To my non-military readers, perhaps, it will be
necessary to explain what is termed a _feu de joie_. The usual mode is,
when formed in line, for the fire to commence by signal with the right
file of the whole, and each of those on their left take it up rapidly
in succession, so that, to a looker-on, it has the appearance of a
wild-fire running along the line; but on this occasion we heightened the
effect, by beginning with the right of the front rank only, and when it
had passed along by the front, the left-hand man of the rear rank took
it up, and so it passed along by the rear to the right again. It
appeared to me, at that time, certainly the finest sight I had ever
witnessed. Every heart present was elated with joy, and beat high to be
led on to share in those glorious achievements which we were then
celebrating; but, alas! we were then ignorant that we were as unfit at
that time to suffer the toils and privations of a campaign, as if we had
never seen a soldier; we were all young, and inexperienced in the
highest degree, and our discipline, as might be naturally expected, was
far from good; for, being an army hastily collected from every regiment
of militia in the kingdom, the officers of course neither had that
knowledge of the characters of their men, which is so essential, nor had
the latter that confidence in their officers, which only a service
together for some length of time can engender, and which is absolutely
necessary to secure an unreserved and active obedience to their
commands. But the period of our embarkation fast approached; previously
to which, we were reviewed by his Royal Highness the Duke of York, (who
was destined to command us,) accompanied by several others of the Royal
Family, and by General Sir Charles Grey, my countryman. I believe they
all expressed themselves highly satisfied with our appearance and
movements, and hoped that we would shortly add fresh laurels to those
already gained by our forerunners.

As it was expected to be a service of only a short duration, it was
determined that the men should embark in what is called "light marching"
or "service order," that is, with only about half the usual complement
of necessaries, consequently every soldier had to leave a considerable
portion of his things behind him; and, in order to deposit them safely,
empty casks were procured for each company, into which every man was
ordered to stow his extra things, after being properly packed and
labelled with his name, &c. This rather grieved me, for I had brought
with me from home as good a kit (as the soldiers term it) as any in the
army. My dear mother had prepared me shirts fine enough for any officer,
and abundance of them, but of those thus left I never saw one
afterwards. During our stay in this camp, I never enjoyed better health
or greater lightness of spirits, forgetful or heedless of the deep and
lasting anguish which my late rash step must naturally inflict upon the
hearts of my tender and affectionate parents; but I was no doubt
stimulated to this thoughtless forgetfulness of them, by witnessing the
animating scenes around me, where all was bustle and high anticipation
of more glorious doings.

We marched from this camp to Deal, where we embarked in transports
already prepared to receive us. As soon as we arrived we were instantly
put on board, but never shall I forget the effect which the sight of the
sea, and such a number of ships of various sizes and descriptions, had
upon me; for before this I had never been near the sea, although I had
marched from the north to the south of England. But, to add to all the
strange things which then met my view, we were instantly on marching
down put into a large boat that lay high upon the beach; which, when
filled with troops, they run down into the sea with astonishing
rapidity, turning my stomach, as we entered the water, completely
topsy-turvy. The effect of all this can better be conceived than
described; we were immediately rowed off to, and put on board our
transport, which happened to be a brig called the Zephyr of Shields.
Here also every thing was quite new to me; but all was met and performed
with the highest spirits, so far as sea-sickness permitted. We remained
on board two or three days before the fleet was ready for sea; but at
length we sailed with a favourable breeze, and in two or three days more
we made the coast of Holland, and soon afterwards came to anchor within
the Texel. Every thing being ready for landing, and the Helder being in
our possession, we disembarked there on the 15th of September, 1799,
having been just one week on board. We were formed on landing near the
town, and waited till some others had disembarked, before we moved off.
Among those regiments which landed, I remember the 35th was one. This
regiment, after coming on shore, was drawn up close to us; they had not
been long landed before the men began with their knives to cut off each
other's hair, which then was worn in the shape of a club; this was done
without any orders from their officers, and appeared to me, I confess,
such a breach of discipline, as I could not have anticipated; for though
on the whole it was an improvement, as later usage has shown, yet I
apprehend for a body of soldiers, without any permission from higher
authority, to take upon them to break through the long-established
custom of the service, was such an utter renunciation of all obedience
to authority, as directly to threaten with destruction the best
interests of the army to which they belonged; however, at such a time it
would perhaps have been attended with still worse consequences to have
made an example of the offenders, although, had stricter discipline been
enforced from the outset, I feel assured the army in general would have
benefited by it.

Towards evening, we moved forward through the town of Helder, and
proceeded on our route towards Schagen, and halted for the night on the
road, and where such as could find houses, of which there were a few
straggling ones in the neighbourhood, got into them. I awoke in the
night, and still fancied myself on board ship; for the wind and rain
were beating violently against the little hovel into which a few of us
had crept, and I imagined it was the dashing of the sea against the bow
of the vessel. Indeed so strong was this imagination, that when I got
up, I literally could not stand steady, not having been long enough on
board, to acquire what is termed my "sea legs;" that is, I had not
learned the art of standing steady when the vessel heeled; and, strange
as it may appear to a person who has never been at sea, I believe most
landsmen have the same feeling for some short time after being put on
shore. We had each man been supplied with a blanket while in camp on
Barham Downs, but had no proper or uniform mode of carrying them; we had
no great-coats, but made use of the blanket sometimes as a substitute in
the morning, when we turned out to proceed on our march. We certainly
made a strange appearance. Some had their blankets thrown around them,
others had them twisted up like a horse collar, and tied over their
shoulders in the manner of a plaid; while some had them stuffed into,
and others tied on to the top of their knapsack; in short, we appeared
like any thing but _regular_ troops. We moved forward as soon as we were
formed, and early in the day reached Schagen-bruck, where his Royal
Highness stood to inspect us as we marched past. Near this place we fell
in with some of the Russian regiments, they having landed nearly at the
same time, and of which nation there were, I believe, about 20,000
troops expected to join our army. But if we appeared irregular and
grotesque, I know not well how to describe them; their riflemen were
shod with boots very much resembling those of our fishermen, coming up
considerably higher than the knee; thus rendering them, I should
imagine, incapable of celerity of movement, one of the chief requisites
in a rifle corps; they also wore large cocked hats and long green coats.
Their grenadiers were dressed more apropos, having high sugar-loaf
shaped caps, mounted with a great deal of brass, and projecting forward
at the top, with long coats, and gaiters reaching above the knee. Their
regular infantry were nearly similar to the grenadiers, only they wore
cocked hats instead of caps. The regiment which we saw on this occasion
had with it, I should think, full half as many followers as soldiers,
some of whom carried immensely large copper kettles; others the
provisions, and others the officers' baggage; in short, these were the
scullions, the cooks, and, as it were, the beasts of burden of the
regiment; but this was a bad system, for it increased by one half the
number of mouths to fill, and must have been attended with the worst
consequences when provisions were scarce. The officers, I remember,
carried what was formerly used in our service, a long sort of pole, with
a head like a halberd, and called, I believe, a "spontoon." This, on
passing a general at a review, the officer twists and twirls around his
head, precisely as a drum-major in our service does his cane. When we
had passed his Royal Highness at the bridge, we moved forward to the
town of Schagen, and took up our quarters in the church. I thought this
extremely odd, as I had been accustomed to view so sacred an edifice
with more reverence than to suppose they would quarter soldiers in it;
but we were stowed in it as thick as we could well be, and made the best
of our quarters; some taking the chancel, others the vestry, and some
the body of the church; nay, some even took up their lodging in the
reading-desk and pulpit. We could contrive to make out the Lord's prayer
in Dutch, but could not well proceed further, although there is much
similarity between that language and the English of my native county.
Here, for the first time, we learnt that our brigade was what was called
the _reserve_, and commanded by Colonel M'Donald of the 55th regiment;
but on this occasion and in Egypt, the reserve was not what is generally
understood by that term, for in both places it was composed of some of
the best troops in the expedition, and was generally first called into
action. On this occasion, the reserve consisted of the 23d Welsh
fusileers, the 55th regiment, the grenadier battalion before mentioned,
and our light battalion.

We remained here till the 18th, when towards evening we were ordered
under arms, having been previously supplied with provisions; and, after
every preliminary was adjusted, we set forward on our march towards the
city of Hoorne, situated on the Zuyder Zee. Of our destination, the men,
of course, were totally ignorant, but no doubt the officers knew. It
turned out that about 8000 troops had been appointed for this service,
the execution of which was intrusted to that gallant old veteran, and
hitherto successful general, Sir Ralph Abercromby. The intention was to
make a rapid and extensive flank movement during the night, and surprise
and capture the said city, while his Royal Highness was to attack the
enemy in front. We moved off as it became dark, but such was the state
of the roads that it became the most trying and distressing march that I
believe ever troops undertook; the roads were literally knee deep in mud
in most places, while every now and then they were rendered nearly
impassable, both by the enemy having broken down the bridges over the
innumerable canals and dikes which intersect this country, and these
canals in many places having overflowed their banks. None but those who
have experienced this or something similar, can form an idea of the
fatigue attending a night march in such a country, where the column is
large. We marched, I think, in sections of about eight file, that is,
with eight men abreast in the front rank, and the like number in the
rear rank covering them. Conceive, then, your arriving at an obstacle
which the darkness of the night multiplies a hundred-fold. Not more than
one man will attempt to pass this obstacle at the same time, and he has
to grope his way; consequently all the other fifteen men must stand
still, or nearly so, till he is over, before they each move on in turn.
Multiply this by the 300 sections behind, and you will have a halt for
the rear of probably an hour or more; standing all this while nearly up
to the knees in mire; or, what is worse, as each regiment has
accomplished the task of getting over, this of course causes the others
in the rear to be drawing up towards it by degrees, so that probably you
are compelled to stand (or, if you choose, you may lie down in the mud)
for a quarter of an hour, or more perhaps; and then move on again for
the space of a few hundred yards, and then another halt; so that could
you lie down to enjoy a little rest, the constant cry of "forward"
resounding in your ears, just as you begin to close your eyes, renders
it the most tiresome and trying situation that I know of. It is true,
the head of the column does not suffer in an equal proportion with those
in the rear, or a night march in an enemy's country would be a dangerous
operation.

During this march, I remember, when the road was extremely deep, some
one on the right of my section called out that there was an excellent
path a little beyond him; when one poor fellow moved in that direction,
but had not made many steps, till souse he went into a deep canal.
Whether the man who called out had been actually deceived by the smooth
surface of the water, which appeared in the dark like a nice level
road; or whether he did it through mischief, I know not, but the poor
simpleton who followed his advice paid dearly for his curiosity, being
with some difficulty extricated from his uncomfortable situation. I may
observe that these canals or dikes skirt both sides of every road in
this part of Holland, and are even made use of as fences for the fields,
there not being any hedges or walls that I remember to have seen.

About break of day we reached the city, which at once surrendered; but
just before daylight, I became so excessively weary that I could not
continue in the ranks any longer; indeed men had been dropping out for
some hours before, so that, I suppose, when the head of the column
reached Hoorne, one half the number had fallen out; for it was beyond
the powers of human nature to sustain such excessive fatigue. I, with
two or three others, got behind a house that stood by the roadside, and
laid ourselves down on a paved footpath which led from the back-door.
Never in my life did I experience a greater luxury than this appeared to
be, where something hard, and that would keep me out of the deep and
filthy mire, could be found to rest upon.

I laid me down and slept as soundly as ever I did in my life for about
an hour, which quite refreshed me. We then got up and set off with all
despatch to overtake the column, which we came up with and joined just
as they halted after reaching the city. None of the troops entered the
place, I believe; but my battalion being towards the rear of the column,
was at a considerable distance from it. All now lay down to rest, and
such as had houses near them occupied them; but those who had not, chose
the driest parts of the canal bank or road, and all were soon buried in
profound sleep, excepting those who were placed on guard.




CHAPTER II.

     The Russian Allies carry Bergen--Allow themselves to be
     surprised, and the whole Army forced to retire to their former
     position--Skirmishing in the vicinity of Old Patten--The
     Russians endeavour to force their way back to Bergen--The
     Russian and British Forces joined--The Enemy forced to abandon
     Egmont-op-Zee--Alkmaar surrenders--The Troops advance to Egmont
     Binnen--Skirmishing--General Engagement--The Enemy
     repulsed--The Forces retire to Zaand Wyck--Armistice
     concluded--Return to England.


From daylight we had heard a heavy and constant cannonade towards our
right and rear. His Royal Highness, with the remainder of the army, as
was before intimated, had moved forward and attacked the main body of
the enemy; but as I did not witness this action, I forbear to relate
what I heard concerning it, further than this, that the Russians who
attacked the enemy posted in the neighbourhood of Bergen, having by some
mismanagement allowed themselves to be surprised after having carried
that village, the whole army had been obliged to retire to their former
position. In consequence of this failure, I believe, we were ordered
towards evening to fall in, and (what appeared annoying in the extreme)
to retrace our weary footsteps by the same dirty road by which we had
advanced. Nearly the same fatigue and misery were endured as in our
advance; but the column did not keep so much together as before, the men
falling out by hundreds, so that the stoppages were not quite so great.
We did not return to Schagen after our retreat, but were cantoned in
some villages in front of that town; and a few days afterwards we were
moved to the right of Schagen, through Schagen-bruck, to a farm hamlet
called Zaand Wyck.

Here we remained till the 1st of October; but I should not omit to
mention, that we had, during the intervening period, several marches,
all of which were made by night, and in which similar sufferings and
fatigue were endured as in the march to Hoorne. This, it may probably be
remembered, was one of the wettest autumns almost upon record; and in
these marches we generally had the full benefit of the torrents which
fell in this naturally wet country. I have actually seen the water
running out at the bottom of the men's trowsers like that from the
gutter which carries the rain from the roof of a house. When we had not
a night march, we invariably had to be at our alarm post an hour before
daybreak,--and that being about four miles distant from our quarter at
this time, we never had what may be called a full night's rest.

Military men will know that the custom of being at the alarm post before
daybreak is almost universal; for, that being the usual time of attack,
it behoves those who are apprehensive of a visit from the enemy to be on
the look-out, and to be prepared to receive them when they come--here
they remain, till, as the vulgar phrase goes, "You can see a white horse
a mile off," that is, till it is clear daylight, and they have
ascertained that no enemy is in the neighbourhood; after which, if all
be quiet, they retire to their quarters. Our accommodations at Zaand
Wyck may be said to have been good, for our officers had a farm-house to
live in, and we had a good dry barn and other outhouses to lie down in;
and in which I enjoyed some comfortable nights' lodgings. But on the 1st
of October, in the afternoon, we were ordered to fall in, it having
been previously intimated to us that we might probably have a brush with
the enemy.

We were, of course, all life and glee on receiving the information, and
the usual quantity of provisions having been issued, and every other
preparation made in the night, we moved off by the same road by which we
had usually advanced to our alarm post. This we passed, and then entered
a most unpleasant country to march through; it being nearer the enemy,
of course all bridges and other communications had been destroyed. As we
moved on, a little after daylight we were overtaken by the 11th light
dragoons, on which we were ordered to open to the right and left to let
them pass us. They seemed in high spirits, and some of them cried out,
as they passed us, "Go on, my lads, lather them well, and we'll come up
and shave them."

Sir Walter Scott mentions this saying as made use of by some of the
cavalry at Waterloo, as if it were at that time new; but I can assure
him it is as old as 1799, if not much older, for I certainly heard it
used on this occasion, and I know not but it may have been said long
before. The cavalry inclined, after passing us, to their left, while we
kept down towards the sea; and soon after, on ascending a small
eminence, we got a view of the village of Old Patten, where we
discovered about 10,000 or 12,000 of our army drawn up near the
sea-beach. We passed them, and moved forward in the direction of a high
range of sand-hills, which commenced about a mile beyond the village,
and which overlooked all the plain below. Here the enemy was posted, and
I was told that they began as soon as we were within reach to cannonade
us; but from the heads of the men in front, I could not perceive any
appearance of such cannonade, nor do I believe that any of their shot
reached us. A little farther on, however, we met a Russian yager, or
rifleman, coming back and holding out his hand, which had been wounded,
and from which the blood was flowing pretty copiously.

This was the first blood that I had ever seen as drawn in hostile
conflict, and it certainly produced a somewhat strange effect upon me;
it showed plainly that we were in the immediate vicinity of that enemy
we had so often talked about, and whom we hoped to conquer; that now the
time had arrived which would infallibly prove what every man, boaster or
not, was made of; and that it might happen that it was my lot to fall.
Having reflected (rather confusedly I own) on the passing scene before
me, and offered up an occasional prayer to Him who alone can cover the
head in the day of battle, we now approached the bottom of this sandy
eminence, when my company was ordered to unfix bayonets, (for we had
previously primed and loaded,) and dash on at double quick time till we
came in contact with the enemy. No time was left for reflection now, the
immediate duty we had to perform occupied all our attention fully; we
soon got into a smart fire from the enemy's riflemen, which we found was
the only description of troops, except a few artillery, that we had to
contend with, their main bodies of heavy infantry being on the right and
left of this sandy range, which in some places was about a mile in
breadth, in others more or less.

After the fight had fairly commenced, we kept but little order, owing
partly to the want of discipline and experience in our people, and
partly to the nature of the ground, which was rugged and uneven in the
extreme, being one continued range of sand-hills, with hollows more or
less deep between them; and partly it may be attributed to the ardour of
our young men, who pressed on perhaps too rapidly. We continued to
advance, and never once made a retrograde movement, the enemy regularly
retiring from height to height on our approach; but they had greatly
the advantage over us in point of shooting, their balls doing much more
execution than ours; indeed it cannot be wondered at, for they were all
riflemen, trained to fire with precision, and armed with a weapon which
seldom fails its object if truly pointed; while we were (what shall I
say) totally ignorant of that most essential part of a soldier's duty.
They consequently suffered little from our fire; but we could not
believe this, and tried to persuade ourselves they had either buried
their dead in the sand before we came up to them, or carried them off as
they retreated; but experience has since taught me to know that we then
must have done them little harm.

About the middle of the day, as I and a young man of the name of Thomas
Bambrough (a countryman of my own, and who had volunteered with me,)
were moving on in company, in passing through one of the valleys to an
opposite height, we were assailed by a little volley from a group of the
enemy which we discovered on a hill in front of us; one of which shots
took effect in poor Bambrough's thigh just about the ham; he instantly
fell, and roared out most piteously; I laid down my musket and
endeavoured to hoist him on my back, in order to take him out of the
fire, which they now poured in without intermission; but in this I
failed, for he was so completely disabled by the wound, as to be
rendered totally helpless, and it was so extremely painful that he could
not bear the least movement.

I felt constrained to leave him, although I did so with reluctance,
telling him that I would push on to the height we had first in view, to
which I then perceived some more of our men had advanced, and would
drive the enemy from their position; of course all this was not
literally told him, but something to that effect was said; and I found
that the moment I left him they ceased to fire on him; and, as I
promised, we did drive off the enemy. Shortly after, some of our own
people came up to where poor Bambrough lay, and carried him off to the
rear; he was sent to an hospital, where he soon after died, they not
being able, I understand, to extract the ball. Soon after this, there
were some tremendous volleys of musketry heard on our left, apparently
down in the plain below us. I, with one or two others, now inclined a
little towards the left, in order to have a peep at the troops there, so
hotly opposed to each other, in doing which, we still kept our line in
front of the enemy's skirmishers.

We found it was the Russian army endeavouring to force their way towards
the village of Bergen, the scene of their former disaster; but they were
most distressingly retarded by the innumerable canals or ditches, by
which the country was so intersected, and which were generally
impassable by fording. On some occasions I could perceive, when they had
found an entrance into an enclosure, and had fought their way to the
farther side of it, they were obliged to retrace their steps, and get
out by the same way by which they had entered, the enemy all this while
pouring into them a close and destructive fire. This appeared to me to
be most trying to their patience, and very disheartening; but they bore
it with great steadiness.

Meantime, our own heavy troops were advancing on the right by the
sea-beach, where was a plain of sand, of perhaps from 100 to 200 yards
in breadth; the sand-hills between the two wings, as I said before,
being swept by us, assisted by a small corps of Russian riflemen. We
moved on till we got a little in advance of the Russian army, (which,
from the obstacles they had to contend with, did not make very rapid
progress,) and immediately over the village of Bergen, which stood on
the plain, close under the sand-hills. Here, the enemy being in
possession of considerable field-works, plied us pretty plenteously
with shells from their howitzers, (their guns they could not elevate
sufficiently to reach us,) but from which we suffered very little; for
our people being much extended, and the sand being deep, the bursting of
the shells was attended with very little mischief. Indeed, for a long
time, I did not know what they were; for, having several times heard a
loud explosion pretty near, I actually looked round to see the gun,
which I imagined had fired, but could perceive nothing but a cloud of
smoke rising from the spot, and the small bushes and herbs about it on
fire. I thought it strange, and it was not till it was several times
repeated, that we discovered what it really was, for my comrades were
equally ignorant with myself.

At length, towards the close of the afternoon, a loud and heavy fire of
musketry broke out on our right, which continued for a considerable
time, and then ceased. This was our heavy infantry, who had advanced by
the sea-shore, and who had now approached the village of Egmont-op-Zee,
where the enemy made a most determined stand, but at last were driven
back with great slaughter, and our people took possession of the town.
From this place the battle derives its name. A little after dark, the
enemy abandoned Bergen also, so that we ceased any longer to be annoyed
by their shells, which they continued to throw while they held
possession of the place. But a short while before they retired, one was
thrown, which pitched just close over my company, (for we had then been
collected, and were formed in close order immediately above the town,)
and where Colonel Sharpe and another officer were walking; it lay for a
second or two hissing and burning, and might be expected every moment to
explode. Their road lay close past it; the veteran however took no
notice of it, but continued his walk and conversation the same as if
nothing had occurred, and without going an inch out of his way. It
burst with a tremendous report, but fortunately without doing either of
them the least injury. I confess I thought it rather _too brave_; for it
appeared to me that he might have walked a little farther from it, or
stopped for a moment or two without any imputation on his courage; but
people do not all see things exactly alike.

Our loss in this action was but trifling, considering the extent of the
operations. We had in my company only about fourteen or fifteen men
killed and wounded; among the latter were my two countrymen, Bambrough,
as before noticed, and Sutherland. One man of our company, I was told,
in charging a fieldpiece, was struck down by the wind of the ball, and
which, although it did not touch him, brought blood from his mouth,
nose, and ears; he never after thoroughly recovered the effects of it. I
do not remember ever to have felt more fatigued than I did after this
day's work. We had marched before commencing the action, I should think,
twelve miles or more. We had been kept upon the run the greater part of
the day, and had fought over nearly as much more ground, through loose
sand, sometimes nearly up to the middle of the leg, and over ground so
extremely uneven, that a few miles of leisurely walking on such, would
be more than I should be able to accomplish now; and we had been nearly
all the day deprived of every sort of liquid, for our canteens were soon
emptied of what little they contained in the morning, and having myself
fired nearly 150 rounds of ammunition, the powder of which, in biting
off the ends of the cartridges, had nearly choked me. What would I not
have given for a good drink? I felt completely exhausted, and laid me
down with the others with great good-will on the top of one of the
sand-hills. But the night proved extremely wet, so that every one of us
was very soon as completely soaked as if he had been dragged through a
river; and, to crown my misfortunes, I was without a blanket. Here I
must confess my folly, that others similarly situated may profit by my
experience. Soon after the commencement of the action a rumour was
spread along the line of skirmishers, that the Duke, seeing the very
arduous duty we had to perform, had said, "Never mind, my lads, if your
knapsacks are any encumbrance to you, and impede your running, throw
them off, and I will take care you shall be furnished with others." No
sooner did this silly report reach my ears, than I, with many others,
equally simple, believed it, without taking time to consider that if
even it were true, a knapsack and a blanket, (for they were together,)
to be useful should be at hand when wanted. But, simpleton like, away
went knapsack and blanket, and I felt greatly relieved in getting rid of
such a burden, and now pushed on after the enemy with increased vigour,
trying at the same time to persuade myself the report was true; although
I own I occasionally had my doubts on the subject. But night came on, as
I have said, and such a one as I have seldom seen for wet, and then I
plainly perceived that I had played the young soldier.

An officer of ours of the name of Lacy, who had formerly been the
captain of the Northumberland light company, and who volunteered with
us, offered any man half a guinea for the use of a blanket for that
night only, but without being able to obtain one: this will give some
idea of the kind of night it was. I had nothing for it, but just to put
the cock of my musket between my knees, to keep it as dry as possible,
and lay myself down as I was. I endeavoured to get as close as I could
to one who had a blanket, and lay down with my head at his feet, which
he had covered up very comfortably with his blanket. The rain pelted so
heavily and so incessantly on my face, that I ventured after a while to
pull a little corner of this man's blanket just to cover my cheek from
the pitiless storm, and in this situation snatched a comfortable nap;
but he awakening in the night, and finding that I had made free with the
corner of his blanket, rudely pulled it from off my face, and rolled it
round his feet again.

I was fain to lie still and let it pelt away, and even in this exposed
situation I got some sleep, so completely were the powers of nature
exhausted by fatigue. At length morning arose and showed us to
ourselves, and such a group of sweeps we had seldom seen. Our clothing
was literally all filth and dirt; our arms the colour of our coats with
rust; and our faces as black as if we had come out of a coal-pit. In
biting off the ends of the cartridges, there are generally a few grains
of powder left sticking on the lips and about the mouth; these,
accumulated as they must have been by the great quantity of ammunition
each of us had fired, and with the profuse perspiration we were in
during the heat of the day, added to the wet which fell upon us during
the night, had caused the powder to run all over our faces; so that in
the morning we cut the most ludicrous figure imaginable. However we
immediately set about getting our arms again in trim, for though the
enemy had left us masters of the field of action, they were not far
distant from us. We soon got our firelocks again in fighting order; that
is, they would go off, though the brightness, on which a clean soldier
piques himself, was gone past recovery at this time. I now felt rather
sore from firing my piece so often; the recoil against my shoulder and
breast had blackened them, and rendered them rather painful, and the
middle finger of my right hand was completely blackened and swoln from
the same cause.

At this time it was reported that a sad accident had occurred in our
battalion; a soldier of one of our companies, in cleaning his musket,
had by some awkwardness allowed it to go off, and an officer being
immediately in front of where he was standing, the ball had taken effect
upon him, and killed him on the spot.

After getting ourselves brushed up a little, the whole battalion was
brought together, and moved to the right into the town of Egmont-op-Zee,
where the guards and some other regiments had been since the evening
before, after beating the enemy out of it, as I before mentioned. We
remained here for that day, during which Alkmaar surrendered, and then
advanced to the village of Egmont Binnen, or Egmont-op-Hoof, I am not
certain which it is called, a few miles in front, and close by the sea.

I omitted to mention, that our fight of the 2d took place over the
ground from which Lord Duncan's victory derived its name, _i. e._
Camperdown. This headland, I fancy, we must have passed during that
day's operations--But to return. We remained in Egmont Binnen till the
morning of the 6th, when my battalion was ordered to fall in and march
towards the outposts, a few miles in front, in order, as we understood,
to relieve our grenadier battalion, which had been out since the day
before. We advanced by the sea-shore, but had not gone far before we saw
and heard unequivocal signs that we should have something more than
outpost duty to perform; the fact is, the enemy was rapidly advancing,
their force in front having been greatly augmented by reinforcements;
but when about two miles from the village, we met a soldier of the 11th
light dragoons bringing in a French officer, whom he had taken prisoner.
He belonged to the chasseurs-a-cheval, a sort of mounted light troops,
who can act either as infantry or cavalry, as occasion may require. When
we met them, and while they stood talking for a moment, I could not help
thinking it would have made a fine subject for a painting; for the
officer was most superbly dressed in dark green, with a richly
embroidered pouch-belt over his shoulder, and with a deep cut across his
cheek, from which the blood was streaming over an extremely handsome
face; indeed he was altogether a most interesting figure, and,
contrasted with the rough features and haughty bearing of the proud
trooper who had taken him, produced a fine effect. The fellow gave his
horse a slap over the flank with the flat of his sword, and set off with
his prisoner, crying out, that there were plenty more of them to take,
and that he would soon return and bring in another.

As we advanced, we could plainly perceive the enemy in front,
skirmishing with our grenadiers, and we also saw that they possessed a
pretty strong body of cavalry--a species of troops we had not
encountered on the 2d. We could distinctly perceive the cavalry wading
into the sea as far as their horses could go, in order, as we imagined,
to see past the point of a projecting sand-hill, which obstructed their
view of the beach beyond it; but when they perceived that the force
which was advancing against them was not great, they attacked our
grenadiers with increased vivacity, and we soon after came in contact
with them, for they were advancing with as great rapidity as if no force
was in front to oppose them.

We soon perceived that they were nearly four times our numbers, and were
obliged to adopt such a _ruse de guerre_ as is frequently practised by
the weaker party, but which had no effect, I am sorry to say, on this
occasion,--that is, while one part of our force was skirmishing, the
remainder got behind sand-hills a little in rear, and letting the men's
heads just show over their tops, as if standing in columns of
battalions, tried to induce the enemy to believe that each separate body
which appeared was of that force; but no, Johnny (as the soldiers
sometimes call the French) was not so easily gulled, for they had
previously ascertained pretty accurately the strength of our force in
front of them, by the operation of the cavalry before mentioned. They
therefore pressed on us with the most desperate fury, and in
overwhelming numbers.

We maintained the action as well as our limited means permitted, and for
a while kept tolerable order; but as the fight became hotter, and the
disparity of force more apparent, I regret to say, our young troops fell
into considerable disorder and confusion. This giving the enemy greater
confidence, of course he availed himself of it, and attacked us with
redoubled impetuosity; and, I lament to say, our dismayed and
disheartened young soldiers fell from one degree of confusion to
another, till at length all order seemed entirely lost amongst us; and
what was at first a rather regular retreat, became at last a disorderly
flight; for wherever an attempt was made to check the ardour of the
enemy, the immense inequality of force they possessed soon completely
overthrew the few that stood; and many were the brave fellows, both
officers and men, who fell in this unequal contest, without their having
the slightest chance of successfully opposing our impetuous foe.

The flight now became more like a race than any thing else, and I
imagine they drove us not less than three or four miles without giving
us time to breathe; but when we had reached within about a mile of the
village we had left in the morning, we perceived some regiments
advancing to our succour; among them was the 23d, which advanced in
line, and showed so good and steady a front as quite delighted us. We
could also perceive to our left, that the Russians had become engaged
with the force in front of them, and were holding it at bay; indeed by
this time the action had extended considerably into the country, and
some others of the British troops, I understand, were soon engaged.

On the coming up of the reinforcement, the 23d in particular, our
straggling and broken troops, which had been so wofully beaten, now
united, and again advanced upon the enemy; and when the 23d had given
them a volley or two, the French gave way and retreated with as great
precipitation as they had advanced. In short the tables were turned upon
them, and the pursuit of them now was equally rapid with our retreat
before them a short while previously; and before the action ceased, we
had driven them considerably beyond where we encountered them in the
morning. Night scarcely put an end to the action, for the firing
continued long after dark, each party being directed by the fire from
the arms of their opponents; the unwillingness to desist on our part, I
attribute to a desire of revenge for the disgrace they had inflicted on
us in the morning. Towards the evening it came on exceedingly wet.

Nothing could surpass the steadiness and fine appearance of the 23d, on
entering into action; but they were all old soldiers, while our two
battalions were composed altogether, I may say, of volunteers from the
militia, who had as little idea of service in the field, as if newly
taken from the plough. I would just remark here, that from what I have
witnessed upon different occasions, I should never be inclined to put
very much confidence in raw troops of whatever nation, or of what stuff
soever they may be composed, for it is certain, that without being at
all deficient in point of courage, they have not that confidence in
their own powers which soldiers who are inured to service possess; and
if hastily or hotly set upon, while without the aid and example of
others more experienced than themselves, it is many chances to one I
think that they will give way. So it was on this occasion. Nothing could
exceed the materials of which these two battalions were composed, had
they had the advantage of a little more experience; and no troops could
fight better than they did, after gaining the support and countenance of
the old regiments which were sent to reinforce them.

But I confess with shame, we showed a great want of nerve in the early
part of the day, although to any troops the occasion must have been one
of severe trial. When the retreat had degenerated into a flight, and
every one seemed intent only on making the best of his way to the rear,
I, with some others who were among the hills, imagined we could get on
faster if we took to the sea-beach, which, although it also was composed
of deep sand, yet was level, and could not be so very fatiguing as
climbing the innumerable hills over which we had to retreat. Away we
accordingly set for the beach; but we had forgotten to calculate that if
the beach would facilitate our retreat, it also would the enemy's
advance. This we soon discovered, for we had scarcely descended from the
hills when we found ourselves almost surrounded by the enemy; and it was
not without the utmost exertion in our power that we were enabled to
effect our escape, the balls flying thicker about us during our short
stay here than they had done all the day before. My haversack was a
great encumbrance to me on this occasion, for, having lost my knapsack
as before related, I was obliged to stuff every thing I possessed into
this inconvenient bag; which, hanging so low as to knock against my
thighs, greatly impeded my progress to the rear, and had nigh got me
lodged in a French prison.

A girl, who had followed a grenadier belonging to my regiment when he
volunteered out of the militia, accompanied her protector during the
whole of this day's operations, and shared equally with him every danger
and fatigue to which he was exposed, and no argument could prevail upon
her to leave him till the whole business was over, and till the
battalion to which her sweetheart belonged was sent to the rear at
night. I am not certain whether it was his Royal Highness's intention to
have fought this day, or whether the action was brought on fortuitously;
but certainly, although we began the fight under very unfavourable
circumstances, and things looked rather awkward at one part of the day,
no army ever got a more complete drubbing than the French did before the
business terminated. I have since learnt that the action became general
along the whole line towards the close of the day. Thus ended the last
affair between the British and French troops during that unfortunate
expedition.

The next day we fell back upon Egmont Binnen, leaving sufficiently
strong outposts to occupy the ground we had taken, and this day I was
fortunate enough to pick up the shell of an artilleryman's knapsack who
had been killed in one of the late fights; but for necessaries I was
totally destitute, and began soon after to feel the effects of my folly
in throwing away my own. A little before midnight of the evening of the
7th, we were again ordered under arms with all dispatch and without
noise, and had no doubt it was for the purpose of advancing as before,
so as to reach the enemy's line by daylight next morning. How great then
was our surprise and disappointment, when we turned our faces towards
the rear, and filed out of the village by the road leading towards our
old quarters! We moved on in silence till we reached Egmont-op-Zee,
where the flashes from a large coal fire erected by way of lighthouse,
shed a melancholy gleam over our columns as we passed beneath the hill
on which it was erected. Here also by the sea lay innumerable dead
bodies, both of men and horses, together with broken tumbrils and other
sad emblems of the devastation which a few days previously had been made
on this very ground; for here it was that the heat and principal part of
the action of the 2d took place, when the heavy columns of the opposing
armies came in contact with each other. It would not be easy to describe
our feelings as we moved sadly and silently along, knowing, as we now
did, that we were for ever abandoning all the advantages that we had
hitherto gained, after so much toil, privations, and loss as we had
suffered; but it was useless to repine. Our leaders must know better
than we could possibly do, what state the army was in, and what
likelihood remained of effecting the object for which we came into the
country; our duty therefore was to obey, without questioning the
propriety of our present movement, however unpleasant it might be to our
feelings.

We passed by Old Patten, near to which the action of the 2d commenced,
and finally returned to our old quarters at Zaand Wyck, which we reached
some time next day, and where I found my comrade Sutherland, who had
been here for some days; his wound, which was through the shoulder, not
having disabled him from making his way thus far. He had some mutton
already cooked, of which I partook with great relish, for I needed
refreshment much; and after taking a swig out of his canteen, I laid me
down and slept most soundly, rejoiced and thankful that I had so
comfortable a home to return to.

We remained in this quarter only a day or two, and then our brigade was
removed towards the left of the line, which, as well as I remember,
rested upon Kolhorn. My battalion occupied the village of Basingohorn,
to which we had retired on a former occasion; I mean on our retreat from
Hoorne. This was one of the villages farthest in advance, consequently
it became an outpost. A night or two passed quietly, but on the second
or third night, a firing commenced from the advanced sentries all along
the line. Whether the enemy had merely been making a reconnoissance, or
whether they had intended to advance in force, and our discovering them
altered their plan, I know not, but think the former the more probable;
but be as it may, it had the effect of turning out our whole line of
outposts, which, as might be expected, prepared to give them the best
reception we were able. I remember on this occasion putting in two balls
when we were ordered to load, as I was determined not to spare them, for
I (with all my comrades I believe) felt sore at having been obliged to
yield up all the advantages we had gained, to an enemy which we
certainly did not consider as having fairly won them from us in action,
but who were more indebted to the severity of the weather, producing
such disastrous consequences on our young army, than to their prowess in
the field. They retired, however, without giving us an opportunity of
welcoming them in the manner we intended. A few days after this, on the
19th October, it came to my turn to be one of the advanced sentries.
About break of day, while musing of many things, of home with all its
comforts, and contrasting it with my then rather uncomfortable
situation, I was suddenly aroused from my reverie by the beating of
drums and sounding of trumpets and music, &c., all along the French
line. I could not conjecture the cause of all this, for although it is
customary to sound and beat the reveille at this hour, yet never having
heard the French do so before, I concluded something more than ordinary
had occurred to cause them to do so on this occasion, and I need hardly
inform my reader that I kept a good look-out, in order that they should
not catch us napping. In a short while, however, the mystery was cleared
up; for an officer of ours came round all the advanced sentries to tell
us, that, as an armistice had been concluded, we were not any longer to
prevent the country-people from passing and repassing, as we had
formerly had orders to do. I imagine the festive noises which I heard
arose from this circumstance having taken place, for I believe the
French were tired enough of the business, although they had now become
in some measure the assailants; or else the cessation of hostilities
allowed them to resume their wonted custom of beating the reveille in
the morning.

Seeing we had failed in our attempt to wrest the country from the
French, and that no hope now remained of our ever being in a condition
to effect it, the prospect of returning home once more became a pleasing
consideration, and I fully gave way to it. My comrades also now began to
turn their thoughts homeward, and cheerfulness once more beamed on
countenances which for some days past had been rather gloomy. But by
this time the dysentery had made sad ravages among our young and
inexperienced soldiery, for on a day soon after this, we could in my
company muster on parade only eighteen men out of one hundred, of which
it was composed at the outset. This inefficiency was caused principally
by disease, although we had certainly lost a fair proportion in the
field. It was therefore well that our removal to a more favourable soil
was about speedily to take place; and wisely had his Royal Highness
acted in agreeing to evacuate a country, the climate of which had been
so extremely prejudicial to his army. About this time also, I began to
have my personal trials and sufferings; for now I began to feel the full
effect of my folly on the 2d inst., in throwing away my knapsack, for I
had not a change of any description, and the consequence may be easily
conjectured. Filth and vermin now began to add poignancy to my other
sufferings, but I bore up against them all as well as I was able; and I
have reason to thank God, that the strength of a good constitution
enabled me to continue my duty without yielding for one day to the
accumulated effects of these disagreeables. Soon after this also, the
good people of England, commiserating our uncomfortable situation, sent
out presents of flannel shirts and shoes, which arrived most
opportunely. I was not fortunate enough to obtain one of the former
necessary articles, but my sergeant kindly put me down for a pair of
shoes, of which I stood in great need, and now beg to return my best
thanks to the kind friends who sent them, although at the time we
expected we should have to pay for them. In a short while after this,
the grenadiers and light battalions were broken up, and each company
returned and joined its own proper regiment. We joined ours (the 56th)
at a weeshaus (or poorhouse), situated on the great canal which connects
this part of Holland with Alkmaer, and not far from Schagen-bruck. Here
we were occupied for a few days in putting things in the best order we
could, previous to our embarkation.

About the 3d November we marched for the Helder, from whence we went on
board. On our way down, one of my comrades, who was not over scrupulous
in expressing his sentiments, was railing bitterly against the
mismanagement (as he imagined) of the expedition, and saying, "he hoped
the next time we came to that country, should we ever come again, that
we would leave it under more favourable circumstances." General Manners
(to whose brigade we now belonged) was riding close behind, unknown to
this complainer, and overheard every word he said. When the soldier had
finished, the General most good-naturedly rode up to him, and began to
argue the matter with him. "Why," says he, "although we are leaving the
country, it is not from the enemy having compelled us to do so from his
superior bravery or success in the field, for we have fought only five
actions since landing, and in four of these we have been the conquerors;
it is owing solely to the great sickness and consequent inefficiency of
the army that we have been compelled to this measure." I could not but
admire the affability and kindness of the General, and was fully
satisfied myself, and so were all who heard him, of, I believe, the
justness of the remarks he made. We reached the Helder the same day,
where we remained doing duty till the 10th November, on which we
embarked on board his Majesty's ship Romney, of fifty guns, commanded by
Captain Lawford, (afterwards by Sir Home Popham.) She was only a small
vessel of her class, and yet our whole regiment was put on board her; we
indeed were not very strong, but she was crowded beyond measure, for
many, nay, most of the troops had not literally lying room, each company
having barely the space between two guns, which, I should think, is not
more than twelve feet at the utmost, and even here the sailors, whether
with or without orders I know not, slung their hammocks over us. I
particularly remember this being the case, for I had the second night,
by way of securing room to stretch myself, lain down between decks early
in the evening, and had had some little repose, when a sailor, whose
hammock was slung right over me, and while standing and making it, put
his foot right on my cheek, and stood there till he had finished. I know
not whether he knew that it was a human head he was treading on, but I
judged it best to be as quiet as possible; preferring the pain of
bearing his weight on my head, rather than, by moving or crying out, to
incur the risk of his foot slipping, and peeling the skin off my face.
The voyage was fortunately short, for in seven days we landed at
Yarmouth, glad and rejoiced that this unpleasant and ill-fated
expedition was terminated. I know not whether my reader is old enough to
remember the autumn of which I have been speaking, but to me it appeared
one of the wettest and most uncomfortable that I ever remember; and it
was here, while exposed to its effects, that were laid, most probably,
the seeds of that severe pulmonic affection from which I have since
suffered so much.




CHAPTER III.

     Arrive in England--The Pompadours embark for Ireland--Arrive at
     Kinsale--Privations in Ireland in 1800--Peace concluded--Our
     Author resolves to return home, but ultimately volunteers into
     the Rifle Corps or 95th--Embarks for England, and joins his
     Regiment at Sussex--Is promoted.


We landed at Yarmouth on the 17th November, and the next day marched to
Norwich, where we remained a few days, and where we found the people
remarkably kind and attentive to our comforts; and, indeed, we now cut a
most sorry figure, being literally nothing but rags and dirt; it was
certainly a sad tax on the good landlords on whom we were billeted, to
be compelled to find us lodgings, for we never left the beds unoccupied
by some of the uncomfortable companions of our travels when we arose in
the morning. I here began to find myself very unwell, for though I had
borne up against sickness in the field, I could not now receive my food
without feeling the most afflicting nausea, my stomach being completely
out of order; and it was no wonder, for we had been compelled for
several weeks past to drink the brackish water of the ditches of
Holland, no springs (that ever I saw) being there to be found, and the
little water in their wells, when we arrived in the country, being
speedily exhausted. We had also been deprived of salt nearly all the
time of our sojourn in that country, one of the greatest privations that
I know of. Through the nursing of my kind landlady, however, I gradually
regained my appetite, and with it my health, for which I have reason to
be truly thankful to Him who has ever dealt so mercifully with me.

In a few days we left Norwich on our route to Chelmsford, and on our way
passed through Bury St Edmunds, where my late regiment, the
Northumberland militia, was quartered; they vied with each other in
showing us kind attentions, but our miserable appearance put the
soldiers of this regiment sadly out of love with the regular service.

We did not remain at Chelmsford long, but marched again for Horsham in
Sussex, on which occasion I for the first time had a view of the
metropolis, as we passed through it, by way of Whitechapel and London
Bridge, &c. At Horsham we were quartered during the remainder of this
winter. About the 10th or 12th of February 1800, we marched for
Portsmouth, where we embarked for Ireland on the 14th. On this occasion
the regiment was put on board two first-rate frigates; the Endymion was
that on which the left wing went on board, but I do not recollect the
name of the other. An agreement was entered into between the two
captains, I understood, to sail for fifty guineas, they both being
considered fast vessels; our destination was Cork; they were to start
together, and the first there of course to be the winner.

We sailed with a favourable breeze, and got on most delightfully,
having, soon after sailing, parted from our antagonist, and passing, if
I recollect right, inside the Isles of Scilly, we in a few days drew
near our destined port. But on the 19th, as we were pushing on with all
our might, having every stitch of sail set, a squall came on so
suddenly, that, before she could be stripped of her superfluous
clothing, she was actually running bows under water, the sea entering
the bow-ports, and making its way along between decks, like to wash
every thing away before it. At this time the log was hove, and we were
going at the (I believe) unparalleled rate of fifteen knots an hour. But
unfortunately for our captain, the vessel was completely driven out of
her course, and towards evening we entered the harbour of Kinsale, thus
losing the fifty guineas, although we were no doubt the better sailer.

This was the first gale I had experienced, and I did not relish it; but
when we entered the harbour, where the water was quite smooth, the
sensation I felt was most delightful, after having been buffeted most
violently by the sea without. The next day we landed, and were billeted
in Kinsale, and here I had the first view of Irishmen and Irish manners.
I need not attempt to describe them; for could I, so many have done it
before me, that the subject is almost exhausted. In a day or two after
landing, we marched to Cork, where the right wing had been landed, and
with which we of course formed a junction.

We remained in Ireland from this time till the peace of 1802 was
concluded, and were quartered successively in the towns of Cork,
Kilkenny, Clonmel, Fermoy, and Kinsale; but as there was nothing which
could interest a reader that occurred to me during this period, I shall
pass it over in silence, save mentioning the following:--In the year
1800, it is well known the utmost distress was experienced by the poor
of both countries, a scarcity, the effects of the wet harvest of 1799,
having grievously afflicted all the British dominions. But in Ireland,
the sufferings of the poor were great, beyond the conception of an
Englishman who has not witnessed them, and many hundreds of them, I
believe, actually perished of want.

But my tale relates more immediately to my own sufferings and those of
my comrades; for we had then but what was termed a "black shilling a
day," that is twelve pence Irish, an English or white shilling, or Hog,
going in that country for thirteen pence; we had not then any beer money
either, but had solely this black shilling to subsist on. Meat at this
time was no less than 10d. per lb., of which each man received half a
pound; bread was 5d. per lb., of which we also got half a pound. This
half pound of bread, and half pound of meat, and that not of the best,
was all we had to live on, and do our duty, which was not always of the
easiest description. The remainder of our shilling was taken to furnish
necessaries, washing, pipeclay, &c., for I do not remember that we ever
laid in any sort of vegetables for the pot. Potatoes were out of the
question, for they were no less than three shillings a stone of fourteen
pounds.

Although we did not absolutely suffer want, the reader will perceive
that we were but sparely dieted; the consequence was, innumerable
robberies of potato fields, and gardens, &c., in the neighbourhood of
our quarters; and many were the men that got punished for this crime,
but it could not be put a stop to, for hunger is not easily borne.
Indeed, on one occasion, I myself was seduced, by the persuasion of my
comrades and by the cravings of hunger, into the commission of this
crime. I remember well I was on what was termed the Commissariat guard,
a short distance from the town of Fermoy, when my companions, thinking
it a favourable opportunity for procuring something to eat, prevailed
upon me to accompany them to a garden near the bridge, into which we
entered, and each of us returned loaded with a fine cabbage, and which
afforded us an excellent meal after our relief from guard. It is
impossible to justify such an act, but the reader will be convinced, I
trust, that sheer hunger alone urged me to the perpetration of this
crime. Others, I have no doubt, were equally ill off, who did not resort
to such disgraceful means of satisfying their hunger, but bore it with
patient resignation. I believe that such was the case, and take shame to
myself for yielding either to the calls of nature or the solicitations
of my companions, some others of whom were not so scrupulous. During
this distressing season I sold a watch which had formerly been my
father's, and with which I felt extremely loath to part. I also received
a little money from home, all, or nearly all, of which was expended in
procuring food.

The hedges and fields, &c. in the vicinity, were ransacked in all
directions, for the purpose of procuring bramble-berries, nettles, &c.
&c.; in short, for any thing that was eatable. Such was our situation
during several months, while under the command of Lieut.-Col. Skinner,
who, although an excellent officer, had little idea of disposing of a
soldier's pay to the best advantage; but latterly we were commanded by
Major Keating, who, making the comfort of the soldiers under his command
his continual study and delight, soon adopted a system which secured to
us plenty in comparison of our former state. He left off the meat and
bread save occasionally, and procured for us plenty of oatmeal and milk,
by which means our wasted bodies began shortly after to resume quite
another appearance.

We were quartered at Lap's Island, in Cork, when the news arrived of
peace having been concluded; and as the bulk of the regiment had
volunteered from the militia for five years, or during the war, measures
were taken for discharging all those who did not re-enlist either into
their own or other regiments. My mind was fully made up to return home;
for although, as I said before, I never repented of having entered the
regular service, yet I knew that the anxiety of my dear parents for my
return was so great, that I had settled it fully in my own mind to leave
the army.

Another reason operated with me partly in forming this resolution--I had
persuaded myself that I ought to have been promoted--for I judged myself
fully capable of conducting the duties of a non-commissioned officer,
and I flattered myself my conduct had been generally unexceptionable;
but I was disappointed, for the great numbers in my company, who were
judged both more deserving and better qualified, and withal
better-looking soldiers, put it out of the question for me to look
forward to promotion.

I was in this state when an officer and a party of the Rifle corps
arrived at Cork, to receive such of the men of the different regiments
then about to be discharged, as chose to volunteer, for this novel, and,
as some thought, dangerous service. I cannot account for the impulse
with which I was urged on, from the moment I had seen one of the men, to
enter this corps. Something strange seemed to push me on, contrary to
the full determination to return home, which had possessed me an hour
before. I will not attempt to account for it, but such was the fact. I
immediately, with some others of my regiment, gave in my name as a
volunteer for the Rifle corps, and was in consequence in a day or two
sworn into that corps, in which I have ever considered it an honour to
serve, and which I have reason to thank a kind and overruling Providence
I ever entered.

No news of course could be so afflictive to my dear parents, as to hear
of the last rash and irretrievable step which I had taken. It had
wellnigh broken their hearts, for they fully calculated on my returning
home, as I had written to that effect. Judge then of their surprise and
sorrow, when they learnt that I had entered, what was deemed by some, a
condemned corps, and that for life--and that the West Indies would no
doubt soon be my grave.

On my leaving the 56th, the officers of my company expressed their
regret that I should quit the regiment, and told me, that although the
mode hitherto pursued of keeping all the best-looking men in the light
company had kept many from obtaining promotion, who otherwise would have
been made non-commissioned officers, yet that mode was no longer to be
adhered to, and that I might shortly expect to be promoted into another
company, if I would consent to remain. I thanked them, and told them I
had made up my mind, on which they each gave me a certificate as to
character, &c., recommending me to the officers of my new corps, and
which were of service to me afterwards.

The sergeant who had been sent to receive us, at once became my stanch
friend, and employed me, as the party was now become pretty strong, to
act as a non-commissioned officer. Every thing went on quite smoothly,
and I felt happy in my new corps, and in my new employment.

We marched soon after to Waterford, and thence to Passage, and there
embarked for the Isle of Wight, and without encountering any remarkable
event arrived at Cowes on the 27th June, 1802; here we remained a day or
two, and then marched for the regiment in Sussex. We found them at East
Bourne, although Blatchington was their quarter, but they had been sent
out of it on account of the assizes or election, I do not remember
which.

We immediately commenced our light drill, in which I took great delight;
but most of all I liked the shooting at the target. As recruits, we were
first drilled at what is termed the horse, _i. e._ a machine to assist
young riflemen in taking aim. At this I pleased my commanding-officer so
much the first time I tried, that he ordered me to the front, and told
me to load, and fire at the target. I did, and made a pretty good shot,
hitting pretty near the bull's eye; on which he made me load again and
fire, and hitting that also, he made me go on till I had fired ten
rounds, all of which hit the target, and two of which had struck the
bull's eye. The distance indeed was only fifty yards, but for a recruit,
that is, a person unaccustomed to rifle-shooting, he called it a
wonderful exhibition, and in consequence he gave me sixpence out of his
pocket, and ordered me home. I thought the reward quite inadequate, so
natural is it for us to overrate our own deservings.

This officer (Major Wade) was one of the best shots himself that I have
almost ever seen. I have known him, and a soldier of the name of
Smeaton, hold the target for each other at the distance of 150 yards,
while the other fired at it, so steady and so accurate was both their
shooting.

I continued to maintain my character as a good shot, which in a rifle
corps is a great recommendation, and proceeded in acquiring a knowledge
of my other duties with such steadiness as obtained the approbation of
my officers. We soon after marched to Chatham--and while there, several
non-commissioned officers being employed on the recruiting service, I
was employed in doing the duty of one, having been appointed what is
termed a "chosen man."

I must record the manner of my appointment. An acting-sergeant was doing
the duty of pay-sergeant of our company, but he took it into his head to
go all wrong, spending the money intrusted to him for the payment of the
men. He of course was deprived of the situation; and on this occasion it
was, that the officer commanding the company came to me one day, and
said to me, "Surtees, I shall be _forced_ to make you a chosen man." I
thanked him, but could not help reflecting on the strange mode of
expressing himself which he had adopted. The fact is, I believe, without
thinking about the opinion I must form of the compliment he was paying
me, he had been indeed forced to it, for he had no one to pay the
company besides; and as I was not yet dismissed from the drill, it was
an unprecedented measure. But he need not have told the _whole_ truth on
this occasion, for I should have been no worse a non-commissioned
officer, had he been more complimentary; but he was a _plain_ man, and
not much given to compliment.

On our march hither, some of the men broke into the plate chest of the
officers' mess, while the baggage stopped in Maidstone; one man was
discovered, and tried for it, and sentenced to receive 800 lashes, all
of which he took at one standing, and that without evincing much
suffering; this was the most I ever saw inflicted at one time.

We marched again from Chatham in September, and on the 2d of October
arrived at Thorncliffe. While here, my parents interested Mr Beaumont,
M.P. for my native county, to solicit my discharge from the Honourable
Colonel Stewart, my then commanding-officer, they paying the regulated
sum to the government. The colonel sent for me, and talked with me on
the subject, and argued most forcibly in favour of my remaining in the
regiment, saying he had intended to promote me the first vacancy; and
that he had no doubt whatever of seeing me one day an officer. I own my
views were not so sanguine; but his reasoning prevailed, and I consented
to remain. Soon after, an opportunity offering, I was appointed corporal
on the 24th of the same month.

Here again I had disappointed my beloved and tender parents, for it was
not without considerable trouble and difficulty they obtained the
interference of Mr Beaumont, and now I had again thrown cold water on
all their endeavours to obtain my discharge. I fear I have much to
answer for, as respects my conduct towards them. May God forgive me!




CHAPTER IV.

     Made Pay-sergeant--Moral Reflections--Wreck of a Dutch East
     Indiaman--Reduced Officers--War with France in 1803--Encampment
     at Thorncliffe under the command of General Sir John
     Moore--Encampment broke up, November, 1804--Embark for Germany,
     October, 1805--Vicissitudes at Sea--Land at Cuxhaven--March to
     Bremen--Outposts established--Retrograde movements, in
     consequence of the defeat of the Allied Forces at
     Austerlitz--The Allied Forces evacuate Germany--Re-embarkation
     of the troops--The Rifle Corps, or 95th, land at Yarmouth.


Having given satisfaction as a corporal, I was shortly after appointed
acting-sergeant; and in that capacity also, having pleased my officers,
I was, on a vacancy occurring on the 19th of February following,
appointed sergeant, and given the payment of a company. My head was
almost turned by such rapid promotion, and I began in earnest to
contemplate the possibility of my colonel's predictions being one day
verified. Kind Providence watched over me, however, and kept me from
being too much elated, and of committing myself as I otherwise might
have done. Indeed I many times did commit things which, if strictly
searched into, would have brought censure upon me, and lowered the high
opinion that both myself and others entertained of me; but nothing that
openly violated the law by which I was then governed (although many of
God's laws I daily transgressed) was done by me.

I was at this time, although careful to secure the good opinion of my
officers, little solicitous to please Him who had alone lavished all
this bounty upon me. Indeed I believe I was as ungodly at this time as
I ever remember to have been, and yet He caused me to prosper. Oh! how I
ought to feel shame and confusion of face at the recollection of such
abused goodness and mercy! May He pardon me for Christ's sake!

A short while before my appointment as sergeant, a most melancholy
occurrence took place in the neighbourhood of our cantonment. A large
Dutch East Indiaman, outward bound to Batavia, and full of troops, in
passing down channel, mistook, I understand, the light at Dungeness for
one on the French coast, and in consequence stood in towards Dymchurch
wall instead of keeping out to sea. As might be expected, she was not
long in striking on the wall, running with her bow quite close under the
road, and in an instant, almost, went to pieces; and although numbers of
people were early at the spot, and some, I believe, at the very moment
she struck, they could render the unfortunate sufferers no effectual
aid, although only a few yards distant from them. Out of about 800
persons on board, only seven men were saved. Many poor fellows, I
understand, attempted to swim on shore, some on planks, and others
without any aid; but such was the tremendous swell, and the general
destruction of the ship so rapid, that only those seven before mentioned
succeeded; and they not without being all more or less injured by pieces
of the wreck. An admiral, I understood, was on board, and perished;
several beautiful females were afterwards cast ashore among the dead,
the wives or daughters, no doubt, of some on board; they were for the
most part nearly naked, so that it is conjectured they had been in bed.

As might be expected, the allurement to plunder so valuable a wreck was
not resisted by the natives of this part of the coast, but Colonel
Stewart humanely placed strong bodies of the regiment at different
points where the wreck had drifted, to secure as much of the property as
he could for the Dutch government, and also to collect and bring in the
numerous dead bodies which floated along the shore; all of which he had
decently interred in the churchyard at Thorncliffe, and had the poor
wounded survivors taken into hospital, where every care was taken of
them. Indeed nothing could exceed the unremitting attention which he
paid both to the dead and living on this most melancholy occasion, and
for which he received, as he well merited, the thanks of the Dutch
government.

About this period we had several individuals serving in the corps as
soldiers, who had been officers in the army during the late war, but
who, from different causes, had been reduced to the necessity of
enlisting as private soldiers. The first that I remember was a person of
the name of Conway Welch, who, I understood, had been an officer, and I
think the Adjutant of the Surrey Rangers. He got on to the rank of
Corporal, but, being excessively wild, I believe he never attained a
higher rank. I do not remember what became of him.

The second was called Hughes; he was, I believe, when he enlisted,
actually in the receipt of half-pay as a lieutenant of the line. He was
a person of good conduct, and was soon promoted to the rank of corporal,
and the colonel took him for his own private clerk, or secretary, as he
was denominated; but he did not remain long in this situation, for he
was shortly after called upon full pay of his rank in the army. I
believe his case was a singular one.

The third unfortunate individual was of the name of Tait. He had been a
captain in the Caithness Legion, but reduced when the regiment was
broken up at the peace. He conducted himself extremely well for some
time after he came into the regiment, and got on so far as to become
pay-sergeant of a company. But in this situation, having considerable
sums at his command, he became involved through his dissipation, and
being unable to extricate himself from his difficulties, he adopted the
fatal resolution of committing suicide, and accordingly, when quartered
at Woodbridge, he one day retired to his room, loaded his rifle, and
blew out his brains.

The story of the fourth individual is a scarcely less melancholy one.
His name was M'Laughlan. I had known him while serving in my late
regiment, as he had been an officer in the light company of the 35th
regiment, and stood next in the light battalion to the company to which
I belonged. He, shortly before our embarkation for Holland, got
involved, through a gambling transaction I heard, and was in consequence
obliged to dispose of his commission, which, it would appear from this,
he had originally purchased. But interest was made in his behalf, and he
was permitted to accompany his regiment to Holland in the capacity of a
volunteer, and he accordingly assumed the firelock and bayonet in place
of his former weapon, the sword. He was fortunate enough to obtain
another commission before the return of the troops to England, but how
he became deprived of that I have been unable to learn. But about the
latter end of 1803, he enlisted as a private in my corps. His conduct
here was far from good, and he consequently never rose higher, for he
was continually in scrapes from his dissipated habits; and becoming
tired of the restraint laid upon him by the strict discipline which our
excellent commanding-officer enforced, he one day made an attempt to
desert and join the French at Boulogne, and was picked up by one of our
cruisers in endeavouring to cross the channel in an open boat. He was
brought back handcuffed, and lodged in the guard-house one day when I
happened to be sergeant commanding the guard.

As I looked on him, I could not help reflecting on the strange
vicissitudes which attend some men in their passage through life. Here
was a person whom I had known only a few years before while encamped on
Barham Downs, a gay and handsome young officer, moving in the circle of
men of gallantry and honour; and now behold him a wretched culprit,
stretched on the wooden guard-bed, manacled like a felon. In contrasting
his miserable situation with my own so much happier lot, what ample
cause had I for gratitude to that kind and indulgent Providence, which
had preserved me from those excesses, which entailed so much misery on
others. He was shortly after tried by a general court-martial, and
transported as a felon for life. I understand a sister of his was at
Thorncliffe at the time of his trial, &c., the wife of a brevet
lieutenant-colonel in the 4th regiment. What must she have felt!

It will be recollected that, in 1803, war again broke out between this
country and France, as my preceding story had intimated. The army was
consequently augmented again, and my corps, till now called the "Rifle
Corps," was made the 95th. This year a camp was formed on Thorncliffe,
under the command of that able general and excellent man Sir John Moore.
This was termed by some the "Vanguard of England," for here it was that
the then threatened invasion of this country by Bonaparte must most
likely have taken place, it being immediately opposite to the grand camp
then forming at Boulogne. Daily rencontres took place between our
cruisers and his far-famed flotilla; and on one occasion, the belief
that he was sending forth his invincible host was so great, that our
camp was struck, the troops turned out, and received each man his sixty
rounds of ammunition; the waggons and carts were all put in immediate
requisition, and the inhabitants were flying in all directions. But to
our disappointment, I will not say whether disagreeable or otherwise, it
all ended in smoke; it happened to have been some of his flotilla making
a movement along the coast, which had been set on by our cruisers and
pretty roughly handled.

We remained in this camp till the 24th of November, I think, having
occasionally before this period had our tents blown from over our heads
by the autumnal gales. The next year a more formidable camp was formed
on the same ground, the force having been augmented by a second line,
composed of regiments of militia. This year also, like the last, passed
over without witnessing the long-threatened invasion of Old England,
although Bonaparte, in the pride of his heart and the vanity of his
mind, had begun to erect a monument near Boulogne, to commemorate that
glorious achievement. My regiment, on the breaking up of the camp,
marched into Hythe Barracks, where we remained till the month of April,
1805.

In the spring of this year another volunteering from the militia into
regiments of the line was ordered, on which occasion I was selected by
my commanding-officer, Lieut.-Colonel Beckwith, to accompany Lieutenant
Evans, of the regiment, down to my native county, to receive such men of
the militia regiments there as chose to enter the 95th. On this occasion
we were very successful, having obtained between seventy and eighty men
from the different regiments in the north. It was on this occasion that
I had the first opportunity, since I became a soldier, of visiting my
native village, and my greatly-distressed parents and family. I need not
describe the meeting that took place between us, on my first seeing
them--it will be better conceived than told;--suffice it to say, joy
and sorrow were strangely mingled together--joy to see me once more safe
and sound--but sorrow that the line of life I had adopted should so
soon, so very soon, call upon me to part from them again. In fact, I
could only remain with them three days, at the end of which, I had
orders to join my party at Morpeth.

With this respectable batch of volunteers we marched, and joined the
regiment at Canterbury, whither it had been removed during our absence,
and, on our arrival, received the thanks of our commanding-officer for
our exertions. Here, and at this time, a second battalion to the 95th
was formed, the sergeant-majorship of which I was in hopes of obtaining;
but in this I was disappointed, for a sergeant, who was both much older
than me, and had much stronger claims than I could pretend to, was
selected for the situation; and although he did not turn out so well
afterwards as was expected, yet these circumstances ought to have
satisfied me at the time that no injustice was done me by bestowing it
upon him. But such was my folly, and the over-high opinion I entertained
of my own merits, that I could not quietly acquiesce in this most just
arrangement; and foolishly imagining myself ill-used, the chagrin of
which drove me to the adoption of one of the worst expedients possible,
I immediately took to drinking and to the neglect of my proper duties,
thinking, like an ass as I was, that I should thus revenge myself for my
supposed ill-usage, forgetting that it was only on myself that this
revenge could ultimately fall. However, the same good Providence which
has mercifully and so continually watched over me, stepped in to my aid
in this my most dangerous situation; for one day my captain, who had
always been my friend, sent for me, and urged upon me the folly and the
baseness of my present conduct, and the unhappy consequences to myself
that were likely to result from persisting in a course so absurd and
blame-worthy. This, with my own reasoning on the subject, brought me at
length to a better disposition of mind, and induced me once more to
resume my duties with cheerfulness and alacrity.

I have mentioned this circumstance, because I believe I was nearer at
this time to falling into my original nothingness, than I ever have
been, either before or since; and I have no doubt that many an excellent
non-commissioned officer and soldier have been involved in the like
error, who have not been so fortunate as I was in escaping its
consequences.

From Canterbury we marched to Brabourn Lees Barracks, in the same
county, where we remained till some time in October, when we were called
upon to embark for Lower Germany. During our stay at Brabourn Lees, a
circumstance occurred which called forth an exhibition of as great
magnanimity, on the part of Colonel Beckwith, as I almost ever remember
to have witnessed: We had received about 200 Irish volunteers, who were
wild and ungovernable in the extreme; a party of these, in strolling
about one day, had fallen in with Mrs Beckwith, with her maid and child,
taking a walk along the Ashford road. Not knowing, I imagine, who the
lady and her maid were, they set on and assaulted them in the most
violent and outrageous manner, proceeding to such lengths as perhaps
delicacy forbids to mention. It was, I believe, discovered who they
were. Accordingly, the next day, the Colonel formed the battalion into a
square, and proceeded to relate the circumstance to the regiment; "But,"
says he, "although I know who the ruffians are, I will not proceed any
farther in the business, because it was _my own wife_ that they
attacked; but, had it been the wife of the meanest soldier in the
regiment, I solemnly declare I would have given you every lash which a
court-martial might have sentenced you." Such a trait of generous
forbearance is not often met with; but by this, and similar instances of
liberal feeling, he completely gained the heart of every soldier in the
battalion, a thing not always attainable by very excellent
commanding-officers.

About the latter end of October, 1805, we marched to Ramsgate, and there
embarked, as before noticed, for Germany. It was my lot, on this
occasion, to be put on board a small and ill-shaped collier brig, called
the Jane of Shields, but the master I have forgot. She was a most
miserable sailer, making on a wind almost as much lee as head-way, and
in every respect ill adapted for the transport service. We had not been
many days at sea before we lost the fleet, and in our endeavours to find
it again were at one time on the coast of Jutland. All this time we had
been beating against a contrary wind; but while here, the wind became
favourable, and we appeared to have nothing to do but to bear away for
the mouth of the Elbe, which river it was our destination to enter; but
unfortunately, by some mismanagement, we fell quite away to leeward of
it, and got entangled between the mainland and the Island of Wangeroog,
not far from the mouth of Jade River, instead of the Elbe.

While in this uncomfortable situation, it came on to blow a tremendous
gale, which rendered our position not only most unpleasant, but
extremely perilous, for we were embayed, and the wind blowing on a lee
shore, and the vessel became almost unmanageable, her bad sailing
becoming distressingly more apparent the more she was put on her mettle.
In the midst of the confusion attendant on such circumstances, the
master (with what intention I know not, whether to drown dull care, or
to fortify him against his exposure to the watery element) went down
below, and swallowed the best part of a bottle of brandy. In doing
which, his corner cupboard, with all its contents, came rattling down
about his ears. He would fain have had me to pledge him, but I begged to
be excused. The consequence was, he became quite drunk at the time when
all his abilities as a seaman were likely to be called into operation;
but he probably saw things clearest after having his eye wet.

My commanding-officer now became quite alarmed for the safety of the
troops, seeing the master had incapacitated himself, as he conceived,
for the management of the vessel; and, after a consultation among our
officers, an attempt was made to deprive him of the command, and intrust
it to the mate, who had in this case, in order to save as many of the
troops as possible, determined on running the vessel high and dry, as he
termed it, on the sandy beach, near the Jade River.

At this proposal, however, the master stormed and blasphemed like a
madman, swearing there was neither soldier nor sailor on board the ship
but himself. He went so far, and became so outrageous, that our
commanding-officer talked of hanging him up at the yard-arm; but it
being a ticklish thing to take the command of a ship from the person
legally authorized to exercise it, the major did not enforce the wishes
of the officers. The poor mate sat down on the companion and cried like
a child, partly owing to the abuse the captain gave him, and partly, I
imagine, from the hopelessness of our situation. The captain, in his
refusal to yield up the command, told the major he had been several
times wrecked, and had been, I know not how many times, exposed for a
considerable length of time in the water; and that he was not afraid to
encounter it again. This, however, was but poor consolation to landsmen,
who had not been accustomed to such duckings.

A desperate case requires a desperate remedy--so our captain
thought--for he instantly clapped on the vessel the square mainsail,
which every moment threatened to carry away the mast, and in which case,
nothing could have prevented our destruction; however, Providence so
ordered it, that she bore it through the gale, and he, after putting her
on the outward tack, continued to stand from the land till he imagined
he had completely weathered Wangeroog; but at midnight, when he ordered
to put about the ship, had it not been for the cabin-boy providentially
seeing close to leeward of us the light of Wangeroog, we should
instantly have been upon the rocks. This will show either what a bad
sailer the vessel was, or how far the master had miscalculated the
distance; for he imagined himself by this time to be quite clear of all
the land, and considerably out to sea. He continued, after this
providential escape, to stand on the same tack, and just cleared the
island; and in the morning, the wind having somewhat abated, and shifted
a little in our favour, we were enabled, soon after, to lay our course.

We arrived in the Elbe, and landed at Cuxhaven on the 18th of November,
1805, the day on which our fleet there was celebrating the victory of
Trafalgar--clouded indeed it was by the death of the hero who fell while
achieving it--yet glorious to the nation to which that fleet belonged.
We, immediately after landing, marched for Dorum, a village twelve or
fourteen miles distant, and from thence by Osterholtz and Bremer Lehe to
the city of Bremen. On our arrival there, (my battalion forming the
advanced guard,) we found the gates were shut against us; a Prussian
garrison was in the town, the commandant of which seemingly did not
know how to act, whether to admit us as allies, or not, the policy of
his government at that time being so extremely ambiguous. Colonel
Beckwith, who commanded the advance, was not however easily to be
deterred from executing his orders, and he hesitated not to tell them,
that if they did not choose to admit us peaceably, force should be
resorted to to gain an entrance. This had the desired effect, for the
gate was soon after thrown open, and we were received by the authorities
of the town, and by the inhabitants in general, with the warmest
expressions of friendship and cordial attachment; the Prussian officers,
all the while looking on, apparently not over-well pleased with the
conduct of their hosts; they were soon afterwards, however, withdrawn
from the territory, and we then remained sole occupiers of this part of
the country.

Our army assembled in this city in considerable force, when it becoming
necessary to establish outposts in advance, my battalion was sent out
first to the town of Delmenhorst, and subsequently a part of it to the
city of Oldenburg, and the remainder to the town of Wildishausen; to
this latter place two companies were detached, under the command of
Major Travers, and to which he appointed me to act as sergeant-major. We
did not remain long in this situation, but were again recalled from
Wildishausen to Delmenhorst, and afterwards sent to join the other
companies at Oldenburg.

Here we staid some time, during which we experienced the most unbounded
hospitality and kindness from the whole of the inhabitants, but more
particularly from the Duke. He actually did not know how sufficiently to
express his friendly disposition towards our officers in general,--his
kindness also extended to the soldiers,--for when we afterwards
received an order to retrograde again to Delmenhorst, he sent forward to
the half-way house refreshments of every description, for both officers
and men; and the night before we left this hospitable city, he gave a
splendid ball in honour of the officers of our corps, to which, of
course, every inhabitant of a suitable rank was invited. Nay, I heard,
and have no reason to doubt the correctness of the report, that he wrote
to the burgomaster of Bremen, to which city we again retired, to
endeavour, if possible, to have us quartered in his immediate
neighbourhood, in the best part of the town, for that not only the
officers, but the soldiers of the corps, were perfect gentlemen; indeed,
the conduct of the battalion at this time, under its kind and excellent
commanding-officer, was such as to entitle it to the highest praise. Our
retreat on this occasion, I understood, was rendered necessary, in
consequence of the defeat of the allied forces at Austerlitz, and of the
fatal termination by that sanguinary action of the campaign in that part
of Germany.

Although I am no prophet, I predicted at this period what the result
would be to the King of Prussia, whose hesitating and equivocal conduct
kept him aloof from taking an active part, when his co-operation might
have been of the utmost advantage to the general cause. It required no
second sight to perceive, that when Bonaparte could clear his hands of
his present antagonists, he would not hesitate for a moment to turn his
arms against a monarch on whom he could not cordially rely, and whose
dominions offered such a strong temptation to an ambitious and aspiring
mind like his.

We continued to occupy Bremen till towards the beginning of February
1806, when the whole army gradually drew down towards our place of
embarkation, for the purpose of evacuating the country, our stay now
having been rendered useless by the unsuccessful and unfortunate turn
which the allied affairs had taken. My battalion covered the retreat of
the army; but as great numbers of the German Legion, which formed part
of the British force in this country, were deserting and returning to
their homes, we were sent away into the interior to endeavour to
intercept such of them as might pass by the villages we occupied, and
restore them to the army. We took some, but not many; and soon after we
also retired, and went on board at Cuxhaven, and again returned to
England, landing at Yarmouth on the 19th of the same month.

During the whole of my military career, I never witnessed so cordial an
attachment to the British name and character, as was manifested during
this service, by the good people among whom we had been residing.
Nothing was too good for us--and nothing was left undone by them to
render us comfortable and happy. It is true they have their vices like
other people; but barring one or two peculiar to continental nations, I
believe them to be, generally speaking, as moral as any people among
whom it has been my lot to sojourn. But, oh! with what shame and sorrow
do I look back on the part I acted at this period--how profligate and
abandoned was my conduct at the very time that a kind and gracious
Providence was showering its choicest blessings upon me! but, alas, I
paid no regard to the remonstrances of conscience, which I endeavoured
and succeeded in drowning in debauchery and intemperance.




CHAPTER IV.*

     Our Author made Quartermaster-Sergeant of the 2d battalion,
     which he joins at Feversham, Kent--Expedition to
     Denmark--Embark at Deal--Land at Vedbeck, Zealand--Partial
     Engagements--Siege of Copenhagen--A Division under Sir Arthur
     Wellesley advance to Kioge--Copenhagen capitulates--Amnesty
     between the Danish Forces in the Island of Zealand, and the
     British--The British evacuate Denmark--Embark at
     Copenhagen--Arrive in the Downs--Land at Deal.


We landed, as I before stated, at Yarmouth, and proceeded by way of
Lowestoft to Woodbridge, in Suffolk, in the barracks of which my
battalion was quartered. Here also was the 23d regiment, that which I
had seen act so nobly in Holland: and as it was determined by its
commanding-officer to give the regiment some idea of light movements, I
was selected for the purpose of instructing their non-commissioned
officers. But I did not long continue to instruct them, for in the May
following, an offer was made me by Colonel Beckwith of the situation of
sergeant-major in the Cornwall Miners, a regiment of militia, with the
prospect, he told me, of shortly becoming adjutant. This, however, after
due consideration, I declined accepting--preferring to remain in a
regiment and service which I liked so well, and in which I hoped one day
to rise to something higher than my present situation. I believe my
conduct on this occasion was approved, for not long after, it was
intimated to me, that the offer I had refused, had been made to the
quartermaster-sergeant of our second battalion, and that he had, after
some hesitation, accepted it, thus leaving his situation open for me.
Accordingly, I departed for the purpose of joining that battalion, and
entering on my new duties.

I joined it at Feversham, in Kent. My means increasing, the sinfulness
of my course of life was increased in proportion. It is true, I
generally performed my various military duties to the satisfaction of my
superiors; but could not at all times please my present
commanding-officer, against whose wish and inclination I had been
appointed to my present situation; he naturally wishing to have a person
of his own selection. Soon after this, an expedition being ordered for
South America, of which three companies of my present battalion were to
form a part, I waited on him, and requested him to permit me to
accompany them in the capacity of acting quartermaster. He said no; but
if I chose to resign my present situation, and go as a sergeant, he
would permit me. This I of course declined, as it would have been paying
a bad compliment indeed to my benefactor, Colonel Beckwith, thus to give
up for nothing what he had been at pains to procure for me.

This, and some other little things which occurred about the same time,
proved to me that I was no favourite with my new lieutenant-colonel, and
that it behoved me to be very guarded in my conduct. We were, after
this, removed to Brabourn Lees again, and remained there, without any
occurrence arising, till we were summoned to take part in the expedition
fitting out for Denmark.

We accordingly repaired to Deal, where we embarked on the 26th of July,
1807, and shortly after sailed for our destination. We arrived in the
Sound about the 10th of August, where the whole fleet was assembled; one
of the largest I had yet seen. On the 16th, every thing having been
previously got ready, we landed at the village of Vedbeck, in the island
of Zealand, about ten or twelve miles below Copenhagen. It was a most
beautiful and glorious sight to witness the debarkation of the first
division, or advanced guard, to which my battalion belonged. The most
perfect arrangements had been made by Sir Home Popham, who superintended
the landing of the troops; and nothing could exceed the beauty and
regularity in which the different divisions of boats approached the
shore, covered by some small brigs and bombs, which had orders to clear
the beach by grape shot, of any enemy that might appear. Some light
artillery also landed with us, prepared for immediate action, for it was
not known but the Danes might attempt to oppose our landing, they having
rejected every overture on the part of our commanders for the delivery
of their fleet.

After landing, mine and the first battalion of my regiment were sent
forward in the direction of Copenhagen; and on this occasion, I for the
first time saw the illustrious General, who has since made the world
resound with his exploits. He commanded us, who formed the advance, and
directed our two battalions during the operations of the day. But we met
with no force of the enemy, save a small patrol of cavalry, which passed
in front of us, and then retired towards the city; this showed that they
were observing our movements. We halted for the night at a village
called, I think, Lingbye, on the great road from Copenhagen towards
Elsineur. We rested on our arms all night, and early in the morning
moved forward on the Copenhagen road, and about mid-day took up
cantonments within a long gun-shot of the city, and began to invest the
place. All was quiet till about three o'clock in the afternoon, when a
general cry of turn out, set the whole of our people in motion. A
considerable body of the enemy were advancing from the town, and by this
time had attacked the advanced picquets on our left, towards the
sea-shore; but instant succour being sent, they maintained their ground.

The force opposed to the enemy was but small, consisting of two
companies of the 4th regiment, four of the 23d, and four of my
battalion, with two light fieldpieces; in all not more than 1000 men,
while the Danes were near 3000. Nevertheless, the moment the armies came
in contact, they instantly gave way, leaving a considerable number of
killed and wounded behind them, and retreated into the town.

On this occasion, I attached myself to my commanding-officer, who, with
the surgeon, and some others of the staff, advanced with one of the guns
on the great road, having some of our companies on each flank. He gave
me his glass to take care of, with which I soon after busied myself in
watching the motions of the enemy. I discovered at a short distance to
our left and front, a considerable body of troops, dressed in long red
coats, which I knew could not be British, for that description of dress
had long been laid aside by us; I accordingly began, pointing them out
as an excellent mark for the artillery, which was then with us; but I
had scarcely spoken, when an officer present, cried out, after looking,
did I wish the artillery to fire on our own people? The colonel also
made some severe and reproachful remarks, telling me, if I would fight,
to go and take a rifle. I said nothing; but he had scarcely finished his
harangue, when a round shot came directly from this body of supposed
British troops, which nigh carried away one of the legs of the first
officer who spoke.

The enemy were soon repulsed, and the troops retired again to their
former cantonments. After their troops retreated, a body of their
gun-boats advanced against some of our small craft which happened to be
rather close in shore, but their attack occasioned little injury, the
distance being considerable.

The next morning the enemy opened a heavy and rather destructive fire of
artillery upon our outposts, by which we lost an officer of artillery
and several men; their fire was chiefly directed against what was called
the windmill battery, which was our farthest advance at this time.

On the 19th, my battalion was moved farther to the right, and nearer the
town; there was constant firing between the advanced posts of the two
armies, and this continued for several days, during which the investment
of the city was proceeding with, and batteries, &c. marked out for the
purpose of bombarding it. All kinds of ordnance stores were at the same
time disembarked, and sent off to the army with the utmost dispatch. In
short, nothing could exceed the vigour with which the siege was now
prosecuted, after the final rejection of pacific overtures by the Danish
general.

On the 24th, we were ordered under arms at two o'clock in the morning,
and immediately advanced, driving in the enemy's outposts, with the view
of carrying our works nearer the town. In this movement we experienced
considerable opposition and suffered some loss, from their guns on the
town walls, and from musketry from the windows.

We this day established two strong and well advanced batteries, and at
night set fire to a windmill in their possession, which obstructed our
view of some of their works. During the whole of the 25th, there was a
constant fire both of artillery and fire-arms, by which one of the light
battalions of the German Legion suffered rather severely. My battalion
relieved them at the outposts a little before dark, and was fortunate
enough not to lose a man, where they had lost considerable numbers.

On the 26th, a corps or division of the army was assembled, and placed
under the immediate orders of Sir Arthur Wellesley. It consisted of the
following regiments, viz. 43d, 52d, 92d, 95th, and 6th Battalion King's
German Legion, with six squadrons of German cavalry, and some artillery,
and was destined to advance against a body of the enemy composed
principally of militia, which had been for some time past collecting in
the neighbourhood of Kioge.

At three o'clock P.M., we started from the neighbourhood of Copenhagen,
the troops making their way through the country to the left of the great
road to Roskild. I had charge of the baggage, which was carried on light
German waggons, the bodies of which are formed chiefly of wicker-work,
and are so light and easy of draught that the natives travel in them in
the same manner nearly of our coaches--they going sometimes at a
considerable rate.

I found it impracticable to continue in the same direction the troops
had gone, for they presently left all traces of a road, and struck right
across the country--and as I knew I should be expected to have the
baggage with them that night if possible, I determined to run all
hazards, and proceed along the great high-road in hopes of afterwards
being enabled to find them out--accordingly I moved forward, and
presently passed the outposts of the German cavalry stationed in the
direction of Roskild; the men, I doubt not, wondering at my temerity in
pushing on with a few baggage waggons, where they were all on the alert
with swords drawn, and with carbines and pistols loaded. I own it was a
hazardous undertaking, for a very small party of the enemy would easily
have captured both me and my baggage; but I knew my commanding-officer
to be such a person as to pay little attention to excuses of any kind
when he wished a thing to be done, and withal he loved his comforts, and
would not have been easily pacified had he been deprived of them.
Fortunately, after advancing for some miles beyond the outposts of our
army before mentioned, I fell in with a road branching off towards the
left, apparently in the very direction the troops had taken.

Till I reached this point, I had advanced with considerable caution, and
slowly; determined, if any enemy should appear in front, to endeavour to
effect a retreat. But now, having left the great road, and taken that
which I judged would bring me to the neighbourhood of those I was
seeking, I accordingly ordered all my guards to mount, and set off at a
brisk trot, keeping a good look-out to my right flank, for fear of
surprise, and fortunately fell in with the division at the very moment
it was entering the road by which I had come. I received great credit
for my generalship, and was complimented by the officers of my corps,
they being the only people in the division, I believe, who had the
comfort of their baggage that night. The name of the village where we
halted is Caughstrup.

The next day we continued to advance in the direction of Kioge, and in
the afternoon we reached a village which I forget the name of, and where
evident traces appeared of the enemy having shortly left it; indeed, we
found two or three stragglers in the village, who were of course made
prisoners. We halted outside the village for the night.

A short while before we reached this village, I saw a body of troops
dressed in red, marching on our right flank, at right angles to the road
by which we were advancing, and which I instantly concluded must be a
part of the enemy's force, as we had no troops in that direction. But
remembering the rebuke I received on the 17th for interfering with
concerns that did not belong to me, I shut my mouth in silence, and did
not, I believe, mention the matter. It is evident it was a part of the
enemy's force, for the General's information led him to take that very
same direction the next day; and that being towards Roskild, we set out
and reached that city in the afternoon, but found the enemy had again
given us the slip, and doubled back to nearly the same place from whence
we had started.

The next morning about three o'clock we left Roskild, and took the road
for Kioge, near which it was now ascertained the enemy had come to a
resolution to make a stand. I forgot to mention that previous to this
our force had been divided and formed into two brigades; the 52d, 92d,
our 1st battalion, and some cavalry and artillery, remaining under the
command of Sir Arthur; while the 43d, the 6th German Legion, and our
five companies, with the remainder of the cavalry, were put under the
command of Baron Linsengen, one of the generals of the German Legion.
Sir Arthur's people had not been with us for a day or two back, but
where I do not exactly know. But this morning it was arranged that his
brigade was to march directly upon Kioge and attack it in front, while
we fetched a circuit behind, and came upon a part of their force
stationed in a forest or wood behind the town--and thus cut off their
retreat. But the poor creatures were unable to stand above a round or
two, and almost immediately broke and fled in all directions.

As we approached the wood we were destined to attack, the appearance was
certainly rather formidable; for from the immense cloud of dust they
raised in performing their movements, we calculated on meeting with a
considerable body of troops; and indeed, just as we approached the wood,
our cavalry laid hold of an officer of their horse, dressed partly in
uniform and partly as a civilian. From him we obtained information that
they had in the field 12,000 men; 5000 of which were armed with pikes,
1000 cavalry, and the remainder consisted of artillery and infantry. He
must, I think, have overrated their numbers, or surely they might have
made some sort of a stand against 5500 men, the strength of our
division.

On Sir Arthur attacking them in the town of Kioge, they stood, as before
said, only for a round or two, and fled, many of them coming in contact
afterwards with our brigade; but from the extent of (and intricate roads
through) the wood, very few of them were made prisoners; till towards
evening, when a company of my battalion, with some of the German
cavalry, overtook a considerable body in the village of Herfolge,
apparently the rearguard of the enemy. In this village they made a
stand, getting into the churchyard, which afforded an excellent
position, it being considerably higher than any other part of the
village. Here also they soon began to waver, and after a few shots from
our people, they all laid down their arms and became prisoners of war.
Their numbers were 1550 men, with 56 officers, and Major-General Oxholm,
the second in command of this part of the Danish army. A considerable
quantity of artillery, small arms, baggage, and provisions, &c., with
two stands of colours, fell into the hands of the captors on this
occasion. These poor creatures were instantly sent off as prisoners, and
put on board our ships at Copenhagen; many of them apparently quite glad
that they had done with fighting. Great numbers of them had nothing
better by way of shoeing than wooden clogs--a very inconvenient kind I
should imagine for a rapid retreat.

The loss of the British during this day's operations was, as might be
expected, quite trifling. I had this day followed the ill-natured
advice of my commanding-officer on a former occasion, and had taken a
rifle, but had little opportunity of using it, not having fired more
than eight or ten shots. My battalion halted in the village of Herfolge
for the night, and the next morning moved forward towards the town of
Kingsted, that being the direction in which the broken fragments of the
Danish army had retired.

Our two battalions had been employed all the day of the 29th, after the
first onset, in scouring the woods from Kioge to Herfolge. We continued
this service on the 30th also, and took numbers of poor creatures who
had been engaged in yesterday's operations, but who had not yet been
able totally to divest themselves of their military habiliments,
although apparently anxious to do so. We reached Kingsted on the 31st,
and finding that the only regular part of the late army had retired into
one of the islands in the Great Belt, and that the militia portion had
totally disbanded itself, we halted here till the fall of Copenhagen,
which took place on the 7th of September. But to prevent surprise from
any lurking parties of the enemy, which might still have kept together,
and to deprive them of the means of injuring us, strong detachments were
sent out to scour the country, and to bring in all the military arms
they could discover. A party of this description, consisting of 100
cavalry, and 100 of my battalion mounted on light waggons, traversed the
country for a considerable distance, and returned after having
discovered and taken possession of ten pieces of ordnance of small
calibre, and forty rifles belonging to the Kallundburg rifle company,
with several muskets. They also gained correct information respecting
the regular troops that had been lately opposed to us, and found they
had retired into the islands of Falstar and Meon.

On the capitulation of Copenhagen, terms of amity and peace were
entered into between the Danish forces in the island of Zealand and the
British; but these did not extend to the islands before mentioned, nor
to the other parts of his Danish Majesty's dominions; consequently, we
still remained at war with such of his forces as were not included in
the capitulation; and he might at any time have collected an army, had
he been able, and attacked us without any infringement of those terms.
It behoved our generals, therefore, to watch against any attempt of this
nature; and accordingly strong outposts were established all along the
Belt, composed principally of the men of our two battalions. The 1st
battalion occupied Kallundburg, Slagelse, Korsoer, and Skielskiore;
whilst the following towns and ports were occupied by my battalion, viz.
Mestyed, Lundbye, Wordingburg and Prestoe; thus forming a complete chain
of posts around the west and south coasts of the island. We remained so
posted till the 15th of October, by which time the greater part of the
naval stores taken in the dockyard having been taken on board, and the
period fast approaching for our evacuation of the country, we began to
retire towards Copenhagen, which we reached on the 17th, and immediately
embarked on board the Princess Caroline, a Danish seventy-four which had
been surrendered with the others of that fleet, and which are mentioned
below.[1]

We remained in the roads till the 20th, when the fleet dropped down
towards the Sound; and on the 21st the whole passed the Castle of
Elsineur, with a favourable and pleasant breeze, the British ensign
waving proudly from the lofty masts of their late gallant fleet; it must
have been an extremely galling sight for them (the Danes) to witness,
and I dare say they did not pray for many benedictions on our heads; I
pitied them from the bottom of my heart. On taking leave of this
country, I could not help remarking on the great similarity between its
inhabitants and the Germans about Bremen--kind-hearted, hospitable, and
inoffensive in the highest degree; and although suffering at that time
so severely from the policy of our country, they were high in our
praises as individuals and as a nation. I have great cause to speak well
of those innocent and worthy people, for I have seldom experienced more
kindness and attention than was shown me by them whenever circumstances
rendered such kindness and attention suitable, particularly at Nestyde,
where I met a young man who had formerly been in the West Indies, where
he had learnt to speak a little English, (for of Danish I could not
understand a word.) He introduced me to one worthy man, who had been an
officer, and fought in the famous action of Kioge above narrated. Poor
fellow, he felt heartily ashamed of the sorry attempt they had made to
act the part of an army, and I daresay would gladly have blotted from
his memory for ever the recollection of the ridiculous part they had
acted. I was not aware of this circumstance at first, and when it was
brought upon the tapis in the course of conversation, (my young friend
being interpreter,) I unluckily said, that "any man armed with a
bludgeon only, could easily beat three such soldiers."

I felt quite ashamed of myself afterwards, when I discovered that he,
poor man, had made one in that memorable action; but he took it all in
good part, apparently conscious of the justness of my remark. Indeed, I
was partly led on to use such expressions by the young fellow condemning
so bitterly their conduct, and which I afterwards would have given
something to have unsaid. He, however, bore no resentment, and kindly
took me home and introduced me to his wife, and requested me to salute
her with a kiss. I hesitated, thinking that I could not have understood
him right, and feeling awkward in such a situation; but my young friend
assured me it was the custom there to do so, on which I of course
complied. They are, in my opinion, an extremely moral race of people, no
vices that I know of being practised by them, save occasionally a little
drunkenness by some few individuals. I heartily wish them well.

We sailed, as I said before, on the 21st of October, and had fine
weather till we arrived in Yarmouth Roads. We passed one Sunday on our
voyage home, at a certain hour of which our pious naval commander (Lord
Gambier) made signal for the whole fleet to lay to, and have divine
service, that is, in such ships as there were chaplains on board of.
This caused the irreligious and profligate part of our people on board
the Princess Caroline to blaspheme and storm at a terrible rate, for
being so long detained when the wind was so fair.

It happened, when we arrived in the Roads at Yarmouth, or near there, I
think it was on the Galloper Sand, that a tremendous gale began to blow,
which baffled all exertions to withstand it. We cast out the anchors,
but without effect, for we ran away with them both, and in the endeavour
to vere out cable, or rather by the rapidity with which it was dragged
out of the ship by the force of the wind, our bits caught fire, which
with considerable difficulty were got extinguished after great
exertions. During the gale, I understand a sailor was blown off the
foreyard; and nearly at the same moment a woman, one of our corporals'
wives, fell down the hatches into the hold, and broke her back, of
which, indeed, she afterwards recovered, but never after regained her
upright posture.

Those scoffing gentlemen before mentioned, attributed the whole of our
misfortunes to the delay occasioned by the divine service before
adverted to, and were not sparing of invective against the individual
who caused its performance, forgetful, it would seem, that _He_, whom
that commander invoked on that day, holds the winds in His hand, and can
at pleasure let them loose upon an ungodly fleet, whether for correction
or judgment, at what time, and in what manner, best pleases him. I doubt
not the excellent commander alluded to has been a blessing to many. May
he long continue to ornament the exalted station he fills! We weighed
again after the storm abated, and proceeded round to the Downs, and the
next day, the 16th of November, landed at Deal, and from thence marched
to our old quarters at Hythe Barracks.


FOOTNOTE:

[1] List of Ships and Vessels captured at Copenhagen, 7th September,
1807.

                             Guns.
    Christian the Seventh,      98
    Neptune,                    84
    Waldemer,                   84
    Princess Sophia Fredrica,   84
    Justice,                    74
    Heir Apparent Frederick,    74
    Crown Prince Frederick,     74
    Frien,                      74
    Oden,                       74
    Three Crowns,               74
    Shield,                     74
    Crown Princess Maria,       74
    Denmark,                    74
    Norway,                     74
    Princess Caroline,          74
    Conqueror,                  64
    Norge,                      74
    Dalmakin,                   64
    Pirle,                      44
    Wory Wife,                  44
    Liberty,                    44
    Iris,                       44
    Rotar,                      44
    Denry,                      44
    Mayed,                      36
    Triton,                     28
    Fredrington,                28
    Kline Belt,                 28
    St Thomas,                  22
    Tylto,                      24
    Elbe,                       20
    Eydeman,                    20
    Gluckstadt,                 20
    Sarp,                       18
    Glowman,                    18
    Nid Elvin,                  18
    Dolphin,                    18
    Marcur,                     18
    Cousier,                    14
    Flying Fish,                14

    Total,                      40

Together with eleven gun boats, with two guns each in the bow, and
fourteen do with one gun in the bow and one astern.




CHAPTER V.

    Our Author marries--The Battalion to which he belongs ordered to
    join the Expedition fitting out for Corunna--Movements of the
    Army in Spain--Return to England.


Some little time after our return from the Baltic, I obtained a short
leave of absence, for the purpose of visiting my parents, and the other
members of my family; and, during my stay in my native village,
contracted a marriage with a young woman whom I had known from my
boyhood, she having been one of my earliest schoolfellows. I cannot say
that I enjoyed in the marriage state that happiness which I expected
from it, partly owing to the frequent and long separations which my
calling rendered unavoidable, and partly from other causes which have no
connexion with my narrative. I believe, during the eight years which my
wife lived after our union, I spent more than six of these in absence
from her.

At the expiration of my leave, we set off to join the regiment, which
still remained at Hythe, where we remained till the beginning of
September following, when my battalion having again been ordered for
foreign service in the expedition fitting out for Corunna, it became
indispensable that my poor wife should return to Northumberland, and
remain under the protection of her parents, till my return, should it
please God to spare me. This, no doubt, was a severe trial to us both,
but particularly to her, who had such a journey to undertake, alone and
unprotected, and she at the time far advanced in pregnancy; but, however
distressing, it must be undertaken, and I unfortunately could not be
spared from the regiment, for our orders were to proceed immediately to
Ramsgate, for embarkation.

We parted, after I had accompanied her as far as I was able, and seeing
her safely stowed in the coach. It may be supposed that a new-married
pair, under such circumstances, would part with heavy and afflicted
hearts.

My battalion embarked at Ramsgate on the 10th of September. On this
occasion, I was very fortunate in getting on board an excellent
transport, called the Nautilus, of Shields, commanded by Captain Watson
(my wife's maiden name), and the steward, a native of the Hermitage, a
place within four miles of my home. Of course, we were mutually glad to
meet each other, and often talked over old Northumbrian stories, which
recalled delightful recollections of our younger years. The fleet in
which we sailed rendezvoused at Falmouth, whence we took our departure,
and arrived at Corunna on the 26th of October.

On our passage, when we made Cape Ortegal, a pilot-boat came off, in
which were the first Spaniards I remember to have seen; certainly, they
did not prepossess me greatly in favour of their countrymen, but they
are now so well known in England, that a description of those I here
saw, would be only to repeat what has been so often and so much better
told by others. We landed at Corunna, as before said, on the 26th, and a
day or two after, proceeded up the country, halting for the first night
at Betanzos. Our force consisted of cavalry, infantry, and artillery, in
all, about 10,000 men, and was commanded by General Sir David Baird,
and intended to co-operate, or form a junction, with that under Sir John
Moore, then in Portugal, and who was then advancing into Spain.

My battalion, and some companies of the first battalion of my regiment,
formed the advanced guard, a situation which I consider the most
enviable of any in the army--for here all is untried, and, as it were,
unbroken ground; every thing is fresh, and although attended sometimes
with a little more danger of being cut off while separated from the main
body, yet possessing so many countervailing advantages, that I hesitate
not to say it is the most desirable post of any in an army.

At Betanzos, we began to experience the great defectiveness of our
commissariat department, at this period of our history; for the
gentleman sent forward to provide our two battalions with food, was so
utterly unacquainted with his business, that he was actually afraid to
make an attempt to issue provisions. Although bread had been baked by
order of the Spanish authorities, he not understanding, as he said, the
Spanish weights and measures, durst not issue any thing without his own,
which were behind; but it was evident the troops could not remain
without provisions. We were here, as in most of the towns we afterwards
passed through, lodged in convents, the officers generally either being
quartered on the inhabitants of the town, or lodged by the monks in
their cells. On these occasions the men occupied only the corridors,
into which straw was generally put by the authorities of the place, the
men lying as close as pigs in a sty, which indeed was necessary to keep
each other warm; but these lodgings were not to be complained of, as
clean straw, and shelter overhead in that country, are no contemptible
quarters.

We moved forward by fair and easy stages, by way of Lugo, Villa Franca,
Cacabelos, and Astorga; this latter place we reached on the 19th
November, but during the march, we had experienced considerable
difficulty in obtaining supplies both of provisions and the means of
transport. This is a considerable town, containing probably about 5000
inhabitants. Both it and Lugo are surrounded by old Moorish walls, which
may formerly have been considered strong, but which, according to the
present mode of warfare, would offer but a feeble resistance to a
besieging army. It contains a number of convents, both in the town and
suburbs, and, of course, a proportionate number of idle monks, &c. Here,
as in many towns in Spain, they have a curious mode of keeping out of
their houses unwelcome visiters; for the doors being all made remarkably
strong, and kept constantly shut, you cannot enter till the inmates have
first reconnoitred you through an aperture above the door, made for the
purpose; and it is not till they are satisfied who you are, and with
your business, that they will open the door, which they generally do by
a cord communicating with the latch from their peep-hole above.

Here we were pretty plentifully supplied with provisions, and rested for
some days, my battalion having been pushed forward to a village called
Zalada, about a league in front of the town. After having been refreshed
by a few days' rest, my battalion was again pushed forward, and occupied
the town of Labeneza, about four leagues in front of Astorga, while the
main body of the army assembled in and around that town; but we had not
remained more than a few days in Labeneza, before a report arrived of
the enemy being in our front, and advancing in force; and we were
consequently recalled to Zalada, in order to form a junction with our
main body. Not long after this, about the latter end of November,
orders were received from Sir John Moore, for our division to retreat
and fall back upon Corunna. This measure, I understand, was rendered
necessary, in consequence of the Spanish armies having been completely
beaten and dispersed, so that nothing remained to oppose an overwhelming
French force, which it was ascertained had entered Spain, but the few
British troops comprising the armies under Sir John Moore, and ours.

We accordingly set to the right-about, and fell back as far as
Cacabelos, the main body occupying Villa Franca and its neighbourhood.
This movement was not by any means liked by any of us; for, independent
of its being so uncongenial to the spirit of Britons to turn their backs
upon an enemy, we felt disappointed at what we saw and heard of the
celebrated Spanish patriots. We had been given to understand that the
whole nation was up in arms against the French, and that we should have
been received, on entering their country, as liberators, and treated as
brethren, but in both these points we were miserably disappointed; for,
instead of a hearty welcome on our arrival, we could with great
difficulty obtain leave to land, and still more to obtain the necessary
supplies of carriages and provisions to enable us to come forward; and
with regard to the patriotism of the people, whatever might have been
their good-will to act in defence of their beloved country and
Ferdinand, they appeared as little likely as any people I had ever seen,
to effect any thing against such an enemy as the French. In fact, those
of them who formed their armies, at least of those straggling parties we
so often met, could be called nothing better than mere rabble--no
organization, no subordination, but every one evidently pursued that
plan which seemed right in his own eyes.

While we remained at Cacabelos, (a place famous for good wine,) many
were the schemes adopted by some of our bibbers, to obtain a sufficient
quantum of this excellent beverage. I understand they occasionally
borrowed each other's clothes; that is, a 43d man would borrow a
rifleman's green jacket, and _vice versa_, and go and steal, or in some
other illegal mode obtain, a camp-kettle full or two; and when the owner
came to point out the person who had robbed him, of course he could not
be found.

We had not remained above a day or two in our new quarters, before an
express arrived from Sir John Moore, with orders for us to advance again
immediately; and which, notwithstanding we had little or no prospect of
assistance and co-operation from the Patriots, was cheerfully complied
with. We retraced our former steps, passing through Astorga and
Labeneza, and reached Benevente on the 15th December.

Our cavalry, consisting of the 7th, 10th, and 15th hussars, under Lord
Paget, had by this time come up from Corunna, and had been pushed
forward to join Sir John Moore's force; they fell in with a party of the
French cavalry at the town of Rueda, not far from Tordesillas, and of
which they either killed, or took prisoners, nearly the whole; in fact,
through the whole of this service, nothing could exceed the gallantry
and intrepid conduct of our cavalry under his lordship. At this town, as
well as at Astorga and Villa Franca, depots of provisions began to be
formed soon after our arrival.

On the 17th December, we again advanced from Benevente, in order to form
a junction with Sir John Moore's army, and passing through Valderas,
Majorga, and Sahagun, we reached the convent of Trianon, about a league
in front of the latter place. On the 20th, here the two forces were
united, and a fresh distribution into brigades took place. Ours, under
Brigadier-general Crawford, was termed the Light Brigade, and consisted
of the 1st battalion 43d, 2d battalion 52d, and the 2d battalion of my
regiment.

The whole army was assembled in this neighbourhood, and consisted of
about 26,000 men, the whole _now_ under the command of Sir John Moore.
Previous to our arrival at Sahagun, Lord Paget, with a part of the 10th
and 15th hussars, discovered that a considerable body of the enemy's
cavalry occupied that town. He therefore detached the 10th by a
circuitous road, while he with the 15th approached it by the more direct
one. They were, however, discovered by the French before reaching the
town, which gave the enemy time to turn out and form to receive the
attack. His lordship, when a favourable opportunity offered, charged the
French, who were greatly superior in numbers, and completely overthrew
them, taking two colonels, eleven other officers, and about 150 men.

On the evening of the 23d, the whole army was put in motion, with an
intention, it was said, of attacking Marshal Soult, who, with a corps of
about 16 or 18,000 men, was posted behind the River Carrion, his
head-quarters being at Saldanha. The Spanish General Romana, was to take
a part in this movement; his small and sadly inefficient force had
approached the left of our army, or rather we had drawn towards his
position, and he was, I believe, perfectly willing to lend all the
assistance in his power, in the contemplated attack; but our General, I
fancy, did not calculate upon any material help, from a force so greatly
out of order as his was said to be. Soon after dark, the troops fell in;
and as it was understood an attack was going to be made on the enemy,
every pulse beat high, in expectation of soon congratulating each other
on a victory. All was life and animation; and the necessary
preparations, by the light of our blazing fires, for such an event as a
battle, after the many long and harassing marches we had had, gave an
interesting appearance to the scene.

When all was ready, the troops moved forward. It was a cold and bitter
night, and there were some small brooks on the road. An officer of my
battalion, who was not very well, when he came to one of those, instead
of marching straight through, as it appears had been ordered, went a
little way round by the bridge, although not off the road. A certain
general officer, who happened to be there at the time, observed it, and
getting into a great rage at the officer leaving his section, made him
turn back, and march through and through repeatedly, by way of
punishment. Such a mode of treating an officer, certainly appeared
rather harsh; but this general piqued himself on his being able to make
his brigade better marchers than any other troops in the army; and in
this he certainly succeeded, although it was not without frequent
exhibitions, such as the above. Our people had not gone far, however,
till they were countermanded, and returned back to our convent. I rather
think the main body of the army had not moved out of their cantonments;
but ours being the advanced brigade, it was necessary we should move
before the others.

It appears Sir John Moore, just before he intended to set out, had
received information, not only of Soult having been greatly reinforced,
but that several strong corps of the French army were marching directly
upon us, by which, should he delay only a few days, we should be
completely surrounded, and cut off from a retreat. This was most
distressing information, for never was an army more eager to come in
contact with the enemy than ours was at this moment, and never was there
a fairer prospect of success, had things remained as they were; but now,
instead of honour and glory being acquired, by showing the French what
British troops could do in the field, it was evident nothing remained
but to commence a retrograde movement, the worst and most unpleasant, in
a British soldier's view, of any other.

Winter had now completely set in; the face of the country being covered
with deep snow, the weather was unusually severe. Our prospect,
therefore, was by no means a pleasant one. To commence a retreat in
front of a greatly superior force, and with the probability that other
French armies might be before us, and intercept our retreat upon the
sea, which was distant from us nearly 250 miles, with the country in our
rear being already exhausted of every thing that could contribute to our
support, and with such excessively bad weather to perform the retreat
in, rendered it, I may say, as unpleasant a situation as troops could
well be placed in. Added to which, our commissariat was by no means so
efficient in those days as they have latterly become; and our troops in
general being young, and unaccustomed to privation, it was but too
obvious, that should the retreat continue long, many would be the
disasters attending it. On Christmas day, our brigade, as the rear of
the infantry, commenced its uncomfortable retreat, and continued
marching till late at night, when we reached a convent near Majorga. The
next day, although we started early, we only reached the village of St
Miguel about midnight.

Here I had considerable difficulty with the baggage. I had had charge of
it all day, my guard being composed of officers' servants, &c., who, the
moment they got into the village, set off to their masters, and left me
alone with the mules, the troops having, by the time I got in, all lain
down to sleep. Several of the muleteers had been pressed into the
service against their wills, and of course would have made their escape
whenever an opportunity offered. I was therefore compelled to drive them
all into the churchyard, and watch them myself, till luckily, after
waiting in this situation a considerable time, without daring to go to
sleep after the fatigues of such a day, some men happened to wander in
that direction in search of meat, by whom I sent to our quartermaster to
request he would send a guard, which he did soon after, and I had the
happiness to be allowed to throw myself down and take some rest.

This day Lord Paget had another brush with the French cavalry, who,
being apprized of our retreat, had advanced to Majorga. He attacked them
with that gallantry which shone so conspicuously in the cavalry during
the whole of this service, and completely overthrew them, killing and
wounding many, and taking a number prisoners; in this affair the 10th
hussars were engaged, and behaved nobly. The next day we reached Castro
Gonzales, and Castro Pipa. At the latter village, my battalion halted
for the night and the next day. These two villages command the passage
over the river Eslar, they being about equidistant from the bridge, and
something more than a mile apart on high ground over the river, which
runs about a league in front of Benevente. Here we were obliged to
remain during the time mentioned, in order that the heavy divisions of
the army might get sufficiently forward before we moved.

I had still the charge of the baggage, and not knowing where my
battalion was to be quartered for the night, I had crossed the Eslar to
the Benevente side, till I learnt long after dark that Castro Pipa was
its quarters. I consequently turned back and recrossed the river, and
just as I reached the end of the bridge, I heard a shot immediately in
my front. The 43d regiment guarded the bridge. It turned out to be a
patrol of the enemy's cavalry who had come close to the top of the
slope leading down to the bridge, and where a double sentry of the 43d
was posted. By some accident these two men were not loaded; the French
dragoons were consequently permitted to come close up to them without
their being able to give any alarm. One of them, however, run his
bayonet into one of the Frenchmen's horses, and retreated, but the other
was not only cut down with the sabre, but had a pistol fired at him,
which was the report I had just heard. I saw the wounded man, who was
severely hurt, but whether he survived or not I know not.

When I reached Castro Pipa, my commanding-officer would scarcely credit
the report I gave him, conceiving it impossible the French could be such
near neighbours. I was a good deal chagrined at his suspecting my
veracity, but he had never been what I may call a friendly
commanding-officer to me, as the story of the rifle at Copenhagen will
prove; indeed, as I had been put into the situation I held contrary to
his wish, it was hardly to be expected that he would show himself very
friendly. During the night, however, our quarters were beat up, not
indeed by the enemy, but by our brigadier, who was not sparing of his
censure for our want of alertness in turning out. Indeed, we neither had
so good a look-out as we ought to have kept, nor did we get under arms
with that promptitude which was desirable, and from the cause before
assigned; that is, that our commandant did not believe the enemy was so
near.

I own I was not sorry that the General paid us such a visit, as it not
only put us more upon our guard, a thing so indispensably necessary in
the presence of an enemy, but it gave me some satisfaction for the
dishonour put upon me by disbelieving my information.

The enemy did not disturb us during the remainder of the night, and
next morning the brigade was assembled on the height above, and in front
of the bridge; considerable bodies of the enemy's cavalry appearing in
the plain before us. Some skirmishing between our people and the enemy
took place, but nothing of any importance occurred. Our brigade was left
in this position to cover the working party who were preparing to blow
up the bridge, at which they worked all day; during the night our people
were withdrawn from the farther side, and the explosion soon after took
place, but the destruction of the bridge was by no means so effectual as
was wished and expected. When we turned out in the morning to move
towards the bridge, I (still having charge of my battalion's baggage)
discovered that a vast quantity of excellent biscuit was stored up in an
empty house in the village, which, no doubt, had been baked for the
purpose of supplying the magazine at Benevente; and as our people had
been but very indifferently supplied with bread since we commenced the
retreat, I determined to load a bullock-cart with it, and try to get it
to a place of safety, where I hoped to be able to issue it to them.

I accordingly took a cart and two bullocks, there being plenty in the
village, and apparently without owners, for the inhabitants had mostly
either abandoned the place on the appearance of the French, or had hid
themselves. I loaded the cart, but still I wanted a person to drive it;
and although I used both promises and threats, I could not prevail upon
any person to go with me. I therefore mounted the cart myself, and using
my sword by way of a goad, I entered the river at a place which looked
like a ford, and had the good fortune to reach the other side in safety.
I mention this to show that so much importance need not have been
attached to the destruction of the bridge, as both here, and near Castro
Gonzales, the river was perfectly fordable, for near the latter place
the French cavalry forded it on the following morning.

I now made my way to Benevente, where I remained during the day of the
28th; and at night, as before hinted, the troops which had been guarding
the bridge arrived, leaving cavalry piquets on the plain between the
town and the river. The next morning our people left Benevente, and as I
was a little behind them with the baggage, on my reaching a height in
rear of the town, I observed in the plain in front a considerable body
of the enemy's cavalry, who had, as before stated, crossed the river
near Castro Gonzales, and were advancing towards the town, opposed,
though feebly at first, by the few of our cavalry left there on piquet;
but the cavalry regiments which were in town quickly turning out to
their support, they were at length completely able to oppose, and
finally overthrow them.

During the time I remained here, I saw our brave dragoons make three
most gallant and successful charges against superior numbers of the
enemy, completely breaking and dispersing the different bodies against
which the charges were made. The enemy appeared to be drawn up in
different lines, the front one of which was that always charged; and I
observed, that as our people advanced upon them, they were always
received with a fire either from the carbines or pistols of the enemy,
but this never appeared in the least to check the ardour of the charge,
for in a minute or two after I observed the French troops retired in
confusion, and formed behind the other lines. At length they were
completely driven back to the ford by which they had crossed; and in a
charge now made upon them, General le Febvre, with about seventy men,
fell into our people's hands. These troops were a part of Bonaparte's
Imperial Guard, and the flower of his army, being fine-looking men,
dressed in dark-green long coats, with high bear-skin caps, and
mustaches, which gave them a formidable appearance. It was said that
Bonaparte was looking on at this affair, and witnessed the defeat of his
hitherto invincible Old Guard; it is certain that he slept the night
before at Villalpando, a place only four leagues distant from the field.
I now set off and overtook the baggage and the bullock cart, not having
had an opportunity of issuing the biscuit; but before I had proceeded
above a few miles, the bullocks knocked up, and notwithstanding every
exertion I found it impossible to get them any farther. Thus was I
reluctantly compelled to abandon a cart-load of excellent biscuit, after
having had so much trouble with it, at the time when I knew it was
greatly needed by my hungry fellow soldiers, and to whom it would have
been a most welcome offering. On this day's march, a most lamentable
number of stragglers were overtaken by us, we being in rear of all the
infantry; they had either fallen out from excessive fatigue, or from
having (as in too many instances) drunk too much; indeed, the
destruction of the magazine of provisions at the place we had left,
enabled too many of them to obtain by one means or other considerable
quantities of spirits, and which, of course, rendered them incapable of
marching. This was a long and wearisome day's journey of nearly thirty
miles; we did not reach Labeneza till late at night, where a
considerable quantity of ammunition was obliged to be destroyed, the
animals failing which drew it.

The next day we reached our old quarters at Zalada, a league in front of
Astorga, where we halted for the night, the remainder of the brigade
going into the town. It was to this village, it may be remembered, that
we were sent on our first advance, and subsequently after our first
retreat from Labeneza; but besides these movements from the village and
back again, during the time we remained in it, we almost every morning
had orders to pack up and move a short distance out of the place. This
was done no doubt to accustom us to a ready turning out, as till this
period our baggage had been transported on bullock-carts; but now we had
mules, and it was necessary to accustom those whose duty it was, to load
the mules with dispatch. But on every occasion of this kind, the
inhabitants always imagined we were actually going to leave them, and
the moment we were clean gone, as they thought, they set to work and
rung the church bell with all their might. This was either to testify
their regret at losing our company, or to evince their gratitude to
Heaven for having got rid of such a band of heretics, by which their
most pure and holy dwellings had been defiled; it was laughable to see
the long faces they put on when we, so contrary to their hopes and
expectations, always returned to our wretched and uncomfortable
quarters.

During the whole of the time we remained in this village, I, as a
staff-sergeant, could find no better lodgings than a dirty open shed;
the reader will therefore judge how ill the privates must have been off.
Our fellows began about this time to pick up little bits of Spanish, and
would often exercise their ability to converse in the native tongue, by
telling the inhabitants that we were certainly going to "_marcha
manana_", that is, to march to-morrow, so that it became quite a
by-word, which annoyed our hosts not a little. If I mistake not, the
Padre of this village was a great knave, and did not scruple to help
himself to such things as he had a mind for, belonging to our officers,
whenever a fit opportunity presented itself. The next day, the 31st, we
moved into Astorga, where we halted for an hour or two, till the
destruction of the magazine there was completed, although nothing but
rum remained; and here I witnessed such a brutal and swinish eagerness
for drink as was quite disgusting. The rum casks were ordered to be
staved, and to let the contents run out on the street, that they might
not fall into the hands of the enemy: thus the rum which had cost so
much trouble in bringing up all the way from Corunna was about to be
lost for ever; a thing most heart-rending to the numerous soldiers
looking on, who loved it so dearly. However, they were determined not to
lose all, for when the heads of the casks were knocked in, and their
contents permitted to run in streams down the gutters, some of those
brutes deliberately took off their greasy caps, and laving up the rum
and the mud together, drank, or rather ate, the swinish mixture. What
noble soldiers would our country produce, were not that detestable vice
of drunkenness so common among us; but to it how many have I seen
deliberately sacrifice their own and country's honour, nay their very
life itself, rather than forego the beastly gratification!

All this morning we had been told to keep a sharp look-out on the Leon
side of Astorga, for the enemy was every moment expected to make his
appearance from that quarter; however, we were not disturbed during the
short time we remained. We here fell in with a considerable body of
Romana's army, apparently all confusion, and destitute of every thing.
We understood that they were not to be marched in the same line we were
taking, but that it had been concerted between the two generals that our
route should be kept free; however, here, and for several days
afterwards, we suffered greatly from their contiguity.

We continued our march from Astorga the same day, and reached at night
the village of Foncevadon, about twenty miles distant. Here we pigged
in as well as we were able, there being only five or six houses; but as
we had a few tents with us, we managed not amiss. Till now our brigade
had formed the rear of the infantry, there being some cavalry in rear of
us; but it was now determined that ours and the Light German Brigade
under Brigadier-general Charles Alten, should strike off from the great
road, and take the route for Orense and Vigo. This was done, I
understand, with a view to secure a passage across the Minho at the
former place, should Sir John, with the main army, be compelled to
retreat in that direction, and probably with the view also of drawing
off a part of the enemy's overwhelming force from the pursuit of that
body, and to induce them to follow us into the mountains.
Notwithstanding this, they continued to pursue Sir John on the great
road, whilst they left us free altogether.

I beg to notice here, that both Mr Gifford and Mr Moore (Sir John's
brother), have fallen into a trifling error respecting the period of our
separation from the main body, they both making us be detached before
our arrival at Astorga, whereas it was not till we had passed a day's
march beyond it that we were sent off. The thing is of no consequence,
only it is as well to be correct.

The next day, the 1st of January 1809, we marched by a most difficult
road through the mountains, to Ponferrada, situated about a league to
the left of the great road to Corunna, on which the main army was
retreating. When we got in, our commissary immediately made a
requisition to the Alcalde of the town, to provide bread for the two
brigades, as we began to be in most fearful want. He promised to set the
bakers to work immediately, and in a few hours, he said, the bread would
be ready. We called on him repeatedly, without obtaining any, he still
alleging it was not yet quite ready, and putting us off from time to
time, till midnight, when the patience of our commissary being fairly
worn out, he yielded to the anger so naturally inspired by such
shuffling conduct, and used some strong language to the Alcalde.
Whereupon, we discovered at once that he had been only amusing us with
promises he did not intend to fulfil; and told the commissary that he
did not fear any of his threats, for that, as Romana's army had now also
entered the town, he had no doubt they would protect him, and revenge
any insult offered to him. The commissary had indeed talked about
hanging him for his double-dealing, and leaving the troops utterly
starving; but if he could have got any bread ready, it is most natural
to suppose he would prefer letting his own countrymen have it; this,
however, as might be expected, had a most pernicious effect upon our
suffering soldiers, for when provisions could not be procured in the
regular and ordinary mode, it is evident they would take them wherever
they were to be found--for hunger is not easily borne, accompanied by
incessant fatigue. In the morning, when we turned out to continue our
march towards Orense, we heard a heavy firing towards our right and
front, and this proved to be an attack made by the enemy's light troops
upon our first battalion, who, with some cavalry, had been left in
Cacabelos as a rearguard. Our first battalion gained great credit for
their conduct on this occasion. The force of the enemy greatly exceeded
ours, yet our people drove them back with great loss, killing General
Colbert, who commanded the advance. This was done by a noted pickle of
the name of Tom Plunkett, who, fearless of all danger to himself, got
sufficiently nigh to make sure of his mark, and shot him, which, with
the fire of the others, caused great havoc in the enemy's ranks, and set
them flying to the rear much faster than they advanced. Our situation
was thus, in a manner, in rear of the enemy's advance guard, yet they
did not turn in our direction. Cacabelos was distant from us only about
a league.

Our road this day lay over high and almost inaccessible mountains,
deeply covered with snow. On the top of one of these, as our General was
passing the column, a cry was passed from the rear to open out to allow
him to pass, the road being very narrow. One of our men, as the General
came near, happened to say, loud enough for him to hear, that "he had
more need to give us some bread," or words to that effect, which so
exasperated the General, that he instantly halted the whole brigade,
ordered the man to be tried by a drum-head court-martial, and flogged
him on the spot. It was a severe, but perhaps necessary discipline, in
order to check in the bud the seeds of murmuring and insubordination,
although I own it appeared harsh.

Our march was a long and toilsome one indeed, and did not terminate till
about ten at night, when we reached St Domingo-Flores, where nothing
could be procured but a very small quantity of black bread, the village
being quite small. Tired with the journey, we felt rather inclined to
sleep than eat; and, wet and dirty as we were, we laid ourselves down
till dawn, when we commenced another such day's march, and reached at
night the village of La Rua. During these two days, want and fatigue had
compelled many to fall out, some of whom, no doubt, perished in the snow
on the bleak mountains, over which our road, or rather path, had lain;
others fell into the hands of the enemy, and some few rejoined us after
having obtained some little refreshment from the natives.

It would but be a repetition of the privations and fatigues we
underwent, to notice all that befell us on our way thence to Orense,
which place we reached on the 7th of January, having previously pushed
on, by double forced marches, a few hundred men, to take possession of
the bridge over the Minho at this place. Here we remained a day, and
obtained provisions, then much needed by us all, for the men had been
literally starving for several days past. We had time and opportunity
here also to strip and change our linen, that is, those who had a
change; the others washed the shirt they took off, sitting without one
till it was dry. Indeed, by this time we were in a most miserable
plight; our shoes, of course, were nearly all worn out, and many
travelling barefoot; and our clothes, as might be expected, were ragged
and filthy in the extreme; indeed they could not be otherwise, for I
suppose none of us had put any thing off since we commenced the retreat.
This day's rest, however, refreshed us greatly, and enabled us to
perform the remainder of our toilsome journey with more comfort; indeed,
since we had secured the passage of the Minho, and thus prevented the
enemy from getting in before us, our minds were more at ease, for strong
apprehensions were entertained that the French would have detached a
corps from their main body to seize this pass, and thus cut off our
retreat to Vigo. A part of Romana's army entered Orense before we left
it, worse, if possible, in point of appearance than ourselves; but they,
in their best days, are more like an armed mob than regularly organized
soldiers.

It is a pity that Romana did not adopt the plan pointed out to him by
Sir John Moore, either to retire into the Asturias with his army
unbroken, or hang upon the flanks of the enemy as he passed through the
mountains; and which he could have done with ease and safety, for these
fellows could live where regular troops would starve, and there was no
doubt but the peasantry would have assisted their countrymen with all
their means. This would have in some measure retarded the too rapid
progress of the French, and probably been the means of saving to our
country one of its bravest and most skilful generals.

Some of our men who had been compelled to stop behind from fatigue and
starvation, rejoined us here, having generally been assisted by the
peasantry, who gave them food, and helped them forward.

On the 9th, in the morning, we left Orense, crossing the Minho to the
north side of that river, and continued our march to the town of
Ribadavia, situated at the junction of the rivers Avia and Minho, both
of which, from the melting of the snow, and the immense quantities of
rain that had fallen, were greatly swollen. So much so, that when I
approached the town with the baggage, (the troops having gone on
before,) and which I did not reach till near midnight, I found the road
completely overflowed with water; and being without a guide, I could not
of course in the night be certain where the road lay, the whole bank of
the river being completely under water. We were in consequence obliged
to climb the mountains to our left, and proceed in the best manner we
were able with the loaded mules; but so precipitous were they in one
place, that a load of ammunition slid off the mule's back, and the casks
rolled rapidly down the hill towards the river. I durst not venture to
leave them, although my chance of finding them in such a situation
appeared small indeed; however, we halted the remainder of the mules,
while a few of us set off down the steep in the direction we had seen
them go, and after a long and anxious groping in every hollow of the
rocky mountain, succeeded in recovering them; but the powder in them,
and indeed nearly all the ammunition we had, was rendered completely
useless, from the constant heavy rain that had fallen. I am almost
astonished that no accident happened to either man or beast in this
perilous journey, for our feet literally "stumbled upon the dark
mountains," without either guide or path, and where the ground was most
uneven and dangerous. We however at length reached our destination, wet
and weary enough, and, just as we entered the town, were informed that
the corridor of one of the convents where two of our companies were
sleeping, had just fallen to the ground with a tremendous crash, and
that several men had had their limbs broken by the fall; I do not
remember that any were killed. It being so late, I could not procure any
kind of quarter, so I was fain to sit down by the side of a fire kindled
in the yard of this convent for the remainder of the night.

We next morning resumed our journey, and in three days more from this
place we reached Vigo. On this last day's march we had a pretty high
eminence to ascend at some distance from the town, from which the view
of the town, the shipping, and the sea, broke all at once upon us. It
was a most delightful prospect, and it was highly amusing to observe the
joy which seemed to animate the woe-worn countenances of our ragged and
dirty soldiers. Fellows without a shoe or a stocking, and who before
were shuffling along with sore and lacerated feet like so many lame
ducks, now made an attempt to dance for joy; laughter and mirth, and the
joke, now succeeded to the gloomy silence with which they had in general
prosecuted their wearisome journey for several days past, as the
friendly element before them promised shortly to put a period to long
and toilsome wanderings. Indeed, although I am a bad sailor, and suffer
always severely when at sea, I do not remember ever to have witnessed a
sight which inspired me with greater pleasure than the shipping and the
sea did on this occasion.

The fleet of transports for the army under Sir John Moore, was just
clearing the bay as we came in sight, but we observed that a sufficient
number remained at Vigo to transport us to our native land, a place we
sorely longed for, as we had often contrasted the happiness and security
and comfort of our friends at home, with the poverty and misery we had
lately witnessed in the country we were leaving; and this no doubt
increased our anxiety for the change. We marched into Vigo, and were
soon after put on board the vessels destined to receive us. It was my
fortune to be sent on board the Alfred, 74, with two of our companies; a
great number of men were still behind, for even the few last days'
marches had deprived us of many who till then had braved the toils and
privations of the journey, but who now had fairly sunk under exhaustion.
The Commodore, therefore, remained as long in the bay as it was safe,
sending the stragglers as they arrived on board the different ships; but
within a few days after our arrival, the enemy entered the town, which
of course precluded all hope of more escaping. We consequently weighed
and stood out towards the outer bay, where we again came to anchor.

A Russian ship-of-war was in a small harbour in this bay, which it was
intended to board and cut out. As we were then, I believe, on rather bad
terms with that nation, never did I witness such alacrity and delight as
our tars on board the Alfred manifested when buckling on their cutlasses
for the occasion, and I feel certain that if confidence in themselves
would tend to insure the victory, no men had a better chance of
succeeding; but from some cause or other with which I am unacquainted,
the enterprise was abandoned.

On the 21st January we weighed and stood out to sea; but a gale coming
on we were obliged to come to anchor again under the shelter of the
Isle of Bagona. We did not get to sea till the 24th, but on the 25th we
spoke a frigate going out to Lisbon with General Dyatt on board, who
informed us of the fatal business at Corunna. Indeed the people on board
this ship had, from vague reports, greatly magnified our loss on that
occasion, telling us that the whole army had been nearly cut to pieces,
and that very few indeed had been able to effect their escape. We each,
of course, mourned for his particular friends, not doubting but they had
fallen among the rest. I think it was the same night on which we saw
this ship, a fatal accident had very nigh taken place. Our captain was
the Commodore, and the captain of the Hindostan store-ship had charge of
the rear of the fleet; his place was consequently always behind all the
other vessels. Some time after dark, however, our look-out people gave
notice of a large vessel on our starboard quarter. We shortened sail and
let her come up pretty close to us, and made the private signal, but no
answer was returned. At length, when near enough, we hailed her, but
still no answer. An order was now given to stand to quarters and prepare
for action, not doubting she was an enemy which had got among the fleet.
The guns were accordingly run out, the matches lit, and every thing
prepared for action. She appeared a large ship, but of what force they
could not guess. Again she was hailed, and again she disregarded it. Our
first lieutenant was now fully convinced she was an enemy, and pleaded
hard with the captain to give the word fire, but the captain said he
would hail her once more, and if she did not answer he would fire.
Providentially they heard us this time, and answered it was the
Hindostan. What they had been about I know not, for we were quite near
each other; and had she received our broadside, as was the intention had
she not then answered, it is most probable she would have gone down; at
all events the consequences must have been awful, for she had the whole
of the 43d regiment on board, besides her own crew. Our captain
certainly censured him in no very mild terms for leaving his station in
the rear, and getting to the very head of the fleet. She was a very
lofty ship, and carried forty-four guns I believe, and had not less than
1000 men on board, many of whom must have suffered had we fired upon
her.

A few days after this we encountered a most tremendous gale, and came in
sight of the English coast, somewhere near the Lizard or the Start; but
our master not knowing exactly where he was, we stood off again towards
the French coast.

The next day the gale was if possible more severe, and the ship rolled
so much that they were afraid her guns would break loose from their
lashings, in consequence of which large spikes were driven in behind the
wheels of each gun-carriage to prevent such an accident. In this
situation, I know not whether I did not almost wish myself on the snowy
mountains of Galicia again, rather than where I was, so miserable a
sailor am I, and so much do I suffer from sea-sickness.

The fleet was by this time completely scattered, every one making the
best shift he could for himself; some got into Plymouth, some reached
Portsmouth, and some, I believe, foundered in the gale, among which, if
I mistake not, was a brig, on board of which my two companies had been
first embarked, but were subsequently removed to the Alfred, and some of
the German Legion, I think, put on board her.

At length we made the Isle of Wight, and subsequently Spithead, which we
reached on the 31st, and the next day landed once more on the happy
shore of our native Britain. Thankful indeed I ought to have been for
the ever watchful care of an indulgent and kind Providence, who had
brought me safely through the toils and sufferings under which so many
more robust and hardy than myself had sunk; but, alas! I had then no
sense of the gratitude due for such unmerited favours, and instead of
rendering thanks to Him who had thus preserved me, I entered, with all
the eagerness of a person devoid of reason and religion, into every vice
and sensuality that presented itself. I here learnt with sorrow the
great loss which my friends in the first battalion had sustained, but
glad nevertheless that it was not to the extent we apprehended, and that
none of my particular friends had fallen.

We left Portsmouth, and returned to our old quarters at Hythe, in Kent,
passing again on the road my native county militia at Battle, in Sussex,
as I did at Bury, on my return from Holland; and truly our appearance on
this occasion was, if possible, more deplorable than on the former.
However, our tattered and worn-out habiliments had the effect of
inspiring some of my countrymen in that regiment with a desire of
sharing in the glory, as they termed it, of suffering so much in the
defence of our beloved country; and they accordingly made up their minds
to volunteer into our corps the first opportunity that offered, and
which they put in execution that same year, as will be told hereafter.
We took up our abode in the comfortable barracks at Hythe, and
immediately set about putting every thing in order, and truly much was
wanting to fit us again for duty as soldiers.




CHAPTER VI.

    Volunteering--Farther Promotion--Embarks for Portugal, with two
    Companies of the Second Battalion--Debark at Cadiz--Advance to the
    Isla--The French occupy all the adjacent Towns, except Cadiz and the
    Isla--Cannonading--Spanish Army--Detachment of the Allied Army sent
    Around by Gibraltar and Chiclana, to take the Enemy in the rear of
    his works, and compel him either to fight or abandon them--Come up
    with a portion of the Enemy in the vicinity of Veger--Bravery of the
    British--The Enemy repulsed with great Loss, but, from the apathy
    and misconduct of General La Pena, and the Spaniards under his
    command, the French are allowed to retain their Works in the
    vicinity of Cadiz.


In April of this year, an order was issued to allow the militia
regiments to volunteer, for the purpose of filling up the regiments of
the line; and I was sent by Colonel Beckwith (our two battalions being
then both at Hythe) to receive those who chose to volunteer from the
Northumberland militia before-mentioned, which had now been removed to
Ipswich. Lieutenant Beckwith had the charge of our party, but proceeded
_incog._ to Ipswich, the general orders not permitting officers of the
line to be seen in the quarters of the militia. On our arrival at
Ipswich, I had the pleasure of obtaining the names of thirty fine young
fellows, among whom the patriots formerly mentioned of course were
included. Several other militia regiments in this district also gave
volunteers to us, so that in three days, from the commencement of the
volunteering, we obtained upwards of 1100 men; and had we not, by an
order from the Horse-Guards, been precluded from taking any more, I
doubt not we should have obtained several hundreds besides, for our
regiment alone had near eighty names down for us, who were not allowed
to enter from the above cause. Indeed the Commander-in-Chief, Sir David
Dundas, (afterwards our Colonel,) appeared quite astonished, and not
well pleased, that we had run away with so many men when others wanted
them so much. He was obliged, however, to grant us a 3d battalion, as we
had so many more men than were required to fill up the 1st and 2d; and
our respected Colonel, Major-general Coote Manningham, dying about this
time of the fatigue he had undergone in Spain, Sir David took us to
himself, and became our Colonel-in-Chief, giving the command of the 3d
battalion to my respected (and now lamented) friend and benefactor,
Major-general the Honourable William Stewart. The Lieutenant-colonelcy
was given to Major Norman M'Leod, our senior Major, and only two or
three other steps were given to the officers of the regiment, although
it was alone owing to their exertions in obtaining men, and to the high
character the regiment had acquired, that such numbers had volunteered
into it.

It becomes not me to censure or criticise the measures of government,
but I cannot help thinking that more favour was certainly due to the
corps as a body. For myself, I ought and must speak with gratitude, not
of them, but of that kind Providence which has favoured me so far, so
very far, beyond my deserts, for, on the 8th of June following, I was
appointed Quartermaster of the 3d battalion.

Our 1st battalion was again sent out to join the army in Portugal, while
mine was sent to Brabournlees to equip and drill our new levies. Every
exertion was made to this effect, and the battalion was soon completed
and rendered fit for service. Here my wife joined me again, the child to
which she gave birth in my absence having died when six weeks old. This
was the only child she ever had, and it was perhaps a providential
dispensation, for she was extremely delicate, and by no means a healthy
person, and it is not unlikely her offspring might have inherited her
disease, that is, an affection of the chest. We had only lived a few
months together, till another call for service separated us again.

In June 1810, we received orders to send out to Cadiz two companies of
my battalion, together with the commanding-officer and staff, three
others having been already sent thither in the spring. The melancholy
business of parting with my wife was again to be gone through; but on
this occasion I was favoured by being permitted to accompany her to
London, where, parting from her with a heavy heart, I took my place for
Chichester, at which place my detachment would be quartered next day, on
their way to Portsmouth. I omitted to mention, that Lieutenant-colonel
Barnard of the 1st or Royals, had exchanged with Lieutenant-colonel
M'Leod some time previous, and he consequently was now going out as my
commanding-officer. We embarked at Portsmouth on the 11th July, on board
the Mercury frigate, armed _en flute_, and commanded by Captain Tancock.

We had a favourable passage, and landed at Cadiz on the 29th of that
month. This city, it may be remembered, was besieged at this time by a
French army under Marshal Victor; consequently, when we arrived, we were
amused by seeing immense shells flying from one party to the other, but
without doing any serious injury to either, the distance being too great
to produce any effect of moment. As we came in sight of Cadiz, the view
was most enchanting, for the city appeared as if composed of lofty and
elegant snow-white buildings, apparently rising from the bosom of the
ocean, for the land on which it is built cannot be seen at a distance;
added to which, the numerous and beautiful towns about the bay, and a
little beyond it, rendered it a most delightful scene. On the right was
Cadiz, with its lofty lighthouse, and its strong sea-walls rising out of
the water; on the left was Rota, an apparently neat little town. Farther
up the bay, on the same side, was Port St Mary's, and beyond that
Porto Real, both considerable towns. In the centre rises the Isla de
Leon, now called St Ferdinand; beyond that Chiclana, composed of the
elegant country residences of the more wealthy Cadiz merchants; and, in
the distance, towering on the mountains behind, the dazzling white town
of Medina Sidonia shining in the sun; indeed altogether imagination can
scarcely picture to itself a more interesting _coup-d'oeil_, the scene
being closed by the lofty snow-clad mountains of Ronda. We landed at
Cadiz, and remained for the night in the barracks situated in the
barrier, on the land-side of the town, and which is remarkably strong,
the fortifications being composed of solid masonry, and the barracks all
bomb-proof. I suffered dreadfully from the myriads of fleas which preyed
upon me during the night, and was glad when morning appeared.

We marched next day to the Isla, (be it observed the town is called by
that name as well as the island on which it and Cadiz are situated,)
distant from Cadiz about seven miles; the island is of a most singular
form, being about ten miles broad at the end next the continent, from
which it is separated by the river Santi Petri; immediately below the
town of Isla it begins to narrow very rapidly, forming from thence to
Cadiz nothing more than a narrow sand-bank, in some places not more
than a hundred yards across, and on which a causeway has been built to
connect the two places. We took up our abode in the Isla, where the
Spanish government, such as it was, at this time resided; and here I
witnessed the first opening of the Spanish Cortes in 1810, which was
attended with all the pomp and show of a truly Roman Catholic people.
_Te Deums_ and other pompous and brilliant ceremonies marked the event;
indeed, here we had an opportunity of seeing a great number of the
grandees of the Spanish nation, for, as I said before, the government
had retired to this place from Madrid, and most of the courtiers and
others attached to the government had assembled here, together with the
deputies from the different provinces; altogether the scenes we
witnessed here were sometimes very imposing.

The French occupied all the towns before named save Cadiz and Isla,
their advanced piquets being thrown forward to near the river Santi
Petri, except near the Bridge of Luaza, which is the only communication
across from the island to the mainland; here our pickets were advanced a
considerable distance beyond the bridge upon a causeway on which is the
road leading to Seville, through a broad salt marsh on the banks of the
river; it is here about two miles wide, and utterly impassable, except
to those who know the footpaths across it, being intersected at every
few paces by deep salt-pits or pans. The enemy, as mentioned before, had
their sentries at some parts pretty far into the centre of this marsh,
and there were some fellows in the Spanish service called by the name of
"creepers," they obtaining their livelihood by killing sea-fowl and
other animals in this marsh; and so dexterous were they at this
_creeping_, that they could steal upon the birds unperceived, which
enabled them to get them with ease. Sometimes a fellow of this calling
would set off on a _creeping_ excursion, and instead of bagging a
wild-duck, or some other such bird, would plunge his stiletto into the
heart of an unsuspecting French sentry, and leave him weltering in his
gore. This was a noble exploit in their estimation, and marks strongly
the character of the Spaniard, who, inured to blood by the frequency of
their bull-fights and other similar exhibitions, hesitates not a moment
at assassination if urged on by what he deems his own or country's
wrongs; this inhuman act, of course, was perpetrated in the dark.

I may mention, in connexion with this, that on the Christmas of 1810, it
was reported that sixteen people had been assassinated in Isla alone, on
the evening or night before; it is probable the number may have been
exaggerated, but the thing was such an almost everyday occurrence that
it appeared not to excite the least horror at its atrocity. I had
occasion to go down the town during the Christmas day, and I saw still
lying at the corner of one of the most frequented streets, one of the
unhappy beings who had thus fallen. No one seemed inclined to own him;
and his body, foul with blood and dust, was thus permitted to remain in
the public streets without any enquiry being made with respect to the
perpetrator of so foul a deed. In truth they are, as it were, trained up
to this recklessness of human life from their infancy, for in the town
of Isla there was a sort of naval academy, where a number of boys, from
perhaps eight to twelve years of age, were educated; these urchins were
permitted to wear swords, and it is really astonishing how desirous they
appeared to make use of them, for they could scarcely ever pass along
the streets without trying the sharpness of their points upon the backs
of pigs or dogs, or any other unfortunate animal that came in their way.

The French also occupied a long low tongue of land which stretches out
into the Bay of Cadiz, taking its rise from between Port St Mary's and
Porto Real, and extending to within about two and a half miles of Cadiz,
and about one from Puntalis, a fort erected on the island opposite the
extremity of this low tongue; this is called the Trocadero, since become
famous as the field on which the Duke D'Angouleme, and Prince Carignan
of Naples, gained so many honours. On the point of this tongue the
enemy's principal batteries were erected, and from thence they contrived
occasionally, but not often, and never with any great effect, to throw
shells into the town of Cadiz. The mortar now in St James' Park, called
the "Prince Regent's bomb," was cast at Seville on purpose to enable
them to reach the town, no ordnance of common dimensions being capable
of throwing a shell so far; but it did not answer the end proposed, or
at least the effect expected from it, for it was imagined by them, that
if they could once succeed in throwing shells into the city, the
inhabitants would become so alarmed that they would compel the military
to surrender. This, however, was far from being realized, although they
did throw a few in; but the distance being so great, they were
necessarily thrown much at random, some of them falling short of the
town, others flying completely over into the bay near the lighthouse on
the other side, and some few, as I said, falling in the city, but from
which very few casualties occurred.[2] I am told they were obliged to
have the mortar slung in chains at the time of firing it, the
concussion being so great as to destroy the bed in which it was fixed.
As may be supposed, there was constant war between our fort Puntalis,
before mentioned, and the enemy's batteries on this point; in fact our
people had orders to throw a thirteen-inch shell every quarter of an
hour, besides the occasional firing from the guns and other mortars when
any thing appeared on the opposite side; and you may be certain the
French were not behind us in the expenditure of ammunition; they were
remarkably fond of firing what are termed salvos, that is, volleys of
artillery. On one occasion I happened to be looking out from a high
tower near Isla, called the Tore Alto, and while all was deep and
profound silence, and I happened to be looking towards the point of
Trocadero, in a moment the smoke rose from at least 100 pieces of
artillery, fired by signal, and the noise they made was tremendous. Our
poor little fort of Puntalis appeared almost enveloped in the dust
raised by the striking of the shot, and the smoke from them which fell
about it, and seemed as if almost deprived of power by so sudden and
unexpected a salute; but she began at length to return the compliment,
although feebly in comparison of the tremendous volley she had received.
This and such like were of frequent occurrence, scarcely a day passing
without something interesting taking place.

To enable us to cope in some measure with the French, a large double
fortified sea-mortar was brought from Gibraltar, which threw
thirteen-inch shells. It was brought up to the back of the town of Isla,
near some powder magazines, and an attempt made there to throw some
shells over to the Trocadero. The first trial, an empty shell was put
in, with not less than thirty-two pounds of powder in the chamber. On
firing it, the shell flew all to atoms, from the violent shock
occasioned by so great a quantity of powder; and the shell being too
weak for that description of mortar, another was tried filled with sand,
to give it more weight and solidity; this answered the purpose, for it
fell on the land on the opposite coast, but still, from the great range,
much uncertainty must naturally attend the practice, and it was
eventually given up. The next day, however, we were saluted from the
opposite side with both shot and shell, the French thus showing us that
they were better able to play at long bowls than we were; neither,
however, did their practice continue, for there was nothing at the point
where their shot and shells fell to be injured by them, the magazines
before noticed being now empty.

On another occasion an attack was made by our people on the Trocadero
itself, where it was reported the French had got a considerable number
of boats, &c., laid up on shore, about half-way between the point and
Porto Real; our folks took gun-boats and boats with rockets, the
intention being to set fire to the enemy's craft. They accordingly
advanced in good style, keeping as far, however, as possible out of the
range of the French batteries at the point, which, as they were directed
towards Cadiz and Puntalis, could not easily bring their artillery to
bear upon our boats. They reached the place where it was said the French
craft was lying, and fired a considerable number of rockets, but without
being able to effect any thing farther than burning one boat, I believe.
As they were returning, however, they met the French commander, who had
been down to the point in a light boat, and he, like a brave fellow,
determined to run completely the gauntlet rather than return, keeping as
close in shore, however, as possible. The whole of our gun-boats fired
at him as he passed, and knocked the water up about him in all
directions without ever once touching him, although, to look at him, one
would have imagined it impossible he could escape; but here the old
soldier's adage was verified, for there was still more room to miss than
to hit him, and he accordingly escaped scot-free.

While here, I had a most ample opportunity of closely viewing the
Spanish army, great numbers being stationed in and about the Isla, and
great numbers constantly coming into and going out of the place, after
receiving such equipment as the government was able to provide for them.
Nothing could exceed the hardy and robust appearance of the men in
general; and had they been clothed, appointed, and disciplined like
either their enemies or their allies, there could not have been a finer
soldiery. I cannot, however, say so much for their officers; most of
them appeared to be utterly unfit and unable to command their men. Those
who had the means, seemed to think of nothing else but dressing like
apes or mountebanks, and intriguing with the women. It was really absurd
and ludicrous to see the strange figures they generally made themselves.
In one regiment alone you might have observed more different uniforms
than both we and the French have in all our armies. One would have had
on a blue coat turned up with red, with a chaco and a straight sword,
the uniform prescribed for officers of the infantry, I believe; the next
would have most likely had on a hussar dress, with an enormous sabre
dangling by his side; another would have had a red coat, a fourth
yellow, a fifth white, and so on. In short, all the colours of the
rainbow were generally exhibited in the uniforms of one regiment's
officers; and every one of them appeared to vie with the other who could
make the greatest harlequin of himself, whilst those of them who were
mounted would caper and prance about the streets like so many fools,
riding with their legs at full stretch, and the toe of the boot (if they
had one) just touching the stirrup, and drawing the reins continually
through the fingers of their right hand; and if by any chance an ape of
this kind came near the window of his dulcinea, and thought there was a
likelihood of her seeing him, I pitied the poor foot-passengers who
might happen to be near him, for he would make his unfortunate Rosinante
prance and caper by the immense long bit in its mouth, and the pieces of
iron in the shape of spurs on his (shoes perhaps), till the poor animal
was like to fall under him. In short, they had all the pride, arrogance,
and self-sufficiency of the best officers in the world, with the very
least of all pretension to have an high opinion of themselves; it is
true they were not all alike, but the majority of them were the most
haughty, and at the same time the most contemptible creatures in the
shape of officers, that I ever beheld. It was, therefore, not to be
expected that the soldiers would or could look upon them with that
degree of respect and reverence so essential to a due maintenance of
subordination in an army.

About the month of February 1811, it was concerted between the Spanish
government and General Graham, who commanded us, to undertake an
expedition which should land in the vicinity of Gibraltar; and being
there reinforced by some troops from that fortress, the whole should
move forward in the direction of Chiclana, and, taking the enemy in the
rear of his works, compel him either to abandon them or fight a battle.
Accordingly, on the 18th of that month, we embarked on board some small
vessels that had been fitted up for the occasion in the bay of Cadiz,
and, sailing soon after, we reached Algeziras, ten miles on this side of
Gibraltar, and landed there on the 24th. Our force consisted of a
brigade of artillery, with ten guns; two battalions of Foot Guards; the
28th, 67th, and 87th regiments; a battalion composed of flank companies
from Gibraltar; two companies of the 47th regiment, and two of the 20th
Portuguese regiment, with six companies of our corps and one squadron of
cavalry,--in all about 4500 men. The Spanish army, under the command of
General La Pena, (who, being senior officer, directed the whole,)
consisted of two divisions,--in all from ten to eleven thousand. We were
not allowed to take any baggage with us, consequently we could not
expect much comfort during the service, which was expected to be short.
The day we landed we bivouacked on a height near Algeziras, and the next
morning moved on towards Tarifa, where we remained for that day and the
next, to allow time to get the artillery and cavalry horses on shore.
Here I observed a strange custom among the females of this place, the
remains, I apprehend, of the Moorish fashion, (which no doubt would
continue longer in this place than others, it being immediately opposite
to and in sight of Africa.) The Spanish women all wear what they term a
mantilla, that is, a kind of scarf made of cloth, generally black, which
they throw over their heads lengthwise, letting the two ends come over
their shoulders, and meeting and crossing on the breast, it forms a sort
of head-dress which shows only the face, and keeps them close and snug
about the head; but here, they bring it so far forward as to completely
cover the face, leaving nothing but a very small hole in front of their
left eye (I think it is), at which they peep out, without showing any
part of the face. Colonel Brown of the 28th, who was then a most wild
and eccentric character, although now I understand completely altered,
could not relish this hiding of their beauty by the modest dames of
Tarifa. All, therefore, that he met in the streets he stopped, and made
them open the mantilla, that he might have a fair peep at them, to the
great scandal of the good ladies of this still Moorish town, and which,
had it been on any other occasion, might have been attended with
unpleasant consequences to himself.

When every thing was ready we moved forward from Tarifa, and halted for
the night on a height about twelve miles distant. The next day we
reached Casas Vejas, or "Old Houses," where we bivouacked on a scrubby
hill, the weather being very bitter, which we felt in all its force,
having no covering whatever. Next day we had to cross a considerable
lake of fresh water, by a sort of ford which crossed it about the
middle. We had started before daylight, and, through some mismanagement,
did not reach this lake till near mid-day, although it was only a few
miles distant from our last night's quarters. One division of the
Spaniards led the column, and another was behind us, we being thus in
the centre, as being the least thought of probably by our Spanish
Commander-in-Chief; for indeed we had often heard it said in and about
Isla, "what fine-looking and well-disciplined soldiers the British
are!--what a pity they cannot fight!" So thought La Pena, probably; but
by two o'clock the first division of Spaniards had not near got over the
lake, at which the patience of our General was so completely exhausted,
that he requested the Spanish General to allow him to bring forward the
British troops, to show him the way how he and they would act. My
battalion led the van, and were ordered to march straight through it
without any picking of steps, and to go forward in regular sections, one
man supporting another. They went in and marched right through it, as if
it had been plain ground, the water taking them generally about
mid-deep. The rest of the British army followed, and were all through in
less than half an hour; a one-horse cart, indeed, stuck fast in the
middle of it, from the wheels having got entangled between the large
stones at the bottom. General Graham seeing this, instantly dismounted,
and, plunging in, set his shoulder to the wheel, and fairly lifted it
clear of the obstruction.

La Pena, and those about him, after witnessing the example set them by
our General and his troops, seemed really ashamed of their former
conduct, and, setting to in good earnest, they contrived to urge their
soldiers and officers to take the water with more freedom, and before
dark the whole army had got over. While we were so long detained by the
first division of Spaniards getting across, I, with several other
mounted people, rode forward to the ford, to ascertain the cause of our
stoppage for so long a time. The Spaniards were going into the water one
at a time,--here one, and there one,--while the creatures of officers
were making the men carry them on their backs. Had the whole army acted
thus, we should not have got over before daylight next morning.

When all were across, and the columns formed, we moved forward, and
reached the neighbourhood of Veger, which stands on a high hill not far
distant from the memorable Cape Trafalgar. We halted in an olive-grove
below the town, and bivouacked for the night; it was bitter cold, and
the troops could find but little wood for firing, which they much
needed, from having got so completely wet in crossing the lake.

We remained at Veger all the next day, and a little after dark commenced
our march. We being now in the neighbourhood of the enemy, it became
necessary to conceal our movements as much as possible. During the night
we passed the fishing town of Conil, and, keeping near the coast, we
arrived the next morning on the plain of Chiclana. I quote from our
General's dispatch, as it states the thing in a much more clear and
satisfactory manner than I could do. He says,--"After a night march of
sixteen hours from the camp (bivouack) near Veger, we arrived on the
morning of the 5th on the low ridge of Barossa, about four miles from
the Santi Petri river. This height extends inland about a mile and a
half, continuing on the north the extensive heathy plain of Chiclana. A
great pine-forest skirts the plain, and circles round the height at some
distance, terminating down towards Santi Petri, the intermediate space
between the north side of the height and the forest being uneven and
broken."

The two Spanish divisions had preceded us, who, after having rested a
while on the plain, moved down towards the Santi Petri, where a bridge
was to be thrown over by the troops in the Isla de Leon, and thus open a
communication between the two armies, that is, between those inside the
island and us.

The General goes on to say,--"A well-conducted and successful attack on
the rear of the enemy's lines, near Santi Petri, by the vanguard of the
Spanish army under Brigadier-general Ladrizabel, having opened the
communication with the Isla de Leon, I received General La Pena's
directions to move down from the position of Barossa to that of the
Torre de Bermesa, about half-way to the Santi Petri river, over which a
bridge had been lately established. This latter position occupies a
narrow woody ridge, the right on the sea-cliff, and the left falling
down to the Almanza creek, on the edge of the marsh; a hard sandy beach
gives an easy communication between the western points of these two
positions.

"My division being halted on the eastern slope of the Barossa height,
was marched about twelve o'clock through the wood towards Bermesa,
(cavalry patrols having previously been sent towards Chiclana, without
meeting with the enemy.) On the march I received notice that the enemy
had appeared in force on the plain, and was advancing towards the
heights of Barossa. As I considered that position as the key of Santi
Petri, I immediately countermarched, in order to support the troops left
for its defence; and the alacrity with which this manoeuvre was
executed, served as a favourable omen. It was, however, impossible, in
such intricate and difficult ground, to preserve order in the columns,
and there never was time to restore it entirely. But before we could get
ourselves quite disentangled from the wood, the troops on the Barossa
hill were seen returning from it, while the enemy's left wing was
rapidly ascending. At the same time his right wing stood on the plain,
on the edge of the wood, within cannon-shot. A retreat in the face of
such an enemy, already within reach of the easy communication by the
sea-beach, must have involved the whole allied army in all the danger of
being attacked during the unavoidable confusion of the different corps
arriving on the narrow ridge of Bermesa nearly at the same time.

"Trusting to the known heroism of British troops, regardless of the
numbers and position of the enemy, an immediate attack was determined
on. Major Duncan soon opened a powerful battery of ten guns in the
centre. Brigadier-general Dilkes, with the brigade of Guards,
Lieutenant-colonel Brown's (of the 28th) flank battalion,
Lieutenant-colonel Norcott's two companies of the 2d rifle corps, and
Major Acheson, with a part of the 67th, (separated from the regiment in
the wood,) formed on the right.

"Colonel Wheately's brigade, (consisting of the 28th, 67th, and 87th,)
with three companies of the Coldstream Guards, under Lieutenant-colonel
Jackson (separated likewise from his battalion in the wood), and
Lieutenant-colonel Barnard's flank battalion (being two companies 47th,
two ditto 20th Portuguese, and four of third battalion 95th) formed on
the left. As soon as the infantry was thus hastily got together, the
guns advanced to a more favourable position, and kept up a destructive
fire. The right wing proceeded to the attack of General Ruffin's
division on the hill, while Lieutenant-colonel Barnard's flank
battalion, and Lieutenant-colonel Bush's detachment of the 20th
Portuguese, were warmly engaged with the enemy's tirailleurs on our
left.

"General Laval's division, notwithstanding the havoc made by Major
Duncan's battery, continued to advance in very imposing masses, opening
his fire of musketry, and was only checked by that of the left wing. The
left wing now advanced firing. A most destructive charge, by the three
companies of the Guards and the 87th regiment, supported by all the
remainder of the wing, decided the defeat of General Laval's division.

"The eagle of the 8th regiment of light infantry, which suffered
immensely, and a howitzer, rewarded this charge, and remained in
possession of Major Gough of the 87th regiment. These attacks were
zealously supported by Colonel Bilson with the 28th regiment, and
Lieutenant-colonel Prevost with a part of the 67th. A reserve, formed
beyond the narrow valley, across which the enemy was closely pursued,
next shared the same fate, and was routed by the same means.

"Meanwhile, the right wing was not less successful. The enemy, confident
of success, met General Dilkes on the ascent of the hill, and the
contest was sanguinary; but the undaunted perseverance of the brigade of
Guards, of Lieutenant-colonel Brown's battalion, and of
Lieutenant-colonel Norcott's and Major Acheson's detachments, overcame
every obstacle, and General Ruffin's division was driven from the
heights in confusion, leaving two pieces of cannon.

"No expressions of mine could do justice to the conduct of the troops
throughout--nothing less than the almost unparalleled exertions of every
officer, the invincible bravery of every soldier, and the most
determined devotion of the honour of his Majesty's arms in all, could
have achieved this brilliant success against such a formidable enemy, so
posted. In less than an hour and a half from the commencement of the
action, the enemy was in full retreat. The retiring divisions met,
halted, and seemed inclined to form; a new and more advanced position of
our artillery quickly dispersed them. The exhausted state of the troops
made pursuit impossible. A position was taken up on the eastern side of
the hill; and we were strengthened on our right by the return of two
Spanish regiments, that had been attached before to my division, but
which I had left on the hill, and which had been ordered to retire.

"An eagle, six pieces of cannon, the General of Division Ruffin, and the
General of Brigade Rousseau, wounded and taken; the Chief of the Staff,
General Bellegarde, and aide-de-camp of Marshal Victor, and the colonel
of the 8th regiment, with many other officers killed, and several
wounded and taken prisoners, the field covered with the dead bodies of
the enemy, attest that my confidence in this division was nobly repaid.
The animated charges of the 87th regiment were most conspicuous.
Lieutenant-colonel Barnard, (twice wounded,) and the officers of his
flank-battalion, executed the duty of skirmishing in advance with the
enemy in a masterly manner; and were ably seconded by Lieutenant-Colonel
Bush, of the 20th Portuguese, who (likewise twice wounded) fell into
the enemy's hands, but was afterwards rescued."

The dispatch contains many more acknowledgments, which, as they have no
connexion with my narrative, I have omitted.

I beg now to make such remarks and observations as may tend to throw
light upon the different parts of the foregoing dispatch.

The two Spanish battalions attached to our division, together with
Lieutenant-colonel Brown's flank-battalion, were left upon the height of
Barossa, when we moved down into the wood, in order to secure that
position till we had possessed ourselves of the height of Bermesa; but
we had not left the plain more than half an hour, I think, and descended
into the wood, till an officer came galloping after us, saying the
French had debouched from the wood, and were moving on to the high
ground in our rear, and had attacked the troops left there for its
defence. Orders were instantly given us to countermarch, and to get on
to the plain and into action as soon as possible. In coming about, one
of the guns got entangled with a pine-tree; there was no time to
disengage it, and setting to with the whip, they pushed the horses
forward, and tore up the tree completely by the roots, although one of
considerable size. I thought (as our General says) it appeared a good
omen, and that a trifling obstacle would not be allowed to impede their
career.

When we reached the plain, and perceived the enemy, never did a finer
sight present itself. They were manoeuvring on the high ground before
us; and as Home says,

    "The hill they gained, and moving on its top,
    Of more than mortal size, towering, they seemed
    An host angelic, clad in burning arms."

Those immediately in front of my battalion were the famed 8th regiment,
and consisted of two battalions of 700 men each; one was composed of
grenadiers, and the other of voltigeurs, or light infantry. The
grenadiers had long waving red plumes in their caps, at least a foot in
length; while the light infantry had feathers of the same length and
make, but green, with yellow tops. The whole of the French army had on
their best or holyday suits of clothing, with their arms as bright as
silver, and glancing in the sun as they moved in column, gave them
really a noble and martial appearance. We had no sooner cleared the wood
than we inclined to our left, and went immediately at them. Major
Duncan's guns commenced playing upon their column the moment he could
get a clear piece of ground. The two companies of the 47th, attached to
my battalion, were taken to cover and remain with the guns. Our people
extended as we went up the hill, the Portuguese supporting us in the
rear; and in a very short time we were hotly engaged with the fellows
with the beautiful green feathers, many of which fell on the ground in a
short time. As we advanced, the battalions to our right and in rear of
us got formed in line, and moving forward in fine style, took up
stronger ground in advance; the guns in the centre also moving onward,
and causing dreadful havoc in the enemy's ranks.

Early in the action my horse was killed, being shot in the head, which
ball, had his head not stopped it, would in all probability have entered
my body. He fell like a stone. I then went on and joined the ranks, and
finding a rifle of a man that had just fallen, (poor little Croudace's
servant, who afterwards fell himself,) I took a few shots at them in
revenge for my horse. At this time the grenadier battalion of the 8th,
with their waving red plumes, began to advance in close column, the
drums beating all the time the _pas de charge_. They were supported by
other columns in their rear, together with one, the French 54th, which
they sent into the wood to try to turn our left. The 8th advanced,
notwithstanding the galling fire kept up by our people and the
Portuguese, every shot almost of which must have told, as they were in a
solid body, not more than from 100 to 150 yards' distance. Our people
were of course compelled to give way to this imposing column, when the
regiments on our right and in our rear, opening out upon them a
destructive fire, and the 87th and Guards immediately after attacking
them with the bayonet, their rout and discomfiture was complete. The
8th, which suffered most, and from whom the eagle was taken, never yet
got into line--nor did they intend, I believe--but advanced as a solid
body, (occasionally firing from their front,) till, coming in contact
with the regiments above mentioned, and in this state receiving the
charge, their loss was excessive, for they could not get away. I
understand, when the 87th charged, Ensign Keogh of that regiment made
the first attempt to wrench the eagle from the officer who carried it;
but in so doing he was run through by several of those who supported it,
and fell lifeless to the ground. Sergeant Masterson of that regiment
then dashed at it, and was more fortunate, he succeeding in securing it.
I understand there was some dispute between them and the Guards, who
charged at the same time with the 87th, to whom it properly belonged;
but I imagine the 87th must have been the captors, for Sergeant
Masterson soon after received a commission for his gallantry, and is now
a captain in that regiment.

The 54th, the French regiment, which had been sent into the wood to turn
our left flank, by some means got entangled; for, except their light
company, no part of the regiment ever got into action again; and when
their columns were routed, they found some difficulty in effecting their
retreat. There is something rather extraordinary and very interesting in
the story of the eagle and the 8th regiment, if it be true, and which I
see no reason to doubt. They were one of the regiments, it is said,
which were engaged at Talavera, and were particularly distinguished; and
it is further said, that the 87th was one of the regiments opposed to
them, and over which they gained some advantage; that is, the French
troops caused the British brigade, in which the 87th was serving, to
retire with considerable loss; and that it was for their conduct in this
action that Bonaparte had placed a golden wreath of laurel round the
neck of the regimental eagle with his own hand. If such was the case, it
is most remarkable that the very regiment by whom they should have
obtained this honour, should be the regiment that deprived them of their
eagle, which had been so highly honoured. But here, poor fellows,
although they did not lose their honour, they lost very nearly the whole
regiment; for out of 1400 which entered the field, not more than 200 of
them entered Chiclana after the action. Indeed I never witnessed any
field so thickly strewed with dead as this plain was after the action;
and I feel confident, and all accounts agree in confirming the opinion,
that the loss of the French on this occasion was little short of 3000
men; ours was about 1250. Here then we have a loss of 4000 men in about
an hour and a half, out of about 12,000 which composed the two armies.

In this action, Colonel Bush was almost absurdly brave and conspicuous.
As soon as he got his Portuguese fairly into action, he rode slowly
backward and forward among them, with his spectacles on, crying out as
the balls whistled past him, "Que bella musica!" what delightful music!
Poor fellow, he did not ride there many minutes; for, being within a
very short distance of the enemy's tirailleurs so conspicuous an object,
it was not to be expected he could escape. He died a few days after the
action.

Colonel Barnard, my commandant, (now Sir Andrew,) about the middle of
the action, received a severe wound, and was borne away to the rear.
Whilst the surgeon was dressing him, another shot struck him, and
inflicted, I believe, a worse wound than the former. The horses of my
battalion suffered greatly in proportion to their numbers. We had only
four in the field, two of which, Major Ross's and my own, were killed,
and Colonel Barnard's wounded; only the adjutant's escaped with a whole
skin. Indeed there was scarcely an officer or soldier in the action that
had not marks of shot about him. The caps of the tall guardsmen were
riddled as it were; while the greater part of the enemy's shot passed
over our little fellows, who were both too near them, and too low for
their fire. I may remark on this subject that the French generally fire
high, but here I think unusually so; for, after a considerable quantity
of ammunition had been expended by my battalion, it became my duty to
look out for a fresh supply. I accordingly posted off to the rear, where
I expected to have found some mules which had been attached to us, with
ammunition on their backs; but on my way thither, the ground was
actually ploughing up on all sides by the enemy's large shot, and their
musket-balls falling very thick; so much so, that some of our mules far
to the rear had been wounded, and the others had dispersed. Hence also
the second wound which my gallant commander received, where he ought to
have been completely out of danger. Some ammunition for our rifles was,
however, found in a one-horse cart belonging to the artillery, and out
of it those whose ammunition was expended were replenished. But during
my absence to the rear, the gallant and decisive charge had been made;
and when I again reached the front, I perceived the enemy's columns in
full retreat, covered by the remainder of their light troops, closely
followed by some of my people. The retreat was accordingly sounded to
recall them from the pursuit, and our brave and victorious little army
cheered the enemy as his beaten and disheartened columns left the field.

Immediately after our army began to move off towards the Isla, our
General being, as I understood, so much exasperated with the apathy
evinced by the Spanish General, that he would no longer co-operate with
him, and consequently drew off our troops into the Isle of Leon. My
battalion, however, was destined to remain on the field all night to
protect the numerous wounded from any marauders, or small parties and
cavalry patrols of the enemy, which might happen to return. However, not
a Frenchman made his appearance there again that night. When it was
determined to withdraw the British army, Major Duncan, with great
humanity, (approved of course by our excellent General,) cast off from
the artillery-carriages all the spare ammunition, in order to make room
for as many of our wounded officers and soldiers as those carriages
could accommodate, and thus a considerable number of them were carried
from the field immediately.

After they had left us, and my battalion was still standing in front of
the position last occupied by our troops, all having retired but
ourselves, and it now began to draw towards night, and we were preparing
to move off, an unfortunate French sergeant attracted our notice. Poor
fellow, he had been shot in the small of the back, and (on our surgeon
examining him) pronounced to be mortally. He appeared to be a man above
forty, and apparently a veteran, who had fought many a hard field; and
was, I think, one of the most respectable-looking men of his class that
I have seen. When he saw us preparing to leave him to his fate, the
expression of his countenance became the most piteous and beseeching
imaginable; imploring us in French not to leave him there to perish. My
heart bled for him; but unhappily we had no means of removing him, had
there even been a hope of his recovery. When he saw that his fate was
inevitable, he crawled in the best manner he was able to a broken
ammunition-box, and raising himself on his knees, supported by it,
besought that Being who never casts out the cry of the unfortunate, and
who, I sincerely hope, imparted to him that strength and comfort which
his unhappy circumstances so greatly required. I doubt not he was a
sincere Christian; never shall I forget the impression his unhappy fate
made on my mind. To be left in solitude and darkness on this
blood-stained heath, with the prospect of his own certain death before
his eyes, and without any to comfort him in his last agony, must indeed
have been a severe trial to his fortitude. Would to God I could have
relieved him! His case was not singular, it is true; but none ever
presented itself to my view under such truly affecting circumstances as
this unhappy veteran's did.

After dark, my battalion retired over the field where the thickest of
the dead and wounded were strewed, and many were the dying groans which
struck upon our ears, as we traversed this bloody field; but, except
these groans, no sound was heard, where lately the din of arms had been
loud and fierce, and where war had raged in all its fury; till coming to
the house upon the sea-beach, where many of the wounded had been
collected, we were formed into square on a sand-hill near it, and in
this position rested on our arms for the remainder of the night. On our
way from the front, we passed not far from where my horse had fallen;
and as saddlery was scarce at Cadiz, I thought it would be prudent to
try to recover that on which I had been riding. I found it; but my horse
having fallen with his back inclined to the front, it was perforated by
shot in five places, and the tree was broken. However, I disengaged it,
and giving it to one of the men, whose rifle I carried in return, I got
it safely into Isla.

About twelve at night, poor General Rousseau died, a cannon-shot having
carried away the greater part of the flesh of one of his thighs; and as
no other troops were near, the task of paying him the last sad duty
devolved upon me. I went to the house aforesaid, and procured a shovel
or a spade, and digging a hole in the sand by the light of the moon, his
body was deposited, where it in all probability will remain till the
last trumpet shall summon it to rise. Poor drunken Gilles, one of the
men I had employed on the occasion, pronounced the only service as he
was committed to the dust, which was, "God rest his soul!" I indeed
sincerely hope so. Poor Rousseau had been a noble soldier; in his pocket
was found a leave which he had obtained to return to France on account
of ill health; but in the prospect of the approaching action he had
delayed his departure, and thus fell a victim as it were to his
patriotism and his sense of honour. He was military governor of Xeres de
la Frontera, from whence we have our wine called Sherry, a corruption of
Xeres. He was a small slender person, and apparently had suffered
greatly from ill health. During the night some Spaniards were sent into
the field to look for and bring off the guns we had taken, which they
did.

As it approached towards morning, Major Ross, seeing all was quiet,
moved us off by the beach towards our former quarters; and passing over
the position of Bermesa, which the Spaniards still occupied, and
crossing the Santi Petri by the lately erected bridge, we returned weary
and hungry to La Isla, and where our friends received us once again with
great cordiality. If my reader is not tired of the subject, I would just
beg to draw his attention for a moment to the circumstances attending
this action. The French troops were at least 7500 (some say 8000)
strong, well clothed and appointed, and apparently well fed, and fresh
from their cantonments, none of them probably having marched more than
four miles. They were some of the best in the French service, and
commanded by one of Bonaparte's ablest generals, a marshal of France,
Victor, Duke of Belluno. They occupied a fine position, having the
ground completely at their choice; while we did not muster more than
4500 at most. We had been marching for sixteen hours successively
through the night over bad roads; and being taken in a manner by
surprise, we came out of the wood _beneath_ the enemy, broken and
disjointed, and were instantly hurried into action.

The French fought desperately; for when their marauding columns came
down upon us with an intrepidity seldom seen in the French army, and
opening out their heavy and destructive fire, my heart quaked within me
for the safety of our little army, and the honour of our country, for I
thought it would be impossible to resist them. However, the steady
valour of our troops repelled the assailants, and, taking advantage of
their proximity, charged as before stated, and completely overthrew
them. It is certain, as General Graham says, that _all_ must have done
their duty on this occasion; notwithstanding, we may sing with great
propriety, "Non nobis, Domine"--"Not unto us, O Lord, but unto thy name
be the praise;" for it is certain we must have been specially favoured
by a kind Providence, or it is impossible we could have gained _such_ a
victory under so many and so great disadvantages; for never was victory
more complete. In less than three hours from the first glimpse we had of
them as we debouched from the wood, a Frenchman was not to be seen in
all the field, save the numerous killed and wounded.

Although our General did not say any thing in his public dispatch of the
abominable conduct of La Pena, no doubt he stated truly in his private
information how ill that General had behaved; for he and the 10,000 or
11,000 Spaniards he had with him remained within two miles of the field
of action, quiet and passive spectators of the scene, without making one
effort to support us had we been beaten, or to take advantage of the
victory should we gain it; and the consequence was, the French retained
their ground and works by which they invested Cadiz and La Isla,
whereas, had he made the slightest movement during or after the fight,
they would have all gone off, and the siege would have been raised, for
it is evident they contemplated and were prepared for this, the soldiers
having each three or four days' bread in his possession.

A considerable number of other officers besides Generals Ruffin and
Rousseau were taken. Ruffin was wounded in the neck by a rifle-shot,
which touched the spinal marrow, depriving him of the use of his limbs.
He was soon after embarked for England, but died as he came within sight
of the Isle of Wight. He was an immense and a fine-looking man, about
six feet two inches or six feet three inches high, and ate enormously.
He every day received a mess from our General's table. The other
officers also were treated with the greatest politeness and attention,
dining first at one regimental mess, and then at another. They were
fully sensible of the kindness shown them, and expressed themselves very
grateful. They were afterwards sent to England.

I cannot omit here noticing the high estimation in which General Graham
was held by every officer and soldier of this little army. I may truly
say, he lived in their affections; they not only looked up to him with
confidence as their commander, but they esteemed and respected him as
their firm friend and protector, which indeed he always showed himself
to be.

In all my fighting I never was in an action where the chances of death
were so numerous as in this; and I may say, I never was in an action
where I was less prepared to die. It is therefore of the Lord's mercies
that he spared me--I hope, for good at last.


FOOTNOTE:

[2] The distance to which the French threw these shells is truly
amazing. The longest range of heavy iron sea mortars is only about 4200
yards, whereas the distance from the French batteries on the Trocadero
to the nearest point of Cadiz was, I believe, 4500 or more; but they
exceeded this considerably, for, as I said above, some of their shells
fell in the sea beyond the town, near the lighthouse, a distance of at
least 500 or 600 yards farther. The shells were always half filled with
lead, to increase their flight, so that when they burst the mischief
they occasioned was never extensive; I believe not more than about
half-a-dozen individuals suffered from them in all.




CHAPTER VII.

     The 2d Battalion of the 95th Rifles ordered to proceed to
     Portugal--Our Author visits England--Returns to Portugal, and
     joins his Regiment at Rodrigo--The Army move towards
     Badajos--Siege of Badajos--Badajos surrenders--Insubordination
     among the Troops--Quelled by the prompt measures of Lord
     Wellington.


We remained at Isla till June, without any thing of importance
occurring, but at this time I was brought nigh to death's door by the
bursting of a bloodvessel in the lungs. I was so ill that it was deemed
necessary to send me home for change of air, it being exceedingly hot at
this time at Isla. I was accordingly removed to Cadiz to wait for the
first ship returning to England, and while there I suffered greatly, not
being able to lie down in bed. However, before a vessel could be had, an
order was received for my battalion to proceed to Portugal, and our
esteemed commander was likewise ordered to proceed to that country. As I
felt myself somewhat better, I obtained permission to accompany my
battalion to Portugal, and I accordingly embarked with it at Cadiz on
the 30th of that month, on board a transport, the name of which I
forget. General Graham intended to have gone in a 50 gun ship that was
leaving that port for England, he being to be left at Lisbon in passing.
He sent an aide-de-camp on board to prepare for his reception; but he
met with such treatment while on board, as induced the General to alter
his plan and go in a frigate, on board which some of our people were
embarked. It is said, that after the aide-de-camp had been shown the
accommodation, the captain intimated to him, that it was expected the
military officers would always keep on the leeward side of the
quarter-deck. The windward side on board a man-of-war is considered the
most honourable, therefore this was in fact putting the General beneath
himself. He suffered, however, for his ill-timed assumption of
supremacy, for there was a quantity of specie at Cadiz which was to be
transported at the same time for the use of the army in Portugal, and
which was intended to have gone in the ship with the General; but after
this reception of his aide-de-camp, and the imperious condition attached
to his going in this ship, he went on board the frigate with his suite,
and took the money with him, thus depriving him of a considerable
premium for its transport, to which he would have been entitled had the
General gone with him. He, however, being the senior officer, we were
all put under his charge, save the frigate before mentioned, and we were
greatly annoyed by him during our passage, which our master said he
prolonged in looking out for American merchantmen, there being then an
appearance of war between the two countries. They said he actually
detained one or two which left Cadiz when we did, and that he fired
small arms into them to bring them to, although war had not been
declared. One day during the passage he made a signal to the transports
which we did not immediately perceive. We were astonished at the report
of a gun, and at the same time a cannon-shot whizzed past our rigging.
This is not, I believe, customary, a blank gun being generally fired
first, and when nothing else will do, a shot a-head of the vessel, but
he appeared not to stand on any ceremony.

We were glad when the voyage was over, it continuing from the 30th June
to the 19th July, although three or four days only is the usual time.

We landed at Lisbon, and immediately set about preparing for our journey
up the country to join the army; but Colonel Barnard having received
letters respecting the settlement of our late Colonel (General
Manningham's) affairs, which could not be easily arranged without my
presence, determined to send me home for the purpose, with a promise,
however, that I should immediately come out again. I accordingly
embarked on board the same transport with a ship full of all kinds and
descriptions of people, sick and wounded, and lame and lazy; such a
motley group I have seldom seen. Our paymaster also returned home with
me, and besides him I did not know a person on board.

We had a long and tedious passage, not reaching Portsmouth till the 27th
August, although we embarked on the 1st of that month. When we entered
the chops of the Channel, there was a considerable swell in the sea. Our
master, for some purpose or other, had got up from the hold a small
quantity of ballast (gravel), which was laid upon the quarter-deck. A
fine stout young Irishman, an officer on board, came up the companion,
and seeing the ballast lying there, asked where it came from.

"Why, don't you see," says the master, "how rough the sea is? it has
been washed up from the bottom and thrown upon the deck."

The Hibernian seemed quite astonished at the effect of the swell, but
believed the story with all the simple-hearted credulity of a
Johnny-raw, as the soldiers term a young and inexperienced soldier. Our
paymaster was a little of a gourmand, and having for some time been
deprived of luxuries, determined to indulge a little now we had come to
the land of plenty. On our road, therefore, to London, (he and another
officer and myself posting it,) we stopped at Godalming for dinner; he
would needs have a carp, which he happened to see in a pond in the
garden, made ready for our dinner. It was prepared according to his
request, and with it and other good things we contrived to fare pretty
well; although, according to my taste, a fresh herring would have been
preferable. But lo, and behold! when the bill was called for, the awful
sum of _half a guinea_ for the carp was added to the other items of the
dinner, which amounted to quite enough without it. To remonstrate would
have been useless; we therefore paid the bill and set off, determined to
be more economical in future.

I passed through London, and reached the depot of my battalion, then
stationed at Ashford in Kent, where, after having arranged the business
for which I had been sent home, I obtained a three months' leave of
absence to visit my native place, where I arrived, thank God, in a much
improved state of health, and where I found all my friends and
connexions as well as could be expected, and no doubt happy to see me.

About the middle of November of the same year, I started once more for
foreign service, and embarked at Portsmouth for Lisbon on the 22d of
that month, on board a small brig heavily laden with corn for the army
in Portugal. We remained some time wind-bound, but at length got to sea
and proceeded on our voyage, but shortly after the wind headed us and
began to blow very fresh. We were therefore compelled to run for the
Race of Portland, where we came to anchor. But the wind coming more
favourable in a day or two, we weighed again, and got as far on our
voyage as opposite Torbay; but here again the wind coming foul, we were
obliged to enter the bay and drop anchor again. We were detained here a
good many days, during which I went ashore with another officer, who was
on board with me, and indulged in some Devonshire clotted cream at
Brixham.

In about a week we again started, and got about half way across the Bay
of Biscay, when a heavy gale overtook us, and in which we lost a
considerable portion of our quarter-bulwarks (I think they are called).
Indeed, from the brig being so heavily laden, the water being within a
very little of her gunwale, she did not weather the heavy seas which
struck her very well, for during the night one came clean over her,
partly filling the cabin where we lay with water; and I own I had
considerable apprehension for our safety, which I believe was pretty
universal on board. It pleased Him, however, who ruleth over all things,
to bring us through the gale without further injury, although we
appeared next morning in a very shattered condition, and after a few
more days' sailing, we reached the Tagus, and landed at Lisbon about the
middle of January 1812, and immediately commenced equipping for a
campaign with the army which was at this time besieging Ciudad Rodrigo.
I had to purchase a riding-horse and a mule to carry my baggage, and a
great deal more of essential requisites to enable me to do my duty in
the field; and to say truth, I had not, by any means, sufficient funds
to meet these considerable expenses, and was consequently forced to
borrow, and glad enough to find a friend who could and would lend me
enough for the occasion. And here I cannot but remark, that it seemed
peculiarly hard on junior officers, on their taking the field, to be
compelled to furnish all this equipment at their own expense. I have
known several who did not recover from the debt they thus incurred
(could they find a friend, as I did, to lend them what they wanted) for
a considerable time after they had joined the army; nay, I believe some
never recovered it, and the persons who were kind enough to oblige them
lost several large sums in this manner. In my own case, I know, I was
most wofully put to it to raise a sufficiency for this purpose; and
many, I know, have been compelled to take the field without the
necessary equipment to render them efficient. They were thus of little
service to the army for a considerable time after joining, and many of
them were obliged to leave it again, after striving to do their duty,
inadequately provided with the conveniences and comforts requisite to
enable a man to bear up against the fatigues he had to encounter. It
struck me as but just, and in this opinion I am not singular, that all
officers who have not sufficient pay and allowances to enable them to
provide themselves with the means of transport, ought to be furnished in
the first instance at the public expense, and then be afterwards obliged
to keep them in a fit state for service at their own.

I set out from Lisbon soon after, and joined my regiment, which was one
of those that formed the light division, and found them cantoned in the
neighbourhood of Rodrigo, that fortress having fallen some days previous
to my arrival. I had not been many days with the regiment till the
division was assembled at a village called Ituera, on the banks of the
Azava, to carry into execution the sentence of a general court-martial,
before which seven men of the division had been arraigned for desertion
to the enemy, they having been taken in Rodrigo at the capture of that
place. They were of course all found guilty, as they were taken as it
were out of the enemy's ranks, and never attempted to plead not guilty;
but they had said in palliation of their heinous crime, that they were
forced to desert from want of food and clothing; indeed the army had not
been so well supplied for a short while previously, as they had been
accustomed to, but there never was any thing like want. I understood the
clothing also was getting bad, but the men could not be got up the
country for want of transport, and they were no worse off than their
comrades. Indeed, from all I could learn, they had acted in a most
diabolical manner; for at the attack of the breaches in assaulting the
place, they were distinctly heard crying out to one another, "Now here
comes the light division; let us give it them, the rascals," or
something to that effect, and had, it is said, done more injury to the
assailing party than twice their number of Frenchmen. Death of course
was their sentence, and now the wretched victims of delusion were to
atone with their lives for one of the greatest crimes known in the
criminal code of the army.

The division was formed into three sides square, on a plain in front of
the village, the graves of the hapless beings occupying a part of the
fourth face of the square. When all was ready, and a firing party from
each regiment had been formed in the centre, the provost-marshal went to
the guard-tent, where the prisoners were in waiting, to conduct them to
the place of execution. They soon after appeared, poor wretches, moving
towards the square, with faces pale and wan, and with all the dejection
such a situation is calculated to produce. Their arms had been pinioned
one by one as they came out from the guard-tent, and all being ready,
the melancholy procession advanced towards the centre of the square. The
proceedings of the court which tried them, together with the sentence,
and the approval of the Commander of the Forces, was read by the
Assistant Adjutant-general, in the hearing of the whole division; which
concluded, the prisoners were marched round in front of every regiment,
that all might see and avoid their unhappy fate. They were then moved
towards their graves. I ought to observe that the chaplain of the
division had been with them in the guard-tent some little time
previously to their leaving it, and when they quitted as above
described, he followed them at a considerable distance, apparently
ashamed of his peculiar calling, and the duty incumbent on him in such a
conjuncture. They were led, as I said before, towards their graves; and
when they reached the bank of earth in front of each, they were made to
kneel down with their faces fronting the square, and then being one
after another blindfolded, and left for a few moments to their own
reflections or their prayers, the provost-marshal proceeded to the
firing party, who had been previously loaded, and directing the men of
each regiment to fire at their own prisoner, he advanced them to within
about ten or twelve paces of the wretched men, and giving the signals by
motion for their making ready and firing, the whole fired at once, and
plunged the unhappy criminals into eternity. There was, indeed, one
melancholy exception to this. One of the prisoners belonged to the troop
of horse artillery attached to the division, and it seems the provost,
in giving his orders for the soldiers of each regiment to fire at their
own man, had not recollected that the artillery had no men there to
fire. He was thus left sitting on his knees, when the others had fallen
all around him. What his feelings must have been it is in vain to guess;
but, poor fellow, he was not suffered long to remain in suspense, for a
reserve party immediately approaching, they fired and stretched him also
along with his companions in crime and misery; and in such of the others
as they perceived life still remaining, they also immediately put an
end to their sufferings, by placing their muskets close to their body,
and firing into them. One poor man, when he received his death wound,
sprung to a considerable height, and giving a loud shriek, he fell, and
instantly expired.

When all was finished, the division was formed into column, and marched
round in front of the bodies, where each soldier might distinctly
perceive the sad and melancholy effects of such a fatal dereliction of
duty. They were then, without more ado, thrown into their graves, which
were filled up without delay, and the division separating, each regiment
marched to its quarters.

I cannot describe the uncomfortable feelings this spectacle produced in
my mind--nay, not only there, but in my body also--for I felt sick at
heart; a sort of loathing ensued; and from the recollection of what I
then suffered, I could not easily be persuaded to witness such another
scene, if I had the option of staying away. Death in the hundred shapes
it assumes on the field of battle seems honourable, and not near so
revolting to the feelings, and withal comes suddenly; but to witness the
slow and melancholy preparations for an execution such as this, is
productive, in any heart that can feel, of the most unpleasant
sensations, I think, imaginable.

One of the poor wretches was the little shoemaker of our Highland
company, by name M'Guiniss, whom I had known for many years, and who
formerly bore an excellent character; but he had most likely been
seduced by some of his companions to commit this heinous crime.

Not many days after this, the whole army began to move towards Badajos.
On the 26th of February we left our cantonments, and passing by way of
Castello Branca and Villa Velha, we reached a village not far from Niza,
called Povo das Meadas, where my battalion took up its quarters for a
time. From hence I was dispatched to Lisbon for the regimental clothing,
which had then arrived at that port; but being unable to procure the
means of transport, I was obliged to return without it. I rejoined them
in the camp before Badajos about the 25th of March, and witnessed the
siege of that fortress from this period to its fall on the 6th of April.
The breaches having been reported practicable by the engineers on the
5th, in the evening the army was assembled for the assault, and was
disposed as follows: the 3d division under General Picton was ordered to
attack the citadel, and to endeavour to establish himself there by
escalade; the 4th and light divisions, the former under General
Colville, and the latter commanded by Colonel Barnard, were destined for
the breaches; the 5th division, which had not co-operated hitherto in
the siege, but brought this evening into the neighbourhood, was ordered
to occupy the ground in front of the town by way of reserve. One brigade
of that division was ordered to make a false attack on a work called the
Pardeleras, which was connected with the town, although not actually
belonging to it. Another brigade of the same division was ordered to
make another false attack round towards the gate near the river
Guadiana, which latter was to be turned into a real attack, if
circumstances permitted General Walker, who commanded it, to do so.
There was also a brigade of Portuguese, which was ordered to attack St
Cristoval, a fort on the other side of the river. Every thing was
arranged in the clearest and most satisfactory manner; all knew what
they had to do, the point they were to occupy in the attack having been
pointed out to most of them the day before. Soon after dark, the
different divisions began to move towards their destined posts, all
elated with the certainty of success.

I was then in the mess of the senior captain of my battalion, who
commanded it on this occasion; and my other messmates were poor little
Croudace and Cary, both lieutenants, the latter acting adjutant, and
another. We had taken a farewell glass before we got up from dinner, not
knowing which of them would survive the bloody fray that was likely soon
to commence. Poor Croudace, a native of the county of Durham, and
consequently a near countryman, put into my hand a small leather purse,
containing half a doubloon, and requested me to take care of it for him,
as he did not know whose fate it might be to fall or to survive. I took
it according to his wish, and put it into my pocket, and, after a little
more conversation, and another glass, for the poor little fellow liked
his wine, we parted, and they moved off. Although I had thus, as it
were, settled it in my mind that I would not go with them on this
occasion, for my services could have been of but very little utility,
yet, when they went away, I felt as if I was left desolate as it were,
and was quite uneasy at parting from my beloved comrades, whom I had
always accompanied hitherto. I therefore slung over my back my
haversack, containing my pistol and a few other things, and moved
forward, to try if I could find them; but falling in with some of my
friends, staff-officers of the 43d, who were in the same brigade, they
strongly dissuaded me from it, representing to me the folly of uselessly
exposing myself, and the little service I could render there; and one of
them requested me to accompany him to a hill immediately in front of the
breaches, where we could see the business as it proceeded.

We waited till about ten o'clock, when the fire first commenced from the
castle upon the 3d division, as they approached it; but the fire from
thence did not appear very heavy. Not long after it opened out at the
breaches, and was most awfully severe; indeed it was so heavy and so
incessant, that it appeared like one continued sheet of fire along the
ramparts near the breaches, and we could distinctly see the faces of the
French troops, although the distance was near a mile. All sorts of arms,
&c. were playing at once, guns, mortars, musketry, grenades, and shells
thrown from the walls, while every few minutes explosions from mines
were taking place. The firing too appeared to have such a strange
deathlike sound, quite different from all I had ever heard before. This
was occasioned by the muzzles being pointed downwards into the ditch,
which gave the report an unusual and appalling effect. This continued
without a moment's cessation, or without any apparent advantage being
gained by our struggling but awfully circumstanced comrades. Lord
Wellington had also taken his stand upon this hill, and appeared quite
uneasy at the troops seeming to make no progress, and often asked, or
rather repeated to himself, "What can be the matter?"

The enemy had adopted an excellent plan to ascertain where our columns
were posted; they threw an immense number of light balls on all sides of
the town, and when they found out where there was a large body, a rocket
was fired in the direction of where it stood, and instantly every gun,
mortar, and howitzer, not previously engaged, was turned in that
direction, and grievous was the destruction their shot made in the ranks
of these columns. Still our people at the breaches did not get forward,
although we distinctly heard, with emotion, the bugles of our division
sounding the advance. His lordship seemed now to lose all patience, and
aides-de-camp were sent to ascertain the cause of the delay. They flew
like lightning, while the whole rampart round the town seemed enveloped
in one flame of fire. Our brave but unsuccessful comrades were heard
cheering every now and then; but still the fire at the breaches did not
slacken. At length a dispatch arrived from General Picton, stating, that
he had established himself in the castle. This was cheering news to his
lordship, who expressed very strongly the gratitude he felt for that
gallant General.

During the reading of the dispatch, which was done by torchlight, the
enemy, perceiving the light, and that a number of people had assembled
on the hill, directed a shell in that direction; but it fell short, and
did us no injury. His lordship now rode off, and ordered our people at
the breaches to retire, as the town was now perfectly secure. I also set
off to inform my people of the happy circumstance. I found them drawn
off from the glacis a few hundred yards; but, oh! what a difference in
their appearance now from what they were previous to the attack! The
whole division scarcely mustered at this time 2000 men, so many had been
killed and wounded, and many had been sent to the rear with the latter.
I informed them that General Picton had got possession of the castle,
but my story appeared to them an incredible tale; for it was actually
impossible, they thought; and although they made me repeat it over and
over again, they could scarcely bring their minds to credit such
unexpected news.

It was now dawn of day, and the firing had ceased at every point. Here I
learnt the fate of my two beloved friends and messmates: Croudace had
been shot through the body, and carried to the rear; Cary had fallen,
but they could not tell what had become of him. I now went forward
towards the breaches, where I found that several men of both the 4th and
light divisions had remained; and when General Picton moved from the
castle towards that point, which I believe he stated in his dispatch to
be his intention, the enemy, finding themselves attacked in rear, began
to abandon the defence of the breaches, and our people were then enabled
to enter. Never did I witness any thing like the artificial impediments
which the enemy had here thrown up, which, added to the natural ones,
that is, to the breaches not having been so perfectly practicable as was
desirable, rendered it next to impossible to enter, even after all
opposition on their part had ceased. In one breach (the large one) this
was literally the case; for at the top of it was fixed a
chevaux-de-frize extending the whole width of the breach, and composed
of a strong beam of wood, with sharp-pointed sword-blades fixed in every
direction, they being generally about three quarters of a yard long, and
so closely set together, that it was impossible either to leap over them
or penetrate between them, and the whole so firmly fixed to the works at
the top, that it could not be moved. In addition, they had fitted a
number of long and thick planks, with spikes about an inch or more in
length, and laid them all down the breach, but fixed at the top, so that
it was impossible for any one to get up without falling on these. Beyond
the chevaux-de-frize several ditches had been cut, into which those must
have fallen who surmounted the obstacles on the breach; but I believe
none did, although I saw one Portuguese lying dead upon the ramparts;
but I imagine he must either have been thrown up there by some
explosion, or been one of those of the 3d division who came from the
castle. In addition to all the above, from the covered way down into the
ditch was, I should imagine, at least thirty feet; our people had
descended by ladders, and, I doubt not, in the dark, and, in the hurry
and confusion of the moment, many were thrown down and killed. In the
middle of the large ditch a smaller one had been cut, which was filled
with water, and in which, added to the inundation close to the right of
the breaches, (which had been caused by bringing the river partly into
the ditch,) numbers were drowned. Small mines had been constructed all
along in the ditch, which were exploded when it was filled with people,
and which produced infinite mischief.

On the top of the ramparts the enemy had a considerable number of shells
of the largest size, ready filled and fused; and when our people had
filled the ditch below, these were lighted, and thrown over on their
heads, each shell being capable of destroying from twelve to twenty men
or more. They had beams of wood also laid on the ramparts, with old
carriage-wheels, and every sort of missile imaginable, which were poured
upon the unfortunate people below.

When these things are taken into consideration, added to the incessant
and destructive fire of from 3000 to 4000 men, all emulous to do their
duty, at the short distance of perhaps twenty yards, with the ditch as
full as it could possibly stow, the reader will be able to form some
idea of the destruction that must naturally ensue: and awful indeed it
was, for, within the space of less than an acre of ground, I should
imagine not less than from 1200 to 1500 men were lying: it was a
heart-rending sight. I learnt afterwards that many were the desperate
efforts that had been made to ascend the breaches, but all in vain; that
many had nearly reached the top, but they being either shot or blown up,
the others were forced down again. Another and another trial still was
made, but each succeeding party shared the fate of their predecessors.
At last the bottoms of the breaches were nearly blocked up with the
bodies of those who fell.

By this time, General Philippon, the French governor, had surrendered.
When he found the 3d division had got possession of the castle, and were
preparing to move down to second the attack of the breaches by taking
the enemy in rear, and that General Walker, with a part of the 5th
division, had escaladed, and established themselves at the other end of
the town, he deemed further resistance useless, and retired, with the
garrison, to St Cristoval, on the opposite side of the river; and
shortly after the whole surrendered prisoners of war, the troops, after
being stripped of their arms and accoutrements, being marched along in
the ditch to one of the gates, from whence they were escorted on their
way to Elvas. They passed near the breaches while I was there, and I had
a full view of them as they moved along. I thought they seemed under
great apprehension for their safety, as they appeared quite downcast and
dejected, which is not generally the case with French prisoners, who
will shrug their shoulders, and tell you it is the fortune of war; but
these poor fellows, who certainly had made a noble defence, seemed
low-spirited and timid to a degree. Certainly by the rules of war, I
believe, they might have been put to death, for having stood an assault
of the place; but a British general does not resort to the same measures
which their Marshal Suchet did at Tarragona, when he put all, both
soldiers and inhabitants, to the sword.

Soon after daylight, the remaining men of attacking divisions began to
rush into the town, in hopes of sharing, with those who had already
entered, the plunder they imagined it would afford; and though every
thing was done by Colonel Barnard, aided by the other officers, to keep
out those of the light division, it was useless, although he even risked
his life to prevent their entering. He had bravely, during the attack,
repeatedly ascended the breach, in hopes of overcoming the obstacles
which presented themselves, but he had always been driven back, although
he escaped unhurt where all was death around him; and now his life
nearly fell a sacrifice, in endeavouring to restore that discipline in
his division which this unfortunate and unsuccessful assault had
considerably impaired. He opposed his personal and bodily strength to
the entrance of the plunderers, but in vain. They rushed in, in spite of
all opposition; and in wrenching a musket from one of the soldiers of
the 52d, who was forcing past him, he fell, and was nigh precipitated
into the ditch. He, however, finding resistance here in vain, set off,
accompanied by several other officers, into the town, to endeavour to
restrain, as much as lay in his power, the licentiousness of those
inside, whose bad passions, it was but too evident, would be let loose
upon the defenceless inhabitants.

I had been in company with Captain Percival, my commanding-officer
before alluded to, from the time of my first coming down to the division
before daylight; and now he and I, hearing the heart-piercing and
afflicting groans which arose from the numbers of wounded still lying in
the ditch, set to work to get as many of these poor fellows removed as
was in our power. This we found a most arduous and difficult
undertaking, as we could not do it without the aid of a considerable
number of men; and it was a work of danger to attempt to force the now
lawless soldiers to obey, and stop with us till this work of necessity
and humanity was accomplished.

All thought of what they owed their wounded comrades, and of the
probability that ere long a similar fate might be their own, was
swallowed up in their abominable rage for drink and plunder; however, by
perseverance, and by occasionally using his stick, my commandant at
length compelled a few fellows to lend their assistance in removing
what we could into the town, where it was intended that hospitals should
be established. But this was a most heart-rending duty, for, from the
innumerable cries of,--"Oh! for God's sake, come and remove me!" it was
difficult to select the most proper objects for such care. Those who
appeared likely to die, of course it would have been but cruelty to put
them to the pain of a removal; and many who, from the nature of their
wounds, required great care and attention in carrying them, the
half-drunken brutes whom we were forced to employ exceedingly tortured
and injured; nay, in carrying one man out of the ditch they very
frequently kicked or trode upon several others, whom to touch was like
death to them, and which produced the most agonizing cries imaginable.

I remember at this time Colonel (the late Sir Niel) Campbell passed out
at the breach, and, as he had formerly been a Captain in our regiment,
many of the poor fellows who lay there knew him, and beseeched him in
the most piteous manner to have them removed. He came to me, and urged
upon me in the strongest manner to use every exertion to get the poor
fellows away. This evinced he had a feeling heart; but he was not
probably aware, that for that very purpose both my commanding-officer
and myself had been labouring for hours; but it soon began to grow
excessively hot, and what with the toil and the heat of the sun, and the
very unpleasant effluvia which now arose from the numerous dead and
wounded, we were both compelled, about mid-day, to desist from our
distressing though gratifying labours.

It was now between twelve and one o'clock, and though we had had a great
many removed, a much greater number lay groaning in the ditch; but our
strength was exhausted, for he was lame and unable to move much, and I
had been obliged to assist in carrying many myself, the drunken
scoundrels whom we had pressed into the service seldom making more than
one or two trips till they deserted us. But my lamented friend and
messmate, poor Cary, was still to search for, and, after a considerable
time, he was found beneath one of the ladders by which they had
descended into the ditch. He was shot through the head, and I doubt not
received his death-wound on the ladder, from which in all probability he
fell. He was stripped completely naked, save a flannel waistcoat which
he wore next his skin. I had him taken up and placed upon a shutter, (he
still breathed a little, though quite insensible,) and carried him to
the camp. A sergeant and some men, whom we had pressed to carry him,
were so drunk that they let him fall from off their shoulders, and his
body fell with great force to the ground. I shuddered, but poor Cary, I
believe, was past all feeling, or the fall would have greatly injured
him. We laid him in bed in his tent, but it was not long ere my kind,
esteemed, and lamented friend breathed his last. Poor Croudace had also
died immediately after reaching the hospital, whither he had been
carried when he was shot.

Thus I lost two of my most particular and intimate acquaintances, from
both of whom I had received many acts of kindness and friendship. They
will long live in my memory. Cary was buried next day behind our tents,
one of the officers (my other messmate) reading the funeral service.

I cannot help adverting to some of the scenes which I witnessed in the
ditch, while employed there as above noticed. One of the first strange
sights that attracted our notice, was soon after our arrival. An officer
with yellow facings came out of the town with a frail fair one leaning
on his arm, and carrying in her other hand a cage with a bird in it; and
she tripped it over the bodies of the dead and dying with all the ease
and indifference of a person moving in a ball-room,--no more concern
being evinced by either of them, than if nothing extraordinary had
occurred. It was really lamentable to see such an utter absence of all
right feeling.

Soon after this the men began to come out with their plunder. Some of
them had dressed themselves in priests' or friars' garments--some
appeared in female dresses, as nuns, &c.; and, in short, all the
whimsical and fantastical figures imaginable almost were to be seen
coming reeling out of the town, for by this time they were nearly all
drunk. I penetrated no farther into the town that day than to a house a
little beyond the breach, where I had deposited the wounded; but I saw
enough in this short trip to disgust me with the doings in Badajos at
this time. I learnt that no house, church, or convent, was held sacred
by the infuriated and now ungovernable soldiery, but that priests or
nuns, and common people, all shared alike, and that any who showed the
least resistance were instantly sacrificed to their fury. They had a
method of firing through the lock of any door that happened to be shut
against them, which almost invariably had the effect of forcing it open;
and such scenes were witnessed in the streets as baffle description.

One man of our first battalion, I am told, had got a hogshead of brandy
into the streets, and, getting his mess-tin, and filling it from the
cask, and seating himself astride like Bacchus, swore that every person
who came past should drink, be who he may. His commanding-officer
happened to be one who came that way, and he was compelled to take the
tin and drink, for, had he refused, it is not improbable the wretch
would have shot him, for his rifle was loaded by his side, and the
soldiers had by this time become quite past all control. Another, who
had been fortunate enough to obtain a considerable quantity of
doubloons, put them in his haversack, and was making his way out of the
town, but was induced, before he left it, to drink more than he could
carry. He laid him down somewhere to take a nap, and awoke soon after
without even his shoes, and not only were the doubloons gone, but all
his own necessaries also.

In, short, a thousand of the most tragi-comical spectacles that can
possibly be imagined, might be witnessed in this devoted city. The
officers did all they could to repress these outrages, but the soldiers
were now so completely dispersed that one quarter of them could not be
found; and indeed the only benefit almost that the officers could render
was, by each placing himself in a house, which generally secured it from
being broken open and plundered. The different camps of our army were
for several days after more like rag-fairs than military encampments,
such quantities of wearing-apparel of all kinds were disposing of by one
set of plunderers to the other. But they were not content with what they
had brought out of Badajos; they had now got such relish for plunder,
that they could not leave it off when driven out of the town.

A night or two after the surrender of the place, they stole no less than
eight horses and mules belonging to my battalion, and took them to some
of the other divisions, where they sold them as animals captured from
the enemy. I lost on this occasion an excellent little mule, worth at
least L.20, and for which I of course never obtained a farthing. We
used every exertion to discover both the perpetrators and the animals,
but without success.

An English army is perhaps, generally speaking, under stricter
discipline than any other in the world; but in proportion as they are
held tight while they are in hand, if circumstances occur to give them
liberty, I know of no army more difficult to restrain when once broke
loose. A reason may perhaps be assigned for it in part. On such
occasions as this siege, where they were long and much exposed to
fatigue almost insupportable, to the most trying scenes of difficulty
and danger, which were generally borne with cheerfulness and alacrity,
they perhaps reasoned with themselves and one another in this
manner,--that as they had borne so much and so patiently to get
possession of the place, it was but fair that they should have some
indulgence when their work and trials were crowned with success,
especially as the armies of other powers make it a rule generally to
give an assaulted fortress up to plunder. They had also become quite
reckless of life from so long exposure to death; but an English army
cannot plunder like the French. The latter keep themselves more sober,
and look more to the solid and substantial benefit to be derived from
it, while the former sacrifice every thing to drink; and when once in a
state of intoxication, with all the bad passions set loose at the same
time, I know not what they will hesitate to perpetrate.

The reader will judge of the state of our soldiers who had been engaged
in the siege, when Lord Wellington found it absolutely necessary to
order in a Portuguese brigade to force the stragglers out of the town at
the point of the bayonet. At this time I think I was fairly tired of
life, so disgusting and so sickening were the scenes the few last days
had presented. I had also lost two of those for whom I had a great
regard, together with several others of my brother officers, all
excellent young men, with still a greater number wounded,--in all, in
our fifteen companies, to the amount of twenty-six,--and men in equal
proportion. It was indeed a trying time.

Notwithstanding what has been said above of the bad conduct of the
British troops on this occasion, I am fully persuaded there is more
humanity and generosity to be found in the breast of an English soldier
than in any other in the world, for, except when inflamed by drink, I am
confident it would be most revolting to his feelings to be ordered to
proceed with cool deliberation to the execution of such horrid
butcheries as we read of in the armies of other nations.--No! When calm
and sober, no man acts with more tenderness towards those in his power
than an English soldier. Bonaparte would not have found in them the
willing actors in his political tragedy in Egypt, when he coolly
fusiladed several thousands of his unfortunate Turkish prisoners, as
related by Sir R. Wilson.

If I may be permitted to make a few remarks on the taking of this strong
fortress, and of the conduct of the besiegers, I would say that never in
the annals of military warfare was greater devotion shown by those of
all ranks, from the General to the common soldier. The arduous and
dangerous service of the trenches was cheerfully performed by every
individual whose duty called him there; but the most conspicuous
gallantry was manifested in the assault. Conceive of the heroic Picton
and his brave division escalading a wall probably forty feet high, built
on the summit of an almost inaccessible rock, and with troops at the top
of all to oppose them as they reached its summit. It is true the enemy
were not numerous here, having only about 200 men in the castle, but
still one man in this situation was able to destroy probably twenty of
the assailants, by throwing down a ladder after it had been set up; most
of those ascending would be crushed to death by the fall over such a
precipice. But he carried every thing before him, and after establishing
his own division in this commanding situation, he either actually did,
or prepared to move upon the body of the enemy, who were defending the
breaches. General Walker also, who commanded a part of the 5th division,
bravely forced an entrance into the town at the opposite side,
overcoming every one of the numerous barriers and obstacles which
presented themselves; and where he himself, in the act, I believe, of
mounting the rampart, received a most desperate wound. It was said, but
I know not how truly, that when he fell, the French soldier who wounded
him was about to repeat the blow, which in all probability would have
deprived him of life, but that the General, whether intentionally or not
it is not said, made the masonic sign, which was understood by one of
the Frenchmen, and that he instantly interfered in his behalf and
stopped the blow. They say the General some time after found out that
his brave deliverer had been sent to Scotland with his fellow-prisoners,
and that he had him searched for and handsomely rewarded, and, I
believe, procured him his liberty.

It is well known, I believe, to be the rule in all services like the
assault of fortresses, &c., that those, both officers and men, who form
the forlorn hope and the storming party, are volunteers, these being
services of extreme danger, and which generally procure for the officers
who survive a step of promotion; but it might as well have gone (in the
light division at least) as a tour of duty, for on all occasions of this
nature, with only one or two exceptions, the senior officers of each
rank insisted upon being sent on that duty. Nay, in one instance this
heroic feeling was carried to an almost censurable excess. Lieutenant
Harvest of the 43d having been some time the senior of his rank in that
regiment, and there being a vacancy for a captain, he had been
recommended for the company; and although he had not been gazetted, yet
it had been intimated to him through his commanding-officer that his
name should shortly appear as captain. Thus his promotion was perfectly
secure; notwithstanding, when volunteers were called for for the
storming party, he insisted on his right of going as senior lieutenant;
so over scrupulous was he that his permitting a junior officer to occupy
this post might be construed to the detriment of his honour. He went,
and fell; and thus not only lost his company but his life, and by his
too refined sense of honour deprived another officer, probably, of that
promotion which would have been the consequence of going on this duty
had he survived.

Among the men also the same noble enthusiasm prevailed, for he who was
selected for this dangerous service out of the superabundant numbers who
always volunteered, was envied by his comrades as truly fortunate. In
fact, it required a character for good conduct to entitle a man to this
honourable employment. Whatever, therefore, their other faults might be,
a want of bravery was not one of them.




CHAPTER VIII.

     The army leave Badajos on the 11th of April, and move into
     quarters near the river Agueda, where they remain till the 11th
     of June--Advance towards Salamanca, which, with the exception
     of three forts, the enemy had evacuated--The forts
     invested--The main bodies of both armies bivouack within a mile
     and a half of each other, in the vicinity of Monte Rubio and
     Morisco--The forts of Salamanca surrender--The main body of the
     enemy retire to Tordesillas--Movements of the army.


On the 11th April we left Badajos to return again to the neighbourhood
of Rodrigo, the French having, during the absence of our army from that
frontier, made an irruption into Portugal, and penetrated as far down as
below Castello Branca, completely ravaging the country. Our first march
was to Campa Mayor, where we were quartered in the town. We next day
reached Arronches, where we bivouacked in a wood near it. The following
day we marched into Portalegre, and on the 14th, Niza; the 15th we
crossed the Tagus at Villa Velha, and moved on to Larnadas. Here we
began to perceive some of the effects of the recent visit from the
French; but at Castello Branca, which we reached next day, the
devastation they had caused was truly deplorable. We halted here one day
to refresh the troops and get forward our supplies, and the next day
reached Escallas da Cima. Here we began to get very close upon the rear
of the enemy; it therefore became us to move forward with
circumspection, for our force on this side the Tagus was yet but small.
We advanced, however, and occupied successively St Miguel d'Arch,
Penamacor, and St Bartholomo, near Sabugal, which last town we passed
through on the 23d, and bivouacked that night at Alfyates. The utter
desolation of Sabugal was beyond conception; filth and misery presented
themselves in every direction. It had been made a depot for provisions
by the French, I imagine, for on all sides the entrails and other offal
of bullocks and sheep polluted the atmosphere by the abominable stench
they caused, and had attracted multitudes of vultures and other birds of
prey, who had by this time become horribly tame and familiar: one
vulture sat so long upon a dead horse as I was riding along the road,
that he allowed me to come near enough to make a cut at him with my
sword, as he stretched his enormous wings to mount up from his prey.

On the 24th we reached Ituera, where we halted for two days. We had now
entered Spain, and it not being intended as yet to commence another
active campaign, we moved into quarters near the river Agueda, my
battalion and the 43d occupying the village of La Encina, or "The Oak."
Here it was necessary that every exertion should be used to re-equip and
prepare the troops for service, as it was intimated that another
campaign would speedily commence.

All the winter and spring hitherto had been spent in active service,
consequently much required putting to rights before we again took the
field; all hands were therefore employed to patch up and repair our
clothing and shoes, and to get every thing in good order when our
services were again to be called for.

While we were here, I began to experience some of the ill effects of a
deep-rooted enmity which one of my brother officers had conceived
against me, though till now partly concealed. I was unconscious of
having given him any cause for this; but he, without ever giving me any
opportunity for explanation, used all his influence in endeavouring to
injure me in the opinion of two of my superior officers, who had
hitherto been friendly to me; and not only with them, but, I have reason
to believe, with our acting brigadier, whose mind, with the others also,
he completely estranged from me for a time. But though he misled them
then, they did not retain the ill opinion of me which his
misrepresentations had produced, for there are testimonials from all
three at the end of this volume. I was not so fully aware of his dislike
of me, till one day I was dining at the table of our acting brigadier,
when he and one of those before noticed were also guests. I overheard
him telling this officer, (with an intention, I almost imagine, that I
should hear,) that I must be a bad man, for that I was sitting silent
when all the rest were talking, in order that I might listen to their
conversation. But I was the junior officer there, and it did not become
me to be talkative; besides, I never was loquacious. I said nothing,
(although some may blame me for it, but I loved peace,) trusting that
one day such forbearance would not be forgotten; but I felt it deeply,
and mourned over it in secret with great bitterness of spirit.

In this place also I began to receive very pressing letters from the
merchants in England, from whom I had purchased a quantity of goods when
last at home, but which, for want of transport, could not be got up to
the army in order to their being disposed of; and, in short, scarcely a
post arrived that did not bring some unwelcome and distressing tidings.
I had purchased a fine mule in place of that stolen from me at Badajos,
for which I had given about L30. I sent him down to Lisbon with my
batman, to bring up as many of the goods as the mule could carry; but he
had not been long gone till I had the mortification to learn that this
mule also was lost. The man said he had been stolen, but I had every
reason afterwards to believe that he had sold him. Be it observed, I
could but very ill afford losses of this extent out of my pay and scanty
allowances; but I endeavoured to bear up as well as I could against
these misfortunes, although it is certain I was not able to bring
religion to my aid at this time of trial, for I had lived hitherto in
total neglect of that most momentous of all concerns, and, although I
endeavoured to amuse myself occasionally by fishing in the Agueda, my
mind began to be greatly depressed.

About this time an order was issued for each British regiment in the
Peninsula to endeavour to enlist fifty Spaniards to be incorporated in
the regiment. I was sent in company with another officer into the
mountains of Gata, not far from the city of Placentia. We were not
successful, for although we obtained the names of some who promised they
would follow us to La Encina, they never made their appearance. However,
the beauty and magnificence of the mountain scenery amply repaid us for
our trouble. From this village also I had the pleasure of visiting, for
the first time, the lately captured fortress of Ciudad Rodrigo, and some
of my brother officers who had shared in the toils and dangers of the
siege, pointed out to me the most remarkable scenes about it. Like
Badajos, it had been battered till practicable breaches were made to
admit the besiegers, and then stormed in the same manner, but its
defence was feeble compared with Badajos; and yet, to look over the
ground in the neighbourhood of the trenches, one would imagine it
impossible for troops to have lived, so completely was it ploughed up
with shot and shells, each of the latter generally making an excavation
sufficiently large in which to bury a horse.

Whilst we remained in these cantonments, the officers of the division
once or twice got up a sort of "pic-nic," every one contributing
something towards the feast, which was held in a large wood in the
neighbourhood of Ituera. On our way from La Encina to this assembly, we
passed over the ground where the 5th and 77th regiments had so
distinguished themselves in September 1811, against a very superior
force of the enemy's cavalry. The bones of the combatants lay bleaching
upon the plain, the flesh having been very soon devoured by the
innumerable birds of prey, which appeared as if collected from every
part of the Peninsula. Indeed so numerous were the battles and
skirmishes which took place along this frontier, together with the offal
from the animals killed for the use of the armies, that they were no
doubt better fed than they had in general been accustomed to.

But the period of our stay in this vicinity drew to a close, and on the
11th June we broke up from our cantonments, and passing the Agueda, the
division assembled in a wood about a mile or two in front of Rodrigo.
While we were here a rather remarkable phenomenon appeared about
mid-day, or soon after; the sun, which shone most brightly, and the
moon, with several stars, appeared all at the same time, the latter
being distinctly visible. This of course attracted great numbers, and
many were the sage remarks that were made, some believing it ominous of
disastrous events; and indeed very shortly afterwards a circumstance
occurred which in some degree confirmed their prediction. A grenadier of
the 88th regiment (I think it was) had come over from his own division,
to endeavour to prevail upon his wife, who had deserted him and taken up
with a sergeant of our first battalion, to return with him, she having,
as I understand, left him with one or more children, the first of their
marriage, which he was anxious she should come and take care of. They
had often, I fancy, quarrelled, and he had probably used her ill, but he
was now desirous of a reconciliation, and entreated her to return with
him to his regiment. He prevailed upon her to accompany him to some
distance from the bivouack, that they might the more freely discuss the
subject, for she had hitherto refused to agree to his request, being
probably better provided for by the sergeant than she had been with him.
While walking in a field close to the wood in which the bivouack was
situated, and arguing the point with some heat, and she still persisting
in remaining where she was, he became so exasperated at her continued
refusal, that he, in a rage of jealousy and anger, drew his bayonet and
plunged it in her bosom. Her cries soon brought people to the spot, who
at once secured him, and he was instantly committed to the provost
prison tent, and her body of course brought in and buried. Poor
creature! she was one of the gayest of the females which graced our
rural balls near Ituera only a short while previous, and had often
danced with old General Vandaleur on those occasions. I believe he was
not brought to trial for it, as her ill conduct probably had been
considered as in some measure palliating what he did, and that he might
be supposed to have been irritated to a degree of madness when he
perpetrated the fatal act. I subsequently learnt that he was a brave
soldier, and that he afterwards fell in the hard-fought battle of the
Pyrenees.

We moved forward the next day in the direction of Salamanca, halting on
the 13th at Alba de Yeltes, on the 14th at Sancho Bueno, the 15th at
Matillo, in a large plain in front of which we bivouacked, where were
the most luxuriant meadows I think I ever saw, the horses on our arrival
being literally up to their bellies in fine rich grass. What a pity the
natives know nothing of hay-making! This fine herbage is permitted to
stand there till it perishes, and yet in the winter they are frequently
very ill off for provender for their cattle; indeed I do not exactly
know how they contrive to feed them in that season, but I know we were
always greatly put to our shifts to procure any sort of long forage for
our animals, being generally compelled by necessity to resort to this
grass, rotten and dead as it was. I believe they use a considerable
quantity of straw, which they chop very short, and which in truth is no
bad substitute for hay; but when it is so very plentiful and so good,
common sense, one would imagine, would induce them to preserve it.

Lord Wellington in the following season caused a considerable quantity
of hay to be made in Portugal, getting scythes, &c. out from England,
but we never returned that way afterwards to reap the benefit of it. All
this immensely rich and extensive plain is in a complete state of
nature--no enclosures to mark the different boundaries of the
proprietors, should it have any, but where there are "landmarks," the
mode of ancient days is resorted to.

On the 16th we moved forward to within about five miles of Salamanca,
and bivouacked near a range of low hills extending from the Rio Valmuso
(which we had just crossed) to the city. In front of this place our
cavalry fell in with that of the enemy, with whom they had a _petit
affaire_, and had captured a few of them, who, in the afternoon, passed
our bivouack, on their way to the rear. We observed as they passed that
they wore long queues, which had an odd appearance in our eyes, the
British army having for so many years left them off.

Next morning we advanced towards the city. We had gone, I think, about
three miles, when ascending one of those heights over which the road
passes, we had a most interesting view of this beautiful place. It
seemed thickly studded with elegant and highly ornamented spires,
springing from the numerous cathedrals and colleges, &c. which it
contained; but what heightened the effect was an immense column of smoke
rising from some magazines which the enemy (not having time to carry
off) had set on fire. We feared it was but the prelude to the whole city
sharing the same fate, for their barbarous conduct in Portugal during
Massena's retreat, rendered it but too doubtful they were resorting to
the same mode of warfare here. They still retained possession of a
portion of the town, in which they had constructed three forts; one very
strong, and capable of containing about 500 or 600 men; the other two
were smaller, to cover and act as supports to the principal one. In
constructing these works they had destroyed the greater part of the
colleges, and a considerable number of other public buildings, besides
several extensive streets which Salamanca had formerly contained; but
even now it was still a beautiful and interesting city. One of these
works commanded the bridge, which rendered our crossing the Tormes here
impracticable. We were in consequence moved about a league higher up the
river, where we crossed by a rather deep ford. However, all got safely
over, and we halted for the night on a small plain, a short distance
from the ford, the main body of the enemy having retired and left 800
men in the forts before mentioned. These occupied but about one-third of
the town, of course the remainder was open and free, and, as might be
expected, every one was anxious to have a peep at this famous
university. Consequently away a number of us scampered, and soon entered
the city, the inhabitants of which were overjoyed to see us. The nuns
were seen waving white handkerchiefs out of their iron-grated windows,
and the Padres and other respectable inhabitants welcomed us with a
thousand vivas, embracing us, and using every means of testifying their
joy at our arrival.

I need not attempt to describe the place, for I am not able, and it has
so often been described that my reader will not be disappointed at my
declining to do it here; suffice it to say, the buildings in general,
and the religious edifices in particular, were most superb; but the
Goths had destroyed the finest portion of the city.

The forts were immediately invested, and we went and had a look also at
them. They seemed remarkably strong, having been constructed principally
of hewn stones, taken from the buildings they had destroyed; and on all
sides of them a space of perhaps two hundred yards or more was cleared
away to make room for the play of their artillery, and to prevent a
lodgement being made by the besiegers.

We next day moved from our bivouack near the ford, and marched to the
village of Aldea Secco, in front of which our cavalry and the enemy had
a rencontre, after which the latter retired: this was about a league and
a half in front of Salamanca. Next day we were suddenly assembled in
consequence of the enemy, in great force, making his appearance at some
distance in front of our bivouack. We were then removed from the plain,
and took up a position on a height called Monte Rubio, or Red Hill, a
little to the right. Soon after, also, the other divisions of our army
began to assemble on the height, and our Chief arriving on the spot,
every thing had the appearance of something serious being about to take
place.

Here also, for the first time, I saw Don Carlos de Espagna with his few
followers. These were better clothed and equipped than almost any other
Spanish troops that I had seen. The day passed over, however, without
the French making any attack, and without any movement being made on our
side, farther than putting the different divisions into position as they
arrived on the ground. The French were continually receiving
reinforcements, or rather their different divisions were rapidly
arriving in succession, when they all bivouacked in the plain in front
of us, at perhaps a mile and a half distance, and near to the village of
Morisco. This they very soon gutted of every portable article, whether
it was food, clothes, furniture, or whatever they could carry off; nay,
they unroofed the greater part of the houses for fuel for the troops,
but this latter proceeding could not be avoided, there being no wood
near them. Englishmen may well feel thankful that their dwellings have
not been exposed to such visitors, who, in half an hour, will convert a
comfortable and smiling village into a heap of ruins.

We remained in this position for some days, the two armies, like two
experienced pugilists, each waiting for the other to strike the first
blow, by which he would in some measure lay himself open. It was not,
however, Lord Wellington's game to commence operations, seeing a part of
our army was then employed in the siege of the forts in Salamanca;
besides, it is said, when some one ventured to hint that we should
attack the enemy, that his lordship judged it would make a difference of
3000 men less on the side of the attacking army. I know not if this
story be true, but certainly great prudence was displayed on both sides.
However, the enemy had occasionally cannonaded us a little from the
first; but about three days after their arrival, they made a very brisk
and vigorous attack upon a conical hill immediately in front of our
position, and a little to the right of Morisco. It was defended by the
seventh division, which repelled the attack with great gallantry,
driving the enemy down the hill again with great precipitation. The 68th
regiment distinguished itself greatly, but in their pursuit of the
beaten enemy, they advanced too far into the plain, and which the French
observing, a forward movement was made again by them, and before our
people could recover the high ground, Captain M'Kay and Lieutenant
M'Donald, with a considerable number of their men, were made prisoners.
Poor M'Kay received I know not how many bayonet wounds on this occasion,
I believe not less than ten or twelve, but none of them very serious of
course, or he could not have survived. He, with the others, were taken
into the French lines, but he was so ill when they retired a few days
after, that they were obliged to leave him in Morisco. The enemy's
artillery played upon our line during the greater part of this attack,
and caused us some loss, but not of any consequence, the horses
appearing to have suffered more than the troops.

The French seemed disappointed and annoyed at our sticking so
pertinaciously to the hills on this occasion, and told M'Donald (from
whom I afterwards had this information) that it was only when we had
every advantage on our side that we durst give them battle. Our armies
were, I think, pretty nearly equal, each having perhaps about 40,000,
but they were, I believe, superior in cavalry, and of course the plain
was the very ground for them. Marmont seeing himself thus foiled,
withdrew from before us, and made a movement to his left, crossing the
Tormes with a considerable part of his force, and advanced on the other
side of the river towards Salamanca. Our heavy German cavalry, under
General Baron Back, opposed them here, and greatly distinguished
themselves, driving the enemy's cavalry from the field. Our army made
corresponding movements with the enemy, changing in parts our position.

Meantime the siege of the forts had been proceeding with from the first
day of our arrival, and as the distance from Monte Rubio to the town was
not great, several of us rode in to see how the siege was progressing,
as the Americans have it. An attempt had been made to carry them by
escalade, but it had failed; General Bowes, who led the attacking party,
with several officers and men, having fallen in the attempt. His
lordship now deemed it necessary to batter them regularly previous to
another assault being made upon them. Heavy ordnance was therefore got
into battery, which not only effected a breach in the smaller fort
nearest the principal one, but which also threw a considerable quantity
of hot shot into a building in the centre of it, which served as a
barrack to the troops, the roof of which was presently set on fire, and
the only shelter they had was thus destroyed. They thus were compelled
on the 27th to surrender prisoners of war.

It is not easy to describe the effect produced on those inhabitants who
lived nearest to the forts while the siege was going forward. Just as I
entered one of our batteries, which had been established close behind a
street, still occupied by the people, one of our artillerymen was
carried out shot by a musket ball in the breast, and dead; the poor
people when he was brought out into the street assembled round his body,
and set up the most piteous lamentations imaginable. This impressed me
with the good feeling which must have existed in their minds towards the
English, for they are not a people, as the reader will be aware, who are
very susceptible of horror at the sight of blood. A few hours after
these forts surrendered, I went to visit the principal one--the
devastation caused by our hot shot on the house before mentioned was
awful. They had been obliged to make this their hospital also as well as
barrack, and it was really lamentable to see the poor wounded Frenchmen
lying there in a house that was literally falling about their ears, the
roof having been completely fired, while burning beams and rafters were
continually dropping upon these poor helpless beings. A French surgeon
was still in charge of these men, and he had the politeness to show us
all over the fort. As it had appeared from the outside, it was in
reality remarkably strong, and the place where our people had made an
attempt to escalade it, was pointed out to us; he said it was heavily
mined, and that if our people had carried it by escalade, the mines
would most likely have been sprung. There was fixed immediately opposite
the gate a beam of wood, with holes bored in it, and about twenty musket
barrels fitted into them, so as to command the entrance. These, I
imagine, it was intended to have fired by a train, as our people forced
the gate, and it would have been like a little volley, which must have
swept away the first of the assailants. The inhabitants seemed greatly
rejoiced when this business was concluded, and peace once more
established in their city, and they vied with each other in showing us
every mark of attention and kindness, looking upon us as their
deliverers.

If I am not mistaken, it was here where our illustrious Chief played off
a sort of innocent _ruse_ upon some of the Padres of the place. Soon
after our arrival, and before the attempt upon the forts had failed, he
went to visit some of the principal cathedrals, &c. which remained
entire; the priests of course were proud to show their churches on such
an occasion. He admired them greatly, and praised them much; but what
seemed particularly to attract his attention was the extreme whiteness
and cleanness of their walls and ceilings, although they were so very
lofty. He enquired how they managed to get up to them to keep them so;
and the unsuspecting Padre, without hesitation, led him to where they
kept the immensely long ladders by which they ascended. This was just
the very thing he wanted in his meditated attempt upon the forts, and of
course they, with others of a similar description, were procured for
that service. I will not vouch for the truth of the above, although I
heard it, and I think it was not unlikely to have taken place. Indeed
had he made a formal demand for such things, it is not improbable they
might have denied they had them; but his having seen them himself
precluded this.

The forts surrendered on the 27th, and on the 28th the enemy's main body
retired altogether; for they soon learned the fate of the besieged, as
they had occasionally communicated in some measure by rockets thrown up,
and answered. On the same day, our division moved forward to
Castilbanos; and the day following to Parada de Rubiallis. On the 30th,
we reached Castrillo de Aguerino; and on the 1st of July, the town of
Ravel-del-Rey. The next day, we moved on towards Rueda, a considerable
town. Here we found the French in some force, their main body having
retired across the Duero to Tordesillas. The force in and about Rueda
consisted of both cavalry and infantry, and seemed to act as a rearguard
till the enemy's columns had time to file over the bridge at
Tordesillas. I was at some distance in front of our division, the
cavalry having preceded it, with whom I went forward. As we approached
the place, a pretty large column of the enemy's infantry left it, and
moved in the direction of the bridge. Some of our horse-artillery at
this time came up, and fired Shrapnel shells into it, which did
considerable execution; one shell particularly having killed and wounded
great numbers, among whom was an officer, I think one of the handsomest
men I had almost ever seen. Our cavalry had a little brush with some
squadrons of the enemy a little further on in the plain, and captured a
few prisoners. One of these was the sergeant-major of one of their
hussar regiments, and of all the men I ever saw taken, this man evinced
the greatest trepidation and alarm. He was absolutely like to sink to
the earth, either from fear of what awaited himself, or from the effects
of the contest in which he had been engaged. He had lost his cap in the
fray, and seemed like a person deprived of his senses. He must,
notwithstanding, have been looked upon by the French as a good soldier,
and a valuable non-commissioned officer; for I learned afterwards that
they sent in a request that he might be exchanged for one of our
sergeants whom they had captured, as it was intended immediately to
promote him to the adjutancy of his regiment; of course this was
immediately complied with. The enemy retired to Tordesillas, and we
bivouacked near Rueda, a part of the officers being permitted to go into
houses in the town during the day.

In this situation we remained for a day and a night; but the sun being
so powerful, the troops began to feel the ill effects of the heat. They
were accordingly brought into the town and quartered in the houses. Here
I experienced more of that hostility before spoken of, on the following
occasion. In the number of houses allotted to my battalion, there
happened to be some of the best of them without stables; but as there
was not time to examine farther than their outward appearance, this
could not be known by me. I therefore marked off the houses according to
custom, giving the best, in point of appearance, to the senior officers
in succession, and so on till all were served. It so happened that the
house allotted to this officer, who had nearly the best in the
battalion given him, had no stable. This I was, from the fore-mentioned
cause, totally ignorant of. Neither had I any stable in the house I
occupied, but, after some trouble, I had found one in a house occupied
by some of the men, where I had put up my horses and mules, and went
about the other duties of my station. In the evening I was informed by
my servant that my animals had been turned out by this officer, and his
own put in, in their stead; and that mine were running loose in a yard,
he not caring what became of them. My saddlery, and all the
mule-apparatus, (precious articles in this country,) had also been cast
out. He was my _senior_ officer, and I was consequently obliged to bear
this ill-treatment.

I mention this little circumstance, because it will show with what
determined and unrelenting hostility he pursued me. Indeed it might not
have been so trifling an affair, for had I not heard of it in time, I
might have lost every horse and mule I possessed, which would have been
one of the most serious disasters that could have befallen me. I could
obtain no redress, for the captain before mentioned, who commanded the
battalion, and this officer, being on rather unfriendly terms, he felt
delicate in interfering in my behalf. Indeed I have some reason to
believe, that it was partly on account of his enmity to this captain
(with whom I still messed) that he so persecuted me.

I own I was on this occasion strongly tempted to demand that
satisfaction which the rules of honour (as they are termed) dictate, for
I then had not a Christian feeling on this subject; but after
consideration and consultation with some friends, it was feared he might
take advantage of his superior rank, not only to decline giving me that
satisfaction, but to report me, and thus destroy my prospects for life,
for he would have been compelled to the latter step had he not acceded
to my demand; and from the feeling he displayed towards me, there is not
the least doubt he would have rejoiced at such an opportunity of ruining
me. At this time, also, I had very few _real_ friends who would have
stood by me; for his secret machinations, and his having the ear of our
brigadier, tended greatly to estrange my former friends from me.

All this, as might be expected, tended powerfully to depress my spirits,
and to cast a gloom over a mind but too susceptible of impressions of
that nature; for there is not any thing almost I would not do or submit
to, to live on good terms with those I associate with, and indeed with
all men. My mind was also much harassed at this time by receiving very
unpleasant letters from England on the subject of the goods I before
mentioned, and which had not yet reached any farther than Abrantes; and
as the men began to be ill off for want of clothing, I obtained leave to
proceed forthwith to Abrantes, to endeavour to get both the clothing and
goods brought up to the regiment. I therefore set off, accompanied by
one servant on a mule, leaving the other animals with the battalion, and
proceeded on the 16th on my journey, and passing through Ravel-del-Rey,
I halted for the night in a village where the seventh division was
quartered. As I knew some of the officers of the 51st, I took up my
abode with them for the night, and they indeed received me very kindly.
My friends spent the evening very merrily; but, about midnight, they
were called out and put under arms, expecting shortly to turn in again,
as they told me; but they were marched off, and left the place entirely,
leaving only my servant and myself in occupation of the town.

It seems that Marmont, with his whole force, had moved from Tordesillas,
and had threatened Lord Wellington's communication with Salamanca. In
order, then, to keep up a corresponding movement, and be ready to take
advantage of any false step the enemy might make, his lordship withdrew
his whole force, and began to retire as Marmont advanced. Thus, in the
morning, to my surprise, all the army had left the neighbourhood, and as
I was not certain who the next visitors might be, I quickly decamped
from a village now left open to the enemy. I got on at a considerable
pace, as both my servant and myself were riding, and on the 19th I
reached Salamanca.

During yesterday's march I heard a considerable cannonade to my right
and rear, and I afterwards learnt that the two armies had come nearly in
contact with each other, and some skirmishing and exchange of shots had
taken place. I did not stop in Salamanca longer than to draw rations for
ourselves and animals, being anxious to get on as fast as possible, to
try to get up the supplies while the army remained near the frontiers,
for it was still expected they would advance into the heart of Spain,
notwithstanding the present partial retreat. I accordingly moved on that
evening to Matilla, and continued thus making stages of thirty or forty
miles a-day, and on the 25th I reached Abrantes; but on the preceding
day I was overtaken by Lord Clinton, going home with the dispatches
relative to the glorious and decisive battle of Salamanca, which took
place on the 22d. His lordship was nearly worn out, being actually
asleep on his horse as he rode past me, for he had never once stopped
from the time he first set out. I learnt the news from the person who
accompanied him. It is impossible to describe the joy this information
created among the Portuguese inhabitants of the village. I stopped for
the night at Gaviae.

I found at Abrantes a detachment of our second battalion proceeding to
join the army; but, to my sorrow, learnt there was no chance of
procuring transports for the clothing, &c., for months to come. This was
distressing information to me, and of course added to the despondency
already preying upon my spirits; for the merchants' letters I was
continually receiving began to be most importunate, and indeed
attributing the non-remittal of their money to a want of principle, and
talked of reporting my conduct to the Commander-in-Chief.

Want of a proper religious feeling, under such circumstances, as might
be expected, laid me open to great temptations. I therefore, to drown
sorrow, and because I had always been too much addicted to it, began to
give way to intemperance, and, falling in with a number of officers of
very dissipated habits, I was led on to indulge in the most vile and
abominable of all vices, _drunkenness_, to an excess almost incredible.
But the gloom still seemed to thicken, and a dark cloud seemed impending
over me, of which I was fully aware, and wrote home to my friends to
that effect. At length my birthday, the 4th of August, arrived, and
which must, as my unhappy companions in sin urged on me, be kept with
all due jollity. Accordingly, a dozen of strong port-wine was procured,
and we boozed away most joyfully, the whole being drank by about four or
five of us. This produced constipation in the bowels, and had nigh
brought me to my end; but my mind was more affected, if possible, than
my body. About two days after this debauch, on my retiring to bed at
night, I felt an unusual inclination to rise up and fall down on my
knees, to offer up my evening prayer; for, notwithstanding all my
wickedness and forgetfulness of God, I had not altogether abandoned the
_form_ of _saying_ my prayers at night, but it was always after I lay
down. I resisted this impulse, however, to rise and pray, and, after
mumbling over my _form_ without the _spirit_, I endeavoured to compose
myself to sleep. I did sleep for a while, during which I was troubled
with some confused and incoherent dreams; but soon after awaking,
gracious God! what were my feelings then? Despair, black despair, had
seized upon me. I rushed out of bed, and rolled upon the floor like one
distracted, as indeed I was. Oh! what would I then have given that I had
never been born, or that I could cease to exist! Had it been possible,
by throwing my body into the flames, to annihilate for ever my
consciousness of being, how gladly would I have done it! But no--the
terrors of the Lord were upon me, and drank up my spirits; and no one
who has not been in a similar situation can form the most distant idea
of the misery which preyed upon me. The pains of hell got hold upon me,
and hope seemed for ever to be shut out from my mind. I believed I had
sinned past all redemption; that the mercy of God could not possibly be
extended to me; and of the efficacy of the Redeemer's blood I knew
nothing. Oh! this was a time much to be remembered by me, for none but
He who afflicted me, and my soul which bore the affliction, knows what I
then suffered!

At length the morning came, but with it no comfort for me. One of my
sinful and dissolute companions came to see me, but he seemed greatly
shocked at the recital of my woful tale, and I believe then formed for
himself resolutions of amendment, which I fear, poor fellow, he never
was able to fulfil. He did not long survive, but was shortly after
called to his awful account, whilst I am spared,--a monument of the
long-suffering mercy of God. Amongst all my companions in error and
wickedness, I could not procure a Bible, and, as a proof of the ungodly
state I was then in, I had not one myself. This poor friend, however,
had a Prayer-book, which he lent me, and out of which I eagerly sought
for comfort and hope, but in vain, for all was against me. Yes--and all
who make God their enemy, will find in the hour of need, that every
other creature and thing will fail to yield them comfort; but I had
sinned too deeply and too perseveringly to find peace speedily. Oh! in
what black array did the sins of my whole life pass before me, and how
did I sigh for annihilation; or, if I could in any way atone for my
wickedness, if I could but go and bury myself in a cave or den of the
earth, and forego for ever all intercourse with mankind, how easily and
how cheaply did I then conceive I should purchase pardon and peace! But,
alas! I knew nothing of the way of reconciliation with an offended God,
although I had been duly instructed in my youth. I was in such agony of
mind that I scarcely heeded my body, but was prevailed upon to have a
surgeon, who administered what he considered necessary, but without
effect. My bowels had ceased to perform their functions, and this no
doubt would greatly affect my head; still, although this, as a _second_
cause of the distraction of my mind, was easily discoverable, yet the
_great first cause_, not only of my disorder, but of all its effects,
was the God against whom I had so grievously sinned, and from whom alone
I could hope for the removal of my present sufferings. But hope was at
this time banished from my breast, and I gave myself up to all the
agonies of a soul that is lost for ever; but still I could not _rest_ in
this sad situation. I therefore now determined to set off for Lisbon, in
hopes that I might obtain from the chaplain, who was stationed there,
some slight alleviation of my misery, for none but Roman Catholic
priests were to be found where I then was. I accordingly set off,
accompanied by my servant, but in such a hurry, and so utterly
regardless of all worldly concerns, that I left my baggage in my
quarters, which was taken care of by the friend before mentioned.

I started in the afternoon of the second day after my attack. The sun
was scorching hot above my head, but I regarded it not, seeing there was
a hotter fire within me; indeed I believed I could not mortify my flesh
sufficiently, so blind was I at this time of the nature of atonement. My
feeling was, that I had an Almighty enemy over me; that His eye was upon
me for evil, let me go where I would; and that I could not possibly
escape from the destruction which He would shortly inflict upon my soul.
How gladly, as I rode along, would I have solicited the rocks and
mountains to fall upon me, and hide me from His sight, did I believe
they could have availed for this purpose! But no--I felt it was
impossible, and that I must endure for a short while longer the lighter
punishment he had then laid upon me; and by and by I must drink to the
dregs the cup of His everlasting indignation. O, sinners! be persuaded
to flee from the wrath to come, for indeed one of the slightest terrors
of the Almighty is enough to drive to distraction the strongest mind,
and to appal the stoutest heart!

I arrived at Galigao, the place of my intended rest for the night--and
here I was attacked with ague and fever in addition to my other
disorder--this was the effect of my exposure to the sun in so weak a
state. But I cared not for my body. I knew that would return to the dust
from whence it was taken. But oh! the never-dying soul--to think that it
should endure eternal and omnipotent wrath, overwhelmed me with dread
indescribable. My mind, it is true, was affected by my disorder; but it
could not be termed insanity or madness, for I even now remember with
great distinctness the feelings I then experienced, and those feelings
remained with me for a considerable time afterwards.

Here I felt myself extremely ill, and believed I could not survive till
morning. I consequently got my servant to make down my bed in a corner
of the room I occupied, with his own near it, and told him to leave the
candle burning, for that my time could not be long. I was compelled to
submit, and quietly lay myself down, in dreadful expectation of the
fatal hour, and when, as I imagined, the infernal fiend would be
commissioned to seize and carry off my soul to its abode of everlasting
misery. I could not pray, nor had I any the most distant hope that my
sentence could be reversed, for I fully believed it had been finally
pronounced by Him who changeth not.

During this woful night, I appeared to possess a sort of second self, a
being which existed and thought and reasoned quite distinct from that
_me_ who was stretched upon the floor, and which appeared to upbraid me
with the misery it was then suffering, and was still to suffer, for the
sins of my past abandoned life. I know not whether any other person in
despair ever experienced this feeling; but to me it was quite obvious,
for I remember distinctly the sin to which it more particularly drew my
guilty attention. Was not this the soul which will exist when the body
is dissolved, and may not such an upbraiding take place between the body
and the soul when the former shall be raised to join the latter in the
judgment? But the fact is, my soul was that night as it were on the
point of taking its departure from the tenement of clay, and seemed
strong to endure the everlasting wrath of God.

I do not know whether I slept any during this dreadful night; but
morning came, and with it a certainty that I was still in this world,
but without the hope that this might have been expected to produce. I
felt as in a fire, yet I scarcely durst put my burning hands into the
water my servant brought me. I felt convinced that I had forfeited all
claim to any thing like blessings, and that curses, both in body and
soul, were alone my due.

Ill as I was, however, I proceeded on my melancholy journey, not with
any hope that a minister of religion could give _me_ any relief, but a
drowning man will catch at a straw. Oh! how strong, how awfully strong,
did my soul appear at this time, to endure the tremendous wrath of
Omnipotence, whilst my body seemed fast sinking into its original
element!

I reached Lisbon in two days from this time, having taken a boat at
Santarem. I ate nothing, with a trifling exception. I had no inclination
for food, nor did I think I ought, for the reason before given; my only
sustenance was a little water which I kept in a bottle, and with which I
now and then moistened my parched lips.

I arrived at Lisbon about daybreak in the morning, and proceeded as well
as I was able to a friend's house, and knocked at the door; but shocked
indeed were he and his wife, when they saw me standing below, more like
a ghost than an inhabitant of this world. Indeed it is not easy to
describe my looks at this time; there must have been much of that
spiritual misery depicted in them which a confirmed despair no doubt
produces. They took me in, and after hearing my woful tale, prepared to
do for me the best that lay in their power; they gave me their own bed,
taking a pallet for themselves, and treated me as if I had been their
brother. He, poor fellow, is no more, but his beloved and kind partner
still lives, and may she always enjoy that happiness she seemed so
desirous of contributing to on this occasion, and everlasting happiness
hereafter! As soon as it could be conveniently done, the clergyman was
sent for, and also a medical officer, although from neither had I any
hope. But, alas! from the former, although a kind and sympathizing man,
I derived but little benefit. He did not direct me to the only source of
a sin-sick being's hopes, the Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of
the world. He made my hopes to centre too much in my own resolutions and
after-doings. No doubt, as my sins had been enormous and flagrant, my
repentance ought to be proportioned; but when he saw me bowed down under
an indescribable sense of guilt, oh! had he, like Paul to the jailer,
pointed me to the Saviour, how unutterably precious and acceptable would
it have been to my soul! I do not remember that any one character in
scripture is described as having felt more fully and more keenly the
sinfulness of sin, and of its consequent danger to the soul, than I did
at this time. How thankfully would I have accepted the mode of salvation
pointed out in the gospel; for indeed I was but too much (as all natural
men are) inclined to expect pardon and happiness from the things which,
if God spared me, I intended to perform. But He only knows best. This
kind gentleman wrote me out prayers, and seemed much interested in my
welfare; notwithstanding, the gloom of despair still hung heavy on me,
and at length; and when the kind medical friend was enabled, after
repeated efforts, to procure me some relief, I felt as if it was only
the prolonging of my existence, in order that I might fill up the
measure of my iniquity. This, I am now fully persuaded, was a suggestion
of the Father of Lies, in hopes probably of prevailing upon me to adopt
the awful and miserable resolution of Judas to get rid of life.

I thank God this was the only temptation of that nature which he
permitted me to be exercised with; for I felt no inclination even in my
darkest hours to commit suicide, fully believing that the utmost of my
sufferings here could bear no proportion to those of the damned in hell.
I consequently had no inclination to hasten them by rushing into
eternity; this, it is evident, was of the merciful goodness of the Lord,
and for which I am bound to be truly thankful.

I continued in this state of mind for several months, and could not,
with all my reading, praying, and doing, find peace. My reading and
praying seemed to me more like an irksome task, than an exercise in
which I took delight. I had formed a resolution from the first to retire
from the service, where it appeared to me I was exposed to so many
temptations; but here the experienced Christian will perceive how
erroneous were my views, and I think feel pleased that I never fully
effected my purpose, although I made preparations for it. Indeed I could
not well feel _certain_ that I should act right by retiring from the
post to which God's providence had appointed me, although my firm
determination was to live devoted to Him. But, alas! how wofully have I
failed of maintaining that resolution!

My health now gradually improved, under the kind and fostering
attentions of my warm-hearted host and hostess, and it became necessary
that I should resume my station at Abrantes, which I did, in hopes of
being able to obtain transport from thence, although the army was at
this time in the neighbourhood of Madrid. But after returning to
Abrantes I suffered a relapse, and was again brought to the borders of
the grave, my mind still deeply impressed with my former ill
forebodings, although not quite so distressing as before. I got my
servant to read to me while I lay groaning on the floor, for I could not
bear to sleep in a bed at this time, but felt little comfort from his
endeavours, the Scriptures being at this time "a sealed book" to me; so
true is it that till the grace of God dispels our darkness we have no
light in us.

I think it is probable that some of my readers, on perusing this part of
my narrative, will be inclined to say, "surely this man must have been
an uncommon and atrocious sinner, above all others, or he never would
have suffered thus." I acknowledge with shame that I have been a most
abominable and vile sinner, deserving of all the Lord laid upon me, and
much more, for I was, and am, fully deserving of hell fire; and should
that be my portion (as, through the merits and sufferings of my Saviour,
I have a humble hope it will not be), I must acknowledge the kindness
and justice of God, although I perish for ever. But I would say to such
readers, as our Saviour said to the Jews, that "except _ye_ repent, _ye_
shall likewise perish." Others may be inclined, on the contrary, to say,
that all this was merely the effect of disease, and not at all to be
resolved into God's hatred of sin and punishment of it in this instance.
I acknowledge that it was the effect of disease. But when God laid that
disease upon me, He knew what effect it would produce upon my mind;
consequently, both disease and mental agony came from Him; and, because
I knew it came from Him, "I held my tongue and said nothing." And I have
now, and I hope shall have for ever, the greatest cause to bless His
holy name for this, as one of the greatest mercies He ever showed me,
for having thus taught me to know how evil and bitter a thing sin is,
and to set a juster estimate upon his favour. He thus taught me also to
value and love the Saviour, who alone can deliver me from the
punishment, the power, the pollution, and the love of sin, and to make
me happy for ever. Blessed be His holy name, for He has done to me all
things well, and I humbly hope to enjoy His favour for ever.

During my stay at Lisbon, my batman, whom I before mentioned as having
lost, or rather sold, my mule, and who had here rejoined me to take care
of the horse and mule I had with me, either from remorse, or some other
cause, made an attempt to cut his throat, and succeeded so far as to
sever the windpipe, I believe, but did not quite effect his purpose. He
was found in a field near Lisbon bleeding nearly to death, and brought
into the hospital, where, with great care, and after some time, he
recovered. Indeed 1812 was a sickly year, and many were affected
strongly in the mind, several having committed suicide, I believe.

While I lay here ill the second time, I received a letter from the
regiment telling me that the paymastership had become vacant, the poor
old gentleman with whom I returned to England last year, having come out
again to the Peninsula, and got as far as Rodrigo on his way to the
regiment, and there, being attacked with the same disease I had suffered
so much from, died; and that as General Stewart, our colonel, had
arrived at Lisbon, I was to go and wait upon him, and that letters would
be written from the regiment requesting him to recommend me for the
situation.

I with great difficulty again reached Lisbon, and waited upon the
general, but to my great mortification I found the promised letters from
the regiment had never been received, and that another person had, in
consequence, been recommended, he being the son of the late paymaster,
and had applied some time before. My disappointment did not prey upon my
mind, for at this time I set very light indeed by the good things of
this world, and felt conscious that I already possessed much more than I
deserved. I was compelled through illness to remain again in Lisbon some
time, but found great difficulty to obtain permission from the
commandant for so doing. My general, however, procured me leave to stay
till I should be able to resume my post at Abrantes. Here, not only
myself, but all the officers who were then in Lisbon, and also at the
army, suffered much from the want of subsistence. I had at this period
seven months' pay due me, and could not obtain a dollar from the public
chest, although I wrote a note to the commandant showing him how I was
suffering from want of money.

The army had in the meantime pursued the French, as before noticed, on
one side to Madrid, and on the other to Burgos; but the attempt to take
the latter by storm having failed, and the enemy having been able to
assemble a more numerous force than Lord Wellington had before it, he
was obliged to retire from both those places to the frontiers of
Portugal. The division from Cadiz, the siege of which having been raised
by our forward movement in summer, had joined the army at Madrid. Much
was suffered, I understand, during this retreat, the troops having been
exposed to great privations, and the weather being exceedingly wet and
unpleasant. My division, after the retreat, took up its quarters again
in the villages on the Portuguese side of Rodrigo--my battalion being
stationed at the village of Espeja. The army, as might be expected from
the late severe and harassing service they had been engaged in, began to
be extremely ill off indeed for want of clothing, many of the men being
nearly quite naked; in consequence, the most pressing orders were sent
from head-quarters to use every means possible to have the supplies
immediately forwarded, for Abrantes at this time contained stores
belonging to almost every regiment in the army. My health having been
considerably improved, I again returned to that depot, and, after
waiting a few weeks, the means of transport were at last given me by the
commissary there. I need not say with what alacrity I prepared for and
commenced my long wished for journey. I had got a sufficient escort
assigned me, from a detachment of our men being about to join the
regiment.

We started about the beginning of January 1813, and proceeded on our
route by way of Niza, &c. I had been obliged to buy another horse from
some cause which I do not now recollect, but when we were leaving the
town just named, I found, on turning out to move off, that a large nail
had been driven right up into the centre of one of his feet. Whether
this was done accidentally, or by design, I never could learn, but the
consequence was the loss of the horse. I had great trouble also to keep
the convoy, which consisted of about a dozen bullock carts, with as many
soldiers as an escort, together; the drivers, if they were not strictly
guarded, very often made their escape, taking their bullocks with them
during the night, and leaving the cart in our possession, glad, I dare
say, that they got off so cheaply, for they seemed to have a great
antipathy to go with us. I was therefore compelled to collect them all
together near Castello Branco, and making the soldiers load their rifles
before them, told them as well as I was able that they had orders to
shoot the first who attempted to desert with his bullocks. This had a
good effect, for I believe we lost no more till we reached the regiment;
but, as we approached the frontiers of Spain, several of the drivers ran
away without their cattle, preferring the loss of both bullocks, cart,
and payment, rather than enter that country, of which the peasantry in
general seemed to have a great dread. Those who stuck by us to the last,
were rewarded with the bullocks and carts of the deserters; but I think
we did not take more than two or three out of the twelve to the
regiment, the rest had all made their escape. Nothing can be conceived
more tiresome than travelling with such a convoy. The carts are all
constructed upon the principle of the Irish car; that is, the axle rolls
round with the wheels, they being firmly united; consequently the
creaking noise created by the friction is loud and most unpleasant, and
they have no idea of grease or tar to diminish this, but believe in many
parts, if not in all, the noise to be a sort of holy noise, which keeps
the devil from them. I found, in removing these stores, that great
robberies had taken place upon them, several of the bales having been
opened while on board ship, great quantities of goods taken out, and
their place filled up with old transport bedding, &c. I found it
necessary, however, to endeavour to bear up against all this, for my
mind would not suffer me to dwell too much upon such misfortunes. At
length I arrived at the regiment, where indeed I was a welcome guest,
for they were greatly in need of all kinds of equipment.

The officer who had rendered my life so unhappy before, had left the
regiment, and gone into another far distant from my present place of
abode, for which I was truly thankful, and his absence I found produced
a great change in my favour; for every one seemed glad to see me, and
sympathized with me in my late alarming illness; in fact, the face of
things was entirely changed for the better. I myself had benefited much
by my late chastisement. I had learned to think meanly of myself, and to
be kind and submissive to all to whom I owed submission; a virtue which,
I fear, I was but too deficient in before.

All things now went well with me. The goods, which before had been such
a source of uneasiness and trouble, were rapidly disposing of, and thus
the prospect of my soon being able to pay my creditors became every day
brighter. But, in the mean time, what I had hinted at before took place:
one of the merchants had actually reported me to his Royal Highness the
Duke of York. This might, indeed, have deprived me of my commission, had
his Royal Highness been harsh with me; but he caused a letter to be
written to my commanding-officer, (now Sir Andrew Barnard,) to call on
me to explain why I had not remitted the merchant what I owed him, and
to account for my not answering his letters, which he said I had failed
to do for several months. My answer was very simple, as the reader is
aware; but, with respect to the letters, I showed the colonel one, in
which the merchant acknowledged having received one from me a short time
previously. This also was satisfactory, and I had moreover remitted him
a short while before L.300 of the money I owed him. The colonel was
fully satisfied, and wrote off to his Royal Highness accordingly, and I
heard no more of the business. Soon after the captain, who had been
acting as paymaster, was obliged to return to England, on account of ill
health. After some necessary steps I was appointed to this duty, it
being an addition of 10s. per diem to my pay. According to the army
regulations, a person in my situation could not be appointed acting
paymaster; but a committee of three captains was formed, who took all
the responsibility of my transactions upon themselves, giving me, as
before said, the whole 10s. per diem. This showed, at least, that they
were not afraid to trust themselves in my hands; for I might have
involved them deeply. In short, whatever I did (almost) prospered, and a
kind Providence seemed to smile upon me; and I believe that from this to
the close of the Peninsular campaigns was the happiest part of my life.
I have reason, therefore, to bless God for his unbounded goodness to
me.




CHAPTER IX.

     Preparations for the Field--Amusements in winter
     quarters--Grand Review--Advance of the Army in pursuit of the
     Enemy--Come up with their rearguard in the vicinity of Hornilla
     de Camino--Skirmishing--Encounter with the 1st brigade of the
     Enemy, who are beaten, and forced to retreat--Our Army advance
     in pursuit--An affair between the rearguard of the Enemy and
     our 4th Brigade--Vittoria--General Engagement--The Enemy
     defeated--Remarks.


I begin this chapter, through the mercy and goodness of God, with
brighter prospects than any I have written hitherto; for though I was
still ignorant of the peculiar doctrines of Christianity, I believed God
was at peace with me, and, from my late dreadful sufferings for sin, I
certainly walked very circumspectly, and I believe I had also more of
the genuine feelings of a Christian, though not the knowledge; for I was
lowly in my own eyes, and loved all mankind. In me was fully verified at
this time that sublime, but seemingly ill understood, saying of our
Saviour's, "Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth." I
now was meek and lowly, and I had friends in abundance, and may truly be
said to have possessed or inherited the earth, for I had plenty of every
necessary good, and, withal, peace and contentment. I could not enjoy
more had I been in possession of more. Alas! how lamentable is it that
chastisement should produce a better effect upon me, than love and
gratitude to God is capable of doing; for, to my shame be it spoken,
pride and selfishness now prevail much more in my heart than they were
able to do then; and I find it much more difficult now to bring my mind
down to that lowly and contrite feeling which with God is so acceptable,
and with the possession of which only He promises to dwell.

As the officer whom I have had occasion so often to mention owed me a
trifle of money, I wrote to him, in as friendly a manner as I could,
hoping, now we were separated, that his enmity would cease, and I was
desirous of being at peace with all mankind; for, as I said before, I
never yet knew why he was my enemy. He wrote back, with an order for the
money, telling me, he hoped never to hear from me again, for that he was
anxious to forget that such a person had ever existed in the world.
This, as might be supposed, wounded my feelings deeply, but I remembered
that I had myself sinned as deeply against God, and that He might raise
up such instruments for my correction as seemed good to Him. My
feelings, therefore, towards this person were more of regret and pity
than of resentment, and I think I did not forget to pray to God for him.
Poor fellow, he has a good while since been called to his account, and
that in rather an awful manner; he fell in a duel, but which (from all I
could learn) he was engaged in from the best motives, that of
endeavouring to prevent the seduction of a young female belonging to his
regiment. I hope he is at peace.

During our stay in winter-quarters every exertion was made to put the
troops in a proper state to take the field again, so soon as the season
was sufficiently advanced. While we remained here also every sort of
innocent amusement, at least generally innocent, was had recourse to,
both by officers and men, not only to pass the time of inactivity with
pleasure, but to keep up that readiness for action always so necessary
in a state of warfare. We accordingly had races, balls, plays, and every
other description of pastime our situation admitted of. We in Espija
established what was termed a _trigger_ club, each one in turn giving an
entertainment at his house, and at which, as the name would imply, as
much game was produced as our sportsmen could procure. The plays were
generally held at Gallegos, the quarter of the 43d, and which were
indeed got up in a surprising style, considering the means of doing so.
A _walking_ club was established in our 1st battalion, which was
quartered at Alamada; we were of course frequently favoured with the
company of its members, for they thought nothing of setting out, each
with a long pole in his hand, and walking twenty or more miles to
dinner. Thus harmony and a brotherly feeling was promoted amongst the
officers of the division,--a thing of great moment where regiments have
to act together, as well as pleasant to all parties. Some of our people
also occasionally had a wolf-hunt, for these animals were quite numerous
in this part of the country; nay, so bold were they when pressed with
hunger, that they did not scruple sometimes to enter our villages, and
devour whatever fell in their way that they could master. An officer of
ours had an ass or a mule torn to pieces one night while standing in the
yard behind his house. The mode of hunting them was, to have a certain
number with arms stationed at the different passes in the wood, whilst a
large party of drivers scoured the wood in line, driving every thing
before them, when the animals, coming upon the armed people, were shot;
but I do not think they were at all successful: it requires people
accustomed to the business to enable them to kill many. There is a
premium given for every wolf's head, but I forget how much it is.

I sometimes took a trip to the Azava, or the Agueda, on a fishing
excursion; but I was ill off for fishing tackle: the hooks the Spaniards
make are the clumsiest things imaginable, and would not, I am persuaded,
be made with less dexterity by the natives of New Zealand. Those which
we were forced to use for fly-hooks had a hole or eye at the top, like
the crook which you will sometimes see in a butcher's shop, intended to
be hung upon another, which was formed by turning the wire down again,
and through this they run their line; besides, they almost invariably
broke, and I have been wofully tantalized sometimes by having the hook
break off the only fly that the fish were taking; notwithstanding, I
caught some very fine trout in the Agueda, this river abounding with
them. I sometimes also caught barbel in that river; but it was literally
swarming with a sort of roach, or what some of our people called
rock-fish: they generally feed from some stuff they find on the large
stones. But as the season approached which was to call us to the field,
a review of the whole division was ordered to take place on the plain of
Espija, and which, I think, was as brilliant a spectacle of that
description as it was possible for 5000 men to make. Every regiment was
in high and complete order, the whole having by this time been fully
equipped for the campaign: the movements, too, were beautiful, and
executed with great precision and promptitude, and, as might be
anticipated, called forth the unqualified approbation of our illustrious
Chief.

A new and different arrangement was made this campaign with respect to
both officers and men in their field-equipment. Experience had proved
that constant bivouacking injured the men's health, as the mode they had
adopted last year, though very ingenious, was not calculated to protect
them sufficiently from exposure to the weather. They had last campaign
been ordered each man to have loops sewed on at the corner of his
blanket; thus, when in the field, two of these were united, and spread
over two stand of arms set up at the ends for poles, and being fastened
down at the other corners with bayonets, they formed a sort of tent,
into which perhaps four men might creep; but then they had thus only two
blankets to serve as a bed for the whole four men; consequently they
would, in cold weather, be much exposed. This campaign each company
received four tents; thus allowing about twenty men for each, and the
officers of each company had one among them, and the field and staff
officers in like proportion. These were carried on mules, which before
had carried the camp-kettles; but these being exchanged for smaller
ones, the men carried them in turns upon their knapsacks. Thus it rarely
happened that the tents were not on the ground nearly as soon as the
men; but strict orders were given always to encamp out of sight of the
enemy, if practicable, that they might not be able to calculate our
numbers. How very different from the ancient mode of encamping! each of
which being more like a town laid out with regular streets, &c. &c. But
war was a very different thing in those days, and could Marlborough have
risen to see one of our straggling and irregular mountain camps, I know
not what his feelings would have been: he would, I fear, have thought we
had sadly degenerated.

All being now ready for opening the campaign, a part of the army, under
Sir Thomas Graham, crossed the Douro low down in Portugal, and proceeded
up the right bank, while we, with Sir Rowland Hill's corps, moved
forward in the direction of Salamanca and Toro. On the 21st of May, our
division broke up from its cantonments, and assembled at the village of
St Felices el Chico, a few miles below Ciudad Rodrigo, each regiment
having had the Agueda to ford in its march to this camp. Our division at
this time consisted of the following corps:--viz. the 1st brigade, under
General Kempt, was composed of the 43d regiment, 17th Portuguese, and
the 1st and 3d battalions of my regiment; the 2d brigade, under General
Skerrit, contained the 52d regiment, 1st and 3d Portuguese cacadores,
and the 2d battalion of my regiment; one troop of horse artillery, under
Colonel Ross, was attached to the division; the whole being under the
command of General Charles Alten. On the 22d, we moved on to Martin del
Rey, near the river Yeltes, by the side of which we encamped. On the
23d, we marched to and encamped near San Munoz, where the division had,
I understand, suffered considerably during the retreat of last year,
from the French having gained ground upon them, and severely cannonaded
them from a height near this village. On the 25th, we moved on to
Robliza, having halted the day before to enable the other division to
come up with us. We next morning moved forward to the little river
Valmuzo, a few miles on the Portugal side of Salamanca, and alluded to
in my former advance. Here we halted for three hours during mid-day and
cooked, and in the afternoon advanced to the ford of El Canto, on the
river Tormes, and about two leagues below Salamanca. Here we encamped
for the night, and remained next day also. Lord Wellington, with some
cavalry we understood, had entered Salamanca, where only a small force
of the enemy's cavalry had been found, and which retired immediately;
but I believe some little skirmishing took place between the parties. On
the morning of the 28th we forded the Tormes, and advanced towards
Aldea Nueva de Figuera, which we reached late in the day, the distance
being about twenty-four miles.

While we lay at El Canto, a few of our officers visited Salamanca, in
hopes of meeting some of their old friends of last year; but not a
_viva_ greeted their ears on entering the city; a sort of suspicious
look of recognition was all they could obtain from those people, who had
received us only last summer with such extravagant demonstrations of
joy. No doubt they had been made to suffer for their former expressions
of attachment to us, for the French had in almost every place their
partisans, who doubtless would not fail to give them, on their return,
an account of the manner in which the English had been received, and the
contributions would be laid on accordingly.

We remained at Aldea from the 28th May to the 2d of June, waiting for
information from the corps under Sir Thomas Graham, it being intended to
form a junction at or about Toro, where it was expected the enemy had a
considerable force; this was distant from us about thirty miles. While
we continued here, I took a trip to Sir Rowland Hill's division, where I
had a townsman, an officer in the 28th, but had not the satisfaction of
seeing him. I had other friends in that division, however, with whom I
and my companions spent the day in great harmony and satisfaction, and
at evening returned to our camp, about four miles distant, highly
gratified.

On the 2d of June, we set off early in the morning, and arrived at Villa
Buena about mid-day, where we halted for three hours to cook and
refresh, after which we continued our march towards Toro, which we
reached in the evening, but the enemy having destroyed the bridge across
the Douro at this place, we encamped for the night in some fields on the
left bank of the river. We learnt here that the hussars attached to Sir
Thomas Graham's division had attacked a corps of French cavalry soon
after their having quitted Toro, and with whom a very smart affair had
taken place, the enemy being completely routed, and about 150 prisoners
taken from them. Our cavalry, I believe, lost an officer on this
occasion, who fell into the hands of the enemy. Nothing could exceed the
miserable appearance of the horses taken from the French on this
occasion; they appeared really half starved, although at this season
there was plenty of green forage to be had; they must either have been
sadly neglected, or have been doing exceeding hard duty.

The bridge having been rendered passable for the men, the division
crossed on the following morning, the horses and mules fording the
river. We left Toro immediately, and moved on in pursuit of the enemy,
and encamped that night at Terra Buena. On the 4th, we reached the
convent of Espinar, and encamped on a height just over it. It was a most
picturesque and beautiful piece of country around this convent, but
itself appeared to have been lately rendered uninhabitable. I believe
the monks had been driven away by the French, but not a soul remained to
enquire of; all about the building was desolation. We next day advanced
to the village of Muderra, and on the 6th to Amperdia, and on the 7th we
marched through the city of Palentia, and encamped outside the walls, on
the banks of the river Carrion.

Here the inhabitants evinced the same degree of enthusiasm on our
entrance as we had been accustomed to witness in other large towns, till
the French had taught them a little more circumspection, and which the
good people of Palentia would have been most probably fully taught, had
these good friends of theirs ever got possession of their city again.
Some time after we had pitched our camp, and were strolling about the
city, the lifeguards entered, and were of course saluted with repeated
vivas. One of the men, a rather country-looking young fellow, cried out,
"Ay, the folks be always glad to see we lifeguards," happily supposing,
no doubt, that they were intended as a particular compliment to his
corps alone. All the country through which we had marched for several
days past, was one continued plain of waving corn, mostly wheat of the
very finest description. There are no hedges or dikes, but, as before
noticed, only landmarks to divide the different fields, so that its
appearance is like an immense sea, stretching as far as the eye can
reach, the long corn undulating with the wind as the waves in the ocean.

On the 8th we marched forward and encamped at the village of Tamara, the
weather having, from being exceedingly fine, and indeed rather hot, set
in extremely wet and cold, and thus rendered marching very unpleasant.
We next day reached La Pena, (the name, it may be remembered, of the
Barossa Spanish hero,) the weather continuing very coarse and stormy. On
the 10th we continued to advance, and marching through the village of
Framosa, and passing over a canal which crosses here, we halted for the
night on the right bank of the river Pisuerga, near the village of
Lantadilla. In all these late movements, we had experienced a great
deficiency of fuel for cooking and drying our clothes when wet, neither
forest nor bush-wood being to be seen for days together, and indeed
scarcely one solitary tree to be met with--nothing but corn; so that we
were occasionally compelled to resort to the cruel and unchristianlike
expedient of pulling down houses to obtain the timber with which they
were built for the purpose of cooking, or we must have eaten our food
raw. This, however, was done in a regular and systematic order, the
Alcalde of the village pointing out such of the houses as were to be
doomed to the fire, and the troops taking no more than was absolutely
necessary. It is astonishing to me how the natives themselves exist for
want of this article of first necessity.

From this village we moved forward on the 11th, and crossing the
Pisuerga, marched on the town of Pallacio, which we passed, and reached
the village of Landrino, near which we encamped for the night.

From the time we left Toro, the enemy had been gradually retiring before
us, having withdrawn his forces from all the strong places on the Douro,
and seemed concentrating somewhere in the direction of Burgos or
Vittoria. Excepting our cavalry, no part of our forces ever had the
satisfaction of seeing a Frenchman hitherto during the whole of this
long and rapid march; but on the morning of the 12th, as we now
approached Burgos, it was fully expected that we should be able to get a
sight of the fugitives; and accordingly, after we had left our last
night's quarters, and marched a few miles in the direction of the city,
a pretty strong body of the enemy's cavalry was seen drawn out on a high
plain, a little above the village of Hornilla de Camino. These were
supported by a division of infantry formed in square, and occupying the
outer edge of the high plain facing the way we advanced, and apparently
observing our motions. On discovering this force, our division was
halted to give the cavalry attached to us time to ride forward to
reconnoitre, and ascertain more exactly the force before us, than could
be done while we were on the low ground.

I rode forward with our cavalry, which, passing by the enemy's square of
infantry, approached the main body of their cavalry. It not being,
however, the intention of the French to fight here, they slowly and
orderly retired before us across the plain; but as we had left the
square of infantry nearly behind us, the guns attached to our cavalry
turned in that direction, for this body seemed indifferent about the
movements of our cavalry, and it was not till our division began to
ascend the hill that they evinced the slightest intention of stirring.
On seeing them, however, they quickly decamped, and as they had to pass
within 150 yards of the position our guns had taken up, I imagined
considerable execution must have been done upon them before they got out
of our reach. But, strange to say, I believe only one single man was
knocked down by the great numbers of shot fired at them. It must have
been owing to the relative situations of the two parties; they passed
down a hollow way which led from the high plain in the direction of the
Burgos road, and which covered them completely till they came
immediately below our guns, when it became a difficult matter to depress
them so as to bear upon the enemy's square as they passed us. However
the whole turned round and gave us a regular volley, for, as we were so
much above them, there was no danger from their firing in square; but
this, although the shots flew pretty thick about us, was not productive
of any mischief that I remember. They retired across the plain below us,
pursued by another division of ours which had advanced on our right, and
between whom and the French a pretty smart skirmish took place. So soon
as their infantry were clear from us, their guns opened out from the
opposite side of the river upon us on the height, but, the distance
being considerable, their shot did little execution. It was evident this
force was only left here as a rearguard, to ascertain our movements and
force, &c. We encamped for the night near the road by which we had
ascended the high plain; but were awoke early next morning by a
tremendous explosion which shook the earth beneath us, although at the
distance of 6 or 7 miles from Burgos, the castle of which the enemy had
blown up, and retired altogether. We soon after commenced our march,
and, leaving that city to our right, made a long march in the direction
of the Ebro, and halted for the night near the village of Tovar. The
next day we moved on to Quintanajar, and on the 15th, after a long
march, we reached the Ebro, and halted at the village of Puente Arrenas,
situated in the delightful valley of Veras. This is one of the most
picturesque and beautiful valleys in Europe, I dare say. When you arrive
at the brow of the high ground over the Ebro, a sight breaks upon you
all at once which is indescribably grand and beautiful;--a large river
rolling under you, beyond which a rich and fertile valley, laden with
the fruits of a hundred orchards, with charming villas and farm-houses
dispersed through all the lawn; a stupendous bridge, of I know not how
many arches, leading you across this magnificent river; and the whole
closed by high and beetling rocks jutting out of the high woody bank on
the opposite side. It really appeared like enchantment when we first
arrived within sight of it, from the long dreary plains we had been so
long traversing. Here, for the first time since we entered Spain, did we
meet with "manteca de vaca," or "cow butter," all the other we had been
compelled to use hitherto for want of better, was what they call
"manteca de puerco," or "hog's-lard." The women who brought it wore a
quite different dress from those we had seen in the parts we had passed
through; the women had on generally yellow stockings, with abundance of
petticoats of red, yellow, green, &c. &c., and were all very stout-made;
they were, I believe, from Asturias. Poor creatures, many of them
followed us with loads of butter, wine, cheese, &c. &c., even into
France, so pleased were they with the excellent prices their
merchandise brought amongst us; indeed, we had been so long debarred the
enjoyment of butter and cheese, that we would have given almost any
price to get them sweet and good. They carried their loads (and
tremendous ones they were) as the flesh-wives in Newcastle carry theirs,
that is, by passing a broad leather belt across the forehead and over
the shoulders, and so underneath the heavy load upon their back. They
were a civil and obliging race of beings, and apparently much more
industrious and cleanly than the rest of their country people.

We left this delightful spot on the morning of the 16th, following the
course of the river upwards for about a league, then turning short to
the right, passed through an enclosed country, and halted for the night
at the town of Medina del Pomar. This is a considerable-sized place, in
which was a nunnery, the inmates of which greeted us with hearty
welcomes and vivas, with waving of handkerchiefs, &c., through their
strongly iron-grated windows, where they more resembled criminals of the
worst description shut up in a strong prison, poor things, than people
who had devoted themselves to the service of their Maker. Next morning,
we moved forward through a country almost without roads; we were, in
fact, crossing the country in order to get nearer to the great road
leading from Madrid to Vittoria, and on which the enemy's army was then
retiring. We encamped for the night, after a fatiguing day's march, on a
woody height near the little river Loza. We took the high ground on this
occasion for our encampment, although extremely inconvenient and
uncomfortable, being among stumps and brushwood, where there was
scarcely room to pitch our tents; this was in consequence of being in
the neighbourhood of a considerable force of the enemy, which was
retreating, as before noticed, along the great road.

The next morning, the 18th of June, we started pretty early, and
calculating that we should this day come in contact with the above
force, we marched in such a manner as to be ready, when that event took
place, to take advantage of any favourable circumstances that might
offer. We had in our front a squadron of Hussars belonging to the German
Legion, and which were generally attached to our division. About mid-day
the squadron in front of us reached the village of San Millan, where the
road on which we were then marching, and the great road on which the
enemy was retreating, unite; the latter descending from a high tableland
just above the village, and passing a narrow defile between two high
rocks. Our cavalry, on reaching this village, descried the advance of
the French, composed also of cavalry; and what was not a little
singular, they also were Germans in the French service. Our brave
Hussars instantly charged those of the enemy, and immediately overthrew
the body opposed to them, and in the charge captured several men and
horses, which they brought in prisoners.

By this time the head of the division had reached the spot, (my 1st
battalion leading,) which in a few minutes got warmly engaged with the
enemy's voltigeurs, a considerable number of whom had advanced to oppose
us, in order that the main body of their division might be enabled,
under cover of their fire, to pass through the village on the way
towards Vittoria. Our people, however, pressed them so hard, that the
whole of their leading brigade was obliged to join in the action. At
this moment our illustrious Chief came galloping up; for, whenever any
thing was to be done, he was always present. He had also taken care to
have our 4th division moved so as to arrive at the village of Espija, a
town about a league in front of us on the great road, nearly about the
same time, so that, should the French contrive to get away from us,
they might fall into their hands. He immediately sent me off to the
leading company of our people who were engaged, for the guide they had
had with them, in order that he might conduct his lordship to Espija;
but that was no place for a Spanish peasant who had neither honour nor
glory to gain, and he had accordingly made his escape the moment our
folks got into action. His lordship instantly dashed off without a
guide, while our two battalions, that is, the 1st and 3d of my regiment,
kept advancing upon the enemy, and fairly drove them through the
village, being supported by the other regiments of the brigade, but who
had not any occasion to come into action.

The first brigade of the enemy being thus beaten, retreated along the
great road in the direction of Espija, leaving their second brigade and
all their baggage to their fate. These latter being pressed by our
second or rear brigade, and seeing us in possession of the village, and
the road they had to pass, immediately broke in all directions, and
dispersed themselves in the mountains over the village, each man making
the best of his way. This their baggage could not do, and it
consequently fell into the hands of the captors, an easy and valuable
booty; but although my brigade, by beating and dispersing the enemy at
the village, had been the principal cause of its capture, yet those
whose hands it fell into had not the generosity to offer the least share
of it to us, but divided it amongst themselves.

During the skirmish in the village, a French hussar chased one of our
officers several times round one of the trees growing by the side of the
road, and repeatedly cut at him with his sabre, and it is likely would
have cut him down at last, had not the officer seen a rifle lying near,
belonging to a man just killed; and luckily it was loaded when he picked
it up. He waited for the Frenchman, and coolly shot him through the
body, and instantly seized his horse as lawful prize; had the rifle
missed fire he was gone. We had not rested long after this brush till we
heard a firing in our front, where indeed it was expected. The troops
which had just left us, I imagine, had been attacked by the 4th
division, and we, the 1st brigade, were instantly ordered to their
support should they need it; but before we reached Espija, the enemy was
completely beaten, and had retired in the direction of Vittoria. We had
to retrace our steps and join our other brigade, and encamped for the
night in the neighbourhood of San Millan.

Our loss on this occasion was but trifling, considering the smartness of
the affair. An officer of my regiment, of the name of Haggup, a
countryman of my own, received a most dangerous wound in the abdomen, of
which it was feared he would die, but he soon after completely
recovered. An aide-de-camp of the French General was wounded, and taken
prisoner, but he soon after died, poor fellow. Along with the captured
baggage were a number of Spanish ladies, who had been attached to the
French officers to whom it belonged, but they did not appear over
faithful to their protectors, for most of them, I believe, preferred
remaining in the hands of their captors, to being forwarded after their
beaten and now ill-provided former companions; such is generally the
fidelity to be expected from that sort of people.

On the 19th we advanced by the same road the French had retired, till we
reached the town of Salinas, where there were very extensive salt-works,
as the name of the place denotes. We encamped for the night near the
village of Pobes, on a small rivulet named Bayas, I believe. Near the
end of our march to-day we had a view of the enemy's rearguard, as they
rounded the end of a mountain, which lay immediately before us, and over
which the road to Vittoria passes. After rounding the mountain, this
part of the enemy's force fell in with our 4th division again, which had
been moved forward from Espija by another road. A very smart skirmish
was the consequence, which we distinctly heard, and in which a good
number fell on both sides. The French retired from hence into their
position in front of Vittoria. During the next day, while we halted
here, it began to be whispered that the enemy had concentrated his
forces in and around Vittoria, which was distant from us perhaps about
ten or a dozen miles, and that the divisions of our own army had that
day approached nearer together, which indicated a determination on the
part of our Chief to try his hand with King Joseph, should he be bold
enough to stay where he then was.

Many, of course, and various would be the reflections which occupied the
minds of the different individuals composing the two armies; but I can
speak from experience, that those are of a much more pleasing nature
which a consciousness of superiority and a good prospect of success
inspires, than those which a retreating army are compelled to entertain.

Pretty early in the morning of the 21st, we fell in and moved forward by
the way the French rearguard before-mentioned had taken, and after
having passed the end of the mountain and descended into the valley on
the other side, we saw evident proofs that the affair between our 4th
division and the French, above alluded to, must have been pretty warm.
We continued to advance on the road to Vittoria, till, on ascending a
rising ground, the French army appeared in position immediately in front
of us. It was a noble and animating sight, for they appeared as numerous
almost as grashoppers, and were posted as nearly as I can recollect in
the following order. Immediately before us ran the river Zadora,
passing from our left and front to our right and rear. In the centre of
an extensive plain rose a pretty lofty conical hill, from which extended
to their left a sloping plain, through which the great road lay, and
terminated by a long range of mountains, stretching from Puebla de
Arlanzon, just above the river, to a considerable distance beyond
Vittoria. The city was shut out of our view by the conical hill before
mentioned, and was distant from it about four or five miles; to the
right of this hill, along the bank of the river, it appeared broken, and
not easily approachable. On the face of the conical hill, and to its
very summit, it appeared as thickly set with troops as if they had been
bees clustering together; it was also thickly studded with batteries and
other field-works. On the plain between that and the long range of
mountains, the troops appeared to stand so thick that you might imagine
you could walk on their heads. There did not appear any great force on
the mountains to their left, and what they had to the right of the
conical hill and towards Vittoria we could not discern, but it turned
out they had a strong force there. There were several small villages in
the plain and on the side of the mountains; the largest stood rather to
the right of the plain, with a wood immediately behind it; this, I
believe, is called Subijana de Alva. On the bank of the river also were
three or four villages, most of them on our side, with a bridge at each
village. The French army did not extend immediately to the river bank,
but was placed at some little distance beyond it. The river was easily
fordable.

Our army began to arrive by divisions, and was posted as
follows--General Hill with the 2d division, consisting of about 12,000
men, was on our extreme right, except about 3000 or 4000 Spaniards under
General Morillo, who were still more to the right, and facing the long
range of mountains before mentioned. In the centre was his lordship
with the 3d, 4th, 7th, and light divisions, perhaps 25,000 strong, with
the main force of artillery and cavalry. Sir Thomas Graham had been
early detached to our left with the 1st and 5th divisions and some
Portuguese, about 12,000 in all, to turn the enemy's right flank, and to
try to cut him off from the great road leading from Vittoria to France,
which ran in that direction.

Whilst this movement was executing, and the different divisions were
getting into their several stations, we, who had arrived first, were
allowed to pile our arms and sit down. His lordship, with a numerous
staff, went down a little nearer to the river to reconnoitre the enemy's
position. I wandered down with them, and got as near as I could in order
to ascertain the opinion of the big-wigs as to the business about to
take place. One staff-officer, after carefully examining the position of
the enemy through his glass, gave it as his opinion, that we should
scarcely be able to make any impression upon so numerous an army, and so
very strongly posted; but this opinion must have been dictated, I think,
by his rather desponding temperament, for I believe it was entirely
singular.

The enemy, however, did not fail to notice this movement of our General
and his staff, and instantly detached a corps of voltigeurs, who,
rushing down to the river, dashed across the bridge at the village of
Villoses, and immediately took possession of a small woody height on our
side of the river, from whence they opened a fire on his lordship and
those that were with him. This of course could not be borne; and as my
battalion was the leading battalion of the column and nearest at hand,
we were ordered (with two companies of our 1st battalion, which stood
next to us) to take our arms, and drive those fellows across the river
again. Thus we had, I believe, the high honour of commencing the action
on that memorable day. We soon chased the voltigeurs from the woody
height, down through the village, and over the bridge, where they took
post and remained, we not having orders to pursue them any farther. We
took possession of the village, and continued skirmishing with the
enemy, a good many men falling on both sides, as the river was not more
probably than thirty or forty yards wide, and a constant fire was kept
up by both parties till the French were afterwards driven away by our
divisions crossing lower down the river.

After we had chased the enemy along the bridge, and they were fairly
clear of the village, a French battery, situated a little above the
river towards the conical hill, opened its fire upon us, from which we
suffered a good deal, one shot having taken our people, who were lining
a garden wall, in flank, and swept away five or six at a stroke; after
this we kept more under cover.

Almost the first person who fell on our side was a lieutenant of the
name of Campbell. He had, I am sure, a strong presentiment of his death,
for he had, I believe, made his will the evening before; and when we
first came in sight of the French army, and the others were all animated
with life and glee at the prospect of gaining laurels in abundance, he,
poor fellow, sat down by himself quite pensive, and seemed lost in
thought. He received a shot in the forehead which terminated his career
in a moment as it were, and plunged him into an eternity of bliss or
woe. I hope he was prepared, but scarcely dare say I believe he was. Our
duty having been accomplished by taking possession of this village, and
keeping the French from coming over, we had now leisure to look round us
and see what was going forward; and we had certainly a noble field for
observation. My commanding-officer, with the rest of the staff-officers
and myself, together with half a company of men, took up our station at
the church, which, standing high, gave us a fine opportunity of
witnessing the movements of both armies.

A short while after we had taken post here, we observed the smoke to
arise in dense columns in the direction which Sir Thomas Graham had
taken, which showed he had commenced the attack on that flank of the
enemy, and this was the signal for commencing operations on our right
and centre. Sir Rowland Hill's people, with the Spaniards, instantly
forded the river, and advanced along the top and side of the mountains
before mentioned; and as this was done in considerable force, it seemed
to disconcert King Joseph a good deal, for instantly his aides-de-camp
were seen galloping in every direction, and the troops which stood upon
the plain began to move in that direction, while those upon the conical
hill began to descend in great numbers into the plain. This was
precisely what our Chief had calculated upon; and now, by a rapid
movement, he threw the centre divisions across the river, by the bridges
of Trespuentes and Nanclara, a little below our village, and attacking
the remaining troops upon the conical hill, they were overthrown as fast
as our divisions reached them. The 2d, Sir Thomas Picton's division,
here particularly distinguished itself.

General Hill's people were by this time very warmly engaged, for the
enemy having, as stated above, strongly reinforced that point, they made
a rather obstinate defence, particularly at the village and wood of
Subijana de Alva, which latter was filled with their light troops, and
where our 28th regiment, which was opposed to them, suffered
considerably, and were not able to make much impression. The action had
now become general, and our people on every side advancing; at this
moment old Douro, who never failed to inspire confidence wherever he
appeared, came dashing down into our village, and seeing the light
troops which had been opposed to us had retired, instantly ordered us to
advance, and join our division on the other side of the river. We
accordingly moved forward, and marched with all expedition to reach our
point; but the French had now begun to retire, and our people to follow
them, so that we found it difficult to overtake them, and did not do so
till they had passed the conical hill. When we came near that eminence,
I rode up to have a peep at the field before us, and never did I witness
a more interesting and magnificent sight. A beautiful and extensive
plain lay before me, covered with the cavalry, infantry, and artillery
of the contending armies; while the noise and din, occasioned by
repeated volleys and rolls of fire from the infantry, with the rattle of
upwards of 200 pieces of artillery, almost stunned the ear. Near the end
of this plain, and to the left, arose the lofty spires of Vittoria; and
beyond that again, the smoke arising from the attack of Sir Thomas
Graham's people added animation to the scene.

I had not contemplated the scene before me above a minute or two, till a
howitzer-shell from the French fell close at my feet. My horse's bridle
was hooked on my arm, and I was standing looking through my glass; but
when this unwelcome visiter descended so near me, I thought it high time
to be packing. My horse, however, not having the same fear of the
consequences that I had, would not move but at a snail's pace. I was,
therefore, constrained to leave him to take his chance, and get myself
out of the way. It burst, but providentially without injuring either
horse or man, but in the scramble I lost the top of my glass, which I
could not afterwards find.

I got down the hill, and joined my people, who had by this time passed
it; and just at this juncture I observed a body of troops a little to
our right, moving in the same direction we were. They were dressed in
blue, and had caps covered with white canvass. I took them for
Spaniards; but upon consideration that no Spaniards ought to be there,
and a closer inspection, I found they were a battalion of French, and
most likely those who had been so warmly engaged with the 28th at the
village of Subijana, and who having stood perhaps too long, and
afterwards having the wood to traverse, they had been detained
considerably behind the rest of the army; for by this time our advance,
and consequently the French rear, could not be less than half a mile in
front of us. I pointed them out to one of our lieutenant-colonels; but
as we had received orders to push on with all haste, and he not liking
to disobey his orders, and withal a ravine being between them and us,
which would have prevented our closing with them, they were allowed to
move quietly off, which they did with a pretty quick but steady pace.
Before we reached our division, we had to pass a village, over against
which was a very strong French battery, and where they peppered us
considerably, but without doing much harm, I believe. We here joined our
brigade. Immediately in front of this village the enemy made one of his
longest stands. Our brigade now formed lines of battalions, and lay down
in some ploughed fields, while their artillery kept playing upon us. On
our left the 3d division was warmly engaged. In about half an hour we
moved in that direction. The 45th we found posted behind a thin thorn
hedge, with its commanding-officer poor Colonel Ridewood, whom I had
known before, lying on its right, gasping in the agonies of death. A
great many men of this regiment had fallen here. We passed them, and
continued to advance along the plain by brigades and battalions; but we
found the ground much intersected with ditches, which would have
retarded us had we wished to advance rapidly; but from some cause or
other, which we could not then comprehend, we never pressed upon the
enemy closely, but gave them time to get quietly away. We were still,
however, in expectation of their making their final stand; for at every
short interval a beautiful little position presented itself, which the
French invariably occupied in the finest style possible, forming their
lines on these little eminences with the greatest precision, and in
beautiful order; but they never stood to let us get at them, for the
moment we began to come within musket-shot, they instantly began to
retire to another, which they took and abandoned in like manner. All
this time, indeed, there was continual skirmishing going on between the
light troops of the two armies, and a constant cannonade, and
occasionally the heavy lines came in contact; but their infantry
appeared to us to leave the field in the main unbroken.

We continued these movements till near dark, by which time we had
considerably passed Vittoria, and the enemy's artillery had nearly
ceased. Our cavalry now got at them; and although, from the nature of
the ground, their movements were greatly cramped, yet they continued to
charge, and nearly captured King Joseph. We halted when we had got about
four miles beyond Vittoria, which we passed on the left hand. We thought
we had indeed gained a victory, but it appeared to us to be a most
barren and useless one; and many were not over well pleased that the
enemy had been allowed to get off so easily. But our noble Chief knew
well what he was about, for he reaped all the fruits from this that
could have been possibly gained from the most bloody battle. Indeed it
was far from being a bloodless victory, but he certainly did not
sacrifice one half the men that some in the action would have done; they
thought we should have pressed the enemy far more, and brought him to
closer action.

After we halted, I (being the only quartermaster present) was sent in
search of the baggage belonging to the division, and which had followed
as far as they could along the great road. I passed through Vittoria on
my way to the rear in search of it, and saw as I entered it several of
Morillo's men, who had descended from the mountains and come into the
town. From the vivas and other marks of gratulation which some of the
inhabitants were rendering these ragged ruffians, a stranger would have
thought that Don Morillo, with his 3000 or 4000 Spaniards, had achieved
the whole victory themselves. It is certain they are a vainglorious
people.

I passed through the town, and, taking the great road, I soon had ocular
proofs of the value of our day's work; the road being literally blocked
up with every description of carriage-guns, tumbrils, waggons, &c. &c.
which filled the great high-road for nearly two miles to the rear of
Vittoria. I found it difficult to make my way through them, but at last
fell in with the baggage; I could not, however, get it through, and was
obliged to leave it, after giving directions where to find the division
in the morning. I again passed through Vittoria in returning to the
division; but oh, what scenes had I now to witness! The followers of an
army are sometimes very numerous, and here they were abundantly so;
muleteers, Portuguese and Spanish concubines, with every description of
vagabond you can imagine. These were by this time all labouring hard in
their avocation of breaking open and plundering the carriages and
waggons, &c. that had been left by the enemy. Among these were hundreds
of soldiers, who were now beginning to feel the effects of the wine, &c.
which they had found in the enemy's baggage; and such a Babel was here
to be witnessed as is not easy to conceive.

I had some difficulty in forcing my way through the town, at the end of
which I was accosted by five or six soldiers' wives, belonging to one of
our light cavalry regiments, who wished to accompany me, in order that
they might find their husbands, as that regiment was attached in some
measure to our division. Of course it would have been cruel to refuse
them; and as they were all mounted, away we posted, but had great
difficulty to make out where the division now was. Many were the waggons
and other carriages we passed on the road, either broken down, upset, or
with people plundering them; and I did not reach the division till 10
o'clock at night. I was very glad when I found them, being then
excessively fatigued and hungry; and just as I reached my people, I
found the mess to which I belonged cooking a piece of thin mutton, which
they had cut off from a sheep that had been taken from the enemy. This
was all the plunder I got that memorable day, although, had I done as
many others did, I might have obtained a great deal both of money and
other valuables; for, as I said before, the numerous carriages I passed
gave me an opportunity which many would have rejoiced at of possessing
myself of immense wealth; but plundering never was my forte. One officer
whom I knew got, I believe, near L.1000 worth of money, and other
valuable property; and innumerable others got considerable sums, more or
less. I am glad now that I refrained from what _might_ have been
accomplished with ease and safety, but what also _might_ have entailed
upon me disgrace and ruin. One officer I heard of, who, while in the
rear, where he ought not to have been, found a box full of money, most
likely silver, but very heavy. A German dragoon coming up at the same
moment laid claim to half of it, and when this officer took hold of it
to remove it, the German also laid hold to prevent him. A sort of
scuffle ensued, when the German made use of most abusive and mutinous
language, with threats, which the officer was obliged to submit to,
knowing, as both of them did, how far he had descended from his station,
thus putting it in the power of the soldier to treat him as a brother
plunderer. Surely the mention of such an occurrence is enough to deter
any man who possesses the least spark of honour from ever putting it in
the power of a soldier to treat him so. Besides, if an officer plunders
before his men, what may not soldiers be expected to do?

In looking back upon the events of this day, I cannot help being struck
with the bad generalship of those who commanded the French army. Marshal
Jourdan, I understand, was Joseph's adviser on this occasion. He had
always borne the character of an able General, but here he showed but
little ability. Why did he so much weaken his force on the conical hill
to support his left? Had he maintained his ground there, which is strong
by nature, and they had rendered it stronger by art, he might have
completely checked us on the right; for if we had advanced too far on
that side, our wings would have been separated, which would have been a
dangerous experiment; and I think Lord Wellington would not have
hazarded it. And after leaving his first position, why did he not fight
at every one of the beautiful little positions which he afterwards took
up but never defended? This conduct is most unaccountable, for had he
made a longer stand, even although he should be beaten, which no doubt
he would have ultimately been, yet, by making this stand, he might have
got off the greater part of his materiel, instead of which he carried
off with him one gun and one howitzer only, leaving upwards of 250
pieces of ordnance in our hands. Most of his infantry left the field
apparently unbroken; for only here and there they had stood to let our
people get at them. It is true Sir Thomas Graham early cut off their
retreat by the great road to France; but what then? This ought to have
made them fight the more desperately, to enable them to get off the
better by the Pamplona road. The infantry should have stood till the
last, and not retired till fairly beaten out of the field. Nothing could
be finer than the movements of our army.

Every thing our Chief attempted succeeded to a tittle. The only thing I
did not like was the delay we occasionally made in following up the
enemy; but I could not, of course, comprehend the general movements,
from seeing only a small part of them, and I believe the victory would
not have been more decisive by being more bloody. We lost in the
village, where we first began the fight, nearly thirty men, with the
officer before mentioned as killed, and a considerable number wounded.
There was something remarkable in the fate of one of the men who were
killed by the cannon-shot I before noticed. This man was remarkably
averse to fighting, and had shown, on all occasions, a disposition to
leave that kind of work as soon as practicable. Poor fellow! his failing
was known to all; and on this occasion those about him had orders to
watch him, and keep him to his duty. They had not been in the village
many minutes when this fatal shot swept him and about five others into
eternity in a moment. It has often been remarked, that this description
of people are generally the first to fall.

It may not be generally known, perhaps, that a battle was fought on the
3d April 1367, a little higher up this river, near the village of
Novarete, between our Edward the Black Prince, and Henry the Bastard,
who had usurped the throne of Don Pedro, King of Castile. The history of
it is given by Froissart, who says, "a little before the two armies
met, the Prince of Wales, with eyes and hands uplifted towards heaven,
exclaimed, 'God of truth, the Father of Jesus Christ, who hast made and
fashioned me, grant, through thy benign grace, that the success of this
battle may be for me and my army; for thou knowest that in truth I have
been emboldened to undertake it in the support of justice and reason, to
reinstate the king upon his throne, who has been disinherited and driven
from it, as well as from his country.'" This zealous prayer was
immediately followed by the onset, the Prince crying aloud, "Advance
banners, in the name of God and St George!"

"At the commencement," says Froissart, "the French and Arragonese made a
desperate resistance, and gave the good knights of England much trouble;
but at last, when all the divisions of the Prince were formed into one
large body, the enemy could no longer keep their ground, but began to
fly in great disorder; and Henry, the usurper, perceiving his army
defeated, without hope of recovery, called for his horse, mounted it,
and galloped off among the crowd of runaways. The English pursued them
through the town of Najara, where they gained considerable plunder; for
King Henry and his army had come thither with much splendour, and after
the defeat they had not leisure to return to place in security what they
had left behind them in the morning."

There is a striking coincidence in many parts of the two actions and
their consequences, which the reader cannot fail to notice. The most
material difference, I think, in the two stories is, the offering up of
the prayer by the Prince, and the modern practice of not recognising,
publicly at least, the hand of God at all in any of our victories. This
is to be lamented.




CHAPTER X.

     Advance in pursuit of the Enemy--Our Forces retreat, in order
     to counteract Soult's movements for the succour of
     Pamplona--Total defeat of Soult in the several Actions near
     Pamplona--Our Forces again advance--Come up with the retreating
     Enemy at the Bridge of Yanzi--The Enemy take up a position
     behind Vera--A considerable body of the Enemy attacked at the
     Pass of Eschallar, and forced to retreat.


We remained in bivouack all night where the battle had terminated; and
did not begin to move till near mid-day on the 22d, when we set off in
the track of the enemy, and at night reached Salvatiera, where King
Joseph had slept the night after the action.

The poor beaten French must have had a long march after the fight, for
this was probably sixteen or eighteen miles from Vittoria. We started
early on the morning of the 23d, and very soon began to overtake the
rear of the enemy. They now resorted to a system of retarding our march,
at once both cruel and cowardly; every village they passed through they
set on fire. Of course this caused us some delay, as the road generally
ran through the middle of the village, and the country on each side was
enclosed, but still nothing could justify such barbarity to the
unoffending natives, who were thus deprived of house and home, and
probably all they possessed in the world. We overtook their rearguard
near a village about two leagues from Salvatiera. They attempted to make
a stand while the village was in flames, but a shrapnell shell from our
horse artillery set them instantly in motion. We came upon a
considerable body of them again near the village of La Cunca, where we
again cannonaded them, and where our people had some slight skirmishing
with their rear.

We encamped for the night near this village, and again started after
them in the morning early. My battalion led the column to-day, the post
of honour. We had marched, I think, about eight or ten miles without
overtaking any of the flying foe before us, but at last we came to an
open country, that which we had traversed being pretty thickly enclosed,
with bad roads and wet weather, which rendered marching very
uncomfortable. Here a halt was ordered, as the enemy was in front in
some force; here for the first time we got upon the great road leading
from Pamplona towards Bayonne; and here, where it turned the corner of a
mountain, forming a pretty acute angle, they had the only gun and
howitzer they had saved from the fight in position, and ready to receive
us. The men of my battalion, and a part of our 1st battalion, were
ordered to put their knapsacks up behind the hussars of the German
Legion, as it was not expected they would be wanted, and it thus
rendered our people better able to run. The enemy appeared to have two
battalions here, one of which remained on the great road near the two
pieces of artillery, while the other moved off more to our right, down a
valley which they imagined would, at the other end, let them out into
the great road again.

We now began to move forward, and as I happened to be the first mounted
person who left the enclosed road we had been in, I was honoured with
the first shot from their gun, which, although a good shot, did me no
injury. Our people now pushed on at them pretty smartly, which caused
them, after firing a round or two more, to limber up and retire with
their artillery, though they of course retired as leisurely as possible,
to give time for their troops, whom they were covering, to get away. The
skirmishing between them and our people continued for about two miles,
they gradually retiring before us; but when they came to a sort of pass
in the road, formed by two rocks nearly meeting in the middle, their
bugles or trumpets sounded first the halt to their troops, and
afterwards the advance upon us. We could not comprehend the meaning of
this, till in a few minutes the battalion which we had observed go down
towards the right, suddenly made its appearance out of a wood among our
skirmishers. Of course a sharp contest now took place, and the firing on
both sides became more brisk; this battalion, it appears, had
miscalculated on getting out of the valley, down which it had retired,
and had been compelled, at whatever risk, to make the great road again
before they passed the rocks before mentioned; and in order to let it do
so, the other skirmishers had advanced to cover its movement. This
battalion suffered considerably before it reached the road, and we did
not get off scot-free, having lost out of our five companies about
twenty-four men.

Our artillery being pretty near at hand, Colonel Ross brought up two
guns, and fired into their retreating column, doing considerable
execution. We now moved forward in close pursuit of the enemy for about
two miles farther, when a shot from Colonel Ross's guns having struck
one of the leaders in their gun, and our people at this time pressing
them so closely as not to give time to disentangle the dead horse, they
unwillingly were compelled to throw their only gun into the ditch, and
there abandon it. We continued the pursuit till we drove them under the
walls of Pamplona, which I understand, poor wretches, they were not
allowed to enter, on account of the scarcity of provisions in that
fortress, and which after events proved was the case. We retired to the
village of Aldava and others in the neighbourhood, where we remained for
the night.

On the morning of the 25th, we advanced on the road to Pamplona, the
enemy having all retired towards France, till we came within about one
mile and a half of it, when we branched off to the left, and moved along
a range of hills at about a mile distant from the works of the place,
till we reached the town of Villaba, on the mountain-road from Pamplona
to France; thus cutting off all retreat from the garrison, and thus in
fact investing the place. During our movements to-day, my people being
in the rear of the 17th Portuguese regiment, I was riding in company
with my commanding-officer at the head of the battalion, when the horse
of the Portuguese major threw out with both his hind feet with all his
might, and struck me with one foot on my thigh, and the other on the
calf of the leg. The blow was so severe that I nearly fainted, and was
obliged to dismount and throw myself on the ground; but as no bones were
broken, I gathered myself up again, and mounted and set off after the
troops.

We encamped on the Pamplona side of Villaba, distant from the former
about one mile and a half. The captain in whose mess I was, with his
company, was that night ordered on picquet within about three quarters
of a mile of the city. I went there to get my dinner, during which
several poor people, who had made their escape from the place, came and
welcomed us in the name of the people, telling us they were heartily
tired of their present lodgers; of course there would be different
opinions among them, but I believe the generality at that time hated the
French most cordially.

There was a division of the French army under General Clausel, which had
not partaken of the flight at Vittoria, being then stationed at Logrona,
and he having learnt the fate of his companions in arms, and their
retreat into France, was moving through the country to our right, in
order to effect his retreat also. Next morning, therefore, the 3d and
our divisions were despatched in pursuit of this French corps. We
marched that day to near Taffala, and halted at the village of Muro, at
the junction of the great road from Logrona with that we now occupied,
but we learnt that Clausel had kept more to his right, and was directing
his course towards the mountain-road, which passes near Caceda and
Languessa, into France.

We accordingly passed through Taffala and Olite, and encamped for the
night. Next day we started early, and moved on till mid-day, when we
halted for an hour or two to cook and refresh near the village of
Murillo del Fruto. We here came upon the river Arragon. This had been
already a long day's march, and the greater part of the division were
ready to lie down now, but a much longer portion still remained to be
accomplished. Accordingly, we set off after a short rest, and traversed
the right bank of this river for about ten hours longer. Night marches
at all times are unpleasant, but much more so on such a road or path as
this was, and every one so nearly tired before beginning it.

We crossed the Arragon at the village of Galla Pienzo, and lay down in a
field not far from the village of Caseda. Very few of the division
reached this place until daylight next morning. But when I got in I
unfortunately lay down on a ridge immediately behind our column, and
where, had I given it a thought, I was continually liable to be
disturbed. And indeed I was most wofully disturbed, for every fresh
batch that came in tumbled themselves down upon me, or in blundering
about in the dark were sure to stumble over me. It must be observed that
my leg by this time, instead of getting better, had begun to swell
dreadfully and to suppurate, consequently I was in a high state of
fever; and to the thumps and kicks which I received in the dark during
this uncomfortable night, I cannot but attribute much of my subsequent
suffering. Next morning we discovered that all our labour had been in
vain, for Clausel had got the start of us, and had got off by another
road into France.

We next day moved into Languessa, from which we were not far distant,
but I could no longer accompany or precede the troops, my leg was now so
bad. I was therefore obliged to get a pillow laid on my holsters, and
then ride with my leg resting upon it, (a most uncomfortable position,
could I have found a better,) while one of my men led my horse, and thus
follow them as well as I was able. We rested in Languessa all the 30th
and 1st July; and on the 2d reached Deriza, having passed through
Monreal. Here I was obliged to be lifted off my horse, and put to bed. I
was almost stupid from the pain I suffered; for my leg was now swoln as
large as my thigh. We next day moved into Villaba, from whence we had
started in pursuit of Clausel, and thence into some villages on the
plain, close to Pamplona. Here I believe some works were thrown up to
shelter the troops, either against the shot from the fortress, or a
sally from the garrison. This continued all next day. I remained very
ill in bed.

On the 5th, the division left this quarter, and set off on the road
towards France; but I could not follow them. I got with great difficulty
from my present station, which was now occupied by other troops, and
stopped at a village, the name of which I forget, just over the ridge
where I received my hurt, and a few miles distant from Villaba. Here I
found out that Dr Jones of the 40th regiment was in the latter town;
and, as he had formerly been in our regiment, I took the liberty of
requesting he would come and see me. This I found out by my servant
going in for provisions. He very kindly came, and gave me the best
advice he could. By this time my leg had burst, and had discharged a
prodigious quantity of matter.

I remained in this village till about the 10th, during which time a
priest had shown himself remarkably kind and attentive; there were very
few inhabitants remaining besides him. He told me in one of the
conversations that I had with him, that, from the first entry of the
French troops into this country, one million had passed out of France
into Spain, for he had had good opportunities of making a just
calculation; and that, out of that vast number, not more than 200,000
had returned, thus proving that the enemy had lost in that country
800,000 men. And this is not to be wondered at, for nearly the whole
population during that time had been in arms against them; and, although
not acting as soldiers in the field, they never failed to assassinate
the French wherever they could accomplish it. He said, moreover, that
Mina, with his little band, could produce documents to prove that he had
destroyed 40,000 Frenchmen.

About the 10th, I set off from this village, as my leg had by this time
become somewhat easier; and, passing through Lantz, Elizonda, and St
Estevan, arrived at Sumbilla on the 13th, still obliged to ride sideways
with my leg over the pillow and holster. Here I found my division; and,
as this journey had again brought my leg to nearly as bad a state as
before, I was obliged to have it opened in two places, but without
reaching the matter, as nothing but blood was discharged.

On the 15th, my division moved forward to the town of Vera, the last
town on the Spanish frontier. Here the enemy had taken up a strong
position, both in front and rear of the town; the front position was on
Santa Barbara, an exceeding high and almost inaccessible mountain. They
were dislodged from the position before the town by my brigade, and
retired into the Puerta, or Pass of Vera. I was not present on this
occasion, having been again compelled to stay behind on account of my
leg. While I remained at Sumbilla, I had been obliged to have my horse
shod by a Spanish blacksmith, who drove a nail right into the quick.
This I did not discover till several days after, when I found my horse
quite lame.

On the 18th, I again crept on after my people, whom I found encamped on
the height of Santa Barbara, from which I before said they had driven
the enemy. Here we remained till the 26th, During this time my horse's
foot had also suppurated, and he was quite unable to move. My leg also
was daily discharging a vast quantity of matter, so that I felt at this
time very uncomfortable; particularly as very stormy weather came on
while we were here, which killed a great number of our animals, horses
and mules, I believe not fewer than seven or eight in one night.

It will be known to the reader, perhaps, that on the 25th, Soult (who
had now been appointed to the command of the French army) made an attack
upon our posts at Roncesvalles and Maya, and had driven the divisions
stationed there from their posts. He moved on towards Pamplona, in hopes
either of beating back our army to Vittoria, (as he vainly talked,) or
of being able to supply Pamplona with provisions, which it greatly
needed. In consequence of this movement of the enemy, we also were
compelled to fall back, although the troops in front of us made no
demonstration of advancing.

Accordingly, on the 26th, we began our retrograde movement, being myself
at that time in as pitiable a plight as can well be conceived. My horse
was so utterly lame, that he could scarcely hop on three legs, while I
was totally unable to walk a step. My kind friend Captain Perceval, with
whom I had long messed, helped me out of my trouble, by dividing the
load of one of his baggage-ponies among the other animals, and lending
it me to ride upon. We retired from the height, and crossed the river
Bidassoa, near Lizacca, through which we passed, and kept along the
mountains on the left bank of that river till we reached a height
opposite Sumbilla, where we pitched our tents, and remained for the
night. We did not move all next day; but just as night set in, we were
ordered under arms, and continued our retreat. This was a still more
distressing night-march than any I had previously witnessed.

We were now, it may be noticed, in the midst of the mountains of the
Pyrenees, where precipices abound; consequently the precaution to avoid
falling over them would be doubled. One little streamlet, I well
remember, delayed the division probably two hours. It came down from the
sides of the mountain which overhung the road, and crossed it at a very
dark and ugly-looking place, making a considerable noise as it fell from
rock to rock. This of course made every one extremely cautious; and in
consequence a poor good-natured corporal, who was killed soon after, got
himself into the middle of the streamlet, and took hold of every
person's hand as he passed, conducting him safely to the other side.
Poor fellow, he was extremely anxious to help me and my miserable little
pony safely over. This and a few other places, something similar,
prevented us reaching our destination till an hour after daylight next
morning, although the whole distance was not more than ten miles.

We arrived at Zubietta in the morning. This place is about a league to
the right of St Estevan, more into the mountains. Here we remained that
day, and the next day moved higher up the mountain, behind the town,
where we encamped, and remained till evening, when we again commenced
our retreat. We had not quite so bad a march of it this night, the road
being much more even, although, just at the outset, our adjutant, in
riding along, had his cap pulled off by the bough of a tree, and in
endeavouring to save it from falling, he pulled his horse right over a
small precipice, which the two rolled down together. Luckily it was not
a deep ravine into which he fell, or he would not have escaped so well:
neither man nor horse were much hurt. We reached the village of Saldias
in the morning, where we remained for the day. Last night my servant
told me he had been obliged to leave my little horse behind, as he could
not get him to hop any farther. I felt grieved at this, for he had
brought me all the way from Lisbon, and shared both my good and bad
fortune; however, it was no use to fret, for that would not improve my
situation, which indeed was not an enviable one, my leg all this time
being extremely painful.

On the 30th, we made an excessively long march, (by day,) and at night
reached Lecumberg, where we encamped. During the latter part of this
day's march, we had heard an incessant cannonade and firing of musketry
in the direction of Pamplona, from which we were apprehensive that Soult
had penetrated too far; but as it did not appear to recede, we believed
our people had been able to hold him in check at least. We were now on
the great road from Bayonne to Pamplona, in order to keep up the
communication between our right, where the fighting was now going on,
and Sir Thomas Graham, who was besieging St Sebastian. We were here also
to intercept any of the enemy's columns that might either advance or
retreat by this road. Towards evening of the 31st, an aide-de-camp
arrived from Lord Wellington, more dead than alive from the excessive
fatigue which he had undergone for the last three or four days, with
news of the total defeat of Soult in the several actions near Pamplona,
termed the Battle of the Pyrenees, and ordering us to retrace our steps,
and again advance. We set off in the evening, and reached Larissa, where
we halted for the night. It was whispered that it was expected we should
have gone much farther this night, but I am not certain whether it is
true; but certainly we might have proceeded to Saldias, if absolutely
necessary.

On the morning of the 1st of August, we again started pretty early. It
was again reported this morning that another dispatch had been received
during the night, directing us to proceed with all haste, as the enemy
were retreating by St Estevan, and that we were to attack them wherever
we met them. We now of course stepped out very freely, and presently
gained Zubietta. Here I had ridden forward to get a shoe fastened on, my
horse having cast one in coming over the mountains; during which time
the quartermaster had been called for some purpose or other, as I was
not there.

My General was not well satisfied: he saw me in this village, and asked
me why I had not been present when I was wanted. I told him the cause,
but he still did not appear satisfied, and, by way of punishment,
directed me to remain in the village till the baggage came up, and show
them the way the division had gone. I may here observe, that it was a
little unreasonable in my General to find any fault with me on this
occasion; for, had I not got the shoe put on my horse, I could not have
been of any use at all as a quartermaster. My punishment indeed was
slight, and I rather think he was glad to find any excuse to delay me
for the purpose for which I was left. I am confident the officers of the
infantry suffered more anxiety and even loss on account of the great
want of farriers or horse-shoers in their regiments, than from almost
any other cause. Without the officer was pretty high in rank, he had not
only to pay most exorbitantly for any thing of this kind which he got
done, but to beg and pray, and to look upon it as a favour conferred on
him. Most of the good shoers were taken by the staff or general
officers, consequently only the inferior ones were left for the
regimental officers, and in several cases none at all. The consequence
of all this was, the loss of several valuable animals, both horses and
mules; besides, in some cases, the officers being rendered incapable of
performing their duty as they otherwise would have done. To this I
attribute a considerable loss in animals during this service. It might
easily be remedied by each infantry regiment having a proper
establishment of farriers, (say two,) with tools, &c. in proportion, and
the means of carrying them; and then every officer, whose duty requires
him to be mounted, might be served. I myself bought tools to the amount
of L.4, and never had but one horse shod with them. I could not get a
man to do it. As soon as I saw the baggage on the right way, I pushed
forward, and joined the division again. We were literally at this time
climbing up a mountain, where I could not ride, but was obliged to crawl
up, and pull my horse after me. My leg by this time had much improved.
We followed the road by which we had retreated a few days before, and at
length came to the rivulet that had so alarmed us all on our
night-march. It was really surprising that we should have been stopped
so long by such a trifle; but in such a situation, and at such a time,
things of that kind are magnified a thousandfold by the imagination. We
passed our old camp ground opposite to Sumbilla, and here we came in
view of the enemy's columns retreating along the road on the opposite
bank of the Bidassoa. This gave our men new life; but here the 52d and
other regiments of the 2d brigade were obliged to halt: they could
proceed no farther.

We had marched by this time to-day two and a half of the stages we made
in retreating; but the 2d brigade had been in the rear of the column all
day, and had consequently suffered much from stoppages, &c. My
battalion, our 1st battalion, and the 43d regiment, continued to move
on, and as they approached, the enemy seemed to acquire fresh vigour. At
length we reached the point of attack,--the bridge of Yanzi,--and here
the 1st battalion turning down towards the river, at once left the wood
and ground above the bridge to be occupied by us. The enemy sent a
pretty strong corps of light troops across, which got engaged with our
people; but we soon drove down through the wood again towards the
bridge. At length, we got two companies posted just over the bridge, in
front of which all the rear of the French column had to pass. Poor
creatures! they became so alarmed, that they instantly began to cut
away, and cast off, all the loads of baggage, and both cavalry and
infantry, &c. to make the best of their way. But the mountain on their
right was inaccessible; consequently they had all, as it were, to run
the gauntlet. Great was the execution done amongst the enemy at this
bridge, and many were the schemes they tried to avoid passing. At length
they got a battalion up behind a stone wall above the road, on the
opposite side, from whose fire we received some damage; consequently
those poor people who had afterwards to pass were not so much exposed.
Just about the close of the business, my kind friend, Captain Perceval,
received a shot through his right wrist. His left hand had been closed
for a length of time before, in consequence of a wound through that
wrist, which had contracted his fingers, besides being lame from a wound
in the hip. Now he was rendered completely useless. Towards dusk I went
with him a little to the rear, and got his tent pitched, and made as
comfortable as circumstances would admit. I pitied the French on this
occasion, they seemed so much alarmed. The whole of their baggage fell
into the hands of our 4th division, who were closely following them up
on their side of the Bidassoa.

In this affair, the French were reduced to a dreadful dilemma; great
numbers of their wounded had been brought off from the battles of the
28th, 29th, and 30th, near Pamplona, which were carried on biers or
stretches by men of this division. When they saw us in front of them,
where they had to pass, as it were, immediately under the muzzles of our
pieces, they were compelled to adopt the cruel alternative of either
throwing their wounded men down to perish, or run the risk of being shot
or taken themselves. I believe the former, shocking as it seems, was
generally adopted; and I have reason to believe that the greater part of
them were thrown into the river; for, from the point where we first came
in view of them to near where this affair took place, the Bidassoa was
literally filled with the dead bodies of Frenchmen, and they could have
come into it in no other way. We lost only a very few men on this
occasion, not more than six or eight, while that of the enemy must have
been extremely severe. Here the effects of rifle-shooting were plainly
visible.

In remarking on this affair, I beg to draw the reader's attention to the
following circumstances; viz. probably never troops made such a march
over such a country before. We travelled at least thirty-two miles over
mountains such as I before described, where you were sometimes nearly
obliged to scramble upon your hands and knees. The day was exceedingly
hot, and occasionally there was a great want of water. I am told that
one of the regiments in our 2d brigade, which, it may be remembered,
were obliged to halt, as they could go no farther, had no less than 200
men fell out, unable to keep up, and that some of them actually died of
fatigue. I heard of one poor fellow, who, when he came to water and had
drunk, lost his senses, fell to the ground, and shortly after expired. I
have reason to be proud of my battalion on this occasion, which, when
the roll was called, just before the action commenced, had only nine men
fallen out; but they had been in the front all day, a great advantage in
marching, particularly over a mountainous country.

This day's work gave me a higher idea of the powers of human nature,
when properly trained, than ever I possessed before; for when you
consider that each of those soldiers carried a weight of not less
probably than forty or fifty lbs. and some much more, it cannot but be
surprising that men should be able to sustain such fatigue for such a
length of time--at the end of which to fight, and gain a victory.

Next morning were clearly observable the effects of the evening's work.
In the house, the yard, and on the road opposite the bridge, were a
great number of dead Frenchmen; and to the rear, by the way they had
advanced, the road was literally strewed with baggage, and equipments of
every description. Some of our people picked up a number of visiting
cards, with General Vandermason on them, very elegant; so that his
baggage, no doubt, had been cast off, as well as that of inferior
people.

Soon after daylight, we were ordered to fall in, and move forward
towards Vera. Just as we cleared the bridge, old Douro, with his staff,
came riding up, who, when he saw how we had handled the enemy the night
before, gave his head a significant nod, and smiled, which conveyed most
intelligibly his approbation. We soon reached the neighbourhood of Vera,
behind which, in the pass of that name, as before stated, the enemy took
up a strong position, from which their picquets had never yet been
driven. We were ordered to encamp a little below the bridge leading to
Lezacca, between that and Vera, while the other regiments were intended
to occupy the heights of Santa Barbara, from which we had before
retreated. But towards mid-day it was discovered that the enemy still
had a considerable body of troops in and about the pass of Echallar, a
few miles to our right. Our brigade was therefore ordered again under
arms, with the intention of co-operating with the 7th division in an
attack upon those people. It was a thick mist, so that we could scarcely
see twenty yards before us; but when we reached the bottom of an
immensely high hill, on which the enemy were posted, we presently
discovered whereabouts we had them.

Our 1st battalion extended to the right, and my battalion moved straight
forward up the hill. For a considerable time the enemy's fire did us no
injury, being deceived, I imagine, by the denseness of the fog. They
fired almost always over our heads, some of which shots struck the men
of the 43d, a considerable way below us. At length we began to approach
the summit of the mountain, where the enemy were of course much more
condensed, the ground they had to occupy being much smaller. Our people
were advancing regularly up the hill, when we run right up against a
rock, on the top of which was collected an immense body of the French,
and from whom our people received a most destructive fire, knocking down
fourteen men in an instant. This unlooked-for circumstance checked our
people, and made some of them retire for an instant behind a broken part
in the mountain, from which they kept up the best fire they could.
During this transaction, the French, who were not more than ten or
twelve yards distant, were calling out to us in Spanish to advance, and
abusing us most lustily. A Spaniard (one of the recruits I formerly
mentioned) was so much annoyed, that he began in his turn to abuse the
French; and, as if words were not enough, accompanying them with the
best shot he could give them. Poor fellow, he was instantly shot through
the body, and fell to rise no more.

They now began to get courage, and made a show of advancing upon us:
they did do so on the right against our 1st battalion, but my
commanding-officer calling out to cheer our people, set up a shout,
which had the effect of intimidating them, and they did not dare to
advance. I was now sent away by Colonel Barnard to request the 43d (who
were behind us) to send a company to support our 1st battalion, which
they instantly did; and just as I returned, I found the French had
evacuated the rock from which they had annoyed us, on the top of which
we found a great number of caps and pouches, &c., belonging to men who
had fallen there. We followed them over the hill, but they now gave us
leg-bail, posting down into the valley towards France with all
expedition.

The 7th division had some pretty sharp work before they dislodged the
people in front of them, and had suffered very severely in effecting
their object. When every thing was settled, one of our men thought he
saw a man hiding behind a tree just below us: he went to see what it
was, and dragged out by the neck a French soldier of the 2d light
infantry. Poor fellow, he came out shrugging his shoulders, and, putting
on a most beseeching look, begged we would spare him, as he was only a
"pauvre Italien." Of course no injury was done him, only the soldier who
took him claiming and taking from him his knapsack, which appeared a
fine full one, and which he appropriated to himself. I thought it cruel,
and would have prevented it, had my voice been of any weight; and yet,
had it not been taken from him now, it would very soon after, when he
became a prisoner.

One battalion was ordered to remain and occupy this hill, which
dreadfully alarmed me, lest it should be ours, for it was bitter, bleak,
and cold. Luckily a Portuguese battalion was ordered up, and we returned
to our snug camp by the river side; and here, as if to crown our good
fortune, one of our men, who had been left behind in charge of the
tents, had got some meat roasted for our mess, of which we all partook
with great delight and thankfulness.

A friend of mine of our 1st battalion, during the advance the French had
made upon that battalion, was nigh falling into their hands. They rushed
at him, but he perceiving, and endeavouring to avoid them, fell into a
bush, which scratched him most wofully, and in the fray lost his cap and
sword. They grasped at the latter, (which was not drawn,) but which
luckily broke loose from the belt, or they would have had him. This hill
was always known afterwards by the name of Barnard's Hill, in honour of
Colonel Barnard, who commanded on the occasion.




CHAPTER XI.

     The Author, from a mistake, loses his Servants for a few
     days--A Feast of Death--A Feast of Life--Fighting near St
     Sebastian--Singular instance of Spanish Bravery--St Sebastian
     is captured, but no Details given, the Author not having been
     present--Attack of the Pass of Vera.


We remained at rest here for some time, during which I, as acting
paymaster, had several trips to Tolosa, a considerable town on the great
road from Bayonne to Madrid, where the paymaster-general had taken up
his residence with the military chest. In one of them I went and had a
peep at St Sebastian, the siege of which was then going on. While here,
I received directions from General Sir William Stewart to attend him at
Villaba, where he lay wounded, he having received two balls in the late
actions. I set off, directing my servants with my baggage to follow
close after me: by some means they were delayed a few minutes, and,
supposing I was going again to the paymaster-general at Tolosa, went off
in that direction, without asking any questions. I imagined they knew
very well where I was going, and still went on slowly, every now and
then looking back to see if I could descry them coming; but although
there was no appearance of them, I simply enough continued my route till
I reached St Estevan; and here I put up for the night, thinking, of
course, they would come by and by. In the morning, I was fully convinced
they must have gone some other road, and as all my books, &c., from
which I wanted information, were in my baggage, I thought it useless to
proceed any farther. In retracing my steps, which I did leisurely, I had
an opportunity of seeing the great number of bodies which the French had
thrown into the river, the road running close by its brink nearly all
the way. It was really shocking to behold such numerous wrecks of
mortality, with the disgusting appearance which most of them had
assumed; many of them were half eaten by the fish, and of others the
flesh was hanging in rags, and bleaching in the stream. Of course I
returned home, but did not see my servants again for several days, as it
took three or four to accomplish the journey to Tolosa and back, and
they had waited there a day for me.

On the day that I was absent, all the officers of my corps had had a
sumptuous and splendid entertainment, it being the 25th August, the
anniversary of the regiment's first formation. They had dug a ditch in
an oblong shape in the middle of a field, the centre of which served for
a table, while they sat with their feet in the ditch. I am told the
French, who were just above, and overlooked them from the heights behind
the town, assembled and viewed them, as if in astonishment to see them
regaling themselves with so much glee in the midst of the wild Pyrenean
mountains. No doubt the wine went merrily round, and many were the
toasts which were drunk with three-times-three.

During this interval, I often amused myself with fishing in the
Bidassoa, in which there were many excellent trout, and I was pretty
successful, for I had got some tackle from one of our captains, which he
had brought from England. On one of these occasions, while I was wading
in a pool, I spied a fine salmon laying just below me; I threw in and
brought my flies right over him, at which he instantly rose, but I
missed him. I tried again, and hooked him, but in a moment he plunged
right across the river, carrying with him all my flies and part of my
line, for I had no reel. I might have calculated upon this, if I had
thought for a moment; but the opportunity was so tempting, that I could
not resist it.

At length the 31st of August arrived, the day on which St Sebastian was
to be stormed. We knew this, for we had furnished a number of
volunteers, both officers and men, to take part in the assault; many of
our higher officers had gone to witness the glorious spectacle. But
early in the morning, we were all astonished at the bugle sounding
through the camp the alarm, or assembly, and instantly orders were given
for the tents to be struck, the baggage to be packed, and to set off
with it to the rear without a moment's delay, for the French were
advancing; of course all this was done in as short a time as possible,
and the troops were ordered to move on to a hill just over the bridge of
Vera. A detachment of ours had joined the evening before, and it cannot
easily be conceived the strange effect this sudden alarm had on some of
them. One of them, a lieutenant, was all in a bustle getting his pistols
put in fighting order, and came to me begging I would take some money to
keep for him. I told him that it was likely to be in as much danger with
me as with himself, and of course declined. The old hands, on the
contrary, were as cool and quiet about it as if it was an everyday
occurrence. We moved to the height before mentioned, and saw a cloud of
fellows with white caps coming down to the left of the town, and of
course prepared to give them the best reception we could. I was sent
with orders to my commanding-officer from the General, 'that he was,
when pressed, to retire till he got on the ridge just over his house,
(which was on the road a little to the rear of where we then were,) and
that he was to stand there as long as it was possible.' I thought
something very warm was going to occur, seeing such a cloud of Frenchmen
were then approaching us, but we were all disappointed; they went
quickly to their right after descending from the heights, and forded the
river below the town, setting their faces towards St Sebastian. All this
was effected under a cannonade from the heights.

Our 1st brigade (except my battalion) was then ordered to cross the
river by the Lezacca bridge a little behind us, and to move parallel to
the enemy along the ridge above that town, which had all along been Lord
Wellington's head-quarters. As soon as they got across, they sent a body
of troops to the bridge of Vera, close to which some of our people were
stationed, and from thence they kept firing on us all day from some
small mountain guns, which they had brought down with them, and
occasionally with musketry. We were now somewhat curiously situated. The
French position was on the side we occupied, while the other side of the
bridge had been fortified by the Spanish General Longa, to protect
himself during the last excursion of the French towards Pamplona; but
now they occupied the side on which the intrenchments had been thrown
up, and turned them against us of course; they did little execution by
their fire. Lord Wellington, seeing the intention of the enemy,
assembled all the British troops he could easily collect, and brought
them in rear of a corps of Spaniards, which met the French in this
direction; and finding this a fair opportunity of seeing what the Don
could do, withheld the British, and let the Spaniards attack them by
themselves. They had now the best chance of showing their valour that
ever had or might present itself; they had the high ground, and the
enemy had to climb up on their hands and knees to get at them; besides,
they had behind them backers that would not see them get foul play. So
away they set at them, and indeed they did tumble the French down in
good style, upsetting them in all directions; so that our English
division had nothing to do but to look on. This was the only time I ever
knew the Spaniards act in a body like good soldiers.

The enemy, being beaten, were obliged of course to retrograde; but it
came on one of the bitterest nights I have almost ever witnessed; the
rain fell in torrents, and the lightning was very vivid. The French
endeavoured to retrace their steps during the night, fording the river
where they had crossed it in the morning; but the heavy rain had so
swoln the river by midnight, that they could not continue any longer to
wade it. A considerable number of them still remained on the other side,
and no way presented itself of extricating themselves, but by forcing
their passage across the bridge, near which a company of our 2d
battalion, under Captain Cadoux, was posted, with one of ours, a short
distance in the rear, to support him. Captain Cadoux's people were
stationed in houses about thirty yards from the bridge, and had a double
sentry on the bridge. The enemy's column approached very quietly, and
then made a rush; but the rain having wet the priming of the sentries'
rifles, they could not get them to go off to give the necessary alarm,
and were in a moment driven from their post. The French then, seeing
they had effected a passage, set up a shout, and rushed towards the
houses where Cadoux's people were, who turned out at once, and with the
supporting company, opened a deadly fire upon the enemy's column; but
poor Cadoux fell instantly almost, as he had imprudently mounted his
horse on the first alarm; his lieutenant also was severely wounded. The
firing of course soon brought the whole brigade to the spot, which kept
up a constant and well-directed fire during the whole of their progress
along the little plain towards Vera.

The enemy suffered dreadfully on this occasion, leaving the ground
literally strewed with their dead, who, like the others before
mentioned, were next morning thrown into the river; so that the fish had
ample feeding for some time after. Some people afterwards reflected upon
General Skerrott, who commanded here, for not posting a stronger force
at the bridge, and for not blocking it up with an abbatis; the former he
might and ought to have done; but the latter was impracticable, from the
enemy holding the breastwork at the other end of the bridge, which was
not more than about thirty yards long. Had a battalion been posted
there, it is probable the French, who were compelled to have recourse to
this daring attempt, might have been induced to surrender; but I believe
the General never imagined they had need to make such an attempt. Our
loss on this occasion was rather severe also. A great many of Captain
Cadoux's men fell; Lieutenant Travers, who commanded the company of my
battalion, was wounded, and a considerable number of men were killed and
wounded; among the former, some of the poor fellows who had joined from
England only the day before.

Thus was Soult's second attempt frustrated, and St Sebastian fell into
our hands. As I was not present at that glorious exhibition of British
valour and prowess, I cannot take upon me to give any account of its
capture. The volunteers who went from our division to assist in the
storm or assault, sustained their full share in the casualties attendant
thereon. The field-officer, Colonel Hunt of the 52d, was severely
wounded; a lieutenant of the 43d, brother to Mr O'Connell, the famous
Roman Catholic advocate, was killed; two lieutenants of our first
battalion, named Percival and Hamilton, were severely wounded. The
latter, I believe, was a volunteer on the occasion, not being entitled,
from his standing, to take it as a tour of duty. He was conspicuously
brave, and received two severe wounds, from which it would scarcely be
imagined possible any one could recover.

A few days after the surrender of St Sebastian, I had again occasion to
go to Tolosa for money, and took the road by Passages, the port where we
now received all our supplies from England; and also to see the ruins of
that late formidable fortress. When I reached it, the houses were still
on fire, and not I believe half-a-dozen in the whole town that remained
habitable, or the inhabitants had quite deserted it. I went up to the
citadel and examined it, and I believe this, with proper casemates or
bomb-proofs, might be rendered one of the strongest places in Spain,
next to Gibraltar; but the French had suffered dreadfully from our
shells, which had literally ploughed the ground on the top of this
naturally strong height, and from which cause they had been compelled to
surrender.

St Sebastian was indeed a melancholy spectacle at this time. I returned
from Tolosa by a part of the road which we had traversed in our late
retreat and advance again, as I now began to hope I might perhaps
recover my little horse, for I suspected from some cause that my
servant, instead of having been obliged to abandon him, because of his
lameness, as he told me, had sold him at that time; and this I actually
found had been the case. I compelled him to tell me where he had
disposed of him, and, with my broken Spanish, traced him from thence for
near twenty miles farther into the mountains, where I found him in a
village, the name of which I do not recollect, but where a squadron of
our German hussars were quartered. I of course claimed and took
possession of the horse, giving the person the amount he had paid for
him; but he being still lame, the commanding-officer of the hussars
kindly permitted me to leave him with his farrier till he got well. He
afterwards sent him to me, and would not even allow the farrier to
receive any remuneration for his trouble, so kindly and politely did he
behave.

September passed away without any thing remarkable occurring. My friend
Captain (now Major) Perceval had been obliged to return to England, and
Captain Balvaird succeeded him as senior captain of my battalion. I
still continued in that company's mess. At length it was determined to
attack the Puerta, or Pass of Vera, which the enemy had rendered
exceedingly strong. The left of our army, under Sir Thomas Graham, were
ordered to attack in their front, and force the passage of the Bidassoa,
and establish themselves in France. We were merely to drive them from
the heights above the town of Vera, taking possession of all the strong
ground between that and France. The fourth division was brought up to
support our attack, and formed immediately in rear of the town. One of
the captains who formed the Committee of Paymastership, and who, it may
be remembered, were held responsible for my accounts, and the due
appropriation of all public money which might come into my hands, took
a fancy that I exposed myself too much, and requested the
commanding-officer, Colonel Ross, to prohibit my again entering into
action, except for the purpose of bringing ammunition, &c., when my duty
required me; in consequence of which the adjutant was sent to me this
morning, previous to the operations commencing, with an order for me not
to accompany the battalion. It may seem to the reader perhaps like
affectation when I tell him I felt hurt at this order, and determined
not very strictly to comply with it, for I believed that my respected
commanding-officer had no objection that I should accompany him, did not
this untoward circumstance interfere with my so doing. Accordingly I
remained a looker-on among the fourth division. My battalion was
destined to commence this attack by driving the enemy from a high and
rugged hill on the right of the Pass, which was a necessary operation
before the Pass itself could be attacked. Accordingly he extended the
battalion, and encircled its base on the side next to Vera; and I
believe, without firing a shot almost, he marched right up to the top of
the hill, notwithstanding the sturdy resistance made by the enemy, and
in a very short space of time completely cleared this formidable height.

This operation was the admiration of the whole fourth division, (for it
was clearly observable by every one,) and they were most lavish of their
praises for such a workmanlike movement. When my people approached the
top of the hill, I felt alarmed for their safety and their honour, for
the French commander closed all his force to one point, and, forming
them into line, made them fix bayonets, apparently with a determination
to charge them down the hill again; and I saw that my people, for they
could not perceive what the French were doing, were likely to be taken
by surprise. Whether the Frenchman's heart failed him I know not, but
when Colonel Ross reached the top of the hill, the enemy went to the
right about, and instantly retired.

I felt proud of belonging to that corps, and happy at such a termination
of this dangerous operation, and feeling a desire I could no longer
resist, I set off to join them. By the time I reached the height just
mentioned, the attack of the Puerta was going on, and a most arduous
undertaking it was. My brigade attacked the right or strongest pass,
which they carried in fine style, without much loss, although the enemy
had a breastwork at every available point of ground. Our 2d brigade did
not attack the left Pass quite so soon as the other, and when they had
got about half way up they encountered the most formidable opposition.

A redoubt which the enemy possessed was filled with men, who waited till
our battalion came within a few yards of them, and then poured in the
most destructive fire imaginable, making the battalion recoil, and
leaving one-third of its numbers on the ensanguined ground. But the 52d
regiment being close behind, promptly supported them when rushing on
together to the charge, and the French, after some hard fighting, were
finally driven from this stronghold. After this they never made any
obstinate stand, although there was occasional fighting all the way from
the Pass down into the plain below, where some of our people followed
them; but it not being intended to quit for the present this high and
formidable barrier, they were afterwards recalled. The boundary lines
passed along this ridge.

We lost a few men on ascending the first hill, and a few in skirmishing
afterwards, but our loss was not severe. But that of the 2d battalion,
before noticed, was awful; several of that battalion who fell in this
action had only a few days before joined from England, and this was
their first action. On looking at the ground on which this affair took
place, one would imagine it almost impossible that any army could force
a passage through such innumerable difficulties. The hill itself was
nearly impassable, and with the numerous redoubts and breastworks, with
which it was literally covered, no troops in the world, I think, but
British, would have dared to attempt it.

We found that the French, who occupied this station, had rendered
themselves extremely comfortable, considering the kind of country and
ground where they were posted. They had been at great pains in building
very convenient and substantial huts in lines and streets, the same as
an encampment, and which were indeed remarkably clean and neat. They had
even built arm-racks at the end of each line, where their arms were
stowed away most securely, and where they were preserved from the
effects of the bad weather. Indeed, from the pains they had taken to
render themselves comfortable here, it would appear as if they had not
expected to be driven from it so soon.

The left of our army, under Sir Thomas Graham, also established
themselves within the French territory. A corps of Spaniards on our
left, between us and Sir Thomas, had likewise made a forward movement
corresponding with the British. Some Spaniards were on the right of our
division also, and were destined to drive the French from La Rhune, an
exceeding high rock, which overlooks all the other mountains, as well as
the plain below. This they failed to accomplish, the enemy keeping
possession all that night, and the skirmishing between the two forces
continuing till after dark.

My battalion was sent on the outpost duty in the evening down into the
French plain below, and relieved the Spanish General Longa, whose corps,
with our 2d brigade, were ordered to assist in the morning in dislodging
the enemy from La Rhune. I will not say whether the sight of the
red-coats coming against them the next morning had the effect of
alarming them, but they certainly evacuated that exceedingly strong post
without much farther opposition, and established themselves on a similar
rock, but lower, on the French side, and called by them Petit or Little
Rhune. But the possession of this lofty peak gave us the power of
overlooking all their movements for miles around us, as well as of
surveying La Belle France as far as the eye could see, and indeed,
compared with the bleak and barren mountains in which we had so long
been residing, it did appear a beautiful country, although, in reality,
it is far from being such. But we gazed upon it with strange and mingled
emotions, hardly believing it possible that we had now reached and
entered the territory of that once formidable nation whose victorious
armies had penetrated to the farthest confines of Europe, who had
overrun and subdued some of the most warlike nations of the continent,
and who had so often threatened, and as often alarmed, the inhabitants
of England with the invasion of that sacred soil, on which never yet a
Frenchman has dared, in hostile array, to set his foot since the days of
the Norman William, but who met there either with a prison or a grave.

We now pitched our camps by battalions, each occupying a post more or
less important, and the enemy began again to construct their huts, and
make themselves as comfortable as their circumstances would admit;
Soult, no doubt, being mightily chagrined that we had now fairly beat
them out of Spain, when he (as we now learnt) had promised his followers
that he would soon lead them again to the plains of Vittoria, where
they might again retrieve their lost honours, and at which city they
would celebrate the Emperor's birthday. He thus boasted, and no doubt
would have effected his purpose, had he not been so promptly met near
Pamplona by his never-to-be outmanoeuvred antagonist.

We now began to suffer greatly from the severity of the weather. It
became exceedingly wet and stormy; and not infrequently the tents were
blown away from over our heads, or the pole was forced up through the
top, letting the wet canvass fall comfortably down about our ears while
we were perhaps in a sound sleep. I had two streams flowing past my
head, one went round the trench outside my tent, while the other I was
fain to let pass through it; their murmurs lulled me to sleep, and I do
not remember that ever I slept sounder than I did here, having made my
couch comfortable by gathering dry fern, and spreading my mattress upon
it.

Whilst we remained here, a few officers were appointed to watch the
motions of the enemy from an old work which we understood had been
constructed by the Spaniards and emigrant French against their
revolutionary neighbours, whom they endeavoured to keep from entering
Spain; and, of course, this was the daily lounge of those who had no
better employment, not only that they might themselves see, but hear
also from others what of importance was passing. On one of these
occasions, a vessel was descried (for the sea was not more than five or
six miles from us) making for the harbour of Bayonne, or St Jean de Luz,
with a small schooner following her in chase, and every now and then
giving her a shot. The vessel, (which turned out to be a French brig
going with provisions for the few Frenchmen who still retained the
castle of Santona,) seeing she could not get clear of her unwelcome
neighbours, her crew set her on fire, and taking to their boats,
abandoned her, and escaped on shore--she soon after blew up with a
tremendous explosion.

On the 31st of this month Pamplona surrendered, the garrison, consisting
of 4000 men, under Major-general Cassan, the governor, becoming
prisoners of war. They had been compelled to adopt this measure from
sheer starvation, of which they, I understand, had suffered dreadfully.
I happened to be at Passages on the day they reached that port, where
they embarked, on their way to England. The General was a stout,
handsome, and intelligent-looking man, and such a one as I should
imagine would make a noble officer. The soldiers seemed quite
unconcerned about their fate; whether from the change being actually an
improvement of their condition, or from the lightness and gaiety of
their natural temper, I know not, but they were jesting and making as
merry as if nothing had happened.

During the time we lay on these mountains, I regret to state my gallant
and respected commanding-officer, Colonel Ross, suffered so much from
rheumatism, that he was compelled to leave the regiment, and take up his
abode at Rentaria, a village near to Passages.

It was reported that Lord Wellington intended attacking the enemy along
his whole line, early in November, but the weather having rendered the
roads impassable, it was postponed. On the day previous to the intended
attack, the commanding-officers had been taken up to La Rhune, and the
post that each corps had to occupy, with the movements they were
intended to make, were clearly pointed out to them; an excellent plan,
when practicable, as it leaves no one any excuse for mistakes or
blunders during the action.

At length, on the 10th of that month, I believe, it was settled to take
place; but on the 9th I was ordered to set off with the mules of the
battalion, to fetch corn from Passages, a distance of about thirty
miles. I suspected this was a scheme of the captain I before mentioned,
as one of the committee of paymastership, in order the more effectually
to keep me out of danger, for certainly had any thing serious happened
me, they would have had some difficulty in rendering their accounts. It
was not quite certain the attack was to take place next day, although it
had been so rumoured; however, I was determined to try and reach the
division as early as possible on that day. I accordingly got my business
done in Passages as early as I could get the commissary to work; and
having got the corn, and come on to Rentaria, which I reached about
mid-day, I took the liberty of leaving the animals in the charge of the
non-commissioned officer who had accompanied me; and calling on Colonel
Ross, obtained his permission to let the sergeant proceed in charge of
them to the regiment, while I might, if I chose, push on at a quicker
rate. I had heard by this time, that the action had commenced by
daylight that morning. I accordingly set off at as quick a pace as my
starved animal could carry me; and passing Irun, and crossing the
Bidassoa, and keeping along the great road for a considerable distance,
I then inclined to my right, and skirted the Pyrenees along the whole
plain. I had thus an opportunity of witnessing the conflict carrying on
by the left wing of our army, as I passed along towards La Rhune, but
with every exertion of myself and my poor jaded horse, night closed in
upon me before I had nearly reached the station of the light division. I
was compelled to work my way through a country which I had not hitherto
passed, and which having been the scene of a sanguinary combat,
presented no very pleasing aspect. At last I heard some strange and
foreign voices before me, for it was now quite dark, on which I turned
into a field, and waited till they passed, by which I learned they were
Spaniards. I was apprehensive I might have kept too far to the left, and
had got into the French lines, which would not have been so comfortable;
but after finding them to be men of General Frere's Spanish division, I
then had hopes of shortly meeting with my own people. Directed by those
good Spaniards, I at last reached Petit La Rhune, the late formidable
position of the enemy, on which the blazes from a thousand of their huts
were rising to the clouds, and enlightening the atmosphere around. But
it being now ten o'clock, I found myself incapable of proceeding
farther, more particularly as the Portuguese, among whom I now found
myself, could not give me any certain directions which way my division
had gone. I was fain therefore to take up my abode, and gladly did so,
in a cottage with Colonel St Clair and several other officers of the
sixth Cacadores. Let it not be supposed that a fighting disposition
induced me to use so much exertion to reach my division on this
occasion--no; but as I considered that a sort of trick had been played
off upon me, I did what I could to render it nugatory; no man liking, as
I imagine, to be the dupe of any other party's manoeuvres, with whatever
friendly intention these may have been put in operation. I arose next
morning early, and hastened to the point where I expected to meet my
brave comrades, anxious to learn the fate of all I loved amongst them. I
saw them and the third division at a considerable distance, each on a
height in front, appearing like flocks of sheep huddled together as
close as possible. I soon reached them, and learned with sorrow, that
the brave Colonel Barnard was, as they supposed, mortally wounded, the
ball having passed through the chest, and that little Lieutenant Doyle
was killed.

This was a most stupendous action; the scene of operations extending
from right to left, embracing, I imagine, not less than thirty miles of
country. The centre had fallen to the share of my division, which, in
the eyes of the best judges, was the strongest part of the enemy's line,
for it had been fortified with the most consummate skill, and no labour
had been spared to render it impregnable, as the enemy had been busily
employed in the construction of forts, redoubts, and other field-works
of every denomination, from the day we drove them from the Pass of Vera;
one in particular, a stone built fort, in the shape of a star, was
exceedingly strong, and which was attacked and carried in the finest
style possible, I understand, by the 43d regiment; the 52d also
surrounded a fort in which the French 88th regiment was posted, the
brave commander of which not having received any orders to evacuate it,
remained till the retreat of the French left him no other alternative
than to surrender at discretion. The part my battalion had to play, was
to cross the valley separating the two La Rhunes in double quick time,
and attack the French rock by a gorge, which allowed a passage from that
valley into their position. This was to be in conjunction with the
attack of the Star Fort by the 43d, as it in some measure took that work
in reverse. In short, every corps in the division, and I believe in the
army, had a most arduous duty to perform, and most nobly did they
execute it. The left of our army, under Sir Thomas Graham, did not
succeed in driving the enemy from his innumerable works which covered St
Jean de Luz, and which he retained possession of till the next morning;
when the centre, that is the 3d and light divisions, together with the
Spaniards on our right and left centre, made a movement in advance, and
crossed the Nivelle river, from which this action derives its name. Our
movement, which threatened to separate the wings of the French army,
caused the enemy to abandon his strong position in front of St Jean de
Luz, as well as that town, on which occasion he attempted, and partly
succeeded in destroying the bridge over the Nivelle at that place; but
it being soon after repaired, Sir Thomas Graham's corps took up their
quarters in the town.

We encamped for the night in front of the village of Serres, or Sarre,
or Zarre. It had rained hard all the day of the 11th, and it continued
almost without intermission till our camp was literally swimming. I
remember perfectly that the water in my tent was several inches deep;
and when I awoke in the morning, I found a Portuguese boy (who had
followed us, and had attached himself to our mess as a sort of servant)
was sitting holding by the tent-pole, that being the only place where he
could find rest for the sole of his foot. In short, we were as wet,
clothes and beds and all, as if we had been dragged through a river. The
evening before, I well remember, we had been highly amused by my Scotch
quartermaster-sergeant and his friends, who had taken up their abode
close by, singing, till they rather grew tiresome,

    "We are nae fou', we're nae that fou',
    But just a drappie in our e'e."

This of course was done to drive away dull care, and to make the best of
an uncomfortable situation.

The next day towards afternoon, a considerable firing was heard on our
right, which had continued but a short while, till our gallant and
unwearied Chief came galloping up, with some few of his staff following,
who could with difficulty keep pace with him, and asking most anxiously
whereabouts and what the firing was. We could only point out the
direction in which we heard it, but could give him no account as to its
cause. Away he galloped in the direction we pointed out, and no doubt
soon reached the spot.

I forgot to mention, that a man of the Brunswick Oels corps had been
hung the day before for plundering by the Provost Marshal, no doubt in
compliance with superior orders. It was necessary thus to give the army
an example of severity, in order to deter them from committing those
acts to which all armies are but too prone. We found indeed very little
to plunder, had we been so inclined; for the greater part of the
inhabitants had left their houses, taking every thing portable with
them. This they had been induced to do from the false statements which
Soult had set forth in some proclamations he issued about this time, in
which he described the English as savages, nay, even as cannibals, who
would not scruple to commit the most monstrous atrocities; so ignorant
were the generality of these poor peasants, that many of them implicitly
believed his representations. This, no doubt, was done with the view of
raising the whole population in arms against us, in order to defend
their homes against such a set of wretches as he made it appear we were;
but, although many of the natives joined the French army at this time,
with which they were incorporated and led to battle, the result of his
famous proclamations was not equal to his expectations; for a great part
of them declined warlike proceedings, and retired into the interior of
the country with their families, leaving only a very small proportion
indeed who remained in their houses. As might be expected, the empty
houses suffered dreadfully; every piece of furniture almost being
destroyed, either for fire-wood, or in seeking for valuables; while the
houses of those who remained in general escaped.

General Harispe, being a Basque himself, had the organizing of the new
levies now raised; indeed, many of these had taken a part in the
irruption into Spain on the 25th July for the relief of Pamplona, and
many of them fell on that occasion. We were not so fully aware of the
extent of the misrepresentation to which Soult had gone in these
proclamations, till some time after we had entered France, and had
penetrated considerably into the interior, when some of our officers,
either during or after a march, entered the cottage of a peasant who had
not left his home, to get a little milk. The poor woman was remarkably
civil, offering them any thing the house afforded. They got some milk,
for which they offered her money, but which she declined. Her child was
running about the house at this time, which, coming near one of the
officers, he took it between his knees, and patted it on the head, with
which the child seemed very well pleased; but the poor mother, standing
at a little distance, and eyeing most intently every motion of the
officer, was like to swoon with fear and agitation. But as the mother
had declined receiving any thing for the milk, the officer who had the
child gave it some small coin, and letting it go, it ran to its mother,
who snatched it up into her arms with the utmost joy, and altering her
look, began to say, she thought they had been deceived; for that they
had been led to believe from the proclamations of Soult, that we were
such barbarians that we would not scruple to kill and eat their
children, and which was the cause of her late fear and anxiety, as she
expected the officer had taken the child for that purpose; but now she
found we were not such people as she had been led to believe. Of course
the officer laughed most heartily at having been suspected of a
man-eating propensity, and soon convinced the poor woman that the
English were not quite such barbarians as that, whatever she might have
heard to the contrary.




CHAPTER XII.

     The British Army advance farther into France--Pass the
     Nive--Soult's Plans baffled--Two or three battalions of the
     Nassau and Frankfort regiments come over from the
     French--French Politesse--Threatened Attack by the
     French--Battle of the Nive--Account of the Basques.


We left our wet camp on the 15th, and advanced to the village of
Arbonne, where, for the first time during the campaign, we were
quartered in houses, except once or twice. During our stay in the camp
at Serres, or Zarre, we sent our baggage animals to Passages for corn,
on which occasion I lost another horse, the batman pretending it had
been stolen, but which, no doubt, he sold, as that trick had often been
resorted to by this time, and there was no detecting it.

On the 17th we left Arbonne, and advanced to Arcangues, sending forward
picquets to the village of Bassozari, about half a mile in front. My
battalion took up into quarters in some straggling houses in front of
the church of Arcangues, while our first battalion occupied the chateau
and outhouses of Arcangues, about a quarter of a mile to the right and
front of the church. The enemy's picquets were close to Bassozari, so
that in some places scarcely a quarter of a mile intervened between our
quarters and their outposts. They allowed us to take up our outposts
very quietly, they being now established in their intrenched camp in
front of Bayonne, and which was not far distant from our advance. There
were some houses in the line of posts occupied by the French, which, if
in our possession, would add greatly both to our security and
convenience, and which it was determined to wrest from them if
practicable.

Accordingly, on the 23d the division was put under arms, and our
brigade, being in front, had this task assigned to them. The 43d, not
having had so much work during the campaign as our two battalions had,
was selected for the purpose of driving in the enemy's picquets, whilst
we supported them. They accordingly attacked and carried the houses
without a moment's delay; but unfortunately, Captain Hobkirk of that
regiment, advancing with his company beyond the line at which it was
intended to halt, got immediately in front of some of their
intrenchments, from which he could not extricate himself, in consequence
of which our first battalion was ordered to advance to cover his
retreat; but he had by this time fallen into the hands of the enemy,
with a considerable number of his men: his lieutenant was killed, and
altogether the company suffered great loss. The remainder retreated, our
first battalion people holding the houses it was intended to occupy.
This occurred on the left of the ridge.

On the right, and adjoining a marsh which separated us from some high
ground near the river Nive, and which was occupied by another division
of our army, were two or three houses also which it was intended to
take, as their possession secured us a passage across this marsh by a
causeway, which connected two eminences, that on which we stood, and
that occupied by the other division, the principal object upon the
latter being a large chateau called Garratt's House. One company of the
43d also took those houses, supported by some more of that regiment and
my battalion; but after they were taken, from what cause I know not, an
order was sent to evacuate them, on which the 43d retired. Soon after,
they were again ordered to be re-occupied, when a company of ours
advanced, and took possession, but had not been there many minutes till
another order was sent for them to be evacuated. This order, however,
had scarcely reached them, when a charge was made on them by a body of
French cavalry, supported by a strong column of infantry. The officer
who commanded the company, either from the order he had received, or
from want of presence of mind, called to his men to run to the rear when
the cavalry charged him, by which he did not suffer much in point of
losing men, for only one was wounded by the cavalry; but it had a bad
appearance to run away from cavalry, a description of force which we had
learnt by this time almost to despise, especially as, from his post, he
might have knocked down great numbers of them, and finally have repulsed
them, had he allowed his men to fire. The houses were, however,
eventually taken possession of by another company of our battalion the
next day, which retained them in despite of the enemy. The man who was
wounded by the cavalry was shot in the head by a pistol ball: he came to
the surgeon, where the main body of the battalion was standing, to be
dressed; while this was doing, and the orderly man holding a tin-full of
water near, from which the surgeon was sponging and cleaning the wound,
a ball came, and, striking the tin, carried it right out from between
the hands of the orderly. I was standing close by, and shall not easily
forget the blank look which, as might be expected, the poor orderly put
on. There was a good deal of firing all day, which, except what the 43d
suffered, as before noticed, did little damage to the brigade.

On the occasion of our company taking these houses the next day, a very
young officer, who happened to command it, evinced great fortitude and
presence of mind. He advanced on the enemy, who, being then rather
inclined to quietness, retreated gradually before him; but after
reaching the hedge, just beyond the principal house, told him (for they
were quite near enough to speak) that he must not advance any farther,
or they would be compelled to fire on him. The young fellow, solicitous
about nothing but obeying his orders, told them that he was determined
to have the house, and immediately putting his men under the best cover
he could, called out that they might begin to fire whenever they
pleased, he was ready for them. This young officer (whose name was Cary,
and brother to my friend who fell at Badajos) spoke excellent French, so
that the enemy understood him perfectly. The enemy did not contend any
longer for the post, but planted their sentries within about thirty
yards of ours. These sentries, indeed, were still so posted as to
prevent a passage across by the causeway, had they been so inclined; but
the next day I went with another officer across by this road, on which
occasion we actually passed to the rear of the French sentries.

A disposition had for some time been gaining ground with both armies, to
mitigate the miseries of warfare, as much as was consistent with each
doing their duty to their country; and it had by this time proceeded to
such an extent, as to allow us to place that confidence in them that
they would not molest us even if we passed their outposts for the
purpose I have mentioned. And this mutual confidence in each other was
productive of the most comfortable results to both parties. We could
move about at any time, and almost in any place, shooting or otherwise
amusing ourselves, without the dread of falling in with an enemy's
patrol, or of getting among their sentries. They never molested us from
this time, except when we either advanced upon them, or they upon us, in
hostile array. Our division had two main picquets; all this took place
at the right picquet. A few days after I happened to be at the advanced
post on the left, commanded by one of my battalion, when the French
officers beckoned to us. We, to show we were peaceably inclined, pulled
off our swords, and advanced to meet them. A number of inhabitants, who
had left their houses on our first entering the country, having heard
that we were not what we had been represented, were desirous of
returning to their homes, and the officers wished us to admit them, and
see them safe through the advanced posts. This of course we gladly
promised, and the poor people were quite overjoyed at being permitted to
visit their dwelling-places once again; but, poor creatures, I fear they
would find little there except the bare walls, if indeed these remained
entire, for, from the reasons before assigned, it could scarcely be
expected that houses without inhabitants, in the midst of an invading
army, would be much respected. Each individual among them, old and
young, carried heavy bundles on their heads, no doubt they having
removed every thing that was valuable, if portable.

The French officers were extremely polite, and asked us many questions
of the news of the day, &c.; but the commander-in-chief, hearing of the
familiarity which subsisted between the two armies, issued an order,
prohibiting British officers from holding conversations with the enemy;
for as all these conversations were necessarily conducted in French,
(very few indeed of their officers being able to speak English,) he was
apprehensive they might gain such information from our people, from
their imperfect knowledge of the French language, as might materially
injure our future proceedings. Before this order was issued, the most
unbounded confidence subsisted between us, and which it was a pity to
put a stop to, except for such weighty reasons. They used to get us such
things as we wanted from Bayonne, particularly brandy, which was cheap
and plentiful, and we in return gave them occasionally a little tea, of
which some of them had learnt to be fond. Some of them also, who had
been prisoners of war in England, sent letters through our army-post to
their sweethearts in England, our people receiving the letters and
forwarding them. They told us also how Hobkirk was situated, and were
astonished at the extent and splendour of his equipage, (for he was a
great dandy,) and could scarcely be persuaded he was only a captain.

My present commanding-officer, who was the senior captain, and in whose
mess I then was, had sent to England, and got out from thence two
immense pies, weighing nearly a hundred-weight each, and packed in tin
cases. They were composed of every kind of game, and the best
description of fowls, such as turkeys, &c., with the bones taken out,
and the meat baked till it became like brawn when cut in slices. They
were most excellent. One of these he had made a present of to our
Major-general, and the other we were eating in the mess. We had also at
this time a considerable quantity of good wine, which, by some accident,
we had got hold of. We also had bought a pig and killed it, both living
quite sumptuously at present, and having a good stock for future use.

But while we ourselves fared so well, our poor horses and mules were
literally starving. There was no kind of forage for them, except what
they could pick up in the now completely exhausted fields around us. We
had nothing else to give them.

In this way we were going on, when, on the 9th of December, Lord
Wellington, determining on passing the Nive, preparatory to future
operations, ordered our division and all the left, under Sir John Hope,
who had now succeeded Sir Thomas Graham, to make a movement in advance,
in order that the enemy's attention might be attracted to this point,
while he threw over some divisions to the right bank of that river. My
battalion had to advance along the ridge by which I had formerly passed
in peace, to meet the returning inhabitants, as may be recollected; but
now the face of affairs was completely altered;--a heavy fire was kept
up by the French picquets from the moment they saw us advance in arms,
but we soon drove them from their advanced works, and they were obliged
to take shelter in their intrenched camp, which was remarkably strong,
and which it was not intended we should attack. We accordingly halted on
the brow of the ridge, while they kept up an incessant fire, both from
their guns and infantry, but which, considering its extent and duration,
was not by any means a destructive fire.

Sir John Hope had a more laborious task to perform, or else his troops
went beyond the point intended, for they continued the fight nearly all
day, and at one time were considerably in advance, but afterwards
recalled.

The passage of the Nive was completely effected, and in the evening we
returned to our comfortable houses, a short distance in the rear, and
went to bed as usual. Next morning, however, very early, orders were
given to turn out immediately, and stand to our arms, for the enemy was
advancing; and indeed, when I came to the door, I heard a good deal of
firing. The troops turned out at once, but the mules were to get, and
the baggage to pack, and send away to the rear, or it might be lost; so
I set myself about this with all dispatch; but before any of it was put
up, I saw posting by me, with all expedition, a civil officer, who had
only a short while joined us, and who, in his hurry, had put up all he
could scrape together on his horse, on which he himself was riding. His
boots, tied together, were slung over the horse's neck, and in short he
looked more like a bagman than an officer, from the number of things he
had hanging about him. It was most laughable to see him. I called out
and asked him why he was in such a hurry, but he did not stop to give me
an answer.

I got up our baggage very well, but what to do with the pie, the pig,
and the wine, I knew not, so was constrained to leave them as they were,
hoping we might not allow the enemy to penetrate so far. I then moved
off the baggage, and, directing the servants who had charge of it to
proceed up a lane which carried them towards the rear, I moved on and
joined the battalion. Just as I reached the plateau, or high ground in
front of the church of Arcangues, I met an officer of ours to whom I had
lately lent a fine young mare, for which I had not food sufficient; and
he having no horse himself, I thought he would take care of her; but
here I met him going into the fight riding on the poor animal, although
scarcely able to drag one leg behind the other. I remonstrated with him,
but he did not mind me. The result was as might have been
anticipated--she soon after dropped down, unable to move farther, and
died; thus I lost L.35 more, which she had cost me. By this time the
enemy had driven in the regiment which had been on picquet, and one or
two of our companies were sent forward to cover their retreat to the
church behind us, where they were ordered to take post, it being a high
and fine position, and had by this time been partly fortified. My people
retired gradually before the enemy, who now advanced in great numbers.

Our 1st battalion were not so fortunate in effecting their retreat. An
officer and some men having got into a hollow way, were surrounded by
the enemy and taken; another was killed; and another, with his section,
had to force their way through a strong body which had got in his rear.
My battalion did not fall into any scrape of that nature, but sustained
a considerable loss in killed and wounded, from the vast superiority of
the enemy in point of numbers, who, no doubt, did not escape with
impunity. We held our ground at the bottom of the hill on which the
church is built, the French not being able to force us farther back; the
1st battalion, at the same time, holding the fence and ditch in front of
the Chateau, as well as that building itself. But a rather unpleasant
occurrence took place at this time. When the enemy appeared on the
plateau before mentioned, a regiment behind us, without orders, I
believe, opened a heavy fire upon them, several shots of which struck
among our men. One of them went in at the back of one of our soldiers,
and killed him on the spot; another penetrated the back window of a
house into which a party of ours had entered for defence, and very near
struck an officer, who was in the room at the time. These shots must
have been fired either by young soldiers, who scarcely knew how they
pointed their muskets, or they must have taken our people for the enemy,
from which, indeed, they were not far distant. I am confident it was
purely accidental, for no two corps could be on better terms than that
regiment and ours always were. The skirmishing continued till dark.

This was one of a series of masterly movements between the two
contending generals. Lord Wellington having sent a pretty strong force
across the Nive, as before mentioned, Soult imagined he had so weakened
his force on the left, as to render it probable he might penetrate it,
and thus cause his lordship to withdraw his troops again from the right
bank of the Nive; but he was anticipated; for Lord Wellington had no
sooner established himself on the other side of the Nive, than he
brought one of the supporting divisions of that movement to support us
at the church of Arcangues, it being an important post to hold; so that,
when we looked behind us, after we retired into position, we saw
innumerable bayonets glistening in the sun, and ready to move forward
whenever they should be required; but they never were wanted here, the
light division being quite sufficient to sustain any attack the enemy
had yet made on them. This, however, showed the provident care of his
lordship, and how completely he had penetrated Soult's design.

This night two or three battalions of the Nassau and Frankfort regiments
came over and left the French. They had heard that the Dutch had
declared against Bonaparte, and wished to be transported to Holland,
with all their arms and appointments, which they brought with them. We
remained in bivouack on the ridge extending between the church and
chateau of Arcangues all night, our picquets remaining in possession of
the houses and hedges at the bottom of the hill, where we stopped the
French in the morning. I visited the picquets at night, in company with
my commanding-officer, where we found all well, and alert. The next day,
there being no firing between us and those in our front, three French
officers, seemingly anxious to prove how far politeness and good
breeding could be carried between the two nations, when war did not
compel them to be unfriendly, took a table and some chairs out of a
house which was immediately in our front, and one which we had lately
occupied as a barrack; and bringing them down into the middle of the
field, which separated the advance of the two armies, sat down within
100 yards of our picquet, and drank wine, holding up their glasses, as
much as to say your health, every time they drank. Of course we did not
molest them, but allowed them to have their frolic out.

During the day, also, we saw soldiers of the three nations, viz.
English, Portuguese, and French, all plundering at the same time in one
unfortunate house, where our pie, our pig, and wine had been left. It
stood about 150 or 200 yards below the church, on a sort of neutral
ground between the two armies; hence the assemblage at the same moment
of such a group of these motley marauders. They plundered in perfect
harmony, no one disturbing the other on account of his nation or colour.
There were a great number of apples in it at the time we left it,
belonging to the owner of the house, but when we returned, two or three
days afterwards, the desolation was complete. Our once comfortable
quarter contained nothing now but filth and dirt. One poor girl had
remained in it all the while, but she could not save one article;
indeed, in such a case it would have been a service of danger to attempt
it.

At night one of our sergeants played the French a trick. He took with
him a few men, and, knowing the ground well, they passed the French
sentry unobserved, having reached the house at the top of the field out
of which they had brought the table, &c., where their picquet was
stationed. He made a rush at their arms, which he found piled in front
of the house, and set to work and broke them before the French had time
to recover from the consternation into which they were thrown by so
unexpected an assault. He and his party then came running off without
sustaining any injury. He was a most determined brave soldier this, but
afterwards lost an arm at Toulouse, and was of course discharged with a
pension.

On the 12th, the enemy made a mighty show of attacking our position,
having greatly increased their force in front of us, and had, some way
or other, found the means of spreading a report in our lines that 1800
grenadiers had been chosen to lead on the attack. They also traced out
batteries, and cut embrasures, apparently with the intention of burning
or knocking down the chateau of Arcangues, the owner of which remained
in it all this time, and was rather suspected of holding correspondence
with his countrymen. It is not unlikely it was by his means the report
above alluded to was propagated. Every thing now wore a serious aspect,
and of course every thing was done to render their attack abortive. All
were animated with the best disposition to defend the post to the last
extremity; but while the generality believed all these preparations were
serious, there were others who thought it only a _ruse de guerre_;
indeed, had our friends, the German hussars, (with whom we had often
acted in concert,) been here at this time, it is more than probable they
would have been strongly inclined to the latter opinion, for they
scarcely ever saw the French make a great bustle and noise, as if about
immediately to advance and attack, but they would coolly say, after
eyeing them awhile, "Oh, he not come to-day!" "He go away!" and were
generally certain of being right. So full of trick and artifice are our
French antagonists, that they generally act in quite a contrary manner
to what appearances indicate. But they began to be known; hence the
scepticism of some of our people on the present occasion. Accordingly,
about midnight, when the attack was to have been made, away they went,
and retired nearly into their lines, leaving only a few to keep the
ground.

At daylight next morning we again moved forward, on which there was a
good deal of firing between the Portuguese battalion that had followed
them and their rearguard; but when our people advanced to our old post
on the ridge, I, happening to be first, took off my cap, and, putting it
on the top of my sword, held it up, which the French taking for a signal
of peace, as it was intended, the firing on both sides ceased, each
party taking up the post they held previous to the late movements. We
wondered why the French had retired, but presently heard a tremendously
heavy firing in the direction of the Nive. Soult, it seems, had
withdrawn nearly all his troops from our flank, and marching rapidly
through Bayonne, had attacked General Hill, who commanded on the other
side of the Nive, with great impetuosity, thinking Lord Wellington had
weakened that force to strengthen us; but here again Soult was
outwitted, for he found on that side quite sufficient to give him as
sound a drubbing as he ever got; the Portuguese on this occasion, I
understand, performing wonders.

These five days' fighting (for on every day there was firing, more or
less, in one part or other of the line) were called the Battle of the
Nive. We had had three days' work of it--they on our right two--and Sir
John Hope's people, on our left, four, I believe, and they not trifling
ones. In every thing Soult undertook, he was completely foiled--all his
schemes having been clearly seen through by his more sagacious opponent.
Indeed he had inflicted a heavy loss on our left wing, commanded by Sir
John Hope, where the fighting had been most severe, but no doubt he
suffered equally, if not more severely than they did. I am told that the
enemy's light troops were most insolent and annoying to our heavy
regiments on the left, on this occasion. What a pity that they could not
have been opposed by troops of a similar description!

It may be remembered the civil officer of whom I made mention, as having
rode away with the greater part of his wardrobe hanging about his horse;
he was more fortunate than we were, for the things which he left, his
kind landlady took care of, and hid in some snug corner till the
business was over, and on his return restored them all to him. He said
the cause of his going off in such a hurry arose from a cannon-shot
having struck the lintel of the door or window of his house while he was
in the act of shaving, on which he bundled out with whatever he could
scrape together, and set off. I verily believe it must have been the
effect of imagination, for I remained behind him at least a quarter of
an hour, and although our houses were close together, I did not either
hear or see a shot fired in that direction till we had reached the hill,
nearly an hour after; but he constantly maintained that it was so.

We again took up our old quarters in front of the church; but oh, how
changed were they now from what they had formerly been in point of
comfort! nevertheless, they still afforded us shelter from the
inclemency of the weather. Soon after dark on this evening, a rather
unpleasant affair occurred at the left advanced post of our division. An
officer and two men coming from the French advance, with what intention
is not known, were observed by the corporal who was stationed at our
abatis, who immediately took out his rifle and shot the officer through
the body, on which his two men lifted him up and carried him into their
picquet-house. We were apprehensive this would put an end to that good
understanding which had hitherto subsisted between the picquets of the
two nations, and much regretted the circumstance. It is more than
probable the officer was coming as a sort of patrol, to ascertain
whether or not we had left the post, which, being a military
undertaking, subjected him to all the chances of war attendant thereon.
This is the more probable from his having two soldiers with him armed,
as I understand they were; but if it was meant as a friendly visit, as
formerly sometimes took place, it was greatly to be lamented; however,
they did not, on account of this occurrence, manifest any soreness or
ill-will afterwards, and the mutual good understanding continued to
subsist between us.

While we remain at rest here a short space, I will endeavour to put the
reader in possession of the character of the inhabitants, among whom we
have been sojourning for a few months past--I mean the Biscayans. From
the time we crossed the Ebro, a wonderful change took place in the
appearance of the natives; and I believe the same description of people
extend considerably into France, although under another government;
they, I understand, still retain their ancient customs, dress, and
language; they are denominated Basques, from the name of the province, I
apprehend, which is called Biscay. They speak a different language from
either the Spaniards, who border them on one side, or the French, on the
other; and some of our officers who spoke Welsh, said they could
understand a few of their words; it is denominated the Basque language.
They generally wear cloth of their own manufacture, which is commonly
blue, in some parts red or brown; in the neighbourhood of Pamplona,
almost always the latter. The men wear a sort of Scotch bonnet, with a
short jacket and trowsers, and are an amazingly athletic and active
people. The women wear a short jacket also, of the same colour with
their petticoat; and with their hair, which they encourage to grow to a
great length, plaited in one large plait, and tied with a small piece of
ribbon; it is allowed to hang down their back, and almost in all cases
reaches to, or below their middle. They wear a handkerchief tastefully
disposed upon their head. They are a fine, tall, and handsome race of
women; but they have a custom of compressing their breasts, so that they
appear as flat in the bosom as the men, which, to an English eye, is not
becoming. The women do the same kind of work as the men, that is, they
plough, and labour at all sorts of husbandry; but what seemed most
remarkable to us, was their sole management of the ferry-boats about
Passages and St Sebastian; they row as well as any men, being amazingly
strong and active; they seem content with their lot, and always appeared
cheerful and happy. I believe they are strictly virtuous; and although
very handsome in general, they did not seem so fond of admiration as the
females of many other countries are; upon the whole, I think they
resemble the Welsh more than any other people with whom I am acquainted;
their countries are exceedingly similar, being mountainous, and in
general not over fruitful, so that constant labour seems to be rendered
absolutely necessary to insure to them the means of subsistence; hence
they are industrious and frugal, and, upon the whole, an interesting and
moral people.




CHAPTER XIII.

     The Author's Battalion quartered in Aurantz on 3d January,
     1814--The Cantonments at Aurantz broke up on 16th February, and
     the Campaign of 1814 commenced--Farther Advance into
     France--Skirmishing with the Enemy--Military Manoeuvres--Battle
     of Orthes--Defeat and Pursuit of the Enemy--Succession of
     Attacks on them--They are driven from their Position in and
     near Tarbes--Skirmishing at Tournefoile--The Enemy retire
     towards Toulouse.


On the 3d of January 1814, we were ordered to quit a part of the
country, which, from the various occurrences that had taken place since
we first arrived in it, had, in some measure, rendered it interesting to
us. We moved a little to the right, and crossed the Nive, and again
moved in advance about a league or more. This movement was made in
support of some operations which Lord Wellington was conducting in the
direction of the Adour, which being completed, we returned to the Nive,
and took up our cantonments in the villages of Ustaritz and Aurantz.
About this time, nearly the whole of the peasantry, who had fled on our
entering France, were now returning to their habitations, all fear that
we should murder them, and eat their children, having by this time been
completely dissipated. Indeed we were often told after this, that they
would much prefer having a British army among them, to their own people,
for they were always haughty, they said, and overbearing, and never
scrupled to take whatever they had a mind for, while we were orderly and
quiet, and never took an article without amply repaying the owner for
it. Indeed I am well convinced the change the poor people had made in
their lodgers was greatly for the better to them.

My battalion was quartered in the village of Aurantz, from which we
often took a stroll, to look at the scene of our late operations. The
French having, in consequence of Lord Wellington's movements near the
Adour, strengthened their army in that direction, which of course
rendered it necessary they should contract the limits of their front on
the side towards Spain, they had consequently withdrawn their advance
considerably within their former lines. We now also had plenty of
opportunity for shooting, but were but ill supplied with fowling-pieces,
or we might have killed an abundance of woodcocks, every thicket in the
neighbourhood being filled with them.

The weather now was extremely bad, and the roads impassable, except by
yourself wading up to the knees, or having your horse almost continually
nearly up to his belly. In consequence of the difficulty of
communicating by dragoons, on account of the roads, telegraphs were
established all along from the right of the army, on the banks of the
Adour, to St Jean de Luz on our left, the head-quarters of the army.
While in these cantonments, an account arrived of our gallant
Major-general (Kempt) having been appointed to the colonelcy of the 8th
battalion of the 60th regiment, which had just been raised. At the
recommendation of my commanding-officer, now Major Balvaird, the general
kindly transmitted my name to the War Office for the appointment of
paymaster of his battalion; but unfortunately for me, before my name
arrived, his late Royal Highness the Duke of York, as Colonel-in-chief
of the regiment, had nominated another person to the situation. It had
always hitherto been customary for Colonels-commandant, and not the
Colonel-in-chief, to nominate their own staff, but on this occasion
another rule was adopted, which, of course, was a great disappointment
to me, as I had, with considerable trouble, got all my sureties, &c.
prepared, although they were now not needed.

I had, during our stay here, one or more trips to the paymaster-general
for money, for although the paymaster of the battalion had by this time
arrived, I had several months' pay still to draw, the army being
considerably in arrear in their pay. I had thus an opportunity of
visiting St Jean de Luz, and all the enemy's late fortifications and
position in that neighbourhood, and amazingly strong they had indeed
rendered the ground in front of that town. It was a considerable and
well-built town, partaking a good deal of both the Spanish and French
character of course, it being the first French town next to the
frontier; and, as I said before, there being very little difference
between the Basques on either side of the Bidassoa, the change of
countries in respect to inhabitants was not very observable except among
the better orders.

On the 16th of February we broke up from our cantonments in Aurantz, and
commenced the campaign of 1814, crossing the Nive at Ustaritz, and
moving on in the direction of La Bastide de Clarence. We encamped on a
wild heath, without any village or town being near us, and again the
next morning continued our route to the place above-named, which we
reached about noon, and encamped on a hill beyond it.

On the 22d we advanced to St Palais, having passed other villages, the
names of which I have forgot, in the intermediate days. Nothing,
however, of any note occurred in that period. On the 23d we encamped
near La Chere and Charrette; on the 24th we crossed two rapid and deep
streams of the Bidowse. The first we got over with considerable
ease,--it was the Gave de Mauleon, which we crossed at Nabes; but the
second, the Gave d'Oleron, was not only both deeper and more rapid than
the other, but the passage seemed intended to be disputed with us; some
French cavalry having made their appearance on the opposite bank, as we
approached the river. The resistance they could offer, however, seemed
very trifling, for, on our bringing up some guns to the bank, and a few
shots having been fired from them, and from a company of our second
battalion, they withdrew.

We now prepared to go over; accordingly, every man was ordered to take
off his pouch and buckle it on the top of his knapsack, the ford being
so deep as to take the men up to or above the middle. On this occasion I
had I know not how many of the poor men hanging about me and my horse.
Some were holding by the stirrup, some by the tail, and others by the
mane, or wherever they could lay hold, for the stream was so rapid as to
nearly sweep them off their legs. Indeed I understand several of those
who followed us were actually swept down, and perished.

On reaching the farther bank, we found the French had endeavoured to
render it impassable, by throwing harrows, &c., with their spikes
upmost, in the only places where you could ascend from the river. I
believe a trumpeter of the French was all who fell on this day.

We passed through Ville Neuve, and formed in a field beyond the village,
till the whole division had got over. It was in this village where the
scene between the mother, the child, and some of our officers, took
place. When joined and formed, we moved on to a high and ugly common,
not far in rear of the village of Orion, where we bivouacked for the
night. It was most uncomfortable.

Before we reached our ground this evening, we observed, at a short
distance to our left, a body of about 200 French infantry moving on
parallel to us, but apparently making all haste to get away in front of
us. Some suggested the idea of attacking and taking them prisoners; but
as they were rather before us, it could not have been done without
setting one of the battalions at them in double-quick time, and which
would not have been an easy operation, after a long and fatiguing march,
and fording two rivers. Besides, as our Quartermaster-general said, it
was certain they could not be far from their support; consequently it
would only bring on an affair, which it was not the General's wish to do
at that time, for there was none near to support us should the enemy
send a force against us. This day General Picton's division had a sharp
affair at Navarreins, where they forced the passage of the Gave we had
crossed.

On the 25th, we moved forward early in the morning, and on reaching the
village of Orion, we found that Soult had had his head-quarters the
night before, with a considerable portion of his army, in and around the
village; it was therefore fortunate we did not attack the French
detachment before mentioned, for we should certainly have had Soult,
with all his people, upon our single division. A French band had
remained in this village till our arrival, having deserted in a body
from the regiment to which they belonged, or they, seeing they could not
make their escape, pretended to desert and join our army.

We bent our course towards Orthes, which was now only a few leagues in
front of us. A man brought a cask of excellent wine to the roadside,
with the intention of giving every man of the division a drink, but we
could not wait, and were consequently obliged to leave the good man's
gift. It showed that either good-will or fear had prompted him to this
act. I rather think the former was the cause, as he lived some distance
from the road. We had not continued long on the march, till we heard a
loud and thundering explosion in front of us, which, as it was expected,
turned out to be the bridge of Orthes, which the enemy had blown up. A
short while after we came in sight of the town, and one of our
Portuguese Cacadore regiments being sent forward, a smart skirmish
commenced between them and the French, who had been left on and about
the bridge to prevent our repairing it. I foolishly went down to see
what was going on, and had nigh paid for my curiosity.

We took up our ground behind a height which overlooked the town, through
which the enemy were passing in large columns. In consequence of this,
we got some guns into a field in front of our hill, and commenced a
cannonade upon them, which, we could observe, made them hurry their pace
considerably. They also brought some heavy field-guns to bear upon us,
and fired some shots, but without doing us much injury. Throughout the
whole of the road by which the French had come before us, desolation and
misery marked their footsteps; and in the village of Orion, where Soult
himself had slept the night before, nothing could exceed the despair and
misery of the few remaining inhabitants, who told us they had been
literally stripped of their all; indeed, they appeared most forlorn and
wretched beings, and, as might be expected, poured out the most heavy
and bitter complaints, not unmingled with imprecations, on the heads of
their plundering countrymen. I went into a poor weaver's house here,
where, if I mistake not greatly, the marauders had actually cut the web
he was weaving out of the loom, and carried it off with them.

We remained on this ground all night, and the next morning his lordship
was intently occupied for a considerable time in reconnoitring the
enemy's position. At length, as if he had fully made up his mind how to
act, he ordered our division to fall in, which was promptly obeyed;
then, sending his staff with directions, we were ordered to file to the
right, and to move down towards the river, apparently with the intention
of crossing a little above the bridge, which had been destroyed. On the
other side, immediately opposite what appeared to be the ford, were
large bodies of infantry, together with a great quantity of artillery.

I recollect my battalion was leading the division, and it appeared at
this moment as if we were going to be engaged in a most arduous and
hazardous undertaking; for the enemy's artillery would have swept us off
the face of the earth before we could possibly have reached the farther
bank; however, this was only a _ruse de guerre_, and a most deep-planned
and well-executed one it was; for while we were moving down towards the
river, a staff-officer came riding, and ordered us all to hide as much
as possible from the view of the enemy, by crouching down, &c. as we
moved along. It may seem rather paradoxical to be ordered thus to act,
at the same time that we wished the enemy to observe our movement; but
the fact is, there were probably a thousand eyes fixed on us all the
time we lay here, and who watched most closely our every movement;
consequently, we could not stir without the enemy being aware of it; and
if on this occasion we had made a show and a parade of our movement, it
would have been suspected as only a feint at once, as the French
themselves, from often practising this stratagem, would have penetrated
immediately our object. But our Chief went a step too deep for them,
adepts as they are in all the arts of this kind; for he made a pretence
of hiding from them his movement, knowing well that we were observed;
and this completely deceived them. This threat of crossing here was made
in order to favour the construction of a bridge about eight or ten miles
down the river, and the crossing there by another division, as they were
thus enabled to guess where the principal force for opposition would be
required. I believe a better planned or more successful stratagem was
never practised. But I own, when we were marching down to the river to
cross in front of the immense masses which we saw ready to oppose us, I
believed that few would survive to tell the tale hereafter.

The moment when we were just opening from the covered ground to plunge
into the river, we were instantly countermarched with all expedition,
and moved down the river at a quick pace till we reached the pontoon
bridge which had been so successfully constructed and thrown over at the
village of Sala. This being now perfectly safe, we encamped at the
village for the night.

On the morning of the 27th, we early crossed the river called the Gave
de Pau, and moved forward in the direction of the town of Orthes by the
great road. On the right bank of that river, when we came within about
two miles of the town, we were moved more to our left, ascending the
high ridge which runs parallel with the river, and on which the French
had taken up a strong position, and were said to be between 30,000 and
40,000 strong. One division had been ordered to move along the summit of
this ridge, on which ran the great road to Peyrehourade, and to attack
the enemy on that flank, while our division communicated with that and
the 3d division to our right. When the action was commenced, the 2d
division had been directed to ford above the bridge, where our feint had
been made the day before, and passing through the town, to attack on the
opposite flank, and thus cut off their retreat towards the Pau. The
enemy's position proved to be exceedingly strong, and difficult of
access by us.

The action commenced by the 4th division attacking on the road leading
along the ridge, where an obstinate and bloody conflict took place,
without our people being able to make any impression. The attack of the
3d division, on our right, also commenced immediately after; but such
was the nature of the ground on this side, being mostly in long pointed
ridges, running out like the rays of a star, and which were exceedingly
strong, that no efforts were able to force them from this ground.

General Hill had by this time got over the river, and was approaching
the position. My division, having been deprived of two of its regiments,
which had been sent, previous to the commencement of our operations this
spring, to receive their clothing at St Jean de Luz, being rendered weak
in consequence, it was kept in reserve, as I before mentioned. During
this unsuccessful attack, our gallant Chief was for a considerable time
immediately in front of us, watching with the most anxious care every
motion of both armies. He appeared to me to be extremely thoughtful and
serious on the occasion, as our troops did not succeed in forcing this
stronghold of the enemy. The firing at this time was extremely animated,
particularly on the ridge to our left, where great slaughter was made on
both sides. And the French having discovered where he and his staff were
assembled, opened a smart cannonade on the group, but without doing any
mischief, I believe, and without being noticed by him. Their shots
generally fell about our division, which was formed immediately behind
the hill on which he stood.

At length, whether from the request of Colonel Barnard, who was at this
time by his lordship's side, or whether by his own direction, I know
not, but the Colonel was ordered to take on the 52d and 1st Portuguese
belonging to the Cacadores, our 2d brigade, and endeavour to force a
passage through the French line, by the gorge of the valley, which lay
immediately in his front, and they would thus, if successful, penetrate
into the centre of the enemy's position. They accordingly moved up the
valley in column of companies, sustaining all the time the most galling
and destructive fire, for the enemy were thus on each of their flanks,
as well as in front. When they reached within a short distance of the
centre height, they formed line, and moving on at a brisk pace and
carrying every thing before them, they drove the enemy from the plateau,
and thus penetrated into the very heart of their army. This was a most
daring and intrepid movement, for although assailed by ten times their
force, and nearly surrounded by the enemy, these gallant corps hesitated
not to push on, although the very elements seemed as it were to fight
against them; for on the brow of the enemy's position the fire had been
so heavy and so incessant, that the very furze bushes and herbs of all
kinds were in a blaze along the front, through which, with innumerable
foes behind it, these gallant men forced a passage at the point of the
bayonet.

This movement had the effect of at once deciding the fate of the day,
for Soult seeing his very centre and strongest position carried, which
separated between his wings, at once ordered a retreat of his whole
force. The remainder of our division were now despatched with all speed
in pursuit of the flying enemy, but they never attempted after this to
make a stand, and nothing was left for us to perform but to give chase
to the fugitives. When we reached the enemy's centre position, we found
that every thing had been cleared away which could in the least impede
his movements; every hedge and ditch had been completely levelled, so
that nothing remained but a beautiful plain on the top of the ridge,
except where works of defence had been thrown up. We were not successful
in capturing any of the enemy, except the wounded, who had necessarily
been left on the field, and we did not lay hold of any of his materiel,
except a few guns which he had been obliged to abandon in a swamp below
the position.

I have related only such things as fell within my own observation, but
no doubt many were the heroic and gallant deeds that were performed in
this hard contested battle, besides what I have detailed. As might be
expected, the gallant 52d and its supporting corps, the 1st Portuguese
Cacadores, suffered dreadfully, leaving probably one-fourth of their
numbers on the field. But I must not omit mentioning one trait of
gallantry which attracted the admiration of the whole army. Lord March
(now the Duke of Richmond) had for some time been on the personal staff
of Lord Wellington, where his services had been most efficient. He also
was at this time a captain in the 52d regiment, but from his high civil
rank had never served as an infantry officer with his regiment. He was
determined to know and practice his duty in every situation, and
therefore requested leave from his lordship to be permitted to join his
corps as a captain, which was granted of course, and this was his first
debut in the character of an officer of foot. It was no doubt a sharp
trial; and poor fellow, while bravely leading on the company which his
Majesty had intrusted to his command, he fell dangerously (then supposed
mortally) wounded. This was a noble example to set our young nobility,
and they cannot do better than to follow such a precedent. I understand
he has been heard to say, "that the chance of a staff-officer being hit
in action, is not near so great as that of an officer of infantry, who
must quietly brave all that comes against him, while a staff-officer,
being well mounted, can quickly get out of danger; and that if a
gentleman wishes truly to learn his profession as an officer, he ought
to serve for a time in the infantry whilst engaged in operations in the
field."

This was a most decided, but withal an unfruitful victory, and only
tended to establish more firmly the superior skill of our commander, and
the superior bravery of the British army. We had heard of the
proceedings of the allies in the north, and of a number of the French
generals having deserted the cause of their once potent, but now fallen
master. And I verily believed that Soult had collected his whole force
together here for the express purpose of either allowing himself to be
surrounded, and thus make a show of being compelled to surrender, or of
inducing his whole army to come over at once to the side of the
Bourbons, but in all these conjectures I was completely mistaken; for
whatever may have been Soult's faults as a man, he has always shown
himself a consistent and an able defender of the cause he first
espoused, and as such is certainly respectable.

We pursued the flying columns of the enemy for about two leagues beyond
the field of action, crossing in our pursuit the river Luy de Bearne,
and at night took up our abode in bivouack, near the village of Bonne
Garde. The night proved extremely cold and frosty, for in the morning
when I intended to arise, I found my cloak frozen to the ground. We had
no kind of covering. My commanding-officer had taken up his abode in a
cottage close by, where there was no bed but what the people occupied.
He therefore got into the kneading-trough, in which he slept very
comfortably; but in the morning I remember he turned out like a miller.

We started soon after daybreak, and continued our march, crossing the
small river Luy de France. Here I remember our assistant
Quartermaster-general told us what great difficulty he found in
obtaining information from the inhabitants as to the by-roads which run
parallel to the great road from Orthes; for these good people could not
conceive why he should be hunting after by-roads of this description,
which were generally very bad, while the great road, which was always
good, lay so near the line by which he wished to move, not knowing
perhaps, or not understanding, that other divisions of the army were
moving on the high-road, while we wished to make a corresponding
movement on their flank. They would always, however, after directing him
how to proceed for a while, bring him again on to the great road, which
he wished to avoid for the reason before given.

The comfort, and the efficiency of an army in the field depends more, I
am persuaded, on the abilities and zeal of officers in the
Quartermaster-general's department, than on any other branch of the
service; for if they are remiss or unacquainted with their duty, the
marches and counter-marches, the halts, and the changes of direction,
are so numerous and annoying, that the spirits and strength of the
troops are soon worn out, and of course dissatisfaction and inefficiency
soon follow. But to the credit of the officers of this department at the
period of which I am writing, I believe never army possessed more able,
more zealous, or more active staff-officers, than we did, and that
principally owing to the excellent example set them by the head of this
department, than whom a more able conductor of an army does not exist.
On one of these occasions when our assistant Quartermaster-general had
occasion to wait upon the authorities of a village, he jokingly asked
them for passports, as is customary in France, to proceed into the
country. "Ma foi," says the worthy Mayor, "you obtained your passports
at Vittoria, you need no others now."

We halted for the night near the village of Duerse. In the morning, we
forded the Adour near a small village, the name of which I forget, and
making a long and rapid march, we took possession of the city of Mont de
Marsan, where we found immense magazines of provisions, which had been
collected by the enemy. This was the most valuable capture that had been
made by the British army since its arrival in the Peninsula; for
although a great deal of treasure was obtained at Vittoria, yet a
considerable portion of that fell into the hands of individuals; but
this was secured for the benefit of the whole army. The enemy had
abandoned the city previous to our arrival, consequently it was a
bloodless conquest, which rendered it the more valuable. Mont de Marsan
is what may be termed a fine and an extensive city, containing about
3000 inhabitants.

The people received us kindly upon the whole, and showed us great
attention. Here we had superb quarters, and the change from what we had
lately been accustomed to, produced a rather uncomfortable feeling; for
our clothes and all our equipments so little corresponded with the
magnificence around us, that we should have preferred less stately
mansions, if comfortable, as more congenial with our respective
establishments. But we did not long enjoy our splendid lodgings; for,
having secured the booty, we left the city, and returned to the banks of
the Adour. The march both to and from this city had been along straight
flat roads, cut through an immense pine forest, with which this
department is almost completely covered. The roads had been for some
time much traversed, and having a sandy bottom, were consequently very
bad at this season of the year; added to which, a violent storm of snow
and sleet assailed us all the march of this day, which made it a rather
uncomfortable business. We halted for the night in a village named, I
think, St Maurice, and the next day were moved into St Sever, a
considerable town on the left bank of the Adour, in which Lord
Wellington had taken up his head-quarters. Here we remained some days,
doing duty over his lordship, when we crossed to the right bank, and
moved up the river, halting at the town of Grenade. We next morning
continued our route up that bank till we reached Barcelonne, a
considerable town some little distance from the river, and nearly
opposite Aire, a large town on the left bank, and near which General the
Hon. Wm. Stewart, with the 2d division, had had a smart brush with the
enemy on the day we captured Mont de Marsan.

On the evening of the 10th we halted at the village of Arblade, and, on
the 11th, entered Tarsac, where we remained for the night. We were next
morning pushed on to a village in front, about a league distant, but
were allowed to remain there only for one night, for the enemy now began
to appear in our front in considerable force. We were consequently
withdrawn, and, passing through Tarsac, the division formed in a wood
about half-way between that and Aire. We expected something serious was
about to occur, but, from what cause I know not, the enemy again
retreated, leaving a body of cavalry on the road about half-a-league
beyond Tarsac, to which we again returned and took up our quarters.

On the 16th, as these fellows still continued so near us, although
evidently without any infantry to support them, it was determined either
to drive them away or take them prisoners. I must observe, our 15th
hussars were at this time occupying Tarsac with ourselves, and one
squadron of them were selected for this service. The advance of the
French consisted only of one squadron, the remainder of their regiment
being at some distance in rear as supports; consequently it was but fair
that an equal force should attack them. Captain Hancox's squadron (in
which was Captain Booth, with his troop) was pitched upon for this
affair. The remainder of the 15th were drawn out to support them, if
needed, but were not to take any part in the combat. Every one of course
went out to see the fight.

Accordingly this squadron moved on to the front, and steadily advanced
upon the enemy, who seemed determined to stand the charge, as they put
every thing ready to receive our gallant dragoons. When within a proper
distance the word "trot" was given, and soon after "gallop," and then
"charge," when our fellows dashed in among the French, upsetting them in
all directions, and cutting many of them down to the ground. In a few
minutes the business was settled, for our people returned, bringing in
with them the captain commanding, (and who, I believe, had been
personally engaged with Captain Hancox,) with about twenty-five men,
prisoners. The rest made their escape. The French captain, and the
greater part of the twenty-five men, were wounded, and some were left
dead on the road.

I shall not soon forget the little wounded captain. He, I believe, was
either a native of Tarsac, or somewhere near, and had been determined
to show his valour to the utmost; hence his standing, when he ought to
have retired; but all the way, as they were bringing him along into the
village, and after he reached the house where he directed them to take
him, he kept crying out, "I'm as brave as a lion!--I'm as brave as the
devil!" and could scarcely be got to hold his peace while the surgeon
was dressing him. Most piteous moaning was made by many of the
inhabitants, to whom it seems he was well known.

We understood afterwards that this regiment, the 13th French hussars,
had fallen rather under the displeasure of Soult, for some ill conduct
on a former occasion, and that they were thus determined to wipe off the
stain and retrieve their character; but they would have shown more
sense, and have rendered more service to their country, had they retired
when they saw it was determined to drive them away.

On the 18th, we again advanced by the road the French had taken, and,
crossing the Adour at the bridge and village of La Row or Arros, we
pursued our route till we reached the town of St Germain's, where we
halted for a short space; and thence to Plaisance, a good town, where we
remained for the night. An unfortunate circumstance occurred in or near
this town, which might have produced the most disastrous
consequences:--A man, who most likely had been resisting the plundering
of his house, was basely murdered by some soldier or soldiers of the
division; but although every endeavour was made to discover the
perpetrators of this vile act, they could not be found out; but a
subscription was set on foot among the officers of the division, and 100
guineas were collected and paid to the unfortunate widow, who, though
grieved for the loss of her husband, was thankful for the money. I
strongly suspect my friends the Portuguese were the culprits on this
occasion.

On the 19th we again moved forward, and, passing Obrigort, halted for
the night at the village of Aget. Towards the close of this day's march,
we both heard and saw smart skirmishing, down on the great road which
runs parallel to the ridge on which we were, and from Auch to Tarbes,
along the plain on our right, and passes through Vic Bigore. Near this
town the firing was very brisk. We understood it was Picton's division
driving the French before them.

The next morning we started early, and, continuing our march along the
ridge of the height on which our last night's quarters were situated, we
reached pretty soon the town of Rabasteins, where we learnt that the
enemy had taken up a position in and near the town of Tarbes. We,
accordingly, changing our direction, moved to our right, down the road
leading from the former to the latter place. We passed on this road the
sixth division, which, it seems, was ordered to keep on the flank of the
enemy, which, should he make a stand, this division was to turn. When we
got within about a mile and a half of Tarbes, we discovered the enemy
posted on a strong woody height on the left of the road, with a windmill
on its highest and most distant point.

The whole of our 95th people were accordingly ordered forward, to
endeavour to drive them from this position. My battalion formed the
right, the 2d battalion the centre, and the 1st battalion the left of
our line of skirmishers. We found them covered in front with a great
number of light troops, which occupied us some time in driving in, and
in which service we suffered considerably, for they occupied the hedges
and dikes on the high ground, from which it was necessary we should
dislodge them. We had also a considerably-sized brushwood to pass
through before we could get at them. At length, after much smart
skirmishing, we gained the height, but found the whole of their heavy
infantry drawn up on a steep acclivity, near the windmill, which allowed
them to have line behind line, all of which could fire at the same time
over each other's heads, like the tiers of guns in a three-decker. We
continued, however, to advance upon them, till we got within a hundred
paces of this formidable body, the firing from which was the hottest I
had ever been in, except perhaps Barossa. At this moment I received a
shot through my right shoulder, which compelled me for a moment to
retire; but meeting the main support of my battalion advancing with
Colonel Ross at its head, and finding my wound had not disabled me, I
again advanced with him, until we got close under the enemy's line, and
took post behind a hillock, which protected us from their fire.

We here found Colonel Norcott, who then belonged to the 2d battalion,
riding about on his large black mare; but he had not ridden long till he
also was wounded through the shoulder, from which he still suffers.
While we were in this situation, a shot struck a captain of ours in the
side where he had his drinking-horn slung; in fact it struck both the
horn and his side; but, from some cause, it did not penetrate the flesh,
but bruised it sore, which is generally painful. The captain, and those
about him, thought he was shot through the body; they accordingly picked
him up, and were carrying him off to the rear, when he cried, "Stop, let
me feel," and putting his hand down to the place, and finding no wound,
he sprung out of their arms, and, with the most ludicrous appearance
possible, returned to his post again. No one present could refrain from
laughing at the ridiculousness of this occurrence, although at the
moment the men were falling fast around us. At this time also, a spent
shot, one which I imagine had first hit the ground, struck me on the
left arm, but did not injure me. I now thought it better to go to the
rear to get my shoulder dressed, immediately after which I became quite
faint from loss of blood. The firing still continued most animated on
both sides; but before an hour had elapsed, the French were driven
completely from every position they held on this very strong hill; and
as I returned, (after having been dressed, and having swallowed some
spirits to remove the faintness,) I found them posting away with all
expedition to the plain below, some guns, which had just arrived, giving
them an occasional shot, but from which they did not suffer much, they
marched with such rapidity. We immediately followed them down to the
plain, on reaching which, we perceived a body of French troops coming
apparently from the town of Tarbes, pursued by the 3d division, with
whom they had been engaged, and which, with some exertion, we thought we
could intercept and cut off; but they, perceiving our intention,
inclined considerably to the right, and marching with all speed, they
got away before us.

The enemy now having all retired across the plain, began to take up a
strong position on a height at its extremity, towards which we continued
to advance; but Lord Wellington having expected that the 6th division
would by this time have reached their position, and, attacking in flank,
have rendered our attack in front more likely to succeed, and they not
making their appearance, although it was now nigh dusk, he ordered the
divisions here to halt, and bivouack for the night on the plain. I never
saw any one more disappointed, or apparently more annoyed by this last
order, than our Adjutant-general, the lamented Sir Edward Packenham; he
was for attacking them at once; but this could not have been done
without a great sacrifice of excellent troops, as all those were who now
filled the ranks of the British army, having by this time been
completely seasoned, and become almost invaluable. In reviewing the
operations of this day, I need say little, as facts speak for
themselves. The enemy had on the Windmill hill, as it was vulgarly
called, or more properly the hill of Oleac, I believe a whole division,
consisting of at least 5000 or 6000 men, while not a shot was fired by
any but by the sixteen companies of my regiment, amounting probably to
1000 or 1100 men; it is true the other regiments of the division were
drawn up in rear of us, and would have supported us had we been
repulsed. But it is not so much to the driving away of this so much
stronger force, that I would draw the reader's attention, as to the
great loss the enemy sustained, and solely from our fire. I believe I
shall not be far from the truth, if I state their loss in killed and
wounded as equal to the whole strength of our sixteen companies.

Lord Wellington, in his dispatch, mentions the destruction caused in the
enemy's ranks as unusually severe; hence the advantage of rifles over
the common musket, or else the superior mode of using our arms beyond
what is practised in the line. The Americans tauntingly tell us, our
soldiers do not know how to use the weapons that are put into their
hands; and, truly, if we are to judge by the awful destruction which
they have occasionally inflicted upon our brave soldiers, we should be
led to suspect that they understand this science much better than
ourselves. It might, however, be easily remedied, if more attention were
paid to the instruction of the recruit in this most essential
qualification, and more time and ammunition devoted to target practice;
but, at the same time, every officer should be made to know something of
projectiles in general, or he will, as at present, be incapable of
instructing his men. I will venture to assert, that eight out of ten of
the soldiers of our regular regiments will aim in the same manner at an
object at the distance of 300 yards, as at one only 50. It must hence be
evident that the greater part of those shots are lost or expended in
vain; indeed the calculation has been made, that only one shot out of
200 fired from muskets in the field takes effect, while one out of
twenty from rifles is the average. My opinion is, that our line troops
ought to be armed with a better description of musket. If five shillings
more were added to the price, it would make a great difference in the
article, and be very trifling to the public. Our army has always been
too sparingly supplied with flints, which may be had almost for an old
song; but if wanted in the field, nothing can supply their place. Many a
brave soldier has fallen while hammering at a worn out flint. It is true
we can, with the weapons we have, drive any other army out of the field,
but not without occasionally sustaining an overwhelming loss,
particularly when opposed to the Americans; and could we meet them with
the same advantages they possess in point of shooting, our chances of
victory would be greater, and at less expense. These are my private
opinions only, and are deduced from the experience I have had, both as a
heavy infantry soldier and a rifleman. I am now firmly persuaded, that
of the near 200 shots I fired on the 2d of October 1799, in Holland, not
one took effect, from my total want of knowledge how to aim. What an
useless expenditure this was of both time and ammunition! Much indeed
has lately been done by Sir Henry Torrens, to supply the deficiency of
which I have been speaking, but still not sufficient, in my opinion, to
remedy all the evils attendant thereon.

Our loss on this occasion was very heavy, being about 100 men and eleven
officers killed and wounded; the proportion of officers being nearly
double what usually takes place. The regiments which supported us also
had some casualties, arising from the shots which passed over our heads
striking among them; but they were not considerable. My servants having
heard I was wounded, went to Tarbes, (where all the wounded were
collected,) with my baggage. I should consequently have been very ill
off, had not my kind friend and messmate, Major Balvaird, lent me his
tent and bed, as he himself had been ordered on picquet. Immediately
after nightfall, the enemy had all retired from the position in front of
us. We accordingly next morning continued the pursuit, and halted at
night at the village of Lannemazen, not far from the borders of the
Pyrenees, towards which, in their retreat, they had been inclined. This
day and night, my shoulder had become extremely painful. We started
again in the morning; but leaving the Pyrenees, we turned our faces more
towards Toulouse, and took up our abode for the night at a
considerable-sized town, called Castelnau; here the inhabitants received
us very kindly, and we had excellent quarters. However, on the following
morning, we were obliged to continue our march, and passing through
several villages on the road, halted for the night at L'Isle, in Dodon.
During this day's march, my poor old horse played me a sad trick. He was
one which I had been compelled to purchase as soon after I lost my
little Portuguese one by the bad shoeing of the blacksmith at Sumbilla,
as I could fall in with one for sale. He was a very tall grey horse,
rather old, and whose mouth had not been well made in his breaking; he
was withal rather stubborn, or more properly speaking stupid,
consequently he did not always obey the rein as he ought. The roads were
excessively deep and dirty, and as I was riding at the head of the
battalion, and had occasion to pull him a little to one side, for some
purpose or other, he either would not, or could not, obey the pull of
the rein; and as I had but one hand, he took advantage of it, and sat
down completely on his haunches, in the very deepest of the mire. Of
course I was tumbled right over his rump, and rolled in the mud, and
after extricating myself as well as I could, I crawled out, as pretty a
figure as may well be imagined. This, as might be expected, raised the
laugh of all who saw it, at my expense; but, uncomfortable and
ridiculous as my situation was, I was not hurt, the mud being
sufficiently deep to protect me from any injury by the fall. In this
village I fell in with a Frenchman who had just come from Toulouse,
towards which he understood we were bending our course. He gave me such
a flaming account of the "belle position" in the neighbourhood of that
town, and of the impregnable works which Soult had caused to be thrown
up, and of the superb artillery which were stationed there, and which,
he said, were those who had served in the famous battle of Austerlitz,
and of the utter improbability of any impression ever being made on them
by an enemy, that if I had given credit to the half of what he told me,
I might have been filled with fear lest all our laurels might here be
tarnished. From what motive this rather exaggerated statement was made,
I know not, but am inclined to think it was merely an inclination to
indulge in a trifling gasconade. On the 25th we reached Mont Ferrand,
where we halted for the night.

On the 27th, in the morning, we were moved forward to the village of
Tournefoile, where it seems some of our cavalry had been quartered the
night before, but who had had their quarters beat up during the night by
a body of the enemy, who still held the ground beyond the village. My
battalion, and a Portuguese battalion, were sent forward, the remainder
of the brigade following. We found the enemy occupying the road leading
from the village to a bridge about half a mile distant, together with
the hedges and enclosures in the vicinity. My people extended to the
left, while the Portuguese battalion kept on the road. A smart skirmish
now commenced, during which the enemy gradually retired towards the
bridge; but at this time a most remarkable occurrence took place. One of
our men (the servant of a friend of mine) received a shot in the mouth,
which struck out several of his teeth. One of these was propelled with
such force by the blow that it flew at least twenty yards, and, entering
the left arm of one of the Portuguese on the road, inflicted a deep and
severe wound. When the surgeon of the 43d, who was the nearest to this
man at the time, came to dress the wounded Portuguese, he, instead of a
ball as every one expected, extracted a tooth, at which, no doubt, both
he and all about him were quite astonished; and a report was immediately
set afloat that the enemy were firing bones instead of balls. This most
extraordinary circumstance was not cleared up till they were informed of
our man having had his teeth knocked out, when, after comparing the
relative situations of the two men, it became quite evident how this
most uncommon wound had been inflicted. If any thing like a joke might
be permitted on such an occasion, it may with great propriety be said,
the Frenchman who fired the shot had killed two birds with one stone. I
happened to be near our man at the time, and besides seeing him wounded,
I enquired minutely into the circumstances, or I own I should have
hesitated before I gave implicit credit to the story; so it may
probably be with my reader. Poor fellow, he had afterwards nearly all
his intestines torn out by a cannon-shot at the fatal attack near New
Orleans, and where I saw him writhing in the agonies of death; his name
was Powell, and he was, I believe, a Welshman.

Not long after the commencement of the skirmish, the artillery on both
sides was brought into play; but the enemy kept gradually retiring till
they crossed the bridge, and as we did not pursue them, they quietly
walked off, taking the road towards Toulouse. I cannot conceive for what
purpose this body of troops had been sent here, unless it was intended
as a reconnoissance, to ascertain whether any, and what description, of
troops had arrived at this point, as their waiting, after driving out
our cavalry, to see whether any infantry approached, would seem to
indicate. Major Balvaird was conspicuously brave on this occasion. The
loss on either side was but trifling.




CHAPTER XIV.

     The British Army cross the Garonne--Advance on
     Toulouse--Prepare for the Attack--The Attack--Spaniards driven
     back--Battle very hot--French completely defeated--Soult
     evacuates Toulouse, and tardily adheres to the Bourbons.


On the 28th or 29th, we were moved forward, and after a short march we
reached a beautiful plain, with Toulouse appearing most magnificent in
the distance. Here we went into cantonments, in the different villages
and chateaux in the neighbourhood, the greater part of which were
completely deserted, and many of them most wofully sacked and plundered,
which could have been done only by their own troops. A noble and stately
mansion, belonging to a Mr Villeneuve, stood immediately in front of our
outposts, which had shared the same fate with all the others, every
article of furniture having been entirely destroyed. The cloth had been
torn from the billiard-table, the splendid pier-glasses shivered into a
thousand atoms, and, in short, every article of luxury or splendour
which a man could wish for, might have been found in this princely
habitation previous to its desertion by its owner; but now devastation
and destruction had laid its unhallowed hands on all in which its
possessor had formerly delighted. I, with my messmates, took the liberty
of visiting Mr V.'s fish-ponds, where we found some fine-looking carp;
and having some hooks by me, we caught a considerable quantity, which we
imagined would be a great treat to our messmates; but we found them
excessively muddy, and not worth eating. Here also we rejoiced in being
able to procure some good provender for our still half-starved horses
and mules. The grass and cinquefoil which we found in this beautiful and
luxuriant plain, in a few days began to make a wonderful improvement in
our poor fellow-travellers. I know not a more gratifying feeling than we
experienced in thus being able to feed the hungry; for although they
were but of the inferior creation, yet so much did our own comforts,
and, indeed, efficiency for service, depend on their being capable of
performing the task allotted to them, and so much did the circumstance
of our having passed through trials and dangers together attach us to
them, that I very frequently would have preferred getting them a meal
even at the expense of wanting one myself. Here my little Portuguese
horse, which I had originally brought from Lisbon, and who had been my
companion in all my wanderings, (except when he was left for a while
owing to his bad foot,) began to look quite brisk and lively again; for
hitherto his spirits had been very low indeed since he happened by his
misfortune, and had been literally starved into the bargain.

A pontoon bridge having been constructed some distance above the town,
and which our engineers had been able to accomplish on account of its
being thrown over above the junction of the Ariege with the Garonne, on
the 31st we moved down towards this point, and crossing it, my battalion
was left as its guard in a village on the bank of the river. The
remainder of the division, and the ---- division,[3] moved up the Ariege
river with the intention of crossing, and thus approaching Toulouse in
that direction; but, from the heavy rains, the river was too much
flooded, which, together with the dreadful state of the roads, these
troops were unable to effect this operation, and were consequently
recalled.

By the 2d of April the whole had recrossed the Garonne, when we again
went into our cantonments on the plain, but now farther down the river
than before. We remained here a few days, and I cannot help recording a
remarkable circumstance which took place at this time. For want of
dwelling-houses we had been obliged to put a certain number of the men
of my battalion into a sort of wine-house; it was not a vault, for it
was above ground, but had a considerable number of barrels of wine in
it, amongst which the men were obliged to sleep. It will scarcely be
credited, but not one of these men ever appeared the least intoxicated
during the whole time they lay there. Whether they were completely tired
of wine, or whether their having been placed in such a situation
produced a feeling of honour and pride among them, I know not, but I
verily believe less wine was drunk by these men during the time they
remained here, than would have been had they had to pay most
exorbitantly for it. With soldiers I believe it is as with mankind in
general; what is prohibited always appears more valuable or more
pleasurable in our eyes, than what we may with freedom enjoy.

On the 6th we moved down the river till within a short distance of
Grenade, about twelve miles below Toulouse. We halted near a small
village, and encamped. A pontoon bridge had been thrown over the Garonne
here, and one division (I believe the 3d) had crossed; but now, owing to
the swollen state of the river, together with several attempts which
were now made by the enemy to destroy the bridge, by floating down
trees, &c. which might eventually carry it away, it loosened at the
farther end, and the anchors being taken up, the whole was allowed to
float down to our side of the river, keeping fast the end next our own
bank. We remained in this situation for several days, one division only
being on the opposite side, with which it was impossible to communicate,
or, if attacked, to afford it almost any support. Now was the time for
the enemy to bestir himself; for had he marched out of Toulouse with
half his force, and been met at this place by the force he had at
Montauban, they must have annihilated this division, or taken them
prisoners. It is true we might have rendered them some little assistance
by our artillery from the bank we occupied, but the distance was so
great that a determined enemy would not have held back from the dread of
it.

I took a trip from hence to Grenade, where the paymaster-general had
established the military chest, as I had not yet quite finished my
paymaster's duty. It is a good-sized town, but contains nothing
remarkable, only here I remember I got some excellent wine of the
Champagne kind, and which my friend poured out of an immense magnum
bottle. I understood our Chief was most anxious to have the bridge
re-established by the 9th, which was Easter eve, the weather having now
somewhat taken up, and the river of course had fallen; but although the
engineer thought he could effect it, and had promised his lordship it
should be ready by that time, it was not passable till the morning of
the 10th. Early on that morning, my division crossed to the other side,
together with the 4th and 6th divisions, and a whole host of Spaniards.

I omitted to mention, that these latter gentry, on their entering
France, had behaved most wantonly, and had committed numerous
atrocities; on which, his lordship, as Generalissimo, had ordered them
back to their own country again; but upon the promise of good behaviour,
and an anxious desire to participate in the honourable achievements of
the allied troops, he had granted them permission to rejoin the army,
and they were to have a post of honour assigned them at the ensuing
battle. Such was the current report which prevailed among our army
newsmongers: be it as it may, however, they were here in number, I
should think, about 6000 or 8000. The whole army now present having
crossed, except General Hill with the 2d division, advanced upon the
town of Toulouse. We here found a beautiful country and excellent roads,
along which we got on rapidly. The town stands close to the right bank
of the river, along which there are numerous quays, and over which there
is an excellent bridge, communicating with the suburb on the opposite
side, called St Cyprian. From the river on the north side of the town
runs the famous canal of Languedoc, with which it communicates by locks,
and which, encircling the town on that and on the east sides, with the
river on the west, almost entirely encloses it. On the east side of the
town, and just beyond the canal, a considerable eminence arises, forming
a sort of chain or ridge, on the top of which numerous redoubts and
batteries had been constructed, and which, both from the nature of the
ground and by the great labour bestowed upon them, had been rendered, as
the Frenchman told me, nearly impregnable.

The 6th division, supported by the 4th, had been ordered to move
considerably to the left, and, after crossing the Garonne, to attack
this formidable position on the outer side, while the Spaniards were to
attack it immediately in front. My division was ordered to communicate
with the right of the Spaniards, and, extending down to the great
Montauban road, was to press upon the town in this direction, in order
to aid the attack upon the height before mentioned. The 3d division
joined our right at the Montauban road, and extended from thence down to
the river, and were ordered to act similarly to us. The 2d division,
under General Hill, remained on the other side of the river, and was to
co-operate by attacking the suburb before mentioned, together with the
works for the protection of the bridge, and for the same purpose of our
attack, namely, to keep the troops in these parts of the town employed,
while the 6th division and Spaniards attacked the height. Immediately in
front of our division, we found considerable bodies of troops, at some
distance from the town, occupying the houses all along the road, and
which it took us a considerable time to drive in. They had also
constructed a battery on the bridge over the canal, where the great road
passes, and from which they kept up an almost incessant fire. At the
hither end of the bridge also there stood a very large convent, which
they had fortified in a very strong manner, having loopholed the whole
of the surrounding wall, which was twenty feet high, and had also looped
the upper part of the convent, which contained a garrison of probably
1000 or 1200 men.

We commenced operations in conjunction with the 3d division on our
right, in driving these people in, and with whom a smart firing was kept
up during the whole day. The French had also other troops beyond the
canal, and on the Moorish or Roman wall which encircled the town inside
the canal, and both of which they had fortified; so that, had it been
intended we should force the town on this side, we should have found it
a difficult undertaking: we were, however, merely (as said before) to
press upon them without committing ourselves; but unfortunately, in the
eagerness of some of our people to push forward, they got immediately
under the muzzles of the pieces of the men who were defending the
convent, and from the loopholes several of our poor fellows were shot
without being able to see their antagonists. A good number fell here;
for it was not more than thirty yards distant where they had taken up
their post, and an unpleasant one it was as well as dangerous; for they
were obliged to stand in a drain which ran from a jakes, and which of
course emitted no very desirable flavour; or, if they had left it for a
moment, they were immediately shot. Our adjutant escaped here as by a
miracle, the bole of a very small tree having stopped the ball that
would have pierced his body. When, however, we had got them fairly
driven in, we had then time to look about us, and the first thing we saw
was the Don moving on to the attack of the height with all due ceremony.
They gained the first or lower ridge without much opposition, and here
getting up some artillery, a pretty heavy fire was opened on the enemy;
but the French remained quite passive, not offering to resist the
approaching Spaniards till they got within a certain distance of their
works on the top of the hill.

The Spaniards, elated by having gained the first ridge so easily, pushed
on too rapidly, and without having taken time to re-form their columns
after the first conquest. They were not aware either that a rather deep
ravine separated them from the enemy's works; however, on they pushed,
in a very disorderly manner, till they reached the point the French
intended they should reach, when a fire was opened out upon them, such
as they had never witnessed before. Few troops would have remained
unshaken by such a reception, but to the Spaniards it was intolerable;
consequently they broke into a thousand parties, and, turning tail, it
was who should be first away from such unpleasant doings. I am told that
Lord Wellington at this moment could scarcely hold his sides for
laughing, and cried out he "wondered whether the Pyrenees would bring
them up again, they seemed to have got such a fright." He did not indeed
depend on their valour, or he would have made a bad winding up of his
Peninsular campaign. The moment they left the height, every man took the
way that seemed to him best, and they soon after literally covered the
whole plain, and set to work with all expedition to plunder at least, if
they would not fight. Some of the villains had the audacity to come and
take a poor man's horse out of the stable of the very house which we
were then, as it were, defending, and had nigh got off with it; but
having been perceived, it was taken from them, and restored again to its
owner.

The left of our division was now obliged to be moved up to fill the
space vacated by these vagabonds; and in doing which a good deal of hard
fighting took place. This also made the people in front of us rally
again, and coming out in great numbers hurraing and shouting, we had
something to do to drive them back. But by this time we heard, in the
distance behind the hill, a dropping and now brisker fire; by and by,
approaching the summit, it became quite animated. We could plainly
perceive now the different appearance which the French assumed; they no
longer lay supine and passive till their enemy approached their works,
but fought for every inch of ground, and all was now animation and
bustle among them, hurrying to the support of those troops who defended
the redoubts, &c. on the point assailed. The battle now raged with great
fury, each party with all their might for the mastery, and the French,
we could perceive, when compelled by sheer force to yield ground, did
it with the utmost reluctance. At length, we saw the British colour
waving on the summit of the hill, with the most deadly warfare raging on
each side of it; but every move we saw was in favour of the British.

The 42d regiment had by this time gained possession of the principal
redoubt, which they held till their ammunition was all expended, and
which the enemy perceiving, or suspecting, again advanced, and gained
possession of it. Things did not now wear quite so favourable an aspect;
but being promptly supported by other troops behind them, a movement was
again made in advance, and again the French were expelled from the
redoubt. Great was the slaughter in and about this place, as I saw next
day when I visited it.

The enemy were now reluctantly compelled to yield up all those famous
works, on which so much time and labour had been expended, and on which
they so much relied, and were obliged to abandon (slowly indeed) this
long disputed ridge; but they fought till they were fairly forced down
into the town, where they still kept up a feeble fire; at length it
gradually subsided. This was the principal part of the drama; but it had
many subordinate plots. On our right, General Picton, with that ardour
which ever characterised him, was scarcely well satisfied to play an
under part on this occasion; and, instead of merely keeping his
opponents in play, as I before hinted, he was for effecting a forcible
entry into the town. He accordingly attacked with his division a strong
and well-secured battery, near the canal, in doing which his brave
Connaught Rangers, who had scarcely ever hitherto known a reverse, met
with a severe and bloody repulse, in which they lost a great number of
excellent officers and men. The other corps of his division, who
co-operated, also suffered greatly. General Hill strictly obeyed his
instructions, and, as he always did, effected every object at which he
aimed.

In this action I had another opportunity of witnessing the effect of
presentiment. Early in it I was sent forward by my commanding-officer
with some orders to a company of ours, which was in front skirmishing,
and which had taken possession of a house, which partly screened them
from the enemy's battery on the bridge. Behind this house, one of the
men was sitting on a heap of stones with the most woe-worn countenance
possible. He had separated from the rest of the men, and was sitting
here apparently ruminating on his fate, and appeared to be quite
absorbed in his meditations. I remarked him most particularly, wondering
what could render him so different from the rest of his comrades, who
were all life and animation, and from what he had formerly been himself
in action. He presently went forward with some of the other men, and
soon after fell to rise no more. The poor man's melancholy look made a
deep impression upon me at the time, together with his fate soon after.

Thus terminated the battle of Toulouse; our troops maintaining the
ground they had gained, while the enemy had retired into the town
completely beaten. Soult seemed undetermined how to act, whether to
endeavour to hold the town, (which indeed he might have done for a day
or two perhaps,) or to leave it by the road towards the south, the only
one now open to him. We rested on the field all night, the enemy sending
an occasional shot or shell in the direction of our camp. Next morning
we still found the enemy retaining possession of the town; and nothing
being likely to be done, I rode up with another officer to see the
bloody field, with all its redoubts and batteries, and also to see, if
I could, in what situation the enemy now appeared. Just as we reached
the summit, a cry was given by the 42d sentry, "Turn out the picquet."
There was a good deal of firing going on in the suburbs nearest to the
position, which this Highlander thought it right to apprize his people
of. We looked a considerable time with our glasses, and observed a good
number of troops on a green and open space in that part of the suburbs,
and who every now and then would fire their muskets. I thought it must
either be a sort of _feu-de-joie_, or a funeral, and it turned out to be
the latter. They were burying a general officer, who had fallen the day
before, and to whom they were paying the last melancholy honours; but it
was conducted in a quite different manner from our military funerals,
for they did not fire in volleys like us; but every few minutes
apparently a few men only fired, and by and by some others. This had the
effect, however, of turning out our whole line in the neighbourhood of
the position; and as I was afterwards returning, I met Colonel Barnard
and Colonel Colborne (than whom there were not two better officers in
the army) riding up to see what was the matter. Colonel Barnard asked me
what it was. I told him what I thought it was. He said the whole line
had fallen in, thinking it was an attack.

Towards evening we heard that the inhabitants of the city had been most
urgent on Soult to withdraw from it; and that he had promised to do so.
Indeed, had he not, Lord Wellington might, if he chose, have soon
reduced the town to ashes; for the heights we had taken were not 500
yards distant from the city, and completely overlooked it. On the
morning of the 12th, therefore, Soult marched out, and was not molested
by our troops. He took the road to Villefranche and Carcassonne, up the
canal of Languedoc, our cavalry following their track. Now all the
loyalists came rushing out of the town to meet and welcome us; every one
wearing white scarfs or favours to denote his attachment to the
Bourbons. Now all was joy and festivity, and nothing but shaking of
hands and embracing was to be seen in all directions. This day also
arrived Lord Stewart from Paris with the account of Bonaparte's
abdication, and of the Bourbons having been reinstated. It was also
rumoured that Soult had received this news previous to the battle; but
not being inclined to yield obedience to that dynasty, he had allowed
the warfare to proceed. Indeed, what almost puts this beyond a doubt,
was his still continuing for many days after this to refuse sending in
his submission to the Bourbon government. We also heard afterwards that
the courier bringing the official information of Bonaparte's fall, &c.
had been detained by the postmaster of Montauban by Soult's direction;
for although he had had private intelligence of the fact, he imagined
the detention of the official information might screen him hereafter.
Such are the surmises of the wise heads respecting this affair, which,
as it turned out, is to be regretted; for the sacrifice of so many
valuable lives on both sides was a thing of no trifling importance; but
I believe Soult felt sore at his having been so often worsted, and hoped
here in some measure to retrieve his lost honours; for it cannot be
doubted, I believe, that he expected to be able to repel our attack at
least, if not to force us to retire from Toulouse.

On the 13th, the divisions marched into the town; my battalion having
the fauxbourg adjoining the lately disputed position assigned to it, and
in which we found very comfortable quarters. To show that the French
people of this place took Lord Wellington either for a very generous
person, or a great fool, a man who owned a house on the border of the
position, and which the French had fortified by loopholing it, and
otherwise rendering it unfit for occupation by its owner, sent in a
memorial to his lordship, praying him to order that he might receive out
of the military chest a sufficient sum to enable him to put his house in
its former state; and this, although it had been done by his own
countrymen. I suppose his lordship would laugh at it when he saw it. I
should have been inclined to be angry with the fellow. The man showed
the memorial to the adjutant and myself before he sent it in--a step
which of course we dissuaded him from taking.

Notwithstanding it was notorious that Bonaparte's career was at that
time finished, Soult still made a show of holding out for him; in
consequence of which the army was again put in motion to compel him
either to send in his adhesion to the new government, or to resign his
command of troops who had not now a master. He had taken up a position
near Villefranche. Accordingly, we marched, I think, on the 15th or
16th, the which rather alarmed him; and in consequence he despatched
Count Gazan with terms to offer to his lordship, the which, after some
alterations, were finally agreed upon, and the army returned once more
to Toulouse, where we resumed our former quarters.

Thus finished the Peninsular War, the last campaign of which had been
the most active probably that is recorded in history. In ten months and
a half we had marched from the frontiers of Portugal, had completely
traversed Spain, which we had cleared of its long troublesome and
insidious invaders; had penetrated far into the interior of that
country, which three years before gave law to most of the continental
nations; and had worsted, in various actions, those troops, which,
except when encountering the British, had been accustomed almost
invariably to conquer.


FOOTNOTE:

[3] Some obscurity is occasioned here and elsewhere, by blanks being
left in the MS., which the death of the good-humoured and kindly author
has rendered it now impossible to fill up.--ED.




CHAPTER XV.

     Author's happy state during 1813 and 1814--Character of the
     veritable French--British distributed over the
     Country--Civility of the Inhabitants of Grissolles--Amusements
     in quarters--The British prepare to quit France.


When I look back on the events of 1813 and 1814, I cannot but deem that
the happiest period of my life, for I had been actively, and, as I
believed, usefully employed. My mind during this time was tranquil, and
I was, with a few exceptions, prosperous in my outward circumstances.
All those among whom my lot was cast were now sincerely friendly to me,
and I believe I may with confidence affirm that I had not (with the
exception of the person before mentioned, and who was now far removed
from me) a single enemy in the world. It is true my occupation had not
been, strictly speaking, of a Christian character, but I believed I was
fulfilling my duty; hence the peace of mind which I enjoyed. I have
since learned certainly, that a Christian, to resemble his Master,
should be more ready to save than to destroy men's lives; but, at the
same time, I cannot see why a Christian soldier should not be as
zealous in the defence of his king and country, as those who are
actuated by other motives; and it is certain, I believe, although I once
doubted whether there was such a precept, that in whatever calling or
occupation a man is in when called to become a Christian, that therein
he should abide, 1st Cor. vii. 17, 20, and 24. But I attribute the peace
of mind I then enjoyed as much to the constant employment which the
nature of our services entailed upon us, as to any other cause. Be it
remembered, I was doing the duties of both paymaster and quartermaster
during this period, and my battalion had been as often called into
action as any in the army, having been engaged in battles and skirmishes
no less than sixteen times in less than ten months. This naturally left
little time for reflection. But, above all, I am bound to render thanks
to where alone it is due, to that gracious and beneficent Being, who not
only watched over me during this period, and protected me from harm, but
who poured his choicest blessings upon me, even the blessings of a
cheerful and contented heart, together with the means of retrieving my
sadly deranged finances; for had I not been appointed acting paymaster,
I might have gone to prison on my return to my native country, from the
unavoidable losses I had sustained, and which I shall mention by and by.
Another cause of comfort and cheerfulness arose from our operations
against the enemy having been invariably successful; for we never, from
the time of our leaving the frontiers of Portugal, till we took
possession of Toulouse, met with any thing like a serious reverse.

Most of my readers no doubt know that the city where we had now taken up
our quarters is one of the largest and finest in this part of France;
but as it has been so often described, I shall content myself with
merely informing my readers, that the people among whom we now resided
were truly and veritably French. The character of the inhabitants,
since we left our poor friends the Basques, had materially changed; that
kind, but rude and simple hospitality, which had on most occasions been
displayed by those honest mountaineers, had now given place to all that
imposing, but less sincere politeness of the real French character. We
were, indeed, treated here with every degree of respect; and perhaps
more, or at least an equal degree of attention, was paid to our
convenience and comfort, as they would have shown to their own troops.
We had every reason, therefore, to be perfectly satisfied.

In this part of the country there are a great number of Protestants,
which, of course, permitted us to live on better terms with them than
had they been all such stanch and bigoted Catholics as we met with in
some parts of the Continent, and where our heretical presence was
frequently looked upon as a contamination; for I remember well in the
small village of Zalada, where we lay for some time, near Astorga, we
never left the village, as they supposed, for a permanency, but the joy
bells were rung for our departure. It was our lot, indeed, to be
frequently quartered in this village, and such was their invariable
custom. It is true the Padre and people of the place only expressed
openly the feeling that was covertly, but universally, entertained
throughout Spain and Portugal respecting us; for although the monks and
priests made great pretences of friendship and good-will towards us,
while we were upholding them in their iniquitous dominion over the minds
of the people, yet secretly they cordially hated us, and were glad when
at last our successes contributed to rid their country of both the
invaders and their conquerors. One noble Spanish lady, (I remember
well,) when I was quartered at Cadiz, made use of an expression which I
am sure would shock and horrify my simple and delicate countrywomen.
She said, "She should rejoice to see all the French then in their
country hung up in the intestines (las tripas) of the English, who had
come to drive them out." Thus they should get quit of both. This lady,
as might be supposed, was a most depraved and abandoned being, yet even
she, it seems, looked upon us in the light of a curse or plague sent
upon their country, rather than as a generous and gallant people, who
had not hesitated to sacrifice much, both of blood and money, in freeing
them from their French oppressors. But such, I fear, is the too general
feeling in that country; for while the innumerable religiosos which
overrun that nation maintain their cursed dominion over the minds of the
other classes, an Englishman will always be looked upon by them as a
dangerous and hateful being, uniting in himself both the mortal sins,
first, of having totally cast off the Pope's authority, and being the
subject of a free and popular government--than either of which, not even
Satan himself could be more odious to them.

We were not allowed, however, to remain long in Toulouse, but were
distributed over the country in the neighbourhood, lines of demarcation
having been pointed out which were to separate the French and British
armies. My division was sent down the right bank of the river, and
occupied Castel Sarazin, Grissolles, and Castelnau, &c. My battalion was
stationed at Grissolles. During our stay here I had two or three
opportunities, in company with others, of going to see Montauban, the
seat of a Protestant college, and famed in romantic lore. The people
were kind and obliging, and showed us every attention; but unfortunately
a French garrison was quartered in it, the officers of which took every
opportunity of quarrelling with ours. Indeed we had no business there,
and were consequently obliged to put up with more than we should have
otherwise done, for we were strictly forbid to enter any place within
the French lines; but we did not conceive that those fellows, who had
shown themselves so friendly and polite near Bayonne, while we were
avowedly in arms against each other, would now turn round upon us when
peace was made, and endeavour to engage us in quarrels and duelling. But
I believe they felt a degree of soreness at our acknowledged superiority
as soldiers, (for even the inhabitants of Montauban, where they lay, did
not hesitate to express it,) and thus wished to be revenged for the many
victories we had gained over them. Indeed there was a sort of
recklessness about them which is not easily accounted for, unless they
supposed their occupation was gone, and cared not what became of
themselves; but they did not succeed, I think, in any instance in
obtaining their wishes, for they would not fight with pistols, the only
weapon which gives each a fair and equal chance, but insisted upon using
the sword,--a mode of fighting to which the English in general were
utter strangers. The people uniformly gave us warning as soon as ever
they learnt that a plot was laid to insult us, on which we generally
came away without subjecting ourselves to it; and when their designs
became too evident, we refrained from going there. It was only a short
distance from our quarters.

During our stay here, also, the Marquis de Pompignan, a gentleman
residing between Grissolles and Castelnau, and where our Major-general
had taken up his quarters, gave to the officers of the brigade a
splendid fete. I know not exactly how to denominate it, for it was a
sort of dramatic medley, part of it being performed in the garden and
part in the house, where a private theatre had been fitted up; that in
the garden, it was said, was intended to represent some military
event,--I think it was the burning of Moscow, and in which the Marquis's
beautiful daughter bore a part.

This young lady was said to be greatly enamoured of an honourable
gentleman, aide-de-camp to the General, who was quartered in their
house, and between whom it was expected a match would have taken place.
She was extremely beautiful and engaging.

We sometimes went a-fishing while we remained here also, but were not
successful, there being none other than lake-fish, such as perch, &c.,
in the neighbourhood, which were scarcely worth taking.

Here, also, for want of better occupation, some of our young gentlemen
amused themselves by hunting and lashing the Spanish muleteers as they
were returning, after having delivered in their loads at the
commissary's stores. They always rode one mule, (sideways, like a
woman,) and led one or two more, and were most dexterous in handling the
long shank of the halter, with which they sometimes soundly belaboured
their pursuers; and had they not been set on by two or three at a time,
they would not have liked better fun than to fight one of our gentlemen
with his whip, for they saw that it was only for amusement, and
generally took it good-naturedly; but our young gentlemen, as they
generally do, carried the joke too far, and it was consequently put a
stop to. Of course none but the young and idle took any part in this
exercise.

We had, while we lay here, also several little balls and hops; and here,
for the first time, several of our young men began to dance quadrilles;
in short, there was no want of amusement among this gay and lively
people, who are ever intent upon pleasure themselves, and who of course
found our wild and thoughtless young fellows ever as ready to second
their endeavours to get up something new and entertaining. Certainly
their morality is not the highest in the world, but their vices are most
of them divested of that coarse and disgusting appearance which similar
vices carry on their front in England; and thus, while they are
generally more pleasing, they are the more seducing, and consequently
the more dangerous. However, as no person is compelled to enter into
these scenes of dissipation and voluptuousness which they rejoice in, I
found it, upon the whole, a very comfortable country to live in. The
people were kind and civil, and were always good-natured and polite,
and, as we now had plenty of the good things of this world at our
command, I spent two months here very contentedly. It is true we had
none of those excellent privileges with which my native country abounds,
and which I have since learnt highly to prize,--I mean the privileges of
the gospel,--the food for the nobler and never-dying part; but I was
then ignorant of their value, for although I had been convinced and
convicted, I had not been converted. I was still in darkness respecting
the way, the truth, and the life, and yet my foolish and carnal mind
whispered peace; hence my contentedness in this situation. No! it was
not till some years that I discovered that there is but one way to real
happiness, but one true foundation on which to build our hope,--even
that which is laid in Zion.

But the time had arrived for us to move down towards Bordeaux,
preparatory to our quitting France. Accordingly, on the 3d June, we
forded the Garonne, and stopped all night in Grenade, a place I formerly
mentioned. We next day reached Cadours, a village near Cologne, where
our 2d battalion was that evening quartered. In the afternoon of that
day, a storm collected in the north, which I think had the most
frightful appearance I ever witnessed. It was actually as black as night
in the direction in which we saw it. It did not reach us, but it alarmed
the inhabitants of our village so much, that they set on ringing the
church bells with the utmost fury imaginable. We could not account for
this strange proceeding till we enquired of them why it was done. They
told us the devil was in the storm, and the bells being holy, he durst
not, when he heard them, proceed any farther in that direction. Indeed
they had ample reason to be in dread of its reaching their village; for
the next day, as we passed along the country where it had raged most
furiously, the whole face of the country was desolated. It had been a
hail-storm such as I never before witnessed. The hailstones were still
lying, some of them larger than a bullet; the vines had been all
destroyed; the crops of corn completely swept from the face of the
earth. Trees knocked down, birds killed; in short, nothing could equal
the appearance of misery and woe which this awful hail-storm had
inflicted upon the unfortunate inhabitants, many of whom were going
about wringing their hands in all the bitterness of heart, which a
consciousness of being deprived of every hope of subsistence for the
year to come would naturally inspire. Indeed most of them were literally
stripped of their all.

On the 6th we marched into Lectoure, a fine town on the river, and
famous for having given birth to Marshal Lannes, one of Bonaparte's best
generals. It stands on a high ground near the river, and overlooks one
of the richest and most beautiful plains I think I ever saw. Here I
experienced another misfortune in my steed. My little Portuguese horse
(which was now in high condition, and being an entire horse was apt to
fight) quarrelled with a large horse belonging to one of our officers,
while I was serving out the billets; and although we were both mounted
at the time, the quarrelsome animals reared up against each other, and
fought most desperately; but his, being the strongest, pulled mine and
myself down to the ground. I luckily fell clear of him, and was not
hurt; but he by some accident got a kick in his hind leg or foot, which
completely lamed him, and I could not ride him any longer.

We passed through Condom, another fine town, and Nerac, also a good
town, and nearly full of Protestants. We next day halted at Castel
Jaloux, where I was quartered on a house of religeuse. Here my poor
little horse was so very ill that I could not drag him any farther. I
was consequently obliged to leave him with those good dames, to whom I
made him a present, and parted from him in the morning with sincere
regret. They promised to take care of him, which I hope they did. We
next reached the town of Bazas. Here there was to be another parting
scene exhibited. The Portuguese were ordered to leave us here, and
proceed towards their own country. The Spanish and Portuguese women who
had followed the men were either to be sent home from hence, or their
protectors were to consent to marry them. Some adopted the latter
alternative, having had children by them, and some others who had not,
and the remainder, of course, were compelled to separate. Our division
drew up in the morning they marched, and honoured the brave Portuguese
(for indeed they had always behaved well in the field) with three
cheers, as they turned their faces towards Portugal. Many were the heavy
hearts in both armies on this occasion; for it is not easy to conceive
how the circumstance of passing through scenes of hardship, trial, and
danger together, endeared the soldiers of the two armies to each other.
It was perhaps never before felt so fully how much each was attached to
the other; but the departure of the poor women caused many heavy hearts,
both among themselves, poor creatures, who had a long and dreary journey
before them, and among those with whom they had lived, and who had
shared in all their good and bad fortune; but among these, several on
both sides were not oppressed with too fine feelings. A friend of mine,
who was an officer in the Portuguese service, told me afterwards that
the women marched down to Spain and Portugal at the same time his
regiment did; that they formed a column of 800 or 900 strong; that they
were regularly told off into companies; and that the commanding-officer,
a major, and all the captains, were married men, who had their families
with them--all excellent arrangements; but that they were the most
unmanageable set of animals that ever marched across a country. The
officers had to draw rations for them all the way; but many of them, he
says, left the column and went wherever they pleased. Few reached
Portugal in the order in which they started.

We reached Langon on the 12th, and Barsac on the 13th June. This latter
place is famed for a fine white-wine, something resembling sauterne. The
adjutant (who had now been my chum for some time) and I were here
quartered in a fine old baronial castle, the inmates of which showed us
great attention. A ball was given in the evening to the officers of the
brigade.

On the 14th we halted at Castres, and on the 15th entered Bordeaux. This
was the finest town we had seen since we entered the Peninsula, except
Lisbon and Madrid. This town had been occupied by the British for some
time, a division of the army having been sent by Lord Wellington to take
charge of it in the name of Louis XVIII.

We were not, however, destined to be quartered in this southern capital
of France, but marched right through it, on the road towards the
village of Blancfort. On the road the division was formed, and very
minutely inspected by our gallant Chief, who was dressed in all his
finery, his orders, and medals, and ribbons, &c., which he wore for the
first time that ever I had seen. He looked most splendid indeed, and
right proud were we to see him in them. After inspection we moved on to
the camp at Blancfort, where we found a great part of the army
assembled, waiting for the arrival of shipping to carry them off. Some
had sailed a considerable time before our arrival. Besides our tents,
the adjutant and I had got a cottage close by, in which our servants and
our baggage were put. We had not been here above two or three days, I
think, till his two servants, that is, his servant and groom, took it
into their heads to desert. This was not the first instance of desertion
that had taken place lately; for as we drew near the time of departure
great numbers ran off into the interior, mostly bad characters. However,
on this occasion, these worthies were determined to have something to
carry them on the road, and, without hesitation, broke open their
master's panniers, or boxes, and took away all the money he had, which
did not indeed amount to any great sum, for it was only 40 dollars,
(about L.10 British,) but it being all he was worth it was a great loss
to him.

I have reason to be thankful to Providence for my escape on this
occasion. My paymaster's chest was standing close to the adjutant's
panniers when they broke them open, and they did not touch it, although
it contained about L.400 worth of gold. Had they taken that I might have
gone after them. I of course expressed my thankfulness for this lucky
escape, and told several people of it. I fancy some person (my groom, I
suspect) overheard me telling what a lucky escape I had been favoured
with, and determined in his own mind that I should not always come off
so well. The sequel will show: A few days after this I had occasion to
go into Bordeaux to draw some money from the Commissary-general. The
amount was 600 dollars, or about L.150. As I could not conveniently
carry them out to the camp, I requested Major Balvaird, who had a
quarter in town, to allow me to put them in his portmanteau till I had
an opportunity of getting them sent out. His servant had overheard this
conversation, and made up his mind at once to desert and take this money
with him; but providentially again I escaped. I found the means, before
night, of carrying it out to the camp, and the Major gave it me unknown
to the servant. That night he broke open the portmanteau, and, taking
every thing worth carrying away, (among which was a gold watch of mine,)
deserted, and got clear off. This money, also, had it been taken, would
have sorely crippled me, although I might perhaps have overcome the
loss.

We marched in a few days after, passing through the district of Medoc,
famous for Bordeaux or claret wine, and halted for the night at
Castelnau de Medoc. The next day we passed through Chateau Margaux,
where the best and most expensive of the claret grows, and again
encamped at Pauillac, from whence we were to go on board.

Now was the time for the person who had overheard me speaking about my
escape with the L.400, to make his grab and start off, or he would be
too late. Accordingly, after dark, he or they lifted up a part of the
tent where the box was standing, and, pulling it out, set off with it
bodily. But, again directed by Providence, I had taken the money out of
the box, and given it into the hands of a gentleman, to take care of for
me; and there remained in the box my papers and books, public and
private, about L.19 in money, an old silver watch, and, among other
things, the half doubloon which poor Croudace had given me to take care
of for him on the evening previous to his death at Badajos, and which I
was preserving as a memorial for his afflicted friends.

As soon as the box was missed I instantly raised the hue and cry, and,
reporting the circumstance to my commanding-officer, he ordered the
rolls to be called, to see if any man had deserted; but no, they were
all present. I then offered a reward of forty dollars to any one who
would bring me the box and papers, and did not regard the money.
Instantly the whole camp was in a move to find the box, and search was
made in all directions. I of course was not idle myself on the occasion;
and having a man or two with me, I actually discovered where the box had
been opened, for I found the inkstand, that had been in it, lying near a
heap of wood close to the bank of the river, into which, after
plundering it, no doubt they had thrown it. I now went down to the town
and waited on the mayor, offering the same reward to any of his people
that would try to find it in the river; but, unfortunately, just as
there was the best chance of recovering it, the order came for us
instantly to go on board.--Thus was I deprived of every document I
possessed, both Paymaster's, Quartermaster's, and private. I had
fortunately got my Paymaster's accounts made out up to the very latest
period, and transmitted to the War-Office, or I know not what I should
have done; but my duplicates were gone, and when afterwards objections
were made to some of the items in the charges, (as is always the case,)
I, being unable to answer them, was obliged to submit to the loss of
them. I had also several private accounts unclosed, on which I lost
considerably, so that altogether I calculate this loss fully amounted to
L.100, besides the vexation of not having my papers to refer to when
wanted.

I had been obliged to part with all my remaining animals for next to
nothing, for when the French people found we were obliged to leave them,
they offered us the most shameful trifles possible, but which we were
compelled to take or give the animals away. One I did actually make a
present of, besides my little Portuguese horse before-mentioned. I made
a close calculation, and found that my losses in horses and mules, from
the beginning of 1812 to June 1814, did not amount to less than L.150,
besides sums that I lost by officers who died. By one I lost L.84, and
another L.74 odd, so that, as I said before, had I not fortunately been
appointed Acting Paymaster, I should have been so much involved, that at
this time I durst not have returned to my native country. I do not
complain, for most of my losses were sent by Providence, who saw best
what was fitting and good for me; but never, till the Peninsular
campaigns, were officers obliged generally to provide and keep up their
own baggage-animals, and from the loss of which I had suffered so
severely; and I cannot but think that rule, always acted upon till these
campaigns, ought to be continued, and that subalterns at least ought to
have their baggage always carried at the public expense.




CHAPTER XVI.

     Author's Battalion embark for England--Land at Plymouth--Expect
     to be again ordered on Foreign Service--Order received--Embark,
     with other troops, for America--Land at Pine Island.


We embarked on the 8th July on board his Majesty's ship Dublin, of 74
guns, commanded by Captain Elphinstone, which took the five companies of
my battalion, with two companies of the 43d. We sailed the next day, I
think, and had generally fine weather during our voyage, which lasted
till the 18th, when we arrived at Plymouth. She was but a dull sailer,
or we ought not to have occupied so many days in so short a passage.
During our voyage, as remarkable an instance of heroic fortitude and
bodily strength was exhibited by a sailor of this ship as I ever
remember to have witnessed. He was doing something on the fore-yard, and
by some accident he was precipitated into the water, but in his fall his
shoulder came in contact with the flue of one of the anchors, by which
it was deeply and severely cut. The ship was going at about five knots
an hour, and it took near half an hour before she could be brought
round and a boat sent to his assistance; and notwithstanding the severe
cut he had received, from which the blood was fast streaming, he not
only contrived to keep himself from sinking by buffeting with a heavy
sea, but actually stripped off his jacket in the water, as it seems it
had been an encumbrance to him. When the boat reached him, the poor
fellow was nigh exhausted, and a few minutes more would have deprived
the ship and the service of an excellent sailor, but having been got
into the boat, he was brought on board more dead than alive, where every
attention being paid to him, he soon afterwards recovered.

We landed at Plymouth on the 18th, and occupied one of the barracks. We
did not exactly know what was to become of us. Kent being our regimental
station, we expected to be ordered to march and join the left wing in
that county, but were still kept at Plymouth, where we met with great
kindness and attention from the inhabitants in general, who are upon the
whole, I think, an excellent and a moral people. We also fared
sumptuously here, every description of food being both cheap and good.
Fish in particular is most abundant and excellent. In short, we were
here as comfortably and as well quartered as we could desire, and every
thing tended to make us perfectly satisfied with our lot. We relaxed by
attending the theatre occasionally, which is one of the best provincial
ones in the kingdom, and at this time could boast some very good actors.
There were a variety of other amusements, such as fishing, &c., which of
course we indulged in occasionally. From hence I was called up to London
to meet our Colonel, the Hon. Sir W. Stewart, to arrange our battalion
concerns, &c. for the few latter years of hurry and confusion, and which
was at last got done to the satisfaction of all concerned. Here also we
began to replenish our wardrobes, which, it will easily be imagined,
were not the most magnificent in the world on our first arrival.

But we were not long permitted the enjoyment of English society or
English comforts, for we had scarcely been a month at Plymouth till we
received an order to prepare again for foreign service, and the nature
of that service being kept a profound secret, we scarcely knew what
necessary articles of equipment to prepare. The general opinion,
however, was, that our destination was some part of America,
consequently we endeavoured to meet all contingencies by preparing both
for a warm and cold climate. All hands of course were vigorously set to
work, in order to be ready when the summons arrived, which we knew might
be very soon expected. An alteration was made in the arrangement of our
battalion. The staff was ordered to proceed to join the other wing at
Thorncliffe, which of course included myself, but Major Mitchell, who
was now appointed to the command of these five companies, was anxious to
take me out with him in the capacity of acting paymaster, and to his
friendly and earnest endeavours, added to the kindness of Captain James
Travers, who had at first intended to apply for that situation himself,
but renounced it on my account, I am indebted for again having an
addition of 10s. per diem made to my regimental pay during the
continuance of service on this expedition.

At length the order arrived for our embarkation, and on the 18th
September, just two months from the day of our arrival in England, our
five companies were sent on board his Majesty's ships Fox and Dover,
both frigates of the smaller class, and which had been prepared for the
reception of troops, by having a part of their guns taken out, and
being, as it is termed, armed "en flute." The commanding-officer, with
the staff and three companies, were put on board the Fox. We laid in an
immense sea stock of provisions, &c. not knowing how long we might be on
the water, but unfortunately for us we had scarcely put foot on board,
when the order was given to weigh and proceed to sea forthwith, so that
no time was given for the stowing away of all the stock, which had cost
us about L.24 per person; the consequence was, a great part of it was
lost or destroyed, from its being knocked about the deck in the midst of
the confusion and bustle consequent on the crew and the soldiers
(strangers to each other) being set to work to weigh anchor and make
sail in such a hurry. Little assistance was afforded us from the ship on
this occasion. We thus lost nearly the half of what we had been at so
much pains to provide; but such things being common occurrences in a
life like ours, it was therefore vain to fret.

The force that embarked at the same time with us, consisted of the 93d
Highlanders, a company of artillery, some rocketeers, a squadron of the
14th light dragoons, without horses, and our five companies, the whole
under the command of General Keane. The good people of Plymouth, as is
customary, cheered us as we left their shore, wishing us the most ample
success and good fortune, and which we, who had for so long a time been
in the habit of conquering, did not for a moment admit a doubt of being
fully realized.

We sailed, as I said, on the 18th September, and stood down the channel
with a pretty fair breeze, till we reached what are commonly called its
"chops," where we encountered adverse winds, and blowing a succession of
gales (equinoctial, I imagine) which detained us beating off and on for
seven days. This was as uncomfortable a beginning of our service as
could well be imagined. High winds, with rain, and contrary to the way
we wished them, were certainly rather trying to the patience of us
landsmen, and there was something in our situation on board this ship
which did not at all tend to alleviate our discomfort. In fact, we
wished our fortune had placed us on board a transport rather than where
we now found ourselves. All the discipline and strictness of a regular
man-of-war was enforced, without any of the countervailing comforts and
conveniences usually found on board such ships; and to such a length was
this carried, that because our officers sometimes stood on the
quarter-deck, holding on, in the rolling of the ship, by the hand-ropes
which surround the companion, not only these, but the ropes which were
stretched to prevent people falling out at the gangway, were ordered to
be removed, that nothing should remain by which lubbers like us might
hold on in the heavy rolls to which the vessel was subject in gales like
those I have been describing. We were no less than twenty-four people in
the cabin, twelve of our officers and twelve gentlemen of the
commissariat department, so that we were sufficiently crowded, besides
being in several other respects ill provided. But all this would have
been borne with cheerfulness and good-will, had we not experienced such
a total want of kindness and urbanity from a quarter where we least
expected it, and from which that unkindness could be made most
effectual.

We lost the fleet during the continuance of these gales, but sealed
orders having apprized our commander where to rendezvous, we made sail
for the Island of Madeira, which we reached on the 9th October, and
where we found the fleet. Some of the wags of our other two companies on
board the Dover, pretending to think we must have been cast away and
lost, had erased all our names from the army list as defunct. This
rather annoyed some of our folks, but it might have been easily seen it
was only a little waggery in which they had been indulging themselves.

A day or two before we reached Madeira, we fell in with a strange sail,
to which we gave chase, and brought her to; she proved to be an English
merchant brig. It was said our commander wished to have a little
independent cruise, which caused him to part from the fleet, and that
there was a famed American privateer called the Wasp that had made a
great number of captures, and which he was anxious to fall in with that
he might take her. Had such a thing occurred as the Wasp appearing in
sight, and we had given her chase, I could have compared it to nothing
but to a vulgar simile which I have sometimes heard used, that of a cow
endeavouring to catch a hare, for indeed she was, I believe, one of the
fastest sailers that had ever been known, while we, on the contrary,
were in comparison just like the cow to the hare. This also must have
been a piece of waggery on the part of those who first set such a report
afloat, for no man in his senses would have ever thought of chasing
privateers with the Fox frigate at the time of which I am now writing. I
regret I did not go on shore on this beautiful island, the town and
scenery of which were most inviting, but as our stay was only to be so
very short, it was scarcely worth while.

We sailed again on the 11th, after having first got a cask of excellent
Madeira wine from the house of Messrs Gordon and Co. This was the best,
I think, I ever drank. We stood almost due south, passing pretty close
to Teneriffe and the other Canary Isles, until we fell in with the
trade-winds, when we kept more away towards the south-west. Our voyage
now became delightful, for a gentle and refreshing, but constant and
steady breeze, carried us on at the rate of about five or six knots an
hour, without having occasion hardly to alter a sail or rope. We passed
to the tropic of Capricorn on the 15th October, when our sailors
prepared to indulge in the same innocent but amusing ceremonies that are
adopted on crossing the equator. Neptune, with his Amphitrite, got
dressed in full costume, and every other appendage being ready, it only
now remained that the commander's sanction should be obtained to their
commencing the imposing ceremony; but no! his godship was dismissed in
no very courteous manner, and told to go and attend to his duty. Thus
the fiat of a greater than Neptune, even in his own element, reduced him
from the godlike rank he held to that of a mere forecastle sailor; and
thus were all our expectations frustrated. In all the other ships of the
fleet the amusement was carried on with the greatest good humour, as we
could plainly perceive with our glasses.

On the 18th, we passed pretty near the Isle of St Antonio, the
westernmost of the Cape Verde Isles, and then bearing off still rather
more to the west, we kept our course generally at about 12 or 13 north
latitude, and in this manner crossed the Atlantic.

From the time that we had entered between the tropics, we had seen
numerous shoals of flying fish, some of which, when closely pursued, (by
the dolphin generally,) actually fell on board our ship. A very accurate
drawing of one of these was made by one of our lieutenants, a friend of
mine, who, I believe, has it to this day. They were generally about the
size of a herring, and much resembling that fish in shape and colour,
with two fins projecting from behind their gills, nearly as long as
their body. These are their wings, with which they can fly generally for
100, or 150, or sometimes 200 yards, when they fall again into the
water. We also caught a dolphin about this time, our carpenter having
harpooned it from the bow of the ship; but I was considerably
disappointed in finding it did not exceed from twenty-four to thirty
inches in length; and the hues of it, though beautiful when dying, by no
means answered my expectations.

On the ---- November, we made the island of Barbadoes, and anchored in
Carlisle Bay, off Bridgetown, the capital of the island. It is not easy
to describe the effect which is produced on an European the first time
he beholds the beauties of a tropical country, and which, I think, he
does in the greatest perfection while they are yet distant from him.
Robertson's description of Columbus's first view of a West India island
is, I think, as correct and as beautiful as any thing can possibly be;
and his feelings for the moment (heightened indeed by the circumstance
of his having at length attained to his long-looked-for Western India)
will describe pretty nearly what every one must feel, who has not before
beheld the productions of a tropical climate. But oh! how is the scene
changed when you get on shore! Nature indeed is still beautiful and rich
beyond the conception of a northern native; but man--how fallen! Here (I
think I shall not far err if I say) you behold man in his lowest state:
the savages of the woods are, in my opinion, much higher in the scale of
being than those whom our cursed cupidity has introduced to all our
vices, without one alleviating virtue to counterbalance the evil. But
how could the poor Africans learn any thing that is good from those who
do not practise good themselves?

One of our people while here said, "he thought the men were all rogues,
and the women all unfaithful." Of the slave population the latter is
certainly a correct description, almost universally, in Bridgetown; for,
with shame be it spoken, their masters and mistresses calculate upon
their worth as if they were brood-mares, by the number and the
description of wretched beings which they can bring into this world of
misery. What indeed could you expect from those who can thus act, and
those who sanction such conduct, but the like treatment that Mr
Shrewsbury met with, if you endeavour to show them to themselves or to
others in a true light? While the strong man armed keepeth his castle,
his goods are in peace; but let another endeavour to bind this strong
man, and take his goods from him, and oh, what a resistance may not be
expected! Let the West Indians have slaves whom they may treat as cattle
for their own gain and profit, even if it be at the expense of the souls
of the poor wretches whom they thus destroy; but endeavour to show these
degraded human beings that they are capable of being raised to a level
with their unfeeling and avaricious masters, and you may shortly expect
the fate of a Smith or a Shrewsbury, so regardless are these dealers in
human flesh of their duty as men who must soon render an account of all
their actions.

It may be said, that I saw little, while here, but the very worst of
society, and this may in a great measure be true; but it is evident that
such things were done and sanctioned at Bridgetown when I was there, in
1814, as led me to pray that my lot might never be cast among such
people.

I now gladly turn from this scene of vice and misery, and pursue my
narrative.

In the bay at this place a hulk was stationed for the reception of
prisoners of war. Our boats usually passed pretty near it on going on
shore for water. A number of Americans were on board as prisoners. On
one occasion, or more, I believe, they called out to our fellows as they
passed under her stern, "So you have come out from England to attack our
country, have you? I hope you have brought your coffins with you, for
you will need them before you return." And, in truth, many of those
fine fellows to whom this insolently coarse but patriotic speech was
addressed, did indeed require coffins before the business we were going
upon was finished.

We left Barbadoes on the ----, and, passing down through the midst of
the islands, we left St Lucia on our left and Martinico on our right
hand. We also passed close to Dominico and Guadaloupe, with several
smaller islands which I do not recollect, and, keeping to the southward,
passed St Christopher's, Santa Cruz, Porto Rico, and St Domingo, having
a fine view of the whole as we moved delightfully along. This latter
large island took us more than two days in passing; but on the 21st we
came in sight of Jamaica, the chief of our West India possessions. We
stood off and on near to Port-Royal till the 23d, when we made sail to
the westward, and on the 25th came to anchor in Negril Bay, at the
extreme west end of the island of Jamaica. Here we found several sail
both of men-of-war and transports, having on board the troops which had
been engaged in the operations against Washington and Baltimore, &c.,
and consisting of the 4th, 21st, 44th, and 85th regiments, with some
artillery. They were not strong indeed, having been considerably reduced
by their late arduous services; but their numbers, added to ours, we
thought quite sufficient to enable us to make a descent upon the
American coast, near New Orleans, which it was now whispered was our
destination: indeed this had been conjectured from the time we left
England, but nothing certain was known, and even now it was not
officially made public. A day or two after our arrival here, two of the
West India regiments also joined us, the 1st and 5th, at least a part of
both; so that we now mustered a respectable force. Admiral Sir Alexander
Cochran commanded the naval part of the expedition, he being here on
our arrival on board the Tonnant 84; several smaller vessels also, with
stores, &c. &c. joined us from Port-Royal. When the whole were collected
together, we felt proud of our fine force, which we vainly imagined
nothing we should have to encounter could withstand for a moment: but
the battle is not always to the strong; and we were shortly after
painfully reminded of this truth. But I must not anticipate,--evil
always comes early enough.

During our stay here, I went on shore for a few hours, and visited some
of the farms or plantations. Indeed, while we remained, the place where
we landed was generally like a fair; for the inhabitants had assembled
in great numbers, bringing with them live stock and poultry and
vegetables, &c. for sale, all of which were greedily bought up at prices
high enough, I warrant you. The vegetation at this place was most
luxuriant, even in this the middle of winter almost; but I apprehend
this was the finest season of the year, for it was not at all
intolerably hot, and every thing, had the appearance which our country
assumes in the height of summer. An accident occurred whilst we
continued here, which had nigh proved serious. The Alceste frigate, one
day, in shifting her berth, run with her head right on board the Dover,
where our other two companies were on board. She cut her up from the
stern into the cabins, not less I am sure at the top than ten feet. Two
of our people were in the cabin at the time playing at backgammon, and
were not a little astonished to see the prow of another large vessel
tearing its way right into the very place where they were sitting.

On the 29th, signal was made to weigh, when the whole got under way, and
started in fine style; our now gallant fleet covering the ocean for many
miles. We kept along on the south side of Cuba, and on the 3d December
made Cape St Antonio, the westernmost point of that large island. From
hence we now stood to the northward, crossing right athwart the Gulf of
Mexico. During our stay at Barbadoes, we had purchased a live sheep and
a pig, as we feared our stock might run out before we landed. The sheep
was productive of great amusement to our messmates, at the expense of
the poor caterer. In all hot climates, I believe, the wool of the sheep
becomes in course of time more like the hair of a goat than what it
really is. This was the case in the present instance, most of our people
declaring they would not eat of such an animal, which was, as they
conjectured, a sort of mule bred between a sheep and a goat; while the
poor caterer was like to have the sheep thrown on his hand. This
produced many a bickering, even after it was known that such was the
case in warm climates; for they kept up the fun as long as possible,
always trying to keep the unfortunate caterer in hot water about it. The
sheep was killed, and produced excellent mutton--not fat indeed, but
eatable. We were not so fortunate, however, with our pig; it appears it
must have been diseased--what, I believe, is usually termed measly. It
was dressed without this being known, and eaten; and the consequence
was, all the twenty-four of our mess, except myself and another were
literally poisoned. In the middle of the night, when it began to take
effect, the most distressing scene took place imaginable, and the
medical men were kept busily employed for a considerable time afterwards
preparing and administering emetics, which providentially had the
desired effect on all, for in a short time the whole recovered; but had
medical assistance not been promptly administered, the chances are some
of them would have suffered. Its effects were something like cholera
morbus, working both up and down in the most violent manner.

On the 10th December we made the American coast off Mobile, where we
fell in with a vessel, on board of which was Colonel Nichols of the
marines, with three or four Indian chiefs of the Creek nation, to which
people he had been for some time previously attached, they being then at
war with the Americans, and consequently our allies. They came on board
our ship, and were shown every thing curious; but their reason for
visiting us was, that they might see our rifles, for they considered
themselves good shots, and wished to examine our arms, with which they
did not express themselves over-satisfied, as they had been accustomed
to see no other description of rifles than those used by the Americans,
which are both much longer and heavier, but carry a much smaller ball.
Indeed they had never seen any military rifles, but only such as the
above, and which are constructed solely for the purpose of killing deer
and other game. The gallant colonel endeavoured to amuse us a little on
this occasion with the wonderful feats of his proteges. He told us, that
they being generally very short of balls, were always very careful how
they expended them in hunting; and that their rule was never to fire at
a deer, until it was in the act of passing between them and a tree,
that, should the ball go through its body, as it sometimes did, it might
lodge in the tree on the other side, and they would then go and pick it
out, and recast it. We thought he ought to have told that story to his
own corps the marines; for I believe he did not get many of us to give
implicit credit to so wonderful a tale. They were most grotesque-looking
figures; most of them were dressed in some old red coats, which they had
got hold of by some means, with cocked hats of the old fashion. These I
believe had been given them by some of our people, for they were English
manufacture. But they had tremendous large rings, &c. hung in their
ears, the laps of which were stretched nearly to their shoulders; some
of them also wore rings in their noses; and some of them were without
any sort of lower garments, having nothing but a sort of cloth tied
round their waist, which passed through between their legs and fastened
before. These people it was intended should bring their warriors to join
us near New Orleans; but, owing to some cause with which I am not
acquainted, none but these three or four chiefs ever came near us.

On the 11th we anchored near the Chandeleur Islands, at the entrance
into Lake Ponchartrain. But it was discovered that the Americans had
some gun-vessels, which, on account of their drawing only little water,
had been stationed in this lake for its protection, and on our
appearance had retired nearer to New Orleans. It was necessary that
these should be previously disposed of in some manner, before the
disembarkation of the troops could with safety be effected. None of our
ships could follow them on account of the shoalness of the lake. An
order was therefore issued for all the men-of-war to prepare their boats
for an attack on these vessels, the chief command of which was given to
Captain Lockyer of the Sophia gun-brig. On the morning of the ----, they
therefore assembled for this purpose, and pushed up the lake in search
of the gun-vessels, which were discovered moored near some islands
called by the natives, "Les Isles Malheureuse," or the "Unfortunate
Islands," and which form the entrance from Lake Ponchartrain into Lake
Borgne, or Blind Lake. No time was lost in attacking this formidable
flotilla, consisting of vessels carrying from five to six guns each, and
commanded by a lieutenant of the American navy, named by them Commodore
Jones. A most determined and gallant resistance was made by the
Americans; but superior numbers, with equal, if not superior courage and
seamanship, prevailed, and in a short space of time the whole were
captured. Both the commandants were severely wounded, with a great
number of officers and men killed and wounded. Nothing could exceed the
gallant intrepidity, I understand, with which our boats advanced to the
attack; for, from experience I am well convinced, the fire from those
gun-vessels must have been most destructive; for better shots, either
with artillery or small arms, do not exist than the Americans. Orders
were now issued for the army to prepare to land; but the distance, from
where we had been obliged from shoal water to stop to the town, being so
great, it was determined to form a sort of depot on a small island, near
the mouth of the Pearl River, called Pine Island; and farther to
facilitate the transport of the troops, small brigs, &c. were sent as
far up the lake as possible, into which the troops were put successively
from the larger vessels, and from which they generally took their
departure for the above island.

On the 15th our people left the Fox, and were moved up the lake into one
of the brigs before noticed, where we were packed in as tight as
herrings, there being near 400 men on board a little thing scarcely
calculated to contain the fourth of that number, and where there was not
literally room to lie down. But, on the 19th, we were relieved from this
rather close confinement; and being put on board of long boats, we
pushed off for the island, which lay at a considerable distance,
notwithstanding the measures that had been adopted to shorten our
voyage. The weather proved extremely rough and unpleasant, which
rendered our trip neither over-safe nor comfortable; and to mend the
matter, the seamen on board our boat were rather in the wind, and did
not manage her so well as was desirable; for, poor fellows, they had
been engaged in this fatiguing service for several days, (a considerable
number of the troops having been previously landed,) and were
consequently the more easily prevailed upon to indulge when grog came in
their way. Our middy too was quite worn out with fatigue, and slept
nearly all the time we were on board. Our boat was several times on the
point of being swamped, for the water came in quite plentifully on
occasions of her being laid down by sudden squalls. Another boat, which
accompanied us, had her mast carried away.

We landed on the island before mentioned in the evening, and of course
looked out for the best shelter we could find. But it was a complete
desert; nothing but reeds grew on it, except a few stunted and scrubby
bushes at the lower end of it. It came on a most severe frost during the
night, which I understand caused the death of several of the sailors,
who had indulged perhaps a little too freely, and had lain down without
any covering. Some of the poor blacks also, I understand, suffered in
consequence of the severe cold, a thing with which they were totally
unacquainted, and against which they were ill provided, having nothing
but their light and thin West India dress to keep it out. It was
laughable the next morning to see them examining so intently the ice
which had been formed on the pools near our bivouack. They could not
conjecture what it was; some of them asserting it was salt; while the
greater part were totally at a loss respecting it. I had by great good
luck got into a sort of hut belonging to some of the officers who had
previously landed; but I do not remember in all my campaigning to have
suffered more from cold than I did this night, and was extremely glad
when daylight appeared, that I might be able to move about.




CHAPTER XVII.

     Proceed to attack the Enemy, and capture one of their
     picquets--Advance in search of a Bivouack--Alarmed by shots in
     front--Fired on by an American schooner--Captain Hallen
     severely attacked--Manoeuvres on both sides--Ruse of the
     Enemy--Fighting continues--Enemy repulsed at all
     points--Courage of the British--A British Battery brought into
     play--Activity of the Enemy.


By the 21st, the whole army had been landed on this island, when they
were told off into brigades, and inspected by the General. During our
stay here, about five or six French Americans, (the natives of New
Orleans, or neighbourhood,) arrived as friends, and told us that there
were scarcely any troops in the district; so that we had nothing to do
but to land on the opposite side, and march right on to the town, and
that the inhabitants would welcome us most cordially, and that no
resistance might be expected. I did not, I confess, put much confidence
in their information, and believed at the time, that they came more as
spies than with any view of befriending, as they pretended, our cause.
More correct information was obtained from Spanish fishermen, who had
been following their occupation at the mouth of a creek on the New
Orleans side of the lake, and who had come across, I believe, at the
suggestion of Major Peddie, our assistant Quartermaster-general, who
had been despatched to find out a suitable landing-place for the army.
From one of them, I learned afterwards that there were troops in the
town, commanded by General Jackson, and that a battery of two guns had
been erected on the road, by which we must advance. What they told the
General, I do not know, but fancy he saw no reason to alter his plans,
from the information of either party. Every thing being ready by the
morning of the 22d, the advance guard, commanded by Colonel Thornton,
and consisting of the 85th and 95th regiments, with two light
three-pounders, some artillery and some rocketeers, accompanied by a few
artificers to repair bridges, &c. embarked on board the boats, that had
been assembled for the purpose--two companies of the 93d followed us;
these troops occupying the whole of the boats that could be mustered in
the fleet, consequently the remainder of the army had to remain where
they were till the return of the boats. The distance was not less, I
should think, than from thirty to forty miles. We pushed off about two
o'clock P.M., the wind being favourable for a considerable part of the
way, but it failing, the men were obliged to commence with the oars. We
were completely wedged in, so that there was no moving, let the call be
ever so urgent. I suffered much from a severe pain in my side, from
being obliged to remain so long in the same position; but we endeavoured
to divert the tedium in the best manner we could by amusing stories, &c.
My luck placed me on board the Bang-Up, a fine cutter belonging to the
admiral, and commanded by a countryman of mine, a Lieutenant Foster of
that ship. We did not reach the mouth of the creek, or bayou, as it is
called by the natives, till a long time after dark. As we approached it,
some light boats were sent forward with Captain Travers of ours and his
company, to endeavour to surprise a regiment of the enemy, which we
knew were stationed in some huts at the mouth of the creek, and which
huts belonged to the Spanish fishermen before mentioned. From the
information they gave, the best arrangements possible were made for
effecting this; for Travers, moving silently on, and landing his men at
the opposite ends of the hamlet, there remained no way of escape open
for the troops in the houses. As soon as all was ready, they rushed
forward and secured the whole picquet without a single shot being fired,
with the exception of two men, who preferred venturing into the marsh,
in rear of the huts, where it is not improbable they perished. The duty
was conducted so quietly, and so expeditiously, that very few of the
other troops knew any thing of the matter; but this alone secured us a
landing without opposition, for had a firing been begun on either side,
it must have alarmed the American army, who, no doubt, would have used
their endeavours to oppose our landing.

We soon after began to enter the creek, but such was the darkness of the
night, and the shoalness of the water, and such the uncertainty of the
way by which we had to proceed, that very little progress was made
during the remainder of the night; daylight, however, enabled us to move
forward at a brisker pace, but from the obstacles that had presented
themselves in the dark, the squadron of boats was sadly dispersed; and
when we reached the head of the creek, only two or three of the light
boats, with the staff and naval officers, had arrived, and considerable
intervals of time elapsed between the arrival of the different boats
with troops; so that had the enemy been aware of our intention, and had
they had a force of a few hundred men hid in the high reeds which grow
in this marsh, they might, I am persuaded, have cut us off in detail,
for from the causes before mentioned, no two boats were sufficiently
near to assist each other.

We got on shore about an hour after daylight; and right glad was I to be
enabled to stretch my legs, which had been kept motionless for the last
sixteen hours. As soon as the whole advance-guard had landed, and a few
planks had been thrown over a deep rill which we had to cross, we moved
forward towards the high ground, Captain Travers' company leading; and,
in order to magnify the appearance of our force, should any concealed
American be looking on, we extended our files to double the usual
distance, and thus passed through a wood which skirted the swamp, and
which it was necessary to traverse before we could reach the open
country, which we did about six miles below New Orleans. As soon as our
advance cleared this wood, they observed a good-looking farm onstead,
towards which they moved in double quick time, and arrived just in time
to seize and make prisoner a Monsieur Villerey, a major of the militia,
just then setting off to join his people. We heard (but I will not vouch
for the truth of the report) that a considerable body of the enemy had
been assembled on the high-road, near to Monsieur Villerey's house, but
on learning that we had landed, and were moving rapidly forward, they
separated, one part retiring towards the town, while the other went down
the river. Our advance now moved on with celerity, and dashing on to the
different farm-houses in the neighbourhood, seized several groups of
arms at each of them, which it seems had either been abandoned by the
troops to whom they belonged, or had been collected there for some
military purpose. They captured at some of these farm-houses to the
amount of twelve or twenty stand; and in all not less than fifty.

Monsieur Villerey unfortunately contrived to make his escape, through
the too great leniency of one of our lieutenants. I think the most
probable opinion respecting the arms and the troops assembled near
Monsieur Villerey's is, that it was the militia of the district just at
that moment assembling, which will not only account for the arms being
found in such numbers, (under the verandas of the houses,) but also for
Monsieur Villerey himself being then on the point of setting out in his
warlike costume, and the number of men which were observed near his
house.

About twenty militiamen were also captured in and about these houses.
Except there, the whites had all abandoned their houses; but a
considerable number of black slaves remained at each, whether of their
own accord, or left to protect the property, and occasionally convey
information to their masters, I know not. As soon as our advance had
sufficiently reconnoitred the adjacent houses, &c. the whole of the
troops moved on past the house of Monsieur Villerey, and turning to the
right, followed the great road to New Orleans for about half a mile,
till a suitable piece of ground presenting itself in the neighbourhood
of some other farm-houses, the whole turned in to a green field a short
distance from the road, and forming into close columns of battalions,
commenced bivouacking for the night. The road ran partly on, and partly
alongside of the river dike. Immediately between the troops and the
river, this dike was perhaps about three feet high. On our right was a
farm-house, and a little to the right and front another--the latter a
pretty large one--all these, and indeed all the farm-houses in this
neighbourhood, are surrounded at one end by the huts of the slaves, and
generally on the other by barns and other out-buildings, and in the rear
a garden or orchard. The ground in all this country, which is perfectly
flat, apparently of alluvial formation, is divided into fields, &c. by
wooden paling of the common description, very few hedges being to be
seen.

The situation in which the troops were placed, was as follows, viz. The
artillery and rocketeers in one line; immediately behind them, my
battalion and the 85th, in close column; the 4th in rear of us, and the
93d two companies in rear of the 4th; the whole in close columns. The
men, as soon as dismissed, instantly set about cooking, for they had had
nothing from the morning before, and it was now considerably past
mid-day. Captain Travers' company, which had formed the advance-guard,
still remained in front as a picquet, and occupied a post on the great
road, about a mile in front of the division.

About three o'clock P.M., we were all alarmed by some shots at the
advanced picquet; and, on enquiry, found that an American staff-officer,
escorted by about thirty cavalry, had come galloping down, no doubt for
the purpose of reconnoitring us; when within distance, our people
instantly fired, one of which shots wounded the staff-officer, and
another killed a horse, but they contrived to get him off. This caused
the whole of the troops to fall in till the cause of alarm was
ascertained, after which they set about their cooking again with great
glee. Considerable discussion now began to take place amongst the
knowing ones, as to the merits and demerits of our situation, in point
of security; and of course various opinions were given on the occasion.
One officer of ours, a particular friend of mine, did not hesitate
roundly to assert, that we were in a most unprotected and dangerous
situation. I do not remember exactly the reasons he assigned; but
certainly, could he have foreseen what yet remained in the womb of time,
he would have had much stronger reasons for his opinion. Another company
of ours, (Captain Hallen's,) and one of the 85th, were ordered to
prepare at dusk to relieve the picquet in advance; and as I messed with
Captain Hallen's company, I accompanied it on this duty. I did not go
with the main body of the company, there being no house at that post,
but with one section, commanded by Lieutenant Forbes, and we occupied a
small house to the right, and a little to the rear of Captain Hallen's
party, which was stationed on the great road. The company of the 85th
occupied the large farm-house before-mentioned, a little to the right
and front of the column. I had purchased an excellent turkey on our
arrival at Monsieur Villerey's house, which we had dressed at this
little house, and made a most hearty meal indeed, after which we took
each a tot or horn of grog to comfort us.

We had not long finished our comfortable meal, when we were astounded by
the report of heavy ordnance, apparently close to the bivouack of the
column, and which reports followed each other in quick succession. A
cheer was also given, but by whom, or what the occasion of the firing
was, we were totally at a loss to conjecture. I at first imagined it was
some of our men-of-war that had been able to pass the forts down the
river, and that they were firing a salute and cheering in consequence;
and yet this seemed a strange conjecture; but we did not long remain in
suspense, for we were soon after informed of the real state of the case,
that it was a large American schooner, with at least fourteen guns, and
which she had been enabled to bring to bear upon our unfortunate
bivouack with the most deadly precision, great numbers having fallen at
her first broadside. The troops of course dispersed in some measure,
leaving their fires, which had too well served as a direction for the
fire of this terrible schooner. But the time was not far distant when we
should have other enemies to encounter; for by the time the schooner had
fired a dozen broadsides, a noise was heard in our front; and just at
this moment an American was brought in by a man from Captain Hallen's
post, who had foolishly come right into the centre of his picquet, and
asking if they could tell him which way the regulars had gone. This
showed that he was a young soldier, who did not know our troops from his
own; but it also showed that the regulars which he was seeking could not
be far distant; consequently, every thing was got ready to give them the
best reception possible; but as the people we had heard in front of the
post where I then was appeared to be rather to our right, I feared lest
they might get unawares upon the company of the 85th, which was
stationed in the farm behind us. I consequently set off with all
dispatch to give them timely warning, but when I arrived there, I could
not find the officers, nor could I see where the picquet was posted; I
therefore thought they must be on the alert at the bottom of the garden,
which lay in the direction in which we heard the noise; and meeting here
an officer and several of our men, who had moved in this direction, from
the fire of the schooner, I told him I was certain that Hallen would be
shortly most vigorously attacked, from the information I had learnt
respecting the regulars, and advised him to collect all the men he
could, and proceed forthwith to reinforce him at the advance. This he
instantly did, and it was well, for by this time the firing had
commenced in volleys at that post. I then returned to the picquet-house,
where I had previously dined, and found the officer was going round his
sentries; but as the firing was going briskly on at Hallen's post, I
expected every moment to be attacked here, and began, in the absence of
the officer, to post the men as advantageously as the nature of the
ground would admit.

The house stood on a little path, or bye-road, running across the
country, from the river towards the wood, and which, before he could get
into, the enemy would have to clamber over a railing which lay on the
side from which they were advancing. On the hither side of the road was
a ditch, with a hedge, almost the only one to be met with, and a little
copse of small trees. Into this copse I put the men, extending them
along the inside of the hedge, which would not only keep them from the
view of the enemy, but be some little protection from their fire, and
would leave them the more at liberty to retreat when overpowered by
numbers, as it was certain they must shortly be. But all my labour was
in vain, for when Forbes came from visiting his sentries, he did not
approve of my disposition, but took them all out, and formed them on the
open road, without any cover, and with a hedge and ditch in their rear,
both of which they would be compelled to pass the moment the enemy
pressed upon him. I felt annoyed, not only at his want of courtesy to
me, but that he would thus expose his men to almost certain destruction,
without being able to effect any thing against the enemy, or at all
check his advance. I accordingly left him in a huff, and went again to
try to find the picquet of the 85th in the house behind us. I was
determined to make a more close and thorough search than I had done
before, and for this purpose went over the gates, &c. into the yard
behind, when lo, I found myself within a yard or two of a strong body of
the enemy, which had got into the garden at the lower end, and were just
advancing to the house. I crouched down, and hid in the best manner I
could, and luckily was enabled to creep off without their discovering
who I was. Just as I reached the outer gate, I found a sergeant of ours
there, to whom I said, we must set off with all possible speed; and
accordingly we both took to our heels, and ran like heroes; the noise
of which brought the fire of twenty or thirty rifles after us, but
luckily without effect.

I now made the best of my way towards where I judged the main body of
our people were, on the great road, in order to inform Colonel Thornton
of what I had seen, of this column of the enemy having got possession of
the house and garden I had just left, and by doing which they had nearly
separated the advance picquet from the main body. He said he had sent
two companies of ours, and two of the 85th, to the house immediately in
the rear of this I speak of, and in a short time afterwards they and the
Americans came into close contact, for they immediately commenced
firing; and where as strange a description of fighting took place as is
perhaps on record.

The enemy soon discovered from some men, whom they had unfortunately
taken, what the regiments were that were opposed to them--and with all
that cunning which the Yankees are famed for, instantly turned it to the
best account--for in several places they advanced in bodies, crying out
at the same time, "Come on, my brave 85th!" or "My brave 95th!" and thus
induced several of our small detached parties to go over the rails to
them, supposing they were some of our own people, when of course they
were instantly made prisoners. This _ruse_ did not always succeed,
however, for some of the parties turning restive on their hands, refused
to surrender, and thus a fight hand to hand took place, and in which
they generally had the worst of it.

On one occasion of this kind our people made a body of them prisoners.
The men and officers being requested to lay down their arms, the
officer, after surrendering, when he saw there were not many of our
people, drew a sort of dirk or knife, and made a stab at the officer of
ours who had taken him. We instantly cried out to the men near him, one
of whom took up his rifle and shot the villain through the body. They
had before this time brought two of their regular battalions close in
front of our advance, which did not consist of more than 100 men, and
were pouring in dreadful volleys into that small but gallant detachment;
but even in this they showed themselves young soldiers, for they formed
up the two battalions in line at about forty or fifty yards in distance
from the post, and gave the words "ready--present--fire," with all the
precision of a field-day; but being so near, of course every word was
heard by our people, who, at the critical moment, always took care to
cleave as close to the ground as possible, by which they escaped most of
their shot. They then up and at them, and, pouring in a desultory but
most destructive fire, brought great numbers of them to the ground.
Their force, however, was too great to be opposed successfully by such a
handful of men, and these brave fellows were at length compelled to
yield a little ground; but it was not more than just to enable them to
cover themselves, and form again in proper order; and from this time all
the efforts of these two battalions were unable to remove them. Indeed,
not long after, our people became the assailants, and, advancing again,
retook their original position. Poor Hallen was severely wounded on this
occasion, and lost about forty of his men.

Two or three naval captains came also to see the fight at Hallen's post,
one of whom soon fell severely wounded. The other, the gallant captain
of the Dover frigate, with whom part of our people went out, and with
whom we all came home, behaved most nobly. Whenever the enemy had fired
their volley, he cried, "Now, my lads, up and give them another
broadside!" and thus contributed, by his animating conduct, to inspire
all around him with confidence.

Poor Forbes just met the fate that I expected. He stood upon the road,
and opened his fire upon the enemy as they approached; but they being
perhaps more than twenty times his number, he was instantly compelled to
give way, after being himself wounded, having his sergeant killed, and
losing nearly the half of his men. The schooner all this time kept up a
most galling and incessant fire. Some attempts were made with our light
three-pounders, and with rockets, and even with small-arms, to compel
her to sheer off, but they were all in vain. Her men, protected by her
stout bulwarks which surrounded them, defied all our efforts, and
continued to pour in both round and grape wherever they judged, from the
direction of the fire, our people were stationed. Luckily the darkness
of the night rendered her fire less destructive than it would otherwise
have been.

A considerable body of the enemy had penetrated to the house immediately
on the right of our original bivouack, where the firing was kept up
between them and the parties opposed to them with great spirit for a
long time; but the General, having detached the 4th regiment to form
line a little to the rear and right of that house, completely secured
that flank from being farther turned. Notwithstanding this, the
skirmishers of both armies extended to the wood, some of whom we found
lying the next morning almost touching each other. The firing now began
to slacken, the enemy having been repulsed at all points, and, towards
three o'clock in the morning, it had completely ceased, when they
retired, leaving us in possession of the warmly-contested field.

My battalion had been extremely unfortunate in this action; for almost
at the very outset, when the attack on Hallen's picquet commenced,
Major Mitchell, our commandant, had taken a party of about twenty or
thirty men, and advanced for the purpose of supporting that post.
Between the bivouack, however, and the point he intended to reach, he
unexpectedly fell in with a large body of Americans, (for it was so dark
he could not distinguish who they were,) when both himself, and all the
men he had with him, were made prisoners. The loss of our five companies
in this action was about 120 men; that of the 85th more, I believe; and
in all, I think, it amounted to about 300 men. The loss of the enemy
must have been considerably greater, if we are to judge from the number
of dead they left on the field, and, which is a good criterion, the
general average being about ten wounded for one killed.

Nothing could equal the bravery of the few troops we had in the field on
this occasion. Their numbers certainly did not amount to 1800 men; while
the enemy could not have had fewer than from 4000 to 5000. They had two
regular regiments, the 7th and 44th; they had a large corps of irregular
riflemen from Kentucky, and another stronger corps from Tennessee, with
all the militia of New Orleans and its neighbourhood, every man who is
able being compelled to bear arms in case of invasion. They had about
300 irregular horse, whether militia or not I cannot tell, but think it
likely they were in all at least 4000 men--with the great and effectual
assistance of the schooner, which did us more mischief than 1000 men
could have done, probably not so much by the loss she occasioned us, as,
by being able to fire on our flank, and even in our rear, she rendered
the enemy the most essential service, besides the fire of the ship on
our advanced picquet.

We were thus completely surrounded on three sides, and had not the
troops behaved with the most determined courage and intrepidity, we
must have been driven back, and eventually the greater part would have
been taken prisoners; for the path to the water was quite narrow, and
even should we reach the head of the creek where we landed, the boats
had probably all left it by this time to return for the other troops.
Indeed it was reported afterwards, that the arrangements of General
Jackson were such, that we were to have been attacked in the rear at the
same time as in front, and by the schooner; but the troops for that
purpose either not being in readiness, or being too distant to arrive in
time, were too late to take part in the action, but arrived about three
o'clock in the morning, when they met with a half-drunk artillery-driver
of ours near Mons. Villerey's house, as he was returning from the field,
and who, seeing a large body of men, which he took for some of our other
regiments that had landed, cried out to them, "Come on, my lads, for the
Yankees never got such a licking in their lives!" This, it is said, had
the effect of frightening them back, without proceeding farther.

I will not vouch for this being fact, but such was the report the next
morning; and indeed it is feasible, from the number of people
(apparently going with orders, &c.) which we saw galloping down on the
other side of the river in the afternoon; and it is certain that a
considerable body of militia must have resided down the river, setting
aside the report which I mentioned, of some troops having retired in
that direction in the morning, when we first advanced; and nothing would
have tended more to our complete overthrow than such an attack on our
rear, could it have been accomplished.

I might here mention, that Captain Hallen saw the schooner as she passed
his picquet, on her way down from New Orleans, on which he instantly
despatched a man with the information; but she having the current in
her favour, sailed much quicker than the man could run, consequently his
information came too late.

I omitted to mention also, that a large ship of 20 guns came down the
river at the same time with the schooner, but being less manageable than
that vessel, she had anchored abreast of Hallen's picquet; and that he
had to sustain her fire, as well as that of the troops in his front,
during the whole of the attack of the 23d. She remained at that spot
without moving.

I will here also notice another circumstance which took place at this
post. An American rifleman fell into the hands of some of Captain
Hallen's people, who, when he was brought in, were desired to take his
arms from him. These he seemed reluctant to part with, and said to the
officer, "Recollect I shall hold you responsible for that rifle, if you
take it from me!"--on which the officer took hold of it by the muzzle,
and flung it right into the river. I daresay the poor fellow thought
they were a strange sort of people he had got amongst; and I doubt not
he had set a great value upon his rifle.

Another officer and myself had a providential escape the next morning,
for we had scarcely left a little wooden hut, behind which we had taken
up our abode, and slept for a few hours after the fight, when bang comes
an eighteen-pound shot right through the house, just at the very spot
where we had a minute or two before been sitting. It seems the captain
of the schooner, which still lay abreast of us at about 800 yards
distance, and from which this shot had been fired, was determined we
should not occupy any of the houses in the vicinity, for, beginning with
our hut, which was nearest to him, he fired into every house within
reach of his guns, although he saw as plainly as we did that most of
them were filled with the wounded; nay, he carried his savage cruelty so
far, that he actually fired on a party of the 85th as they were removing
one of their wounded officers. It could not be pleaded that he did not
know what it was, for, being only half-a-mile distant, and much elevated
above our level, with a glass he could see as well as we could what they
were doing, for they were carrying the poor fellow on a bier, on their
shoulders. He continued this cruel work all the next day, the ship also
giving us an occasional shot. One shot which he fired went through the
front of a house in which some of our wounded men were lying, and,
striking low, it carried the knapsack out from under the head of a man
of ours named Rayour, which he had put for a pillow, without doing him
the smallest injury. I could not credit the story till I went and
actually saw the hole by which it entered, the knapsack and the shot
lying near the fire-place. After this I went to view the house where I
had fallen in with the column of the enemy the night before, and where
the 85th were now stationed; but the fire of the schooner still
continued, one shot from which we saw was directed towards us. It fell
right in among the 85th, and, striking a corporal about the breach, as
he was endeavouring to get out of its way, it passed out at his breast,
on which he gave himself a sort of shake, and fell lifeless to the
earth.

Nothing could exceed the great annoyance this mischievous schooner
continued to be to us all that and the next day, for they not only saw
every thing we did, but we could not move in any number without being
saluted with an 18 lb. shot, and we had no means of retaliation. But
during the 25th, efforts were made to get up some heavier guns from the
fleet, and every thing having been settled as to the plan, &c., a
battery was constructed as close to the water's edge as possible in the
river dike, and a number of gun barrels having been collected from those
broken, &c. during the late fight, a sort of furnace was erected for the
purpose of heating shot, with which it was determined to give her a
salute the next morning. Every thing succeeded admirably. The battery
was constructed, embrasures cut, and shot heated, and all ready by
daylight on the morning of the 26th; of course we were all looking out
to witness the effect, and most noble it was, for when the guns opened
out upon her, the people on board seemed quite thunderstruck, and
although they attempted to return our fire, it was only like the blows
of a man beat blind by his antagonist, for her shot fell in every other
direction but that in which she should have thrown them. However, they
could not stand to fire more than one round, as our hot shot rendered
their situation very soon untenable, and taking to their boats, they
made their escape to the opposite shore with all expedition.

The distance from the battery to the schooner had been so accurately
measured by Major Blanchard, who superintended the construction of the
work, that almost every shot and shell penetrated the hull of the
vessel, and in a short time after her crew had left her, she broke out
into a blaze of fire, which soon reaching the magazine, she blew up with
a loud explosion, to the great comfort and joy of all our army. This of
course deserved and obtained three as hearty cheers as I believe were
ever given by Britons, and no doubt the Americans were greatly chagrined
at the loss of their fine and exceedingly useful vessel. A shell or two
were directed towards the ship, but she having seen the fate of the
schooner, got out her boats, which, taking her in tow, she set off up
the river in all haste. Could a battery have been constructed to fire
upon her at the same time, it would have saved us some hard knocks
afterwards. She, however, effected her escape, and we now remained in
peace for a few days at least.

On the 25th, Sir Edward Packenham and General Gibbs had arrived; the
former immediately assumed the command, and they both set off to the
front to reconnoitre the enemy and the kind of country around us. Every
night since our arrival the enemy had been incessant in their means to
harass and annoy us, as in truth they had a right to do if they pleased,
but it was exceedingly distressing to the troops, and therefore I
mention it. They seldom let an hour pass during the night, that they
were not firing at some of our out sentries, and on some occasions they
brought the body of irregular cavalry, before mentioned, immediately in
front of our outposts, and fired volleys, which, although it did not do
much injury to our advanced picquets, had the effect of turning out the
whole line, and that often repeated, with the annoyance from the
schooner, certainly did not leave us much time for comfortable rest.
They frequently lay in ambush for the reliefs of our sentries also, and
patrols, and fired upon them sometimes with effect. In short, they did
all they could to annoy and weary us out, but of which we ought not to
complain, as they were defending their own country, and allowances ought
to be made in such a case that would not be tolerated in an army having
no interest in the soil. I trust Englishmen will be equally zealous and
bitter to their enemies should our country ever be invaded.




CHAPTER XVIII.

     British Army told off into Brigades--Advance, and are hotly
     received--Heroism of a young Artillery Officer--We take up a
     fresh position--The Enemy work incessantly in raising an
     extensive breastwork--Two Batteries erected, from which our
     heavy Ship Artillery are brought to bear against it, but
     without effect--The Enemy also place their Ship Guns on
     Batteries--Colonel Lambert arrives with the 7th and 43d
     regiments--Preparations for a grand attack on the Enemy's
     lines, which entirely fails, and the British are repulsed with
     great loss.


The remainder of the army all arrived during the 24th, and were put in
bivouack in an oblique direction, with their front to the late field of
action, their right thrown back towards the wood, and their left towards
Mons. Villerey's house. The 93d formed line in advance at an angle of
the wood, as a sort of outpost, while the 85th and ours were stationed
in and around the house, to which I have so often alluded, _i. e._ where
I fell in with the column of the enemy. Our advanced picquets remained
the same as before the action. If I might here be permitted to hazard an
opinion, I should say that had we advanced upon New Orleans the morning
after the fight, I think there is little doubt we should have been
successful; for when an irregular and undisciplined body of troops once
meet with a reverse, it is difficult to bring them into action again
with that steadiness and determination which they often evince in their
first essay.

I understood General Jackson had some trouble in keeping them together
after their defeat on the night of the 23d, and the only mode in which
he could get them to form was, in planting the first who retired in line
near the road, and as each successive detachment arrived from the fight,
they were made to form on their left, the whole line sitting or laying
down for the remainder of the night. It is easy to perceive that they
would have been quite unmanageable should they have been seriously
attacked, while their spirits were depressed by their recent failure,
and as the works which we afterwards encountered did not then exist, at
least only in part, I think they would have retired after a very slight
resistance indeed. I had the information as to the manner in which they
formed, from some of those who were made prisoners, and who witnessed
it. All this, however, is merely the opinion of a private individual,
who judged from appearances only, and it is not in the nature of things
probable that I should be able to form so correct a one as those who
possessed more ample information.

After the arrival of the two general officers before mentioned, the army
was told off into brigades as follows, viz. the 1st brigade, commanded
by General Gibbs, consisted of the 4th, 21st, and 44th British, and 5th
West India regiments; the 2d brigade, commanded by General Keane,
consisted of the 85th, 93d, and 95th British, and 1st West India
regiments, (observe, the West India regiments had by this time become
exceedingly reduced in point of numbers from cold and hardship, which
they seemed unable to bear, and very soon after almost ceased to be
regiments, so many of them were sent away sick;) the artillery was
commanded by Colonel Dickson, an excellent officer; the squadron of the
14th light dragoons not being able to get mounted, formed the guards at
the hospitals, and at head-quarters, &c.

Every thing having been previously arranged on the morning of the 28th,
we advanced in two columns, the right near the wood commanded by General
Gibbs, and ours on the left by the great road near the river, commanded
by General Keane. The enemy had all along kept possession of those
farm-houses which lay at some distance in front of our picquets. They
were consequently driven from these as we moved forward, which we did, I
should imagine, to the distance of about three miles, their picquets
retiring gradually before us. We here discovered that the enemy had
thrown up a strong field-work, which extended from the river to the wood,
and which consequently shut up every avenue to our farther advance,
without fighting. We also found that their numbers had considerably
increased, as we could perceive by the immense bodies of troops behind
their works. As we pressed upon their picquets as they retired, we got a
shot or two at them with our field-guns; but every thing remained quiet
within their lines till we had arrived within about 400 yards of them,
when they opened out on the head of our columns as destructive a fire of
artillery as I ever witnessed. One shot struck in the column of the
85th, which knocked down two officers and about ten men. My battalion
was leading, and being partly extended skirmishing, they did not offer
so fair a mark for artillery as a solid body, and consequently escaped
this.

The ship also, which was anchored a little in advance of their work,
opened her broadside on the columns on the road at the same time. Our
gun and howitzer, the only two pieces we had there, endeavoured to
return the fire of the ship, but without doing her much injury. When the
fire was found to be so galling, the troops were moved off the road
into the fields on the right, and my battalion advancing about 100 paces
farther, was ordered to lay down in a sort of ditch which was there, and
to shelter themselves the best way they could. The 85th and 93d formed
also more to the right, and secured themselves as well as the nature of
the ground would admit. It was only intended as a reconnoissance,
consequently the troops did not advance farther, as soon as the nature
of their position was ascertained. It appeared to be a high dike of
casks, formed as a breastwork, with a considerable quantity of artillery
mounted on it, and with a sort of canal or wet ditch in front of it.

Of course, all this took some time to ascertain, during which they kept
up an incessant cannonade, both from their works and from the ship. The
latter poured in an immense quantity of large grape, which rendered the
situation of those exposed to it extremely unpleasant. Our two
fieldpieces were very soon silenced by the superior fire of the enemy,
and in an hour after our arrival at this point, there was not a man left
with them but the officer, who was quite a youth, but yet stood as
steady as if he had been on a common parade, although all his men were
knocked down about him. I never witnessed more devoted heroism than this
fine young man displayed. One shot, nearly towards the last, struck off
his sergeant's head, and sent his cap spinning over a ditch, where
another officer and I had taken up our post. Some rockets were also
tried from this point, both against the ship and the enemy's works, but
those directed against the vessel flew quite wide of the mark, and
totally failed. Some of those fired into the works, we saw pass over the
heads of the men posted in them, but whether they produced any effect we
could not see.

The enemy either had set fire to the houses near us before they retired
from them, or they had fired heated shot with a view of producing that
effect; but we had not been long here ere the whole of the houses in the
neighbourhood were in one grand and terrific blaze of fire. I do not
exactly know what was done on the right, for we could not see distinctly
for some trees which grew in the garden of the farm in that direction,
but imagine they encountered something similar to ourselves, as the play
of artillery from the enemy's line in front of them was equally
unceasing with that in our front. Not a man showed himself out of the
enemy's works.

When every thing was ascertained that could be, the troops began
gradually to draw off, but this was obliged to be conducted in a very
cautious manner, or the loss from their fire would have been severe. The
93d retired first, by separate wings, afterwards the 85th, but ours did
not leave their ground till after dark, when, I believe, some of the
Yankees began to advance in a rather triumphant and bullying manner, but
were taught to keep at a respectful distance by a few shots well laid in
among them. A party of sailors had been sent forward to bring off the
two fieldpieces, there being no artillerymen left to do it, and we had
no horses. They undertook and accomplished this task most cheerfully and
effectually, without a man hurt I believe.

The loss of my battalion on this occasion was not great. The army now
took up a fresh position in which to bivouack, at about a mile and a
half distance from the enemy's line, but which they could easily reach
with the shot and shells of their larger pieces. The head-quarters were
removed from Monsieur Villerey's house to a large farm or chateau behind
our new lines, and which were formed in the following manner, viz.:--the
4th and 44th composed one line, with their right near the wood. The 21st
formed on their left, but with an intervening space between them. The
85th and 93d formed one line on the left of the 21st, with an interval
between their line and that regiment. This latter line was rather in an
oblique direction, with its front towards a farm-house in advance and to
the left, and where my battalion was ordered to take its station. This
latter post was more exposed to the enemy's shot than any of the others;
it being a good deal advanced, and being close to the river, the guns
from the opposite shore ceased not firing on it, generally with hot
shot. The men were put into a sugar house belonging to this chateau, the
floor of which being sunk a little below the surface of the adjoining
earth, protected them wonderfully; but on occasions they had their very
cooking utensils knocked off the fire by the enemy's shot, in
consequence of the exposed situation of this house. The acting
quartermaster and myself being deemed civilians, and having no
inclination to be deprived of our natural rest at night, as long as we
could be allowed to obtain it, took up our abode in one of the outhouses
at head-quarters, which we found unoccupied, and where our respective
duties could be carried on with as much facility as if we were in the
same house with the battalion, the distance between them being only
about half a mile.

Here, also, the sick and wounded were brought, where they could enjoy
more comfort than in the sugar-house, till an opportunity offered of
sending them down to the shipping. To secure our front a little more,
and to protect the troops against the shot from the opposite shore, a
redoubt was thrown up about half a mile in front of the right, and
pretty near the wood; while batteries and breastworks were constructed
on the road, to fire on any vessels of the enemy which might come down
the river. These latter were principally constructed of hogsheads of
sugar, which were found in the sugar-houses of the different
plantations in the neighbourhood. But nothing could have answered worse
than they did for this purpose, the enemy's shot going quite through
them, without being at all deadened almost by the resistance they
offered. In front of the left also, inside the road, a breastwork was
thrown up, which secured the persons of a corps of marines and sailors,
who occupied that part of the line. This body was, soon after the 28th,
landed from the fleet; and the latter, having brought small arms on
shore with them, acted as a small battalion.

It is evident the enemy must have worked incessantly, from our first
landing, to complete the work they occupied; for, from the information I
before mentioned, as given me by one of the Spanish fishermen, it is
clear they had only two guns, mounted on something like a battery, on
the great road. But now that work extended even into the wood, a
distance of at least three quarters of a mile, and at this time there
could not be less than ten or twelve pieces of heavy ordnance mounted on
it. We were told by the slaves who had remained in the houses, that the
ditch behind which they had constructed this work was a sort of small
canal, which the gentleman who owned the property used for the purpose
of transporting the produce of his farm from thence into the river. From
this time we could plainly perceive great numbers of men continually at
work upon it, mostly blacks, of which they would, of course, have
abundance; but their white people also (the army, we conclude) were
constantly employed upon it. We could see distinctly that they were
widening and deepening the canal in front of the work, and raising the
parapet to a considerable height.

It was now determined to try what our heavy ship-artillery would do
against this work. Accordingly, the greater part of the army were
employed in bringing up these unwieldy machines, and to effect which
required no slight power and perseverance, as we had no means of
transport but the sheer strength of a number of men combined, to drag
them successively through the deep soil. A sufficient number of them
having been brought up by the 31st, strong working parties were employed
all night in erecting two batteries, as near to the enemy's works as
they could with safety venture, and getting the guns, carriages, and
ammunition, &c., into them. These were formed principally of casks, &c.,
filled with earth; and I am not sure that some sugar hogsheads were not
used on the occasion. However, at daylight on the morning of the 1st
Jan. 1815, the whole of the troops were ordered under arms, and moved
forward to nearly the same points they occupied on the 28th ult.

This morning there was an extremely thick fog, which greatly favoured
our movements, the Americans being, I believe, totally ignorant that any
alteration had taken place in the situation of our army. As soon as the
fog cleared away, our artillery opened out a tremendous and thundering
cannonade upon the enemy's line, which so completely astonished them,
that there was not a shot returned for twenty minutes at least, so
little did they expect heavy artillery there. Nay, we heard afterwards
that a great number of the irregular troops were so alarmed, that they
actually quitted the lines without orders, and were posting off to New
Orleans, and were with great difficulty brought back again. As soon as
they perceived, however, that nothing more than a cannonade was
intended, and that our troops did not advance to the attack, they
commenced gradually with their artillery against ours, the fire of which
increasing as their confidence increased, they were not long in
silencing our guns, and in dismounting some of them. The fact is, our
works had been thrown up in such haste, that they were not nearly so
strong as they ought to have been made, had there been more time; the
consequence was, their shot penetrated into every part of our works, and
caused us not only considerable loss in artillerymen, (with one officer
killed,) but, as I said before, actually dismounted a great many of our
guns. This consequently entirely failed of having the desired effect;
but with such a very favourable opportunity as this morning's fog
presented, together with the alarm and terror with which the enemy were
struck on opening our artillery upon them, there is not the most distant
doubt that we should have at once got possession of their lines, had we
but advanced to the attack. It is true, we were not prepared for passing
the ditch, having no fascines or other necessaries for that purpose; but
the resistance, in my opinion, would have been so slight, that we might
almost have chosen our own place to cross it; and it was not very deep
at any place. The battalion of sailors were quite annoyed at being kept
looking on, while so fair an opportunity, as they thought, offered, and
were crying out one to another, "Why don't we go on? what is keeping us
back?"

'Tis not to be doubted that the first effect of any new thing in warfare
is always the most certain of producing success, particularly against
inexperienced troops; but let them see and know the whole of the effects
that such a thing is calculated to produce, and the alarm wears off, and
confidence and courage return with wonderful rapidity. So it was here;
the first fire of our guns struck them dumb with amazement and
terror--But mark the contrast! Both the latter part of this day, and on
the 8th, at the general attack, how little they seemed to care for all
the artillery we could bring against them! Their gun, a 32-pounder, was
a most bitter antagonist to our principal battery. This happened to be
erected nearly in front of that part of the line where this gun was
situated, and when it fired, its shot always struck the battery at the
first bound, and then it ricocheted into the redoubt where I had taken
up my post. General Keane, with a part of his brigade, was in this
latter work, and some of them narrowly escaped the effects of the
numerous balls thrown from this gun. We were told the captain of the
schooner, after having been deprived of his vessel, had been appointed
to the charge and management of this gun, with some of his crew to work
it; and indeed it seemed very like the bitter and determined manner of
our former opponent, for any of the other guns seemed like children's
play to the unceasing and destructive fire of this heavy piece of
ordnance. I could distinctly see that they were sailors that worked
it--one of whom, a large mulatto, with a red shirt, always spunging her
out after firing.

In what I am going to relate, I know I shall incur the risk of being
deemed a _traveller_ by some of my readers, but that shall not deter me
from telling what I plainly and repeatedly saw with my own eyes,
assisted by a glass. At the distance of three quarters of a mile, I
could distinctly perceive the ball from this gun every time it was
fired, it appearing like a small black spot in the midst of the column
of white smoke, and which gradually grew larger in appearance as it
approached us. In many instances I was providentially the cause of
saving some of the men who were in the redoubt with us, because, seeing
which way the ball was coming, I told them when to lie down; and on one
occasion was the shave so close, that it actually carried away one of
the men's packs as he lay on the ground. Another shot struck about
three feet above our heads, and carried away part of a piece of timber
which supported a shed just behind us.

I forgot to mention, that, after the 28th, the Americans, conceiving
that the guns of the ship would be of more use if taken out and placed
in batteries, this was accordingly done; the greater part of them being
planted on the other side of the river, and being completely on our
flank, were enabled to annoy our people considerably, who were posted
near the great road.

About two or three o'clock in the afternoon of the 1st, the army began
again to retire to its bivouack, leaving covering parties to protect the
batteries; and after night, the whole having formed, working parties
were sent to bring off as many of the heavy guns as possible. Some of
these, however, they were obliged to bury in the earth, not being able
to drag them away before daylight next morning. This work seemed more
oppressive and fatiguing to the troops than the bringing of them up did,
inasmuch as they were animated in the latter instance by the hope of
their being able to effect something against the enemy through their
toil and labour; but now disappointment added poignancy to their
sufferings. However, although things began to assume not quite so
favourable an aspect as formerly, yet every thing was borne with the
greatest good-will, as they were still confident of all their laborious
services being ultimately crowned with success. In all these fatiguing
services, the sailors bore an ample share, and were of the very utmost
benefit to the whole army, for they could readily contrive the means of
moving those immense masses of metal by purchases, &c., which to a
soldier would be utterly impossible. Indeed, throughout the whole
service, the gallant tars deserved the very highest praise, for they
were equally brave as laborious and willing.

All hands, both soldiers and sailors, had been up the whole of the night
of the 31st, and now up again all night of the 1st. This was very
trying, no doubt. If any thing like dissatisfaction was evinced, this
incessant toil and want of rest in encountering it, arose more from a
desire to be led on to the attack, than from any wish to be rid of their
labours, however painful these were. As this attempt had failed, no
other scheme now appeared to present itself, but a vigorous and well
sustained attack on their line; for several efforts had been made to
penetrate through the wood, to endeavour to ascertain whether it was
possible to turn their position at that point, but all these efforts had
failed. The last that was attempted was conducted by Lieutenant Wright
of the engineers, but both himself and nearly all his party perished;
for it seems they fell in with a body of American riflemen, who, being
much better accustomed to travelling in woods than our people were, fell
on them, and, as said before, nearly cut off the whole party; yet it is
evident it was not utterly impassable, or the two parties could not have
met.

I do not recollect to what regiment the men belonged who accompanied
Wright, but think it probable they were altogether unacquainted with
that description of service, which led them into the fatal snare in
which they fell. I am confident I saw blacks, who passed and repassed by
the wood, but it is certain that no attempt upon a large scale could be
made in that direction to turn their position; and it was probably the
better plan to abandon the idea altogether. A very excellent expedient
was however devised, for the purpose of turning the right flank of the
enemy; it was certainly a bold and vigorous idea, and one which, if
successful, would no doubt have secured to us the victory and the
possession of New Orleans. This was no less than cutting a canal, in
order to unite the Mississippi with the lake by which we had arrived,
and by getting boats out of the latter into the river, to transport a
sufficient number of men to the opposite shore, for the purpose of
making a diversion in aid of the principal attack on this side.

Nothing could exceed the grandness of the conception. Accordingly, all
hands were set to work to widen and deepen the rill of water which flows
into the creek at the landing-place, and, continuing it up past Monsieur
Villerey's house, to let it enter the river a little above that point.
This, as may easily be conceived, was most laborious and dirty work;
and, lest the health and spirits of the troops should suffer from such
incessant fatigue, they were told off into four watches or spells, each
of which followed the other in regular succession, so that the work
never stood still. When it had reached near the house and high-road,
screens were put up on the latter, to prevent the enemy on the opposite
bank of the river from seeing what was carrying on; but as the blacks
were passing and repassing almost continually by the wood, as I before
mentioned, no doubt the Americans were well acquainted with what we were
doing.

On the ---- General Lambert arrived with the 7th and 43d regiments, to
our great joy, two finer regiments not being in the service.
Consequently every eye now sparkled with hope, that our labours and
privations would soon terminate, as every one confidently anticipated a
favourable result, and seemed still inclined to despise that enemy who
had shown us that we could not do so with impunity. We were glad to meet
many of our old Peninsular friends in these two fine corps, and of
course welcomed them to the New World in the best manner we were
capable of. They took up their ground a little in front of the canal
which was cutting, there not being room sufficient for them in the line
of our bivouack. We were now about 7000 effective troops, and all
beginning to cheer up again, imagined nothing could withstand us.

By the 6th the canal was finished, and the boats brought up into it.
There was obliged to be a lock in it at the entrance from the river, for
the strength of which Sir Edward, our Chief, I understand, expressed his
apprehensions, but was assured by the engineer that there was not the
slightest danger. I give this merely as report.

On the 7th the arrangements for the attack next morning having been
completed, orders were issued to that effect. The arrangements were as
follows, viz.--a corps consisting of the 85th regiment, with 200 sailors
and 400 marines, and the 5th West India regiment, with four light
fieldpieces, the whole under the command of Colonel Thornton, was to
embark in boats by twelve o'clock, and to be all across the river by
daylight next morning. This force would amount to about 1200 or 1300
men, and were destined to attack and carry the works on the opposite
bank, getting possession of the guns without allowing them to be spiked
if possible, when they were to be turned upon the right flank of the
enemy's position, on this side the river, to favour our attack. It is
clear, then, that this movement should precede that of the grand attack
by a considerable space of time. In the grand attack the troops were to
be disposed as follows, viz.--The right column, under General Gibbs, was
to consist of the 4th, 21st, 44th, and three companies of my battalion,
which latter were to extend as close to the enemy's work as possible,
previous to the advance of the column, and, by maintaining a constant
fire, were to endeavour to keep the enemy down as much as possible. The
44th was to be divided; one-half of that corps was to carry fascines,
&c., which they were to throw into the ditch on reaching it, in order
that the remaining regiments of that column might be able to pass it.
These fascines were to be had in the redoubt I before mentioned. The
other wing of the 44th was to lead that column, followed by the 21st,
and then the 4th, regiments. This was to be the principal attack. The
left column, commanded by General Keane, was to be composed as follows,
viz.--one company of the 7th, one of the 21st, one of the 43d, and two
of ours. The whole to be supported by the 93d regiment. These were to
make a feint attack upon the half-moon work which the enemy had
constructed near the river, and if opportunity offered, to turn it into
a real attack, and penetrate the enemy's line, co-operating with the
other column. Our two companies were to act here in the same manner as
the other three with whom they were to form a junction, thus covering
the whole front of the enemy's work. Some blacks of the 1st West India
regiment were to enter the wood on the right of our right column, and to
keep up as much noise as possible by firing and sounding bugles, &c. to
induce a belief that a large body of troops was moving in that
direction. The reserve, under General Lambert, was to consist of the 7th
and 43d regiments, and was to be so stationed as to be able to render
aid to either of the attacking columns. Strict orders were given that no
obstacle was to be permitted to retard the advance of the columns, but
that they were to press forward and endeavour to overcome every
hinderance that might present itself.

As far as I recollect, and from the information I have since gained,
these were substantially the orders issued, and arrangements made, on
this occasion. The commanding-officers and heads of departments were
also assembled, and each told the part he had to perform; on which
occasion, I understand, the commanding-officer of the 44th expressed
himself in terms which I could scarcely conceive it possible could fall
from the lips of a soldier, which were, that "it was a forlorn hope with
the 44th." In all my campaigning I never yet heard a commanding-officer
who did not look upon the post of danger as the post of honour, and who
did not rejoice, as if a favour was conferred on him, when appointed to
an arduous or hazardous duty. Had the commanding-officer of the 44th
served in the Peninsula under our illustrious leader there, he would, I
am confident, have been animated by a quite different spirit. After dark
I went with my commanding-officer and adjutant to view the ground over
which our battalion was to march next morning, and to find out the
wooden bridges, &c. over some ditches which lay in the way, that no
delay might take place when they were to be called upon to act.

I was sadly disappointed at our not meeting with any other
commanding-officers engaged in this most necessary duty, and at the time
I expressed my apprehensions as to the result. I pointed out to him the
different manner in which the business had been conducted previous to
the assault of Badajos, and previous to the attack on the enemy's
position on the Nivelle, where every commanding-officer, or others, who
had any particular duty assigned to them in the next day's operations,
were brought to ground from which it was clearly pointed out to them how
they were to move and act; but here all seemed apathy and fatal
security, arising from our too much despising our enemy. This latter, I
believe, was the principal cause of our not taking the necessary
precautions, and consequently of our failure; particularly the
commanding-officer of the 44th ought to have been brought and shown
where the fascines were lodged, that no excuse of ignorance on that
score might be pleaded. A rocket thrown up was to be the signal for the
troops to advance to the attack, after they had been properly posted
under the cover of night for that purpose. I own I did not at all feel
satisfied with what I had seen and heard, and retired to rest with a
considerable degree of despondency on my mind; and as I knew I could
render little aid to the service in a case like the present, I
determined I should not take any part in it, for I almost felt confident
of its failure.

The whole of the troops were at their post by the time appointed; but,
unfortunately, as the sailors, &c. were getting the boats out of the
canal into the river, the lock gave way after only a very few had passed
it. Thus the whole business seemed at one blow to be totally ruined.
Every effort was made to remedy the evil, but it was irremediable. They
toiled, however, to get more boats into the river, but the delay had
been so great that it began to draw towards dawn before they had
effected any thing worth mentioning. Poor Sir Edward seemed like one
bereft of his reason, for this failure had blasted all his most sanguine
hopes; and as the troops were now close under the enemy's works, and
could not be withdrawn before daybreak, nor without being perceived by
the enemy, he thought it as dangerous to turn back as to go forward with
the operation, consequently he ordered the rocket to be fired, although
it was considerably past the time for the attack to take place, and no
troops on the opposite shore. As soon as this was done, he galloped to
the front. But the enemy had been quite prepared, and opened such a
heavy fire upon the different columns, and upon our line of skirmishers,
(which had been formed for some time within about 100 or 150 yards of
the enemy's work,) as it is not easy to conceive. I was not in it as I
said before, but I was so posted as to see it plainly. But the 44th,
with the fascines, were not to be found. Their commanding-officer had
taken them considerably past the redoubt where the fascines were placed,
and when he bethought him of what he had to do, he and his men were
obliged to turn back to seek them; and thus, when he ought to have been
in front to throw them into the ditch to allow the other troops to pass
over, he was nearly half a mile in rear seeking for them. But I believe
it would not have availed much had they been there in time, for the
right column never reached the point to which it was directed; but from
the dreadful fire of every kind poured into it, some of the battalions
began to waver, to halt and fire, and at last one of them completely
broke, and became disorganized. Sir Edward seeing this rushed forward
with his hat in his hand, and endeavouring to animate them by his
presence, he cheered them on to advance again; but at this moment he
fell, after receiving two wounds, the last of which was mortal. General
Gibbs also fell nearly at the same time mortally wounded, and was borne
off the field. Thus was the right and principal column deprived of both
its leaders; and although one regiment gave ground, and could not be
brought again to the attack, the other continued to keep in a body,
although any attempt now must be hopeless, and they were losing such
numbers of men that they must shortly be annihilated. They accordingly
retired without effecting any thing.

The left column succeeded somewhat better; but, as things turned out, it
was only to enhance their own loss. They forced their way into the
circular work before mentioned, in which they made all the men who
defended it prisoners. But the canal still lay between them and the
main work, which was passed only by a plank; and being so few in
numbers, it would have been madness in them to attempt to go beyond
where they had at present stationed themselves. Indeed, they were in a
most critical situation; for, being within a few yards of the enemy's
main body, they could not move without being shot through the head by
their riflemen; and it was not till they had threatened to shoot the
prisoners they had taken, that they induced the Americans to desist from
attacking them; for by this time General Keane also had fallen severely
wounded, and the 93d had been nearly cut to pieces; and General Lambert,
with the reserve, had been obliged to advance and cover the retreat of
the other columns. Colonel Dale, who commanded the 93d, fell early in
the action, and the command devolved on Colonel Creagh; this officer,
being unwilling to retire his regiment without effecting the object
aimed at, although the men were literally mown down by the murderous
fire of the enemy, and the other column had given way, still endeavoured
to advance, but was at length reluctantly compelled to retrograde,
taking care to keep his men together. This showed a fine and noble
feeling in him, and is equally honourable to his gallant regiment; but
unfortunately it tended only to swell the list of killed and wounded on
this lamentable occasion.

My people were thus left to shift for themselves, and to get away in the
best manner they could. But being extended, and not being so good an
object for the artillery to fire at as the columns, they escaped with
much less loss than could well be supposed. Some few of them reached the
ditch when they saw the columns advancing, and which they say could have
been passed with ease; but the columns never advanced so far, which had
they done, and that rapidly, their loss would not have been half so
great; for the enemy's troops in front of the right column were
evidently intimidated, and ceased firing for some seconds as the column
approached; and there is little doubt, had they pushed on to the ditch
with celerity, the Americans would have abandoned their line; at least,
such is my humble opinion. But the poor fellows on the left, who had
gained the only work which fell into our hands on this bank of the
river, were still detained there, unable either to advance or retreat;
and not one durst show his head above the parapet, or he was instantly
shot dead.

Such was their confined and critical situation at this period, that an
officer of the 7th, whose name I forget, being himself rather tall, and
wearing at this time the high narrow-topped cap, could not squeeze in
sufficiently close to cover himself completely by the parapet, the top
of the high cap he wore sticking above the top of the work. This part of
the cap, which was visible to the Americans within the line, had no less
than four or five rifle-shots put through it while he lay there, but
without touching his head. All this information respecting these three
companies I had from Lieutenant Steele of the 43d, one of the officers
who was in the work.

They were obliged at last to adopt a very singular but politic
expedient, which was, to make one of the American prisoners embrace a
man of the 43d, and thus to stand up together to see what was going
forward; for hitherto they were totally ignorant, from the causes above
assigned. The enemy durst not fire in such a case, for fear of killing
their own man. The news they now learned was most disheartening indeed,
which was, that the whole of the British had retired, and that the
Americans were coming out of their lines, and were moving in the
direction of that work. Nothing now remained but to surrender, or to
make an attempt to retreat, at the risk of being every man knocked
down. The latter, however, they preferred; on which Colonel Rennie, of
the 21st, who commanded these three companies, was the first to make the
experiment, and in doing which, the moment after he left the fort, he
fell to rise no more. They thought it better for them all to go at once,
and instantly the whole party made a rush out of the work. The greater
part of them providentially succeeded in effecting their escape,
although many a brave fellow fell in the attempt.




CHAPTER XIX.

     Bravery and Success of Colonel Thornton--Negotiation for leave
     to transport the Wounded across the River--Insult offered to
     the British--They retreat--Our Army embark, and determine to
     make an Attack upon Mobile--Proceed in the direction of Mobile
     Bay--A Brigade detached to reduce Fort Boyer--The Fort
     surrenders, the Garrison becoming Prisoners of
     War--Intelligence of a Treaty of Peace being concluded at
     Ghent--Cessation of Hostilities.


It now remains to detail the operations of Colonel Thornton's party. It
will be seen, that, although his people were all ready at the appointed
hour, they could not get a sufficient number of boats to transport them
to the opposite shore. In fact, they did not get on board till it was
near daylight, and then only about one-half of the appointed number.
But, although at the risk of sacrificing himself and the few men he took
with him, he hesitated not to make the attempt of fulfilling his orders.
The signal for the general attack, however, was made before he could
reach the opposite bank, and he had then to land, and after making his
disposition with the few troops he had, to advance and attack a corps of
2000 men, mostly covered by works, some of which were extremely strong.
He dashed on, however, the advance of the enemy giving way before him,
till coming to their principal battery, he was obliged to detach a part
of his force through the wood on his left to turn their flank, while he
with the remainder attacked in front. This was conducted in such a
soldierlike manner, that, after a short conflict, the enemy gave way on
all sides, and retiring with precipitation, abandoned to the victors
batteries and works containing sixteen guns of various calibre.

But, alas! all this success came too late; for the principal attack had
by this time ended in a total failure, attended with the loss of three
out of four generals, and with nearly 2000 officers and men killed,
wounded, and made prisoners. Had Providence prospered the work of the
canal, and the troops could have been got across at the appointed hour,
and in sufficient numbers, there is every reason to believe that the
effect produced on the main body by such a powerful diversion, would
have tended to the complete overthrow of the whole force before us; for
so insecure did General Jackson feel himself to be after our
establishment on the other bank of the river, and so alarmed at its
consequences, that, in the evening of the fatal day, he would not
consent to a cessation of hostilities, to enable us to bring off our
numerous wounded, till General Lambert (who had now succeeded to the
command) agreed as a preliminary to withdraw the force under Colonel
Thornton from that bank; and this, although with great reluctance, the
General was compelled from motives of humanity and other causes to
consent to.

Before, however, a final answer was returned to General Jackson, I
believe it was suggested to our General, that, with the possession of
the other bank of the river, and with the 7th and 43d nearly yet entire,
and with the remainders of the other regiments, our chances of success
had not yet entirely departed, particularly as Jackson evinced such
eagerness for our withdrawing from that bank. General Lambert in
consequence used means to ascertain the feelings of the troops on this
proposition, but without their knowledge of his having done so; but I
regret to state, they seemed utterly hopeless of ever being able to
overcome such formidable difficulties as had presented themselves,
particularly now that their means of overcoming them had been so
lamentably diminished. The idea was consequently abandoned.

In this negotiation between the Generals, which continued for some
hours, Lieutenant-colonel Smith, our assistant adjutant-general, had
repeatedly to pass from army to army with flags of truce, before the
matter could be finally arranged. This officer was most indefatigable in
his exertions on this unfortunate expedition, and to him the army is
greatly indebted for his zeal, ability, and gallantry, on this and every
other occasion where they could be of service to his country, and by
those in authority no doubt they are duly appreciated.

Thus terminated the fatal attack on the lines of New Orleans--a
termination probably as disastrous in its consequences as any of modern
date--not even excepting that of Buenos Ayres; for that, discreditable
as it was to our arms, did not cost the lives of such a number of fine
soldiers; and I fear we have not yet experienced the full consequences
of this failure, for it is certain that the Americans are greatly
elevated by it in their own estimation, and it is not improbable they
may be thence induced to maintain a higher tone in all their future
negotiations with this country.

One instance may be to the point, as showing the feeling of individuals
of that country on this subject. A fellow in the shape of an officer
asked Colonel Smith, (I think it was,) "Well, what do you think of we
Yankees? Don't you think we could lick any of the troops of the
continent easily?"--"I don't know that," says our officer.--"Why, I'll
prove to you," says Jonathan, "that we have shown ourselves the best
troops in the world. Didn't the French beat the troops of every other
continental nation? Didn't you beat the French in the Peninsula? and
haven't we beat you just now?" This of course was conclusive, and no
farther argument on that subject could be advanced.

The remainder of the troops retired in the evening to their sorrowful
bivouack, worn out and sadly dispirited. All that night was of course
devoted to bringing off the unfortunate wounded; but several of those
who fell far in advance had been taken into the American lines, and, I
have every reason to believe, were treated with the greatest humanity.
Every effort was used, during the continuance of the truce, to bring
away the great numbers who lay wounded in the different parts of the
field; and on this as on all other occasions, the sailors with their
officers, evinced the utmost solicitude to render assistance to the
army; a great number of them were employed all night on this distressing
duty. During the whole of that afternoon, both while the negotiations
were pending, and at other times, the American officers were unceasing
in their endeavours to induce our soldiers to desert and join their
army. Too many, I regret to say, listened to their offers, and accepted
them. To some they promised promotion, to others money or grants of
land; in short, they were more like recruiting sergeants, I understand,
than the officers of a hostile army. My battalion did not quit the field
till after dark, and it is from some of them I have this information. A
group of two sergeants and a private of ours were accosted by an
American officer of artillery with a request that they would enter the
service of the United States; that the sergeants should be promoted if
they wished to serve, or that they should have grants of land if they
preferred a civil life; but that, if they chose to enter the army, he
would ensure them the rank of officers. Our people listened to this
harangue for some time, and then began, I regret to say, to give him
some bad language; telling him, at the same time, that they would rather
be privates in the British army, than officers among such a set of
raggamuffins as the Americans, and told him to sheer off or they would
fire upon him. This so exasperated the cowardly villain, that he went
off instantly into the line, they watching him all the while, and
pointing the gun, of which, it seems, he had charge, it was fired, and
knocked down the private, who was only wounded, however, by the shot.
Innumerable attempts of this nature were made both now and all the time
we remained before their lines subsequently, but which attempts, I am
proud to say, as far as I have been able to learn, failed in every
instance in the men of my battalion.

Much about the same time, an American soldier came within about 150
yards of our line, and began to plunder such of the killed or wounded
men as he thought possessed of any thing valuable. He at length
commenced upon a poor wounded man belonging to my battalion, which being
perceived by a Corporal Scott of ours, he asked permission from his
captain to take a shot at him. This being granted, (although a sort of
truce had been established while the negotiations were going on,) he
took up his rifle, and taking a steady aim, he fired, and tumbled the
plundering villain right over the body of the poor wounded man.

The loss of our five companies in this attack amounted to seven officers
and about ---- men killed and wounded. Some of the other regiments, the
93d in particular, had suffered dreadfully, having lost more than half
their numbers. The sad ceremony of burying such of the officers whose
bodies had been recovered, together with attention to the wounded,
occupied several days from this period, and sending the wounded, who
were able to bear removal, to the shipping, kept great numbers of the
remaining men continually employed; and the attention of all was now
turned towards drawing off from this scene of our late disastrous
attempt.

The General entered into a negotiation with Jackson about being
permitted to send a portion of our wounded down the river in boats; for
which permission some equivalent, which I forget, was to be granted on
our part, and which, after considerable discussion, was eventually
agreed to. The sick, the wounded, the stores of every description, were
now despatched as fast as circumstances would allow; but the effecting
of this occupied not less than nine days, during the whole of which time
the enemy was incessant in his attempts to harass and annoy us. All
their heavy ordnance was brought to bear on our bivouack; the
sugar-house our people occupied, and even the head-quarters, did not
escape; night and day they kept up a fire of shot and shells upon these
points; but the distance being considerable, no very great mischief
resulted from it, further than the continual state of uneasiness and
alarm in which it kept the troops. On one occasion, however, a shell was
thrown into the lines of the 43d, who had since the attack occupied a
part of the general bivouack, and which, falling into a hut occupied by
Lieutenant Darcy of that regiment, while he lay asleep, carried off both
his legs as it fell. Poor fellow! he would thus be awakened in a rough
manner indeed. I have since seen him in Dublin, the government having
kindly compensated him by giving him a company, and I believe two
pensions.

Several shells were thrown into the head-quarters premises, but
providentially without injuring any one. One fell in the yard while a
party of troops was halted there for a short while, and which falling on
one of the men's knapsacks, which he had put off, it carried it, with
itself, not less than six feet deep into the earth. It did not explode.
Some fell on the roof, which penetrated through all the stories to the
very ground. Every night also the picquets were kept in a state of
agitation and alarm by the continual attacks of small parties of our
skulking enemy, and my battalion, as did the others also, lost
considerable numbers by this petty warfare. In short, the men's lives
began almost to be a burden to them.

There was another source of annoyance adopted on the part of the
Americans on this occasion, but which, affecting only the mental, and
not the bodily powers of our soldiers, was not so much heeded. Every day
almost they assembled in large bodies on the parapet of their line, with
flags of various descriptions, some with "sailors' rights" and numerous
other devices, &c. painted on them, using the most insulting
gesticulations towards those who were near enough to see them, a band
playing Yankee Doodle, and other national airs, all the while, and
sometimes ironically favouring us with Rule Britannia. Considerable
numbers of our men deserted about this time. Every encumbrance being
removed, however, by the 17th, orders were issued for the march of the
army on the following evening soon after dark, leaving the picquets as a
rearguard, which were not to march till a short while before daylight.
In retiring, some of the wounded, who were unable to bear removal, were
necessarily left in the houses where they had been collected; but there
were not many so left, and no doubt the enemy acted humanely by them.
There were seven men of my battalion left, out of which three rejoined
us after the conclusion of peace; the other four, I believe, were very
badly wounded, and died in consequence. It was also necessary to abandon
such of the guns as remained in the advanced batteries, because, both
from their weight and their being so near the enemy, they could not be
brought off without exposing our intentions of retreating. Neither were
these numerous, and most of them only iron ship-guns, which are of no
great value.

The movement commenced according to the preconcerted plan, and being
conducted with secrecy and regularity, every soldier was brought off,
over a country almost impassable, and where, if followed and harassed by
an enterprising enemy, great numbers must have either fallen into their
hands or perished in the swamp. But I believe, had the Americans even
been aware of our intention, they would have hesitated before they came
into collision with our highly exasperated army, and would scarcely have
dared to attack us in the open field: they had had enough of that work
on the 23d, to give them a specimen of what British soldiers could do
when met fairly, front to front.

The marsh, it may be necessary to mention, extended from the lower skirt
of the wood to the fishermen's huts at the mouth of the creek. This
creek we had sailed up on our advance, but this could not possibly be
the case at present, both on account of our numbers being much too great
for the number of boats, and of the danger to which it would have
exposed the troops had they been attacked from the shore, but
principally on the former account; a sort of road had therefore been
constructed by our artificers, by cutting down boughs from the wood, and
laying them across such places as required something on the surface on
which to tread. This road extended, as nigh as I can judge, about eight
or ten miles, and in passing which numerous slips were made into the
sloughs on each side; but there being plenty of assistance generally at
hand, they helped each other out: some men, I understand, were lost,
however, in this night-march through the swamp.

Having arrived at the huts before-mentioned, the whole army set about
forming such places of shelter as the desert swamp afforded. There were
certainly reeds in abundance, but we wanted some sort of timbers for the
support of the outward covering. We, however, did the best we could; and
now every exertion was made by the navy to bring the army off from this
most uncomfortable place of abode, and regiment after regiment were
despatched as fast as the boats and other small craft could go and
return, the distance from hence to the shipping being about seventy
miles. While we remained here, we who were fond of shooting found plenty
of wild-ducks on which to exercise our sporting abilities; but, alas! we
wanted shot, and were therefore seldom able to bring home a couple for
dinner.

A considerable number of slaves, belonging to the estates where we had
lately been stationed, followed us down thus far, some of whom would not
return, but were afterwards sent on board of ship. These, male and
female, often amused us with their native dances, the men generally
having a number of rings or bells about them, which sounded as they kept
time to the tune. Some of their dances were, however, far from decent,
particularly on the part of the females, which, it may be supposed,
highly delighted some of our young and thoughtless countrymen. Some were
induced to return to their masters: for those who came on board of ship,
I believe it was not till very lately that the two governments came to
terms as to the remuneration which their owners claimed for them.

At length the turn came for my battalion to go on board, which we did on
the 25th of January, when our whole five companies were put on board the
Dover, the ship that had brought out two companies of the battalion, and
which were then not much fewer in number than the five at present were;
in fact, we had lost more than half. The whole army did not get embarked
till ----, when the 7th Fusileers came on board. This regiment had been
necessarily left alone at the fishermen's huts till the boats could
return, as before stated, to bring them off, and yet even this single
battalion the enemy, with upwards of 10,000 men, dared not come down and
attack, although there were no works to protect it in this exposed
situation. Nothing could possibly demonstrate more fully and clearly,
that, notwithstanding the repulse they had unfortunately given our
troops, they dreaded them in the open country; or else it must be
attributed to the prudent sagacity of their leader, who, having gained a
victory which he had previously scarce dared to hope for, now wisely
resolved not to risk the tarnishing of his dear-bought laurels. It is
not an easy matter to reconcile this cautious and timid conduct with
their furious onset on the night of the 23d, and with their boasting
speeches after our failure on the 8th instant.

Now, while we remain at rest for a short while on board of ship, let us
take a retrospective glance at the late events. It is certain we were
singularly unfortunate. Providence, which had smiled upon us in our late
operations against the most formidable army in the world, the French,
here taught us most painfully, that the victory is not always to be
gained by strength or courage. Indeed it was but a just punishment for
the contempt we entertained for our opponents, and which unfortunate
feeling, I believe, was almost universal. I own I entertained it in a
high degree; for I judged it next to a moral impossibility that an army
of undisciplined and unmanageable peasants, however numerous, could for
a moment withstand the attack of those troops who had overthrown the
victorious legions of Bonaparte. But every soldier was a patriot, and
they fought for their country, and for a country of all others most
suitable for the operations of such troops; full of fastnesses, composed
of creeks, and necks, and woods, &c. of all which they did not fail to
take the utmost advantage. For this work of theirs, constructed on a
spot of ground said to have been pointed out by General Moreau,
completely shut us out from all approach towards the town, and
compensated for every disadvantage under which they, as irregulars,
laboured; for it was not only a formidable barrier to our army, but it
gave them, by the protection it afforded their persons, all the
steadiness of troops inured to combat, and permitted them the full
exercise of that superior skill as marksmen for which they are famed,
and which exposure in the open field would have deprived them of; for
here they were covered up to the chin, and suffered comparatively
nothing from all our fire.

But I fear we have something for which to blame ourselves on this
occasion. It is certain, I believe, that they had been timely apprized
of the destination of our expedition, however secret we pretended to
keep it ourselves, and if rumour may in such a case be permitted to go
for any thing, it is said that information was conveyed from Jamaica to
New Orleans direct by a French ship, which left the former for the
latter place some time before our arrival. How she came into the
possession of that information, I cannot justly tell. It is certain,
however, that the Americans must have had timely notice, or General
Jackson could not have had the men from Kentucky and Tennessee to
oppose us the first night we landed.

I before hazarded an opinion, that had we pushed forward on the 24th
December, we should in all probability have proved successful. I will
say nothing as to the point of debarkation being well or ill chosen,
although many have said we should have been more likely to succeed had
we attacked Fort ----, which, after carrying, would have allowed us to
land behind the town, instead of three leagues below it. These things I
am totally incapable of judging of, from my ignorance of the country. I
also before expressed my opinion, that had we attacked on New Year's
Day, when our artillery produced such an effect on the appalled
Americans, we should have had a better chance of carrying their works.

Another thing in which I venture to differ from the plan adopted by our
lamented commander, is, that I would have employed the 7th and 43d to
the post of honour, instead of keeping them in reserve. They, it was
well known, had each established a reputation for being the finest
regiments in the service, and every reliance might have been placed in
their executing whatever task was assigned them, if executable by human
powers. Far different was it with those who unfortunately led the
attack, for except one of the regiments of the attacking column, they
had not any of them been conspicuous as fighting regiments.

It was, I believe, a well known maxim of Bonaparte's, always to put his
best troops in front; if they were successful, their example served to
stimulate the others to copy their example; if unsuccessful, their
discipline and valour never permitted them to become so totally
disorganized as to render the reverse irretrievable. The onset also of
these better troops, must produce a far different effect on the enemy
than the hesitating and dispirited attack of inferior ones. Had our
troops on this occasion rushed forward to the ditch in double quick
time, or at least at a quick march, I venture to affirm the work would
have been carried with the fourth part of the loss of what they
suffered. Reason itself must point out to any man, whether acquainted
with military matters or not, that to move slowly under a galling fire
is more trying and destructive to the troops so moving, than to rush at
once to the point aimed at; but much more, to halt at the very point
where every fire-arm can be brought to bear upon them with the deadliest
effect, is of all other modes of proceeding the least likely to succeed.
They were thus exposed for hours to as destructive a fire as ever was
poured upon the heads of an attacking army, while, had they pushed on at
the rate I mention, a few minutes would have sufficed to put them from
under the fire of the artillery at least, for when close to the ditch,
it could not be brought to bear upon them. Mark the mode in which the
three companies on the left effected the task assigned to them. Before
the enemy were aware almost that they were to be attacked, these troops
were in possession of the work they were destined to storm; so quickly
indeed that the defenders of that work had not time to effect their
retreat, and were, as before noticed, made prisoners by the attacking
party. This not only secured their safety while left there by
themselves, but enabled them, in some degree, to effect their retreat
with less loss than they would otherwise have been exposed to.

I have dwelt perhaps too long on this, but of all other causes I deem
this to have been the greatest of our sad failure. It is lamentable,
however, to be obliged to confess, that ill conduct on the part of some
parties, but of one individual in particular, contributed in no small
degree to our repulse on this melancholy occasion. For the rest,
nothing could exceed the determined courage and patient endurance of
hardship that the army in general evinced, and certainly nothing could
exceed the gallantry of our leaders.

It was now determined to make an attempt upon Mobile, a town lying about
thirty or forty leagues to the eastward of New Orleans. Accordingly, the
fleet got under weigh and proceeded in the direction of the entrance
into Mobile Bay, which is protected on the west side by shoals and Isle
Dauphine, and on the east by a fort, built on a point of land called
Mobile Point, and mounting about twenty pieces of heavy ordnance. Its
name is Fort Boyer, I believe. Before our arrival in this country, an
attempt had been made on this fort by one of our frigates, but which
entirely failed, owing to her taking the ground on the shoals before
mentioned. As she could not be got off, and as she lay under the fire of
the fort, her crew were compelled to abandon her, but, I believe, not
till they had first set her on fire; her wreck lay here when we came.
Until this fort was taken, no vessel of any size could enter the bay,
consequently it became necessary to attack it in form. The brigade
formerly General Gibbs's, consisting of the 4th, 21st, and 44th, was
therefore landed a little behind the point, and proceeded without delay
to invest it; the remainder of the troops were landed on Isle Dauphine.

We were put on shore on the 8th February, and instantly commenced
hutting ourselves by brigades. Some of the officers had tents issued out
to them; the acting Quartermaster and myself had one between us. This
island is almost covered with pine-wood, but in other respects it is
nearly a desert, and without any inhabitants resident on it, save one
family, a Mr Rooney, formerly from Belfast I understand, but now a
naturalized American. He was married to a native of Louisiana, a lady
of French extraction. He had been a midshipman in the American navy, but
had been dismissed for some misconduct, it was said, and banished to
this island. He appeared to us to be no great things.

I omitted to mention that the 40th regiment had arrived from England
before we left the banks of the Mississippi, but it being after the
failure they were of no use, and were consequently not permitted to
land. They were afterwards placed in our brigade, which now bivouacked
near to the point of the island facing the bay. When we arrived, the
island contained a considerable number of cattle, with pigs, &c.
belonging to Rooney, but which had been permitted, as is customary in
this country, to run wild in the woods, there being no danger of their
leaving the island. These, however, soon fell a prey to such hungry
fellows as we were, who had been for some time past on rather short
commons. But they did not answer our expectations, being in taste, what
may appear singular, quite fishy. This was attributed to their feeding
so much on marine vegetables, there being little other pasture for them
on the island.

A hoax was played off upon great numbers of our young hands respecting
this fishiness. There was on one point of the island a considerable
oyster-bed, and it was generally pretty near this that the cattle were
found and shot, that being the most distant from our bivouack. It was
therefore said the flesh of the cattle became of that peculiar flavour
from feeding upon oysters. Some, without reflecting, credited this
strange story, as the assertor generally said he had seen the cattle
opening the oysters with their tongues. This oyster-bed, however, was a
source of great luxury to us, for it not only afforded us the means of
rendering the salt junk more palatable by having an excellent sauce to
make it go down, but it even afforded a most wholesome and delicious
meal upon occasions by eating them raw. We also made the best use of our
time when not employed on military affairs, in endeavouring to catch as
many fish as we could; and for this purpose, my mess purchased from one
of the poor Spanish fishermen before mentioned (and who, for the
information and kindness they had shown us, were obliged to quit their
habitations and follow us), an excellent casting-net, with which the
acting Quartermaster and myself occupied ourselves from day to day,
generally bringing home a sufficient quantity of fish to serve our mess.
I never laboured more assiduously in any occupation than I did in this,
not only from a relish for such amusement, but because we really wanted
something to eke out our scanty meals. We at length got a siene-net from
one of the men-of-war, with which we were not only able to supply
ourselves most abundantly, but always had a large quantity to give away
to the soldiers. Wild-fowl also were very plentiful when we first
entered the island; but from the number killed, and the constant
shooting at them, they soon became scarce and difficult to get at.

Here also there were abundance of alligators, and on our fishing and
shooting excursions we frequently started them from their
lurking-places, which were generally among the reeds by the side of an
inland lake, or rather creek of the sea. On these occasions we seldom
saw them, for they always endeavoured to avoid us; but wherever they ran
along the bottom of the water, they stirred up the mud so greatly all
the track they took, that we had no difficulty in tracing them. I never
remember to have seen a live one on these occasions, but a dead one once
afforded us considerable amusement. One evening, on our return home from
our constant occupation, there being three or four of us of the party, I
was in front, and the acting Quartermaster and the others in the rear
of me. On a sudden I was alarmed by the cry of "Oh stop, here's an
alligator!" and before I could look round, a shot was fired apparently
into the earth, close beside their feet. I went back to see what was the
matter, and found indeed, as he had said, an alligator, but one which I
suppose had been dead for several months at least. It was buried in the
sand, and only a part of its body appeared; but whether he imagined it
might have placed itself in that situation intentionally, with the view
of enticing its prey within its reach, or what other thought he had, I
cannot tell, but, to make assurance doubly sure, he fired his rifle
right into the body of the half-rotten alligator. He was long and often
severely roasted about this afterwards. A young one was caught alive,
however, by some of the 14th dragoons, and brought home to England, and
afterwards, I understand, presented to the British Museum. All this
while the siege of the fort was going forward, but as we had nothing to
do with it, we had plenty of time, not only to hunt for extra prog, but
to amuse ourselves in any other manner we pleased.

The army, about this time, was inspected by our Chief, General Lambert,
by battalions. My kind late commanding-officer, Captain Travers, who was
severely wounded at the attack on the 8th, had rejoined by this time,
although still very lame. During the inspection, the General said to
him, "Travers, I am sorry to hear that your sergeant-major ran away on
the night of the 23d, during the attack."--"That is impossible,
General," said Travers, "for he fought as bravely as any man could
possibly do, and was carried off the field near the end of the fight,
severely wounded. But I have a guess what has given rise to this report.
A sergeant of ours left his battalion, I believe, either during or after
the fight, and having taken up his quarters near one of the houses
where the wounded were carried, the surgeon pressed him to remain with
him as hospital-sergeant. I made efforts to have him sent to his
battalion, but could not get it done. This must have been the cause of
such a story having got abroad."--"Ah," says the General, "I am sorry
that the poor sergeant-major should have lain under a stigma, of which
he was altogether undeserving; and, now since we have done him an
involuntary injustice, and he is a deserving man, we must try what
amends we can make him for it." He accordingly recommended him for an
ensigncy in one of the West India regiments; and before that day
twelvemonth, he had risen to the rank of lieutenant. Nothing could be
finer than the feeling of Sir John Lambert on this occasion; indeed, he
has always shown himself a most excellent upright man, and a gallant
officer.

About this time, a Russian vessel was detained going up to New Orleans
with a cargo of wine from Bordeaux; but although she would, I doubt not,
have been a legal capture, for breaking the blockade, the master was
permitted to dispose of his cargo to our army, and an excellent thing he
made of it, for the wine, which he must have purchased for about one
shilling or one and sixpence a bottle, he charged us in general about
four shillings for; we were glad, however, to get it at any price, and a
most seasonable supply it was indeed. On one of our shooting excursions,
an officer of ours fell in with a sow and two or three pigs, in the
wood; he instantly fired at one of the pigs and killed it; but when
going to pick it up, the sow set upon him with such fury, that he was
glad to abandon his prize, and retreat with precipitation.

When the army landed near New Orleans, the 14th light dragoons had taken
their saddles and other horse equipments with them, in hopes of being
able to get mounted in the country; and which, being bulky, required a
good large boat to bring off again. They were therefore put on board a
considerable-sized one, with an officer of the regiment and a guard to
protect them. On their way down towards the shipping, night overtook
them before they could reach their destination, on which they pushed
towards the shore, whether of an island or the mainland, I cannot say,
in hopes of being more secure for the night; they consequently put on a
sentry, and all lay down in the boat to sleep. Soon afterwards, however,
a boat came rowing rapidly alongside, and before the sentry could
discover who or what they were, they boarded, and instantly made the
party all prisoners. The officer, I believe, when called on to deliver
up his sword, was so annoyed at being trapped in such a manner, that he
threw it into the lake, as far as he could fling it. The American
officer who captured them was a lieutenant in their navy, and went by
the name of Commodore Shiel (for every fellow is a commodore who
commands even a few boats). He was so elated by his success on this
occasion, and, I believe, by having taken another boat with stores, that
he boasted to his prisoners, that he would take even Admiral Cochrane
himself yet, before he left the country.

While we remained on Isle Dauphine, a commissary, with a sergeant and
party of our men, were sent on shore, on the mainland, to shoot bullocks
for the supply of the army. They had landed, and the commissary, with
the sergeant and I think two men, went off into the neighbouring wood,
leaving the two or three other men at the landing-place to protect the
boat. Here again Mr Shiel made his appearance, quite suddenly and
unexpectedly, having come round a jutting point before the men were
aware of his presence; he instantly, of course, made them prisoners,
and, taking their arms from them, he put them on board their own boat,
then, sending a part of his crew on board to manage it, despatched it
for the American harbour. He now with a few more of his people went in
search of the commissary and his party, whom he soon found; and they
seeing resistance would be vain, when their own boat was departed, were
compelled at once to surrender. He instantly put them into his own boat;
and taking the commissary into the after-sheets alongside of himself,
the sergeant and the other men were put forward to the head of the boat.
Whether any preconcerted scheme and signal had been agreed upon between
the commissary and the sergeant, I do not know, but an opportunity soon
after offering, the commissary gave the sergeant the wink, and instantly
seizing Mr Shiel by the thighs, pitched him right overboard in an
instant; the sergeant, at the same moment, seizing the stoutest of
Shiel's men, and serving him in a like manner. The others being attacked
by the remaining two men, at once surrendered, and, I believe, suffered
themselves to be bound; and our people, having now resumed their arms
and become masters of the boat, admitted Mr Shiel, who, I fancy, had
clung to the boat to prevent his drowning, to come once more on board.
What became of the other man who was thrown over, I know not; whether he
swam on shore, or was drowned, or was afterwards taken into the boat, I
cannot tell; but the result was, that the great, the boasting Commodore
Shiel, was brought to the island a prisoner, where he landed like a
drowned rat, and quite chopfallen.

The commissary, who was a fine, stout, and gallant young fellow, spoke
highly in praise of Tom Fukes, our sergeant, for his bravery and good
management on the occasion.

At length the works being all completed for battering the fort, Colonel
Smith was sent in with a flag of truce to demand its surrender. The
commandant was quite undecided how to act, and asked the Colonel what
he, as a man of honour, would advise him to do. "Why," says the Colonel,
"do you not see that our guns are now overlooking your whole work, and
that we could, in a very short time, knock it down about your ears? I
have no hesitation in telling you, that the rules of war will fully
justify you in surrendering to such a superior force, and when the siege
has advanced to such a point as it actually is." His arguments, together
with the truth of his statements, at length overcame the courage and
determination of Jonathan, and he instantly agreed to surrender, the
garrison, afterwards becoming prisoners of war, marching out and laying
down their arms on the glacis.

Thus, on the 12th February, this important fortification fell into our
hands, together with 400 men of the 2d regiment of the United States,
and either one or two American colours. This obstacle removed, every
exertion was now made to advance up the lake to the attack of Mobile;
but on the 14th, a vessel arrived with the unexpected, but cheering
information, that peace had been concluded at Ghent between the two
nations, and that it only required the ratification of Mr Maddison, the
United States' president. Of course, all further operations of a warlike
nature were suspended for the present, till it was known whether the
treaty would be ratified or not. This ship also brought out the
notification of our two Generals, Lambert and Keane, being appointed
Knights of the Bath. Some of our Colonels also were included in the
list, viz. Blakeny of the the 7th, and Dickson of the royal artillery.

And now nothing was thought of but amusement, and making ourselves as
comfortable as possible. But we began to get very short of provisions.
Our people were therefore obliged to send to the Havannah, where they
procured the strongest sort of beef I ever saw. It was not salted; but
after the cattle had been killed, all the thin belly part had been cut
round the whole bullock, in narrow stripes, of about two inches in
width; this being laid, or hung up in the sun, which is extremely
powerful in that country, it was dried without having the least
offensive taste or smell, farther than a little rancidity, which was not
by any means unpleasant; but when brought from on board, it had much
more the appearance of coils of ropes (for it was coiled up in a similar
manner) than provision for the use of man. An aide-de-camp of General
Lambert's, then Lieutenant, but now Major D'Este, son of his Royal
Highness the Duke of Sussex by Lady Augusta Murray, used frequently to
join the shooting party of our acting quartermaster and myself; and, on
one occasion, having obtained a canoe, a trip to the mainland was
projected, for the purpose of shooting; accordingly we took two or three
men with us, and started from the northernmost point of the island, that
being the nearest to the main, which we saw before us, and not more than
five or six miles distant. It was considered the best mode of proceeding
for us all to get into the boat, except one man, who was a famous wader,
(having often accompanied us in our expeditions around the island,) and
who was to wade as far out into the sea as he could, dragging the canoe
after him. This he could do very easily, for she was quite light, and
the water was exceeding shallow for a great distance into the sea. He
continued towing us in this manner for about half a mile, when, being
fairly up to his chin, he and we thought it was high time for him to
come on board; but, in doing this, he gave her such a cant as turned her
right over, and pitched us all into the water. I luckily had my eye
upon the man when he sprung to get into the canoe, and suspecting that
she could not bear so rough a pull, was ready; and accordingly, when I
saw her going, leaped out, without being plunged overhead, as all the
others were. But all our rifles, &c. were pitched out, and of course
sunk to the bottom, to which we were obliged to dive before we could get
them up. This accident put a stop to our excursion, and we waded out
again, looking extremely foolish. Nevertheless we ought to have been
truly thankful to Providence that it occurred before we got out of our
depth; for, with such a frail bark, it is more than probable some
accident would have happened before our return, had not this prevented
our further progress.

Innumerable were our adventures of this nature, for the water was
delightfully warm, and having no military occupation at the time, we
could not find any better amusement. A party, indeed, suggested the
getting up of theatricals, which being approved on all hands, workmen
were instantly set about erecting the theatre-royal, Isle Dauphine.
This, of course, with the getting off of parts, occupied the managers
and the other performers for some time; but at length all being ready,
most excellent entertainments took place, following each other in quick
succession. At some of these parties, American officers, who now often
paid us visits, were highly entertained, and paid us high compliments,
not only as to the splendour and magnificence of our theatrical
representations, but to our ingenuity as displayed in hut-building,
which, they said, even surpassed the architectural abilities of the
Indians in that branch of the art,--a high compliment indeed!




CHAPTER XX.

     Ratification of the Treaty of Peace--Exchange of Prisoners--Our
     Troops embark for England--When off the coast of Ireland,
     receive intelligence of Bonaparte's escape from Elba--The
     Author and his Battalion reach the Downs, and proceed to
     Thorncliffe--Embark for France--Arrive at Paris, and occupy the
     Champs Elysees--Review of the Russian Guards--Russian
     Discipline--British Troops reviewed--Accident to Prince
     Blucher--Amusements in Paris--The Allied Forces, except the
     Army of Occupation, leave Paris--The Author's Battalion embark
     for England--Reach Dover, and return to Thorncliffe--He obtains
     leave of absence, and visits his Family--His Battalion ordered
     to Ireland--Sets out to join it, accompanied by his Wife, who
     dies three days after they reach Dublin--His Battalion
     reduced--Joins the first Battalion at Gosport, which is ordered
     to Scotland--Arrive at Leith, and march to Glasgow--The Author
     returns home in ill health--His Father dies--Joins his
     Battalion again--Winters at home--His Battalion ordered to
     Ireland--Joins it at Belfast--They occupy different stations
     during the Whiteboy Insurrection--Six companies of his
     Battalion ordered to Nova Scotia, but the Author remains with
     the other four companies--He is shortly ordered to proceed to
     Nova Scotia--His health declines--Returns home in consequence,
     takes advantage of Lord Palmerston's Bill, and retires on full
     pay.


On the 5th March, the ratification of the treaty of peace, by Mr
Maddison, arrived; and now all our thoughts were turned towards our dear
native country. On the 15th also, all our poor fellows, who had been
made prisoners by the Americans, joined us at this island, an exchange
in consequence of peace having of course taken place. Many of these
were strange-looking figures when they came among us, most of them
having been stripped of great part of their uniforms, their caps
particularly, and wearing mocassins, a sort of Indian sandals, instead
of shoes or boots, and being so sunburnt as to be scarcely recognisable.

Major Mitchell told us that General Jackson had treated him exceeding
harshly, because he did not choose to give the General such information
respecting our numbers, &c. as he wished. He also said he met with great
insolence on his way up to Natchez, where the prisoners were kept, from
the different parties of Kentucky men, and others, whom he met on their
way down "to take a shoot," as they termed it, "at his countrymen." He
met many thousands in this manner, so that 10 or 12,000 is the very
lowest number that Jackson could have had for the defence of his lines.

I do not remember that we ever had Divine service performed during the
period of this expedition except once or twice, and that about this
time. Indeed the activity required of the army at all times, during the
continuance of hostilities, almost necessarily precluded it. At this
time I remember perfectly the preacher's text was, "My son, give me thy
heart." Alas! how few of the hearts of his hearers were given at that
time to Him who only had a right to demand them! I confess with shame
and sorrow, that almost any trifle, however unworthy, possessed a
greater interest in my heart than He who had formed it, and who alone is
worthy of supreme regard.--The good Lord pardon this neglect, for
Christ's sake!

The regiments now began to go on board the different ships, as fast as
arrangements could be made to receive them; and when on board, they
sailed at once without waiting for the others, there being now no danger
of falling in with an enemy. The weather now began to grow exceedingly
warm, which brought out alligators and snakes in abundance. The latter
were extremely annoying, for they sometimes got into our very tents, and
one on one occasion so frightened a captain of ours (who was not afraid
of man) as to make him sprawl up the tent-pole to get out of its reach,
roaring out at the same time most lustily for help. It was killed and
put into a bottle of spirits, and I believe he brought it home. It was
an exceeding small one, but with the most beautiful crimson, or rather
pink-coloured wavy streak running down its back imaginable. We were told
it was one of the most venomous of all the American reptiles, save
probably the rattlesnake.

The thunder and lightning also became very frequent, and the former, I
think, the most awfully grand I ever heard. It appeared to roll along
just on the very tops of the pine-trees, many of which indeed were
scathed to the very roots by the latter.

On the 31st March our turn came to go on board, and we were rejoiced to
find that the Dover, our old friend was to be our principal ship, the
remainder of the men beyond what she could hold being sent on board the
Norfolk transport. While we were preparing for sea, I took a boat and a
party with a siene, and went on shore on a sandy point of the island,
where I had not been before, and in a short time caught a fine load of
fish, mostly grey mullet, with which we returned on board, greatly to
the satisfaction of all those who shared in them. Every thing being now
ready, we weighed and bid adieu to America on the 4th April, shaping our
course for the Havannah, where our captain intended to call for various
purposes, but principally to replenish his stock, which had begun to get
exceedingly low.

On our passage thither we encountered a heavy gale, which detained us
longer than we had calculated for our voyage. We did not reach that
place till the 19th. Here we found ourselves once more in Espana, every
thing here being exactly like what you meet with in the mother
country,--the same stink of oil, garlic, and dried fish. Speaking of the
latter, which is called by them Bacalao, an officer of ours who kept a
journal, when describing this place, says, "The natives catch a great
quantity of fish on the coast, called Bacalao." Unfortunately it is not
called Bacalao till after it is dried, but Piscado. This brought, as it
might be expected, lots of laughter upon his head.

I need not describe the Havannah, because any one who has a Gazetteer,
may there read an account of it; and which, though perhaps not
altogether a correct one, will be sufficient to give him an idea of what
it is; suffice it to say, it is an exceeding strong place, and would
not, I apprehend, be so easily taken, if the inhabitants are true to
their country, as it was in the year 1762. The capture of it at the time
above stated, made the place extremely interesting to me, for one of my
earliest and best friends served as a lieutenant in the 56th grenadiers
at the taking of it; and often have I heard him expatiate, with great
delight and animation, on the scenes he witnessed, and the dangers he
encountered, in this most arduous undertaking. He is now, poor man, no
more, having died only very lately, and I sincerely trust and hope he is
in peace. The Moro and the Punta, and all the other immense
fortifications, attracted my particular regard, on this old gentleman's
account; but so extremely jealous were the Spaniards, that they would
not permit even us, their late faithful helpers and friends, to view the
works. We visited the theatre, which is a fine building, but heavy and
badly lighted, but apparently well supplied with performers. The piece
on this occasion was Anthony and Cleopatra. There were also some
equestrian performers here from the United States. They had built a fine
circus, at about half a mile's distance from the city, to which every
one of course repaired. All the world was there; even little Connolly,
whom I had known at Cadiz as a major in the Spanish service, was here in
the command of a regiment, and had attained the rank of full Colonel. He
did not seem over anxious to recognise any of his former acquaintances,
nor even to let it be known that he was so much of a Briton as to have
acquaintance with any people of that country; in short, he wished to be
considered a complete Spaniard. I doubt not he is now a rank
apostolical. We paid a visit also to old Woodville, the famous
cigar-maker. He was an expatriated Englishman, from Portsmouth I
believe, obliged to flee his country on account of some smuggling
transaction, and, in doing this, he had changed his name. We found the
old man ill in bed, but able to sit up and speak with us. He wore an
immense long white beard, reaching down nearly to the bed as he sat up.
Yet this old man had a young black wife, and a whole fry of young
mulattoes running about the house like as many little pigs. He was very
kind, but apparently not over well to do. We bought each a considerable
quantity of his famed cigars, for which we paid him, I think, four
dollars a thousand--more, I apprehend, than he usually gets from the
Spaniards for them.

Having laid in such sea stock as we could conveniently procure, and
having stored ourselves well with the delicious preserves of this
country, and withal bought a fine turtle, weighing about two cwt., on
the 24th we set sail for old and happy England, glad once more to set
our faces homeward.

We had a quickish run through the Gulf of Florida, or, as it is more
properly called, the Bahama Channel, and, keeping to the northward of
Bermuda, shaped our course so that we passed a little to the south of
the Great Newfoundland Bank. From hence the wind was roughish generally,
but quite fair, so that we frequently ran at the rate of 200 miles in
the twenty-four hours, the transport being an excellent sailer.

Nothing particular occurred till we were within a few days' sail of
Ireland, when we fell in with an American who had just left England.
From him we learned the totally unlooked-for information, that Bonaparte
had made his escape from Elba, and had returned to France, and that the
whole continent was once more involved in war. Nothing could exceed the
change which this unexpected news produced among our people. Some who
were desponding at the gloomy prospect of half-pay, revived in a moment,
and again set honour, glory, and promotion, once more before the eyes of
their imagination. Indeed, I think no one seemed sorry at the change;
but some probably would have preferred a short repose, before they were
called upon again to leave that home which they had painted to
themselves so comfortable and happy.

On the ---- we arrived at Plymouth, where the good folks received us with
great cordiality; but the news from Flanders now engrossed all
attention, and our unfortunate business seemed forgotten. It was as well
perhaps that it was so, for we had no victory to boast; and with the
world it is but too often the case, that a want of good fortune is
almost tantamount to a want of good conduct. We were ordered on to
Portsmouth, which we reached in two days; and from thence proceeded
still onwards to the Downs. Our arrival was telegraphed to London,
from whence, after some communication by post also with the
Commander-in-Chief, we were ordered to disembark, which we did on the 2d
June. The cause of this being ordered, and of our not proceeding direct
to Flanders, was, that we were extremely ill off for equipment, nearly
one-fourth of our men being without arms or appointments, all those who
had been prisoners, and many of those who had been severely wounded,
having been deprived of them. In some respects the order for our landing
was unfortunate, as far as regards the honours of that great and
crowning victory of Waterloo, in which we consequently had no share;
and, on the other hand, as far as regards my own public accounts, at
least it was fortunate for me, for I was thus enabled to have them
prepared, and forwarded to the War Office, and finally settled without
loss of time, which I could not have done had we left England again
immediately.

We were ordered from Deal to Thorncliffe, our old quarters, where we
found three companies of my battalion, and five or six of the other two.
All our old friends were of course glad to see us; and, under such
circumstances, the meeting of those between whom friendship has long
subsisted, is in a great measure a compensation for the toil and
sufferings of a soldier's life. We continued at Thorncliffe for some
time, but busily preparing once more to take the field; and had
Bonaparte not been so precipitate in his movements, we might have shared
in the glory of his final overthrow.

I was compelled to go to London while we remained here, for the purpose
of settling a variety of accounts, &c., and while there was persuaded to
appear before the Medical Board, for the purpose of obtaining a
certificate as to the nature of my wound, on which to found a claim for
a year's pay, the amount at this time given to all whom that Board
recommended as fit subjects for this bounty. I had omitted doing so when
in London before, because I thought no one had any claim for it, except
such as had suffered most materially in health in consequence of their
wounds. However, at the suggestion of my friends I did appear before the
Board, who considered my wound of such severity as to entitle me to that
bounty; and I accordingly soon after received the sum of L.118, 12s.
6d., the amount of one year's pay. I have reason to be thankful both to
the government and to my friends for this unlooked-for augmentation of
my funds, and trust I did not make an ill use of it.

But at length the news of the memorable battle of Waterloo arrived, and
we had no share in it. I know not whether I shall be believed, but I
think there were few of my companions in the late expedition but felt
somewhat disappointed, and rather vexed, that this decisive action
should have taken place so early, and almost wished that the government
had despatched us even as we were on our first arrival in England; for
really, as it turned out, it was most unfortunate to those of my
friends, who had been undergoing probably as severe and hazardous a
service as any our army had lately been engaged in, and that all that
should be looked upon as almost worse than nothing, while some young
fellows, who had never before seen an enemy, should be covered with the
honours and distinctions which were so amply lavished on them, merely
because they had the good fortune to share in that brilliant and
decisive victory. But regret is vain and unprofitable, and a soldier
must make up his mind to meet with bad as well as good fortune, or he
will only render his life the more miserable.

On the 10th of July we embarked at Dover, and on the 13th landed at
Ostend; but we were entering only on a barren service, the honours
having been all acquired previous to our arrival. We moved forward by
the way of Bruges, Ghent, Oudenarde, and Mons, and then through Bavay
and Chatelet to Peronne; from Peronne through Roye, Pont Lant, Maxence,
and Louvre, to Paris. Here we were posted to the brigade in which our
other two companies were stationed, and occupied the Champs Elysees as
our camp. Certainly the sights we witnessed in this far-famed capital
amply repaid us for our trip to France, however devoid of military glory
that might be.

It will not be expected that I should enter into a detail of all the
lions which this splendid city contains, and which have attracted the
curiosity of nearly half the gentry of this country. Suffice it to say,
we saw the palaces of the Tuilleries, St Cloud, Luxemburg, and
Versailles, with all the splendour they contain--the churches of Notre
Dame and the Pantheon--the Hospital of Invalids--the Garden of
Plants--the Hotel de Ville--the Palais Royal, and the far-famed Louvre.
In this latter, a person might at that time spend a twelvemonth, without
exhausting the curiosities and beauties it contained; but, during our
stay here, we witnessed its divestment of nearly all its most valued
specimens of art, to the great regret, grief, and annoyance of those who
had ransacked almost all nations to decorate this splendid gallery. This
was undertaken and executed by our illustrious Chief, in the name and on
the behalf of this our generous nation. He dealt out with a just and
impartial hand, to all who had claims upon this magnificent collection,
the specimens of art which had formerly adorned their national churches
and palaces, without one painting or one statue of the meanest
description being reserved for himself, who had been mainly
instrumental in this restoration, or for the nation which he
represented.

We saw also the triumphal arch of Bonaparte, in the Place de Carousel,
stripped of its four matchless Venetian horses. The stately pillar in
the Place Vendome was also deprived of the effigy of him who erected it.
In short, every thing was done by the Bourbons at this period,
sanctioned by the Allies, to obliterate even the very remembrance of
such a character as Bonaparte. We visited also the splendid manufactory
of china at Sevres--the National Museum of Antiquities--the Royal
Library, and the Theatre Francais, to witness Talma's performance of
Hamlet, with various other places of curiosity, too tedious to notice
here; and, finally, the catacombs, the repository of millions of human
bones.

Here it is where man is taught to remember what he is--a worm--a shadow
that departeth--even a vapour, which appeareth for a moment, and then
passeth away for ever. Oh, how does all human greatness dwindle into
nothing, while you stand viewing these silent memorials of our frailty!
The myriads of generations that have passed away, multitudes of whose
bones are collected in this vast, dark cavern! Now how noiseless those
who perhaps once shook the world with alarms! I love to meditate on this
sad scene, which, if duly considered, teaches the soundest wisdom. How
apt are we to be allured by the gay fantastic follies of an hour, to
forget that we must soon, so very soon, take up our abode in the dark
and silent tomb! Oh! to be ready, when called upon, to descend into the
house appointed for all living! But though these meditations may be
pleasing to myself, they may not be so to my reader. I will therefore
leave this dark, deep, and capacious charnel-house, and once more ascend
with him to the light of the sun.

We had not remained long in Paris, till there was a grand review of the
Emperor of Russia's Guards, and which took place in the Place of Louis
XV., immediately in front of the Tuilleries. Nothing could exceed the
uniformity and the steadiness of these Northern warriors. There were
troops of all armies amongst them; the Cossacks, the hussars, the
artillery, the grenadiers, and the regular infantry, all vied with each
other in their endeavours to please their beloved Czar. Here were all
the great ones of the earth assembled to witness this imposing
spectacle; exhibited, no doubt, as much as any thing, for the purpose of
showing the French the power of those who now held them in subjection.
But that arbitrary power which is so intolerable to the ideas of an
Englishman, was here exhibited in all its native deformity. A Colonel of
one of the regiments, whose movements did not please the Emperor, was,
without the least ceremony, taken from the head of his regiment, and
rammed into a common guard-house, where an English officer was on duty.
He hesitated to receive him, until assured that such was the custom in
the Russian service, and that it was the Emperor's orders.

My battalion was soon after removed from the brigade it was originally
posted to, and joined another, stationed on Montmartre. Here the
adjutant and myself were quartered on a proprietor of the pits out of
which the famous plaster of Paris is dug. These pits are situated on the
side of this hill, facing the city. From hence I often took a fishing,
or a shooting, or a coursing excursion. The first was generally confined
to the Canal del Ourq, in which I found pike, perch, and tench. I never
was very successful, however, both from the vast numbers of fishermen
which frequented this water, and from the scarcity of fish. Partridges
and hares were abundant in the neighbourhood of Paris, but we had not a
good dog among us. We obtained leave from the Duke of Orleans to shoot
in one of the royal preserves, the Forest of Bondy. In our coursing
expeditions we were more successful, sometimes bringing in to the amount
of seven hares in a day. This would be looked upon almost as poaching in
England, but in France it was otherwise; they know nothing of coursing
there; and nothing could exceed the beautiful country round Paris for
that sport; it was a dead level generally, without a hedge, sometimes
for miles together, and a rich corn country, so that hares abounded.
Towards autumn, we had two or three reviews of the British troops; these
were splendid exhibitions of the tactics of our great General. But
though the army had the appearance of a fighting army, I do not think it
equalled the Russians in point of regularity and uniformity; with them
the whole army is nearly dressed alike, especially the infantry; while
the variety of our facings, and other distinctions of regiments,
detracts greatly from the appearance of the army as a whole. Here also
the crowned heads of Europe assembled in this city, paid us the
compliment of their presence, the Emperor Alexander inspecting most
minutely every regiment and division as it passed him. The Austrians and
the Prussians also occasionally showed themselves in bodies, but I do
not remember to have seen a general review of either of these armies;
indeed neither of them had a large force in or near Paris, they being
mostly at some distance from the capital, I believe. But we were often
delighted with the Austrian Emperor's band, in which there were no less,
I believe, than seventy performers, and all these the very first-rate
musicians. We also had horse-races occasionally, that is, among the
English officers; at one of which I witnessed poor old Blucher receive a
hurt, from which he never recovered. Near the winning-post, the course
was roped in, which the brave old fellow, as he came galloping down, all
life, from the city, did not perceive, and coming up against them with
great force, he was thrown from his horse, and unfortunately broke his
arm. He lingered some time afterwards, but never got well of it, till
death released him. We had two English boxers over there also, to amuse
the people; they only sparred of course, with gloves on; and I rather
think they realized a good deal of money by these exhibitions. Balloons
also were set up from the gardens of Tivoli, with various other sources
of amusement, so that to recount them all would only tire out my reader;
suffice it to say, that in Paris, with plenty of money, and with an
inclination to enter into all the gaieties of the place, no city on
earth, I believe, is so fruitful of the means of pleasure and
dissipation; but they leave a sting behind, which far outweighs these
momentary gratifications; and if I was asked which I considered the most
sinful city in the world, I would without hesitation say Paris.

Towards December arrangements were made for the army leaving Paris, and
going into cantonments on the north-eastern frontier; but the remainder
of the troops above the number required for the army of occupation were
ordered home to England. My battalion was among the latter number; and,
accordingly, we left the French capital on the 3d December, and marched
out to St Denis, that famous burying-place of French royalty. From
thence we passed near Beaumont, through Noailles to Beauvais, thence
through some small villages, where we halted for the night, and on the
11th reached Abbeville.

On the 14th we quartered in Montreuil-sur-Mer, and on the 20th reached
Calais, where we embarked for Dover. We landed at the latter place on
the 22d, and the next morning proceeded to our old quarter Thorncliffe.

All warlike proceedings having now terminated, I made application for,
and obtained, leave of absence to revisit my wife and my family, whom I
had not seen for four years. I need not describe my feelings on once
more beholding those I loved, and the reader will best appreciate them
by placing himself in my situation. But I had not long enjoyed this
pleasure till I heard that my battalion had been ordered to Ireland. I
confess I did not much relish the information. When my leave expired I
started for that country, and endeavoured to procure a passage across to
Dublin; first from Maryport, in Cumberland, but without success. I then
tried Workington, next Whitehaven, but was equally unable to get off
from either of these. I then moved on to Liverpool, and took my place in
one of the packets; but, after waiting several days, I was obliged to
start for Holyhead, the only place from whence I was able to proceed to
Ireland. All this disappointment and fatigue, together with some sad
punches which a large woman in the coach had given my wife with her
masculine elbows, so preyed upon her health and spirits, that three days
after our arrival in Dublin she breathed her last. She had been in
delicate health for a number of years, of an affection in the chest, but
she complained mostly of this woman's elbows, which she said had injured
her much. It will easily be conceived how afflictive such a dispensation
must have been to him who had to bear it. But God does all things well;
and even in the midst of our severest chastisements, we should view Him
as a kind and tender parent, who only chastens us for our good, and who
does not willingly afflict the children of men. A part of the battalion
had arrived in Dublin when the melancholy event took place, almost all
the officers of which favoured me by their presence at the funeral. I
had her buried in St Mary's churchyard, Mary being her own name.

We remained in Dublin for twenty-seven months--a longer period than any
other regiment I believe; and here I think I may truly say I acquired
the first knowledge of the only way of salvation; for although born and
reared a Christian, and having, as the reader may recollect, been
brought sensibly to the knowledge of myself as a condemned sinner, I had
as yet no distinct knowledge or apprehension of the nature of the
Christian faith; and I think I may, under the blessing of God, attribute
my earnest search after a sure foundation of hope to the reading of
Doddridge's "Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul," and to the
truly evangelical sermons I heard from the many eminent preachers which
fill the pulpits of this capital, but more particularly to the Rev. Mr
Matthias, chaplain to the Bethesda Institution. My narrative will
contain nothing interesting from this period to the general reader. I
will, therefore, generalize as much as possible. From Dublin we marched
to Birr, in the King's County; and while here, it was determined upon by
government to reduce the battalion to which I belonged, which was
carried into effect in January 1819; but as I was then the senior
quartermaster of the regiment, I was ordered to join the 1st battalion
of the corps at Gosport, which I did in February. Here we remained till
September, when the Radical war called us to the north.

We embarked on board the Liffy frigate and ---- corvette, in about three
or four hours' notice, on the 18th of that month, and landed at Leith on
the 28th, whence we marched to Glasgow, the seat of this unhappy
disturbance. I need not describe the Radical war, it being well known.
Here my health began to be much impaired. The affection of my chest,
occasioned by the rupturing of the bloodvessel at Cadiz, produced most
distressing effects upon my general health. I consequently obtained
leave, and returned home for a few months.

During my stay at home my dear father departed this life; and I had thus
the melancholy satisfaction of witnessing the last sad scene, and of
paying the last duties of a child to a beloved parent. He was not, as I
mentioned at the beginning of my narrative, a religious man when I left
home; but towards the close of his life I have every reason to believe
he was a sincere penitent, and a believer in Him through whom alone our
sins can be forgiven; and I have a well-grounded hope that he is now
enjoying eternal felicity in heaven, whither I hope myself to come
through Him that loved me, and washed me from my sins in his own blood,
and to whom be praise and glory for ever. Amen.

I joined again in the spring, and remained there all that summer, during
which I had many pleasant fishing excursions into the country. I visited
the falls of the Clyde, and proceeded to some a considerable distance
higher up, where another officer and myself caught abundance of trout. I
also took a trip into the Highlands of Argyleshire, where I had
excellent sport. But at the approach of winter I was again obliged to
leave Glasgow, the damp atmosphere of which, together with the smoke of
the numerous steam-engines employed in its manufactories, fairly drove
me out. I again went home for the winter; but during this period this
battalion also got an order to embark for Ireland, and I joined them in
Belfast in January 1821. From hence we marched in the spring to Armagh,
where I had the high privilege of becoming acquainted with a sincere and
pious clergyman, one of the reading vicars of the cathedral; and I
trust I benefited by this favourable opportunity. From Armagh we marched
to Naas, the country to the south having become much disturbed by the
Whiteboys, as they termed themselves. We did not remain long at Naas,
but were pushed on to Kilkenny, where I first became acquainted with
that truly Christian minister, the Rev. Peter Roe, a gentleman well
known in the religious world. I am proud and happy that I ever had the
privilege of knowing him. May God prosper his pious and unceasing
endeavours to benefit the souls of his fellow-creatures!

We did not remain long, however, at Kilkenny, but moved on to Fermoy,
and thence to Newcastle, in the county of Limerick, the cradle of the
Whiteboy insurrection. Here we were for a time actually shut up as in a
besieged town; and no individual belonging to the army durst attempt to
move out without a sufficient number being together, to deter the
misguided peasantry from attacking us. Innumerable were the murders that
were committed about this neighbourhood at this time; and one's blood
runs chill to think that these miscreants, when taken and brought to the
gallows to atone for their crime, protested their innocence with their
last breath, although hundreds around them could attest their guilt.
This Rockite war gave us considerable trouble, and it was not for a long
time after that it was finally put down.

We remained in Newcastle till September, when we marched to Rathkeale,
in the same county. Here we continued stationary till October 1823, when
we marched again for Dublin. I had thus an opportunity of again hearing
my favourite preacher; but the place was always so crowded that it was
seldom practicable for strangers to obtain seats.

From Dublin we marched to Belfast, in September 1824, where we
continued till July 1825, when my battalion was ordered for service in
Nova Scotia. The orders of the army being now for only six companies out
of the ten to go abroad, the other four remained at home, to form what
is termed the depot. Application was made for me to remain and act as
paymaster to this body; but it having been decided that quartermasters
could not act as paymasters, according to the new regulations, this boon
was refused me, although I had acted four times before. This is to be
attributed to the ill conduct of many of my brother quartermasters who
had obtained paymasterships during the war, but who generally did not
conduct themselves as men of honour and integrity ought to do, and many
were consequently dismissed from the service. It was perfectly correct
for those in authority to consult the good of the public in all
appointments of this nature, but it was hard on those who were thus made
to suffer for the sins of others,--nay, this ineligibility of
quartermasters extended farther than to the appointment of acting
paymaster. They have since 1817 been precluded from holding the
situation of full paymaster, however well recommended they might be. I
was a second time recommended, in 1820, by Lieutenant-General the Hon.
Sir William Stewart for the paymastership of his own battalion, that is,
the one in which I was serving, but received the same answer from the
Secretary-at-War, that quartermasters were ineligible to the situation.
I cannot but feel keenly the degradation to which the ill conduct of
certain individuals has reduced that situation, which formerly was only
like a step towards the more lucrative and more respectable one of
paymaster; but, as I said before, we must not murmur at the
dispensations of Providence, however severely they affect our worldly
prospects; and no doubt all this was done by the direction of Him who
cannot err. However, I have great reason also to be thankful to Lord
Palmerston, notwithstanding my disappointments as above stated; for
he--taking into consideration the injury that the present quartermasters
had sustained, in consequence of the ill conduct of the individuals
before noticed, and their consequent deprivation of all prospects of
farther promotion, however eligible in other respects they might be, and
however exemplary their conduct--brought in a bill in the session of
1826, to allow these officers to retire on _full_ pay after twenty
years' service in the army, provided their health was such as to render
them incapable of farther service. This could not formerly take place
till after thirty years' service. I have, therefore, abundant cause of
gratitude to that Right Honourable Lord, for his kind remembrance of us
on this occasion, as well as for his kindness in permitting me to avail
myself of the benefit of this act; and I have on this, as on all other
occasions, abundant cause of thankfulness to the Great Disposer of all
events, not only for what He has permitted me to enjoy, but for what He
has withheld from me; for He only knows what is really good for me, and
I doubt not will give me always that. I may with great truth declare,
that goodness and mercy have followed me all my days, notwithstanding my
seeming disappointments, and which I believe were inflicted on me solely
for my everlasting good. To Him, therefore, be praise and glory for
ever.

But to return. Having been disappointed of obtaining the acting
paymaster's place, I remained with the depot in my capacity as
quartermaster till the spring of 1826, when I received an order to be
ready for embarkation to join the battalion in Nova Scotia. Accordingly
I embarked, with four other officers, at Liverpool, on the 14th of June,
on board the Robert Burns merchant brig, and reached Halifax after a
rather tedious passage, in which we encountered some roughish weather on
the 22d July.

I scarcely need say any thing of Halifax, which, being one of our oldest
colonies, must be well known to almost all my readers. Neither was I
there a sufficient time to enable me to enter into a minute description
of the town or country: suffice it to say, it appears to be a town built
mostly of wood along the face of a hill, on the left-hand side of the
harbour, reaching close down to the latter, which is so deep, capacious,
and sheltered, that I question whether there is a better in the world: a
seventy-four can lie close alongside the wharfs. The town contains, I
understand, about 13,000 inhabitants, composed of settlers from
different countries, but chiefly English, Irish, Scotch, and Dutch.
There are a few negroes, a part of the slaves taken from the Americans
during the late war having been located here.

The colony is not so flourishing as it was during war, as it was then
greatly supported by the immense number of ships and troops which always
were stationed here. The country round Halifax is barren in the extreme,
except a very small portion, where hay is generally grown. It seems
incapable of cultivation, being little else than rock, with forests of
stunted pines, &c. growing upon it. In some parts of Nova Scotia,
however, there is excellent land, which yields a great return for
cultivation; and were it not for the severity of the winter, which in
this country is both long and severely trying to weak constitutions, it
would, I doubt not, be an excellent country to which to emigrate. The
waters in every direction afford abundance of fish, but not of the best
quality. There are portions of two tribes of Indians occasionally in the
neighbourhood of Halifax. I forget their names; but the men of one tribe
are exceedingly tall, being seldom below five feet ten inches, and many
reaching to six feet three inches. The men of the other are in general
short. Both tribes are fast diminishing in point of numbers. They are
greatly addicted to the fatal vice of drunkenness, whenever they can
command the means of becoming so; and in Halifax it is no difficult
matter, for the abominable rum which is sold here may be had almost as
cheap as ale in England.

These unfortunate wanderers have hitherto resisted all efforts to induce
them to settle and cultivate the land, although many of them are _good
Christians_, their progenitors having been converted by the Roman
Catholic priests while the French held the country.

The woods, &c. in the neighbourhood of Halifax contain little game of
any kind. There are a few what they call partridges, which, I believe,
roost on trees; but they have more the appearance of grouse than the
partridge of England. There are some woodcocks also in the season, but
they are rather scarce. Snipes also, and several species of plover, may
be met with occasionally; but you will seldom be able to fill your
game-bag with any thing. There are some hares of a very small
description, little larger than our rabbits; but these are rare. Bears
also, with a few other wild animals, occasionally show themselves; but
in winter, I am told, a deathlike silence pervades the whole face of the
country, as if every living animal had totally deserted it, and I
believe with all the winged tribes this is actually the case.

The women here are remarkably fair and beautiful, and, generally
speaking, are, I believe, as virtuous as at home; but among the lower
orders, whose virtue is so frequently assailed by the temptations which
a large naval and military force always brings with it, like our
Portsmouth, and other places of a similar description, the scenes of
vice and abomination are extremely disgusting. A great many of the
unfortunate blacks before mentioned are included in the number of these
unhappy prostitutes.

The places of worship in Halifax are both good and pretty numerous.
There are two churches, two or three Presbyterian or Scotch churches,
two Baptist, two or three Methodist, and one or two Roman Catholic
places of worship.

I did not remain here long; for, finding that my broken and debilitated
constitution could not possibly withstand the severity of a winter in
this climate, I was ordered to be examined by a board of medical
officers, who recommended my return to England without delay.
Accordingly, on the 20th of September, I embarked on board the Borodino
transport. We sailed on the 22d, and on the 25th encountered one of the
severest gales I almost ever witnessed. It carried away every sail we
had set, and swept away our jolly-boat from the quarter. I often wished
I was once more snug in England, and my hope was, I should then tempt
the sea no more. That same all-gracious Being who had so long watched
over me, and had brought me in safety that far on my journey, He also
brought me to my native land once more in peace; for on the 13th of
October I landed at Portsmouth, having been only three weeks in
returning from, while we had been nearly six in going to, Halifax.

I immediately set off for London, where, having reported myself to the
Secretary at War, I was ordered to be examined by the Director-General
of Hospitals as to the state of my health, and with a view to avail
myself of the benefits of the act of Parliament before mentioned, and
being prospered by Him who has always been better unto me than I could
possibly deserve, I have been permitted to set myself down in peace in
this my own native village for the remainder of my life, having the
unspeakable privilege of being surrounded by many kind and dear
relations, who vie with each other in their endeavours to render me
comfortable and happy, and where I can in serenity watch the gradual
approach of that enemy which my Saviour has overcome for me, and which,
my hope is, He will deprive of all his terrors, as I trust he has done
of his sting, and that, when I shall have continued my appointed time in
this vale of tears, I, as well as the reader of this narrative, shall be
taken to Himself, to dwell with Him for ever.




APPENDIX.


The following are copies of fifteen testimonials addressed to the late
Quartermaster Surtees.


    No. 1.--FROM LIEUT.-COL. DUFFY.

    _Birr, 24th January, 1819._

DEAR SIR,

As you are on the point of removing to the 1st battalion, I take this
opportunity of expressing my entire satisfaction at the very regular and
orderly manner in which your department has been conducted during the
time you have been placed under my command; and it will give me great
pleasure should an occasion occur where my testimony to your
gentlemanlike conduct can be of service to you.

    I remain, Dear Sir,
      Very faithfully yours,
        J. DUFFY,
        Lt.-Col. Rifle Brigade.

  Quartermaster Surtees,
  1st Bat. Rifle Brigade.


    No. 2.--FROM MAJOR TRAVERS.

    _Tuam County, Galway, 19th April 1820._

DEAR SURTEES,

With feelings of most sincere regret I read your letter to me, which I
received yesterday, and lose not a moment in complying with your
request, which, should it prove to be of any use to you, I am sure will
be productive of the most heartfelt gratification to every one of those
concerned, whose opinions of you are, as they always have been, of the
highest description. Your conduct, both as a gentleman and soldier, has
ever been such as to excite in the breast of your brother officers
sentiments peculiarly favourable; and for myself, I have only to say,
that few of my old acquaintances in the corps have had my esteem in a
higher degree. I send you the sentiments of such of your old brother
officers, in the shape of a certificate, as I could obtain, whose
standing may have some influence in the procuring the accomplishment of
your wishes, and regret that the dispersed state of the regiment
prevents its being more general.

    Dear Surtees,
      Yours faithfully,
        JAS. TRAVERS.

  Wm. Surtees, Esq.
  Quartermaster, Rifle Brigade.


    No. 3.--FROM OFFICERS OF THE 2D BATTALION RIFLE BRIGADE.

The following testimonial is subscribed by us, in hopes it may prove
beneficial to an officer who has so long supported the character which
we are desirous to portray in the terms it deserves.

We certify, that Mr William Surtees, late Quartermaster in the Rifle
Brigade, has been for a considerable number of years known to us in the
regiment, and that for soldierlike and gentlemanly conduct, no person
bore a higher character. He served in the situation he filled in the
corps, particularly that of Acting Paymaster, for two considerable
periods in the Peninsula, and with the expedition to New Orleans, with
credit to himself, and satisfaction to his superiors, and, to our
knowledge, obtained the general esteem and approbation of all his
brother officers of the regiment who knew him.

    S. MITCHELL, Brevet Lieut.-Col. and Major, 2d Bat. Rifle Brigade.
    JAS. TRAVERS, Brevet-Major, Rifle Brigade.
    WM. COX, Capt. Rifle Brigade.
    BOYLE TRAVERS, Capt. Rifle Brigade.
    CHAS. GEO. GRAY, Brevet-Major, Rifle Brigade.
    WM. HALLEN, Capt. Rifle Brigade.
    T. H. RIDGWAY, M.D., Surgeon, Rifle Brigade.

  _Tuam, 19th April 1820._


    No. 4.--FROM LIEUT.-COL. ROSS, C.B.

    _Paisley, 15th July 1820._

DEAR SIR,

I learn with extreme regret that you consider it to be expedient to make
application to be removed as Quartermaster to a veteran battalion. I
have stronger reason to feel this regret than I believe any other of
your brother officers, as I have known you longer, it being now about
twenty years since we met at the formation of the Rifle Corps; during
the greater part of this time you served, I may say, under my immediate
command; and I can bear the most ample and unqualified testimony to the
zeal, intelligence, and gallantry with which you discharged the duties
of the different situations you have filled in the corps.

I shall have great pleasure in hearing of your future welfare; and
should it ever happen to be in my power to promote your views in any
way, I hope you will consider that you will only have to make them
known.

    Believe me, my Dear Sir,
      Ever yours most sincerely,
        JOHN ROSS, Lt.-Col.
        Major, Rifle Brigade.

  Quartermaster Wm. Surtees,
  Rifle Brigade.


    No. 5.--FROM LIEUT.-COLONEL SMITH, C.B.

    _Halifax, Nova Scotia, 25th August 1826._

MY DEAR SIR,

Were it permitted a soldier to regret the loss of his comrades, then
truly should I deplore yours; I have only just learned that you are
about to avail yourself of Lord Palmerston's permission to retire from
the service on account of ill health, after having in your present
situation completed your period of twenty years. You have struggled
against indisposition with manly fortitude in various climes, and have
ever performed your duty zealously and conscientiously.

I, as well as the other officers of the corps, have ever lamented that
your natural zeal and talent as a soldier, should not have been called
forth in a more conspicuous situation; and there is not an old officer
in the regiment who has not witnessed your intrepid bravery in the
field.

I must again assure you, that you leave us with the most heartfelt good
wishes for your welfare, and the universal regret of the corps, in which
you have served so many years with the most rigid integrity and zeal;
and should I have it in my power upon any future occasion to render you
any service whatever, it will afford me as much satisfaction as I now
feel distress, in losing one of my old companions in arms, with whom I
have been so many years happily associated.

    And ever believe me,
      Your very sincere friend,
        H. G. SMITH,
        Brevet Lieut.-Col. Rifle Brigade.

  Quartermaster Surtees,
  Rifle Brigade.


    No. 6.--FROM OFFICERS OF THE 1ST BATT. RIFLE BRIGADE.

    _Halifax, Nova Scotia, 30th August 1826._

We the undersigned officers present with the 1st Battalion Rifle
Brigade, who have had the satisfaction of an intimate acquaintance with
Mr Surtees for a series of years at home and abroad, beg leave to add
our testimony as to the valour, integrity, zeal, and gentlemanlike
conduct which we have ever witnessed in him; and beg to express our
sincere regret at the prospect of losing his society and services.

    J. LOGAN, Major.
    W. JOHNSTONE, Captain.
    A. WADE PEMBERTON, Captain.
    G. HOPE, Captain.
    JOHN COX, Captain.
    J. KINCAID, Lieutenant.
    JOSEPH BURKE, M.D. Surgeon.
    GEORGE SIMMONS, Lieutenant.


    No. 7.--FROM COLONEL NORCOTT, C.B.

    _Halifax, Nova Scotia, 30th August 1826._

MY DEAR SIR,

I most truly and sincerely regret that your long, zealous, and
indefatigable duties have so seriously undermined your constitution, as
to oblige you to retire from the service.

Although I feel a very lively gratification in bearing testimony to your
merit and gallantry in the field, as well as to your public and private
character as an officer and a gentleman, in the most unqualified sense,
during a period of twenty-four years which I have known you, I cannot,
at the same time, but lament the circumstances which bind me, in justice
to your meritorious services, to tender you this my humble tribute of
regard and esteem for all you have done for the service and the corps,
and for such unremitted integrity and worth. You have my ardent wishes
for your health and happiness wherever you go.

    Believe me to be,
      My Dear Sir,
        Always sincerely yours,
          A. NORCOTT, Colonel.


    No. 8.--FROM LIEUT.-COLONEL FULLARTON, C.B.

    _Halifax, Nova Scotia, 25th August 1826._

DEAR SIR,

Having served in the same battalion with you for eighteen years, during
which time I had every opportunity, both public and private, in various
situations of home and on foreign service, of witnessing your very
exemplary conduct, both as an officer and a gentleman, I, with my
brother officers, have to regret that your ill health has deprived the
regiment of a valuable officer, and your companions of a friend, whose
amiable and excellent qualities will ever be revered by them.

With regard to myself, it will afford me the greatest pleasure if at any
future period I can in any way be of service to you.

    Believe me, my dear Sir,
      Yours most truly,
        JAS. FULLARTON, Lt.-Col.
        Major, Rifle Brigade.

  Quartermaster Surtees,
  Rifle Brigade.


    No. 9.--FROM LIEUT.-COLONEL BALVAIRD.

    _Naas, 2d June 1826._

MY DEAR SIR,

It affords me much pleasure to assure you, that during the time I was in
the Rifle Brigade (13 years), and more particularly when you served
under my immediate command, I can bear the most ample and unqualified
testimony to the zeal, intelligence, and gallantry with which you
discharged your duty--and wherever you may go, you carry with you the
good wishes of,

    Yours most sincerely,
      W. BALVAIRD, Lt.-Col.
      late Major, Rifle Brigade.

  Quartermaster Surtees,
  Rifle Brigade.


    No. 10.--FROM MAJOR-GENERAL SIR A. F. BARNARD, K.C.B.

    _Albany, 18th October 1826._

DEAR SIR,

I have heard with great regret that your state of health has obliged you
to avail yourself of the regulation which enables you to retire from the
Rifle Brigade, in which corps I had such frequent cause to praise the
gallantry and assiduity which you showed in the discharge of your duties
in the field, and your regularity and assiduity in quarters.

The officers of the corps, I am confident, will all regret the loss of a
person whose mild and gentlemanlike manners and disposition had so much
endeared him to them.

With every wish for your future welfare,

    I remain, dear Sir,
      Very sincerely yours,
        A. F. BARNARD.

  Quartermaster Surtees,
  Rifle-Brigade.


    No. 11.--FROM MAJOR LOGAN.

    _London, 18th October, 1826._

MY DEAR SURTEES,

I have just learnt with much regret that you are about to retire from
the Rifle Brigade, from an impaired constitution, owing to your
unwearied and zealous exertions in the service.

From the period of my entering the Corps, _twenty-two years_ ago, I have
had the pleasure of being intimately acquainted with you, and I must do
you the justice to state, that a more gallant, zealous, and
indefatigable officer, I have seldom fallen in with. As a gentleman,
your conduct always won and gained the esteem of your brother officers.

Believe me I shall ever feel warmly interested in your welfare.

    Yours, my dear Surtees,
      Most faithfully,
        J. LOGAN,
        Major 1st Bat. Rifle Brigade.

  To Quartermaster Surtees,
  1st Bat. Rifle Brigade.


    No. 12.--FROM LIEUT.-COLONEL BECKWITH, C.B.

    _London, 20th October, 1826._

MY DEAR SURTEES,

I cannot suffer you to return to your home, without adding my mite of
applause to that of our brother officers, who have, together with
myself, known you so well and so long.

From the day that we were employed together at Ipswich, in obtaining
volunteers from the Militia, when you were so instrumental in obtaining
so large a number of men for the service, and during the whole of our
services in the Peninsula, and elsewhere, when my situation as Assistant
Quartermaster-General of the Light Division threw us so constantly
together, until the last period of our regimental service, I have always
known and respected your courage, your active discharge of your duties
in times of difficulty and hardship, and your zeal and affection for the
Rifle Brigade.

Your present poverty is the surest testimony of your integrity, which
you have always kept in times of strong temptation, when very many
others similarly placed have not resisted so well.

All my feeble services are constantly at your disposal, and wishing you
content, and as much happiness as we can reasonably expect here,

    I remain, my dear Surtees,
      Yours, most sincerely,
        CHARLES BECKWITH,
        Lieut.-Colonel.

  Quartermaster Surtees,
  Rifle Brigade.


    No. 13.--FROM LIEUT.-GENERAL THE HONOURABLE SIR WM. STEWART, G.C.B.

    _Cumloden, Newtonstewart, Nov. 19, 1826._

If the three or four-and-twenty years, my dear sir, that I have had the
satisfaction of having had you under my command in the Rifle Regiment or
Brigade, suffice not to authorize my full approval of your conduct, both
towards that corps and towards the public service, I know not what
experience would do so. To this extent and to still farther extent, if
it be required in detail, I am gratified by your having given me this
opportunity of certifying the above. The loss that my battalion will
sustain by the deprivation of your services will be great, and the only
consolation that I shall have will be in learning that your present
object of retiring on full pay be obtained, and that your health,
injured, as my own has been, by perhaps too great a zeal in the
fulfilment of our respective duties, may be somewhat amended by your
retirement in private life. I have much to thank you for the most justly
merited encomiums from your several commanders and from your elder
brother officers, enclosed in your letter of the 13th instant, and to
these honourable documents favour me by adding this one. I wish it was
in my power to be of any service to your views towards a civil
appointment under government, but as your age much exceeds that to which
all official nominations are now limited, application for such will be
fruitless.

I have the honour to be, my dear Sir,

      With repeated assurance of regard,
        Your faithful friend and obedient servant,
          WM. STEWART,
          Lieutenant-General.

  Quartermaster Surtees,
  1st Bat. Rifle Brigade.


    No. 14.--FROM MAJOR EELES.

    _Dublin, Nov. 28, 1826._

MY DEAR SURTEES,

I enclose herewith copies of two letters which I have received from the
office of his Royal Highness the Commander-in-Chief.

In congratulating you on their contents, I cannot refrain from
expressing, strange as it may seem, not only my gratification but also
my regret; gratification that you have succeeded in obtaining the object
of your wishes, and regret the most lively, that your state of health
should have obliged you to quit the corps; the more particularly, as the
regiment will not only by your retirement be deprived of the benefit of
your zealous and meritorious services, but I shall lose the society of
one of my oldest and most valued friends.

The senior part of the regiment will ever remember with pride the
glorious occasions in which you so often signalized yourself in the
field, while the younger members of the corps will not fail, equally
with the former, to admire the gentlemanlike conduct and urbanity of
manners which have secured to you the friendship and good wishes of us
all.

    Believe me, my Dear Surtees,
      Very sincerely yours,
          WILLIAM EELES,
          Major, Rifle Brigade.

  To Quartermaster Surtees,
  Rifle Brigade.


    No. 15.--FROM MAJOR-GENERAL SIR T. S. BECKWITH, K.C.B.

    _Gilsland, June 26, 1827._

MY DEAR SIR,

In returning to you the packet you have favoured me with the perusal of,
I cannot refrain from expressing, in common with all your old friends
and brother officers of the Rifle Brigade, my regret that your health
made it necessary for you to retire from a corps, where your faithful
and unremitting services for nearly thirty years had been so eminently
useful, and where you possessed the friendship and confidence of every
individual of any standing in it.

That your concern is as sincere as theirs in parting with them, I am
perfectly convinced; yet it will be matter of real consolation to you to
be able to reflect that you never gave just cause of offence to any
member of the corps, and never neglected an opportunity of rendering
them a service when in your power.

That you have not retired a richer man, is a subject of regret to us
all; and we shall learn with great satisfaction of any event, that may
tend to increase your means of doing good to those who look to you for
protection.

Should any such opening present itself, I do not hesitate to express my
conviction, that whoever may employ you, will never have reason to
repent doing so; as I am well assured you will undertake no situation,
without due reflection, and the nature of which you do not understand;
and that, once taken in hand, you will discharge the duties of it with
the same diligence and fidelity that you have performed those of your
public life for so many years past.

Earnestly wishing that a little repose after such a lengthened series of
toils and dangers, may restore you to health and strength,

    I remain,
      My Dear Surtees,
        Your sincere and faithful friend,
          THOS. SIDNEY BECKWITH,
          Col. 2d Bat. Rifle Brigade.

  To William Surtees, Esq.
  Late Rifle Brigade.


    FINIS.


    EDINBURGH: PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE AND COMPANY,
    PAUL'S WORK, CANONGATE.


       *       *       *       *       *


    Transcriber's Notes

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Presumed archaic spellings have not been changed: apprize, assertor,
fusileers, grashoppers, harraing, mocassins, reconnoissance, sailer,
siene, shrapnell, spunging, vere, visiters, woful.

The following words appear both with and without diacritical marks and
have not been changed: Camino, depot, Pena.

There are two chapters "IV". The second one is denoted with an asterisk.

Hyphens removed: "quarter[-]master" (page 60), "wind[-]mill" (page 63,
twice), "Porto[-]Real" (page 102), "brush[-]wood" (page 197),
"death[-]like" (page 139), "road[-]side" (page 274), "fore[-]yard" (page
322).

Hyphens added: "farm[-]house" (page 14), "mid[-]day" (page 61),
"half[-]way" (pages 107, 283), "field[-]work(s)" (page 248, 369).

Page xi: "Ships'" changed to "Ship" (place their Ship Guns on
Batteries).

Page 25: "apppeared" changed to "appeared" (separate body which
appeared).

Page 45: "94th" changed to "95th" (The Rifle Corps, or 94th).

Page 55: Removed duplicate "on" (to stand on the same tack).

Page 55: "Lhe" changed to "Lehe" (Bremer Lehe to the city of Bremen).

Page 60: "Feversham" changed to "Feversham" (I joined it at Feversham).

Page 79: Illegible number changed to "2d" (2d battalion of my regiment).

Page 82: "18th" changed to "10th" (in this affair the 10th hussars
were engaged).

Page 106: "call" changed to "called" (called the Tore Alto).

Page 128: "Pompadours" changed to "95th Rifles" (2d Battalion of the
95th Rifles).

Page 157: "bettter" changed to "better" (no doubt better fed).

Page 209: "Morilhl" changed to "Morillo" (thought that Don Morillo).

Page 245: "officer" changed to "officers" (the commanding-officers had
been taken up).

Page 258: "horse" changed to "horses" (our poor horses and mules).

Page 297: "numder" changed to "number" (to put a certain number).

Page 346: "chooner" changed to "schooner" (the fire of the schooner).

Page 398: Redundant "the" removed (Blakeny of the 7th).

Page 404: "brough, ast" changed to "brought, as" (This brought, as it
might be expected).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Twenty-Five Years in the Rifle Brigade, by
William  Surtees

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY-FIVE YEARS IN THE ***

***** This file should be named 36778.txt or 36778.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/7/7/36778/

Produced by Steven Gibbs, Moti Ben-Ari and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
