The Project Gutenberg EBook of Throckmorton, by Molly Elliot Seawell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Throckmorton

Author: Molly Elliot Seawell

Release Date: July 24, 2011 [EBook #36829]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THROCKMORTON ***




Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 THROCKMORTON

 A NOVEL

 BY

 MOLLY ELLIOT SEAWELL

 GROSSET & DUNLAP
 Publishers ::  :: New York




 COPYRIGHT, 1890
 BY D. APPLETON & CO.

 COPYRIGHT, 1909
 THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY




THROCKMORTON.




CHAPTER I.


In a lowland Virginia neighborhood, strangely cut off from the rest of
the world geographically, and wrapped in a profound and charming
stillness, a little universe exists. It has its oracles of law,
medicine, and divinity; its wars and alliances. Free from that outward
contact which makes an intolerable sameness among people, its types
develop quaintly. There is peace, and elbow-room for everybody's
peculiarities.

Such was the Severn neighborhood--called so from Severn church. Every
brick in this old pile had been brought from green England two hundred
years before. It seemed as if, in those early days, nothing made with
hands should be without picturesqueness; and so this ancient church,
paid for in hogsheads of black tobacco, which was also the currency in
which the hard-riding, hard-drinking parsons took their dues, was peaked
and gabled most beautifully. The bricks, mellowed by two centuries, had
become a rich, dull red, upon which, year after year, in the enchanted
Southern summers and the fitful Southern winters, mosses and gray
lichens laid their clinging fingers. It was set far back from the broad,
white road, and gnarled live-oaks and silver beeches and the melancholy
weeping-willows grew about the churchyard. Their roots had pushed, with
gentle persistence, through the crumbling brick wall that surrounded it,
where most of the tombstones rested peacefully upon the ground as they
chanced to fall. Within the church itself, modern low-backed pews had
supplanted the ancient square boxes during an outbreak of philistinism
in the fifties. At the same time, a wooden flooring had been laid over
the flat stones in the aisles, under which dead and gone vicars--for the
parish had a vicar in colonial days--slept quietly. The interior was
darkened by the branches of the trees that pressed against the wall and
peered curiously through the small, clear panes of the oblong windows;
and over all the singular, unbroken peace and silence of the region
brooded.

The country round about was fruitful and tame, the slightly rolling
landscape becoming as flat as Holland toward the rich river-bottoms. The
rivers were really estuaries, making in from the salt ocean bays, and as
briny as the sea itself. Next the church was the parsonage land, still
known as the Glebe, although glebes and tithes had been dead these
hundred years. The Glebe house, which was originally plain and
old-fashioned, had been smartened up by the rector, the Rev. Edmund
Morford, until it looked like an old country-woman masquerading in a
ballet costume; but the Rev. Edmund thought it beautiful, and only
watched his chance to lay sacrilegious hands on the old church and to
plaster it all over with ecclesiastical knickknacks of various sorts.

The Rev. Mr. Morford had come into the world handicapped by the most
remarkable personal beauty, and extreme fluency of tongue. Otherwise, he
was an honest and conscientious man. But he belonged to that common
class among ecclesiastics who know all about the unknowable, and have
accurately measured the unfathomable. On Sundays, when he got up in
the venerable pulpit at Severn, looking so amazingly handsome in his
snow-white surplice, he dived into the everlasting mysteries with a
cocksureness that was appalling or delightful according to the view one
took of it. In the tabernacle of his soul, which was quite empty of
guile and malice, three devils had taken up their abode: one was the
conviction of his own beauty, another was the conviction of his own
cleverness, and still another was the suspicion that every woman who
looked at him wanted to marry him. Mr. Morford reasoned thus:

     I. That all women want to get married.
     II. That an Edmund Morford is not to be picked up every day.
     III. That eternal vigilance is the price of liberty.

On Sundays he scarcely dared look toward the pew where General and Mrs.
Temple sat, with their beautiful widowed daughter-in-law, Mrs. Beverley
Temple, on one side of them, and Jacqueline Temple, as lovely in her
small, kittenish way, on the other, for fear that one or the other of
these young women would fall hopelessly in love with him. Mrs. Beverley,
as the young widow was called, to distinguish her from the elder Mrs.
Temple, had the fatal charm for the Rev. Edmund that all things feared
and admired have. He believed in his heart of hearts that widows were
made for his undoing, and that the good old Hindoo custom of burning
them up alive was the only really safe disposition to make of them. The
charm of Judith Temple's piquant face and soft, shy eyes was somewhat
neutralized by a grim suspicion lodged in Mr. Morford's mind that she
was unnecessarily clever. The Rev. Edmund had a wholesome awe of clever
women, especially if they had a knack of humor, and was very much afraid
of them. Judith had a sedate way of replying to Morford's resounding
platitudes that sometimes created a laugh, and when he laboriously
unwound the meaning, he was apt to find the germ of a joke; and Judith
was so grave--her eyes were so sweetly serious when she was laying traps
to catch the Rev. Edmund's sluggish wits. But Judith herself thought of
no man whatever, and had learned to regard the sparkle of her
unquenchable humor almost as a sin. However, having got a bad name for
cleverness, neither the most sincere modesty nor the deepest courtesy
availed her in keeping it quiet. Morford, in his simple soul, thought a
clever woman could do anything; and suppose Judith should cast her eyes
on--at this the Rev. Edmund would turn pale in the midst of his sermon
when he caught Judith's gray eyes fixed soberly on him. Soberness--and
particularly Judith's soberness--was deceitful.

Barn Elms, the Temple place, was near to the Glebe and to Severn church.
The house was rambling and shabby, and had been patched and pieced, with
an utter disregard of architectural proportion that resulted in a
curious and unexpected picturesqueness. A room was put on here, and a
porch was clapped up there, just as the fancy of each successive Temple
had dictated. It was partly of brick and partly of stone. Around it
stood in tall ranks the solemn, black-leaved poplars, and great
locust-trees grew so close to the house that on windy nights the sound
of their giant arms beating the shingled roof awoke superstitious fears
in the negroes, who declared it to be the "sperrits" of dead and gone
Temples struggling to get in through the chimneys. There was a step up
or a step down in every room in the house, and draughts enough in the
unnecessary halls and passages to turn a windmill. There was, of
course, that queer mixture of shabbiness and luxury about the old place
and the mode of living that is characteristic of Virginia. Mrs. Temple
had piles and piles of linen sheets laid away with the leaves of damask
roses between them in the old cedar chests, but half the rooms and all
the stairs and passages were uncarpeted. It required the services of an
able-bodied negro to keep these floors polished--but polished they were,
like a looking-glass. The instrument used in this process was called a
"dry-rubbin' bresh" by the manipulators, and might well have been used
in Palestine during the days of Herod the tetrarch, being merely a block
of wood covered with a sheepskin, well matted with wax and turpentine.
At unearthly hours, in cold winter mornings and gray summer dawns, the
monotonous echo of this "bresh" going up and down the hall-floors was
the earliest sound in the Barn Elms house. There was a full service of
silver plate displayed upon a huge and rickety mahogany sideboard, but
there was a lack of teaspoons. Mrs. Temple had every day a dinner fit
for a king, but General Temple was invariably behindhand with his taxes.
The general's first purchase after the war was a pair of splendid
Kentucky horses to pull the old carriage bought when Mrs. Temple was a
bride, and which was so moth-eaten and worm-eaten and rust-eaten that
when it started out it was a wonder that it ever came back again. The
kitchen was a hundred yards from the house in one direction, and the
well, with its old-fashioned bucket and sweep, was a hundred yards off
in another direction. The ice-house and stables were completely out of
sight; while the negro houses, annually whitewashed a glaring white,
were rather too near. But none of these things annoyed General and Mrs.
Temple, who would have stared in gentle surprise at the hint that
anything at Barn Elms could be improved.

General Temple, six feet tall, as straight as an Indian, with a rich,
commanding voice and a lofty stride, stood for the shadow of domestic
authority; while Mrs. Temple, a gentle, affectionate, soft-spoken,
devoted, and obstinate woman, who barely reached to the general's elbow,
was the actual substance. From the day of their marriage he had never
questioned her decision upon any subject whatever, although an elaborate
fiction of marital authority was maintained between them and devoutly
believed in by both. Mrs. Temple always consulted the general
punctiliously--when she had made up her mind--and General Temple, after
a ponderous pretense of thinking it over, would say in his fine,
sonorous voice: "My dear Jane, the conviction of your extremely sound
judgment, formed from my experience of you during thirty years of
married life, inclines me to the opinion that your suggestion is
admirable. You have my permission, my love"--a permission Mrs. Temple
never failed to accept with wifely gratitude, and, like the general,
really thought it amounted to something. This status is extremely common
in Virginia, where, as a rule, the men have a magnificent but imaginary
empire, and the women conduct the serious business of life.

Brave, chivalrous, generous, loving God and revering woman, General
Temple was as near a monster of perfection as could be imagined, except
when he had the gout. Then he became transformed into a full-blown
demon. From the most optimistic form of Episcopal faith, he lapsed into
the darkest Calvinism as soon as he felt the first twinge of his malady,
and by the time he was a prisoner in the "charmber," as the bedroom of
the mistress of the family is called in Virginia, he believed that the
whole world was created to be damned. Never had General Temple been
known under the most violent provocation to use profane language; but
under the baleful influence of gout and superheated religion combined,
he always swore like a pirate. His womenkind, who quietly bullied him
during the best part of the year, found him a person to be feared when
he began to have doubts about freewill and election. To this an
exception must be made in favor of Mrs. Temple and of Delilah, the
household factotum, who was no more afraid of General Temple than Mrs.
Temple was. She it was who was mainly responsible for these carnivals
of gout by feeding the patient on fried oysters and plum-pudding when
Dr. Wortley prescribed gruel and tapioca. Delilah was one of the
unterrified, and used these spells to preach boldly at General Temple
the doctrines of the "Foot-washin' Baptisses," a large and influential
colored sect to which she belonged.

"Ole marse," Delilah would begin, argumentatively, "if you wuz ter jine
de Foot-washers--"

"Jane! Jane!" General Temple would shout.--"Come here, my love. If you
don't get rid of this infernal old fool, who wants absolutely to dragoon
me out of my religion, I'll be damned if I--God forgive me for
swearing--and you, my dear--"

Sometimes these theological discussions had been known to end by
Delilah's flying out of the room, with the general's boot-jack whizzing
after her. At Mrs. Temple's appearance, though, the emeute would be
instantly quelled. Delilah was also actively at war with Dr. Wortley, as
the black mammies and the doctors invariably were, and during the visits
of the doctor, who was a peppery little man, it was no infrequent thing
to hear his shrill falsetto, the general's loud basso, and Delilah's
emphatic treble all combined in an angry three-cornered discussion
carried on at the top of their lungs.

Like mistress, like maid. As Mrs. Temple ruled the general, Delilah
ruled Simon Peter, her husband, who since the war was butler, coachman,
gardener, and man-of-all-work at Barn Elms. Mrs. Temple, however, ruled
with circumlocution as well as circumspection, and had not words
sufficient to condemn women who attempt to govern their husbands. But
Delilah had no such scruples, and frequently treated Simon Peter to
remarks like these:

"Menfolks is mighty consequenchical. Dey strut 'bout, an' dey cusses an'
damns, an' de womenfolks do all de thinkin' an' de wukkin'. How long you
think ole marse keep dis heah plantation if it warn't fur mistis?"

"Look a heah, 'oman," Simon Peter would retaliate, when intolerably
goaded, "Paul de 'postle say--"

"What anybody keer fur Paul de 'postle? Womenfolks ain' got no use fur
dat ole bachelor. Men is cornvenient fur ter tote water, an' I ain' seen
nuttin' else much dey is good fur."

Simon Peter's entire absence of style partly accounted for the low
opinion of his abilities entertained by his better half. He was slouchy
and sheep-faced, and, when he appeared upon great occasions in one of
General Temple's cast-off coats, the tails dragged the ground, while
the sleeves had to be turned back nearly to the elbow. Delilah, on the
contrary, was as tall as a grenadier, and had an air of command second
only to General Temple himself and much more genuine. She was addicted
to loud, linsey-woolsey plaids, and on her head was an immaculately
white "handkercher" knotted into a turban that would have done credit
to the Osmanlis.

The war had given General Temple the opportunity of his lifetime. He
"tendered his sword to his State," as he expressed it, immediately
organized Temple's Brigade, and thereafter won a reputation as the
bravest and most incompetent commander of his day. His ideas of a
brigade commander were admirably suited to the middle ages. He would
have been great with Richard Coeur de Lion at the siege of Ascalon,
but of modern warfare the general was as innocent as a babe. It was
commonly reported that, the first time he led his brigade into action,
he did not find it again for three days. His men called him Pop, and
always cheered him vociferously, but pointedly declined to follow him
wherever he should lead, which was invariably where he oughtn't to have
been. He had innumerable horses shot under him, but, by a succession of
miracles, escaped wounds or capture. It was a serious mortification to
the general that he should have come out of the war with both arms and
both legs; and it was marvelous, considering that he put himself in
direct line of fire upon every possible occasion, and galloped furiously
about, waving his sword whenever he was in a particularly ticklish
place.

Since the war General Temple had found congenial employment in studying
the art of war as exemplified in books, and in writing a History of
Temple's Brigade. As he knew less about it than any man in it, his
undertaking was a considerable one, especially as he had to give a
personal sketch, with pedigree and anecdotes, of every member of the
brigade. He had started out to complete this great work in three
volumes, but it looked as if ten would be nearer the mark. As regards
the theory of war, General Temple soon became an expert, and knew by
heart every campaign of importance from those of Hannibal, the one-eyed
son of Hamilcar, down to Appomattox. A good deal of the money that would
have paid his taxes went into the general's military library, which
was a source of endless pride to him, and which caused the History of
Temple's Brigade to be, in some sort, a history of all wars, ancient
and modern.

The pride and satisfaction this literary work of his gave the general's
honest heart can not be described. He read passages of it aloud to Mrs.
Temple and Judith and Jacqueline in the solemn evenings in the old
country-house, his resonant voice echoing through the old-fashioned,
low-pitched drawing-room. Mrs. Temple listened sedately and admiringly,
and thanked Heaven for having given her this prodigy of valor and
learning. Nor, after hearing the History of Temple's Brigade all the
evening, was she wearied when, at two o'clock in the morning, General
Temple would have a wakeful period, and striding up and down the
bedroom floor, wrapped in a big blanket over his dressing-gown,
declaimed and dissected all the campaigns of the war, from Big Bethel to
Appomattox. Mrs. Temple, sitting up in bed, with the most placid air in
the world, would listen, and thank and admire and love more than ever
this hero, whom she had wrapped around her finger for the last thirty
years. O blessed ignorance--O happy blindness of women! which gracious
boon God has not withheld from any of the sex. But there was something
else that made General Temple's long-winded war stories so deeply,
tragically interesting to Mrs. Temple. There had been a son--the husband
of the handsome daughter-in-law--Mrs. Temple could not yet speak his
name without a sob in her voice. That was what she had given to the
great fight. When the news of his death came, General Temple, who had
never before dreamed of helping Mrs. Temple's stronger nature, had
ridden night and day to be with her at that supreme moment, knowing that
the blow would crush her if it did not kill her. She came out of the
furnace alive but unforgetting. She would not herself forget Beverley,
nor would she allow anybody else to forget him. She remembered his
anniversaries, she cherished his belongings; she, this tender,
excellent, self-sacrificing woman, sacrificed, as far as she could,
herself and everybody else to the memory of the dead and gone Beverley.
As fast as one crape band on the general's hat wore out, she herself,
with trembling hands, sewed another one on. As for herself, she would
have thought it sacrilege to have worn anything but the deepest black;
and Judith, after four years of widowhood, wore, whether willingly or
unwillingly, the severest widow's garb. Jacqueline alone had been
suffered, out of consideration for her youth and the general's pleading,
to put on colors. The girl, who was beautiful and simple, but quite
different from other girls, in her heart cherished a hatred against this
memory of the dead, that had made her youth so sad, so encompassed with
death. Jacqueline loved life and feared death; and whenever her mother
began to speak of Beverley, which she did a dozen times a day,
Jacqueline's shoulders would twitch impatiently. She longed to say:
"What is he to us? He is dead--and we live. Why can't he be allowed to
rest in peace, like other dead people?" Jacqueline was far from
heartless; she loved her sister-in-law twice as well as she had ever
loved her handsome silent brother, whose death made no gap in her life,
but had ruthlessly barred out all brightness from it. Jacqueline, in
her soul, longed for luxury and comfort. All the discrepancies and
deficiencies at Barn Elms were actually painful to her, although she had
been used to them all her life. She wanted a new piano instead of the
wheezy old machine in the drawing-room. She wanted a thousand things,
and, to make her dissatisfaction with Barn Elms more complete, not a
quarter of a mile away, across a short stretch of feathery pine-trees,
on a knoll, stood a really great house, Millenbeck by name. To
Jacqueline's inexperienced eyes, the large square brick house, with its
stone balustrade around the roof, its broad porch, with marble steps
that shone whitely through the trees around it, was quite palatial. And
nobody at all lived there. It was the family place of the Throckmortons.
The last Throckmorton in the county was dead and gone; but there was
another--grandson to the last--a certain Major George Throckmorton, who,
although Virginian born and bred, had remained in the regular army all
through the war, and was still in it. This George Throckmorton had spent
his boyhood at Millenbeck with his grandfather, who was evil tempered
and morose, and thoroughly wicked in every way. The old man had gone to
his account during the war, and since then his creditors had been
fighting over his assets, which consisted of Millenbeck alone. Major
Throckmorton had money, and it had been whispered about that, whenever
Millenbeck was sold, this army Throckmorton would buy it. But it was
freely predicted that he would never dare show his face in his native
county after his turpitude during the war in fighting against his State,
and he was commonly alluded to as a traitor. Nevertheless, at Severn
church, one Sunday, it was said that this Throckmorton had bought
Millenbeck, and would shortly make his appearance there.

General and Mrs. Temple, as they sat on opposite sides of the fireplace
at Barn Elms, discussing the matter with the profound gravity that the
advent of a new neighbor in the country requires, to say nothing of the
sensation of having a traitor at one's doors, came nearer disagreeing
than usual. The night was cool, although it was early in September, and
a little fire sparkled cheerfully upon the brass andirons on the hearth
in the low-pitched, comfortable, shabby drawing-room. Mrs. Temple,
clicking her knitting-needles placidly, with her soft eyes fixed on the
fire, went over the enormity of those to whom Beverley's death was due.
To her, the gentlest and at the same time the sternest of women, the war
took on a personal aspect that would have been ludicrous had it not been
pathetic. Ah! what was that boy that Beverley had left, what was Judith
the young widow, or even Jacqueline, to that lost son? Nothing, nothing!
Mrs. Temple, still gazing at the fire, saw in her mind, as she saw every
hour of the day and many of the night, the dead man lying stark and
cold; and, as if in answer to her thoughts, General Temple spoke, laying
down his volume of Jomini:

"My love, what will you do--ahem! what would you recommend me to do
regarding George Throckmorton when he arrives? Speak frankly, my dear,
and do not be timid about giving me your opinion."

A curious kind of resentment shone in Mrs. Temple's face.

"It is not for a woman to guide her husband; but _we_ at least can not
forget what the war has cost us."

General Temple sighed. He had heard that Throckmorton had got a year's
leave and would probably spend it at Millenbeck. How fascinating did the
prospect appear of a real military man with whom he could discuss plans
of campaign, and flank movements, and reconnaissances, and all the
_technique_ of war in which his soul delighted! For, although Dr.
Wortley had become a great military critic, as everybody was in those
days, he had never smelt powder, and was a very inferior antagonist for
a brigadier-general, who had been in sixteen pitched battles without
understanding the first thing about any of them.

Jacqueline, who sat in her own little chair, with her feet on a
footstool, and her elbows on her knees, began in an injured voice:

"And the house is going to be perfectly grand. Mrs. Sherrard told me
about it to-day. A whole parcel of people"--Jacqueline was a provincial,
although an amazingly pretty one--"a whole parcel of people came by the
boat--workmen and servants, and most splendid furniture, carpets, and
pictures, and cabinets, and all sorts of elegant things--just for those
two men--for there is a young man, too--Jack is his name."

"Yes," said Mrs. Temple, meditatively, as she still clicked her
knitting-needles together with a pleasant musical sound, "the boy must
be about twenty-two. George Throckmorton I well remember was married at
twenty-one to a pretty slip of a girl, so I've heard, who lived a very
little while. He can't be more than forty-four now. He is the last man I
ever supposed would ever turn traitor. He was the finest lad--I remember
him so well when he was a handsome black-eyed boy; and when we were
first married--don't you recollect, my dear?"

General Temple rose gallantly, and, taking Mrs. Temple's hand in his,
kissed it.

"Can you ask me, my love, if I remember anything connected with that
most interesting period of my life?" he asked.

Neither the handsome Judith nor little Jacqueline were at all
discomposed by this elderly love-making, to which they were perfectly
accustomed. A slight blush came into Mrs. Temple's refined, middle-aged
face. It was worth while to coddle a man, and take all the labor of
thinking and acting off his shoulders, for the sake of this delightful
sentiment. Like his courage, General Temple's sentiment was high-flown
but genuine.

"I was about to say," resumed Mrs. Temple, when the general had
returned to his chair, "that when I came to Barn Elms a bride, George
Throckmorton was much here. You did not notice him, my love, as I
did--but I felt sorry for the boy; old George Throckmorton certainly was
a most godless person. The boy's life would have been quite wretched, I
think, in spite of his grandfather's liberality to him, but for the few
people in the neighborhood like Kitty Sherrard and myself, who tried to
comfort him. He would come over in the morning and stay all day,
following me about the house and garden, trying to amuse Beverley, who
was a mere baby."

Mrs. Temple never spoke the name of her dead son without a strange
little pause before it.

"And, my dear," answered the general, making another feeble effort, "can
you not now embrace the scriptural injunction?"

"The Scripture says," responded sternly this otherwise gentle and
Christian soul, "that there is a time to love and a time to hate."

All this time, Judith, the young widow, had not said a word. She was
slight and girlish-looking. Her straight dark brows were drawn with a
single line, and in her eyes were gleams of mirth, of intelligence, of a
love of life and its pleasures, that habitual restraint could not wholly
subdue. When she rose, or when she sat down, or when she walked about,
or when she arched her white neck, there was a singular grace, of which
she was totally unconscious. Something about her suggested both love and
modesty. But Fate, that had used her as if she were a creature without a
soul, had married her to Beverley Temple--and within two months she was
a widow. The shock, the horror of it, the willingness to idealize the
dead man, had made her quietly assume the part of one who is done with
this world. And Nature struggles vainly with Fate. Judith, in her black
gown, and a widow's cap over her chestnut hair, with her pretty air of
wisdom and experience, fancied she had sounded the whole gamut of human
love, grief, loss, and joy. Neither Millenbeck, nor anything but
Beverley's child and his father and mother and sister, mattered anything
to her, she thought.

Jacqueline, however, looked rebellious, but said nothing. Like her
father, she was under the rule of this soft-voiced mother. But it
was certainly very hard, thought Jacqueline, bitterly, that with
Millenbeck beautifully fitted up, with a delightful young man like Jack
Throckmorton--for Jacqueline had already endowed him with all the graces
and virtues--and a not old man, a soldier too, should be right at their
doors, and she never to have a glimpse of Millenbeck, nor a chance for
walks and drives with them. Jacqueline sighed profoundly, and looked
despairingly at Judith, who was the stay, the prop, the comforter of
this undisciplined young creature.




CHAPTER II.


Within a few days Throckmorton and Jack Throckmorton--the traitor and
the traitor's son--had arrived at Millenbeck.

Jacqueline could talk of nothing but the dawning splendors of the place.
Delilah, who had an appetite for the marvelous scarcely inferior to
Jacqueline's, kept her on the rack with curiosity.

"Dey done put Bruskins carpets all over de house," she retailed solemnly
into Jacqueline's greedy ears, "an' velvet sofys an' cheers, an' de
lookin'-glasses from de garret ter de cellar. An' dey got a white man
name' Sweeney--mighty po' white trash, Simon Peter say--dat is a white
nigger, an' he talk mighty cu'rus. Simon Peter he meet him in de road,
an' dis heah Mis' Sweeney he ax him ef dey was any Orrish gentmans 'bout
here. Simon Peter he say he never heerd o' no sich things ez Orrish
gentmans, an' Mis' Sweeney he lif' up he stick, an' Simon Peter he took
ter he heels an' Mis' Sweeney arter him, an' Simon Peter 'low ef he
hadn't run down in de swamp, Mis' Sweeney would er kilt him, sho'! An'
he doan' min' blackin' de boots at Millenbeck an' milk de cows, an' den
he dress up fine an' wait on de table--an' he a white man, too! He done
tell some folks he wuz a soldier an' fit, an' he gwine ev'ywhar Marse
George Throckmorton go, ef it twuz hell itself. Things is monst'ous fine
at Millenbeck--_dat_ dey is--an' all fur dem two menfolks. Seem like God
A'mighty done give all de good times ter de menfolks an' all de hard
times ter de womenfolks."

"Is that so, mammy?" asked Jacqueline, dolefully, who was simple of
soul, and disposed to believe everything Delilah told her.

"Dat 'tis, chile, ez sho'--ez sho' ez God's truf. De menfolks jes' lives
fur ter be frustratin' an' owdacious ter de po' womenfolks, what byar de
burdens. I tell Simon Peter so ev'y day; but dat nigger he doan' worrit
much 'bout what de po' womenfolks has got ter orndure. Men is mighty
po', vain, weak creetures--_I_ tell Simon Peter dat too ev'y day."

"Dat you does," piously responded Simon Peter.

The windows to Judith's room possessed a strange fascination in those
days for Jacqueline, because they looked straight out to Millenbeck.
There she stood for hours, dreaming, speculating, thinking out aloud.

"Just think, Judith; there is a great big hall there that mamma says has
a splendid dancing-floor!"

"Jacky, stop thinking about Millenbeck and the dancing-floor. It doesn't
concern you, and you know that mother will never let you speak to
either of the Throckmortons," answered Judith.

"Yes, I know it," said Jacqueline, disconsolately. "The more's the pity.
Papa is dying to be friends with them when they come; but, of course,
mamma won't let him."

Jacqueline's voice was usually high-pitched, rapid, and musical, but
whenever she meant to be saucy she brought it down to great meekness
and modesty.

"Major Throckmorton, you know, is a widower. I don't believe in grieving
forever, like mamma. Suppose, now, Judith, _you_ should--"

But Judith, whose indulgence to Jacqueline rarely failed, now rose up
with a pale face.

"Jacqueline, you forget yourself."

Usually one rebuke of the sort was enough for Jacqueline, but this time
it was not. She came and clasped Judith around the waist, and held her
tight, looking into her eyes with a sort of timid boldness.

"Just let me say one thing. Mamma is sacrificing all of us--you and me
and papa--to--to Beverley--"

"Hush, Jacqueline!"

"No, I won't hush. Judith, how long was it from the time you first met
Beverley until you married him?"

"Two months."

"And how much of that time were you together?"

"Two--weeks," answered Judith, falteringly.

"And then you married him, and you had hardly any honeymoon, didn't
you?"

"A very short one."

"And Beverley went away, and never came back."

There was a short silence. Jacqueline was nerving herself to say what
had been burning upon her lips for long.

"Then--then, Judith, he was so little _in_ your life--he was so little
_of_ your life."

"But, Jacqueline, when one loves, it makes no difference whether it is a
month or a year."

"Yes, when one loves; but, Judith, did you love Beverley _that_ way?"

Judith stood quite still and pale. The thought was then put in words
that had haunted her. She no longer thought of answering Jacqueline, but
of answering herself. Was it, indeed, because she was so young, so
entirely alone in the world, and, in truth, had known so little of the
man she married, that it became difficult for her to recall even his
features; that she felt something like a pang of conscience when Mrs.
Temple spoke his name; that this perpetual kindness to his father and
his mother seemed a sort of reparation? Jacqueline, seeing the change
in Judith's face, went softly out of the room. Judith stood where
Jacqueline had left her. Presently the door opened, and little Beverley
came in, and made a dash for his mother. Judith seized him in her arms,
and knelt down before him, and for the thousandth time tried to find
a trace of his father in his face. But there was none. His eyes, his
mouth, his expression, were all hers. Even the little bronze rings of
hair that escaped from under her widow's cap were faithfully reproduced
on the child's baby forehead. This strong resemblance to his mother was
a thorn in Mrs. Temple's side. She would have had the boy his father's
image. She would have had him grave and given to serious, thoughtful
games, and to hanging about older people, such as her Beverley had been;
but this merry youngster was always laughing when he was not crying, and
was noisy and troublesome, as most healthy young animals are. Yet she
adored him.

The boy soon got tired of his mother's arms around him, and
uncomfortable under her tender, searching gaze.

"I want to go to my mammy," he lisped.

Judith rose and led him by the hand down-stairs to Delilah. The child
ran to his mammy with a shout of delight. His mother sometimes awed his
baby soul with her gravity, when he had been naughty. Often he could not
get what he wanted by crying for it, and got smart slaps upon his plump
little palms when he cried. But with Delilah there was none of this.
Delilah represented a beneficent Providence to him, which permitted
naughtiness, and had no limit to jam and buttermilk.

The Throckmortons had at last come, but had kept very close to
Millenbeck for a week or two after their arrival in the county; but on
one still, sunny September Sunday at Severn church, just as the Rev.
Edmund Morford appeared out of the little robing-room, after having
surveyed himself carefully in the mite of a looking-glass, and satisfied
himself that his adornment was in keeping with his beauty, two gentlemen
came in quietly at a side door, and took their seats in the first vacant
pew. They looked more like an elder and a younger brother than father
and son. Both had the same square-shouldered, well-knit figures, not
over middle height--the same contour of face, the same dark eyes. But it
was a type which was at its best in maturity. Major Throckmorton was
much the handsomer man of the two, although, as Judith Temple said some
time after, when called upon to describe him, that handsome scarcely
applied to him--he was rather distinguished than actually handsome--and
she blushed unnecessarily as she said it. His hair and mustache were
quite iron-gray, and he had the unmistakable look and carriage of a
military man. The pew they took near the door was against the wall of
the church, and in effect facing the Temple pew, where sat all the
family from Barn Elms, including little Beverley, who looked a picture
of childish misery, compelled to be preternaturally good, until sleep
overcame him, and his yellow mop of hair fell over against his mother.
Young Throckmorton, whose eyes were full of a sort of gay curiosity, let
his gaze wander furtively over the congregation, and in two minutes knew
every pretty face in the church. The two prettiest were unquestionably
in the Temple pew. Without boldness or obtrusiveness, he managed to keep
every glance and every motion in that pew in sight; and Jacqueline, by
something like psychic force, knew it, and conveyed to him the idea that
no glance of his escaped her. Nevertheless, she was very devout, and the
only look she gave him was over the top of her prayer-book. Judith,
with her large, clear gaze fixed on the clergyman, was in her way as
conscious as Jacqueline. But Throckmorton saw nothing and nobody for a
time, except that he was back again in Severn church after thirty years.
How well he remembered it all!--the little dark gallery to the right of
the pulpit, where in the old times Mrs. Temple and Mrs. Sherrard had
sat, and sung the old, old hymns, their sweet, untrained voices rising
into the dark, cobwebbed, resonant roof--voices as natural as that of
the sweet, shy singing birds that twittered under the eaves of the old
church, and built their nests safely and peacefully in the solemn yews
and weeping-willows of the burying-ground close by. The September
sunlight, as it sifted through the windows on the heads of the kneeling
people--even the droning of the honey-bees outside, and the occasional
incursion of a buzzing marauder through the windows--made him feel as if
he were in a dream. It was not the recollection of a happy boyhood that
had brought him back to Millenbeck. He remembered his grandfather as an
old curmudgeon, the terror of his negroes and dependents, wasteful, a
high liver, and a hard drinker; and himself a lonely boy, with neither
mother nor sister, nor any sort of kindness to brighten his boyish soul,
except those good women, Mrs. Temple and Mrs. Sherrard. Deep down in his
being was that Anglo-Saxon love of the soil--the desire to return whence
he came. He knew much of the world, and doubted if the experiment of
returning to Millenbeck would succeed, but he at least determined to try
it. He had no very serious notion of abandoning his profession, which he
loved, while he grumbled at it, but he had had this project of a year's
leave, to be spent at Millenbeck, in his mind for a long, long time, and
he wanted Jack to own the place. Himself the most unassuming of men, he
cherished, unknown to those who knew him best, a strong desire that his
name should be kept up in Virginia where it had been known so long.
With scarcely a word on the subject spoken between father and son, Jack
had the same drift of sentiment. Both had inherited from dead and gone
generations a clinging to old things, old forms, that made itself felt
in the strenuous modern life, and even a sturdy family pride that native
good sense concealed.

The Rev. Edmund Morford, along with his unfortunate excess of good
looks, inherited a rich, strong voice, in which he rolled out the
liturgy with great elocutionary effect. He saw the two strangers in the
congregation, and at once divined who they were, and determined to give
them a sermon that would show them what stuff parsons were made of in
Virginia. He was much struck by the scrupulousness with which Major
Throckmorton went through the service, which the Rev. Edmund attributed
partly to his own telling way of rendering it. But in truth,
Throckmorton neither saw nor heard the Rev. Edmund. He went through the
forms with a certain military precision that very often passed for
strict attention, as in this case, but he was still under the spell of
the bygone time. Mr. Morford gave out a hymn, and the congregation rose,
Throckmorton standing up straight like a soldier at attention. After a
little pause, a voice rose. It was so sweet, so pure, that Throckmorton
involuntarily turned toward the singer. It was Judith Temple, her clear
profile well marked against her black veil, which also brought out
the deep tints of her eyes and hair, and the warm paleness of her
complexion. She sang quite composedly and unaffectedly, a few women's
voices, Mrs. Temple's among the rest, joining in timidly, but her full
soprano carried the simple air. Her head was slightly thrown back as she
sang, and apparently she knew the words of the hymn by heart, as she did
not once refer to the book held open before her.

There is something peculiarly touching in female voices unaccompanied.
Throckmorton thought so as he came out of his waking dream and glanced
about him. In an instant he took in the pathetic story of war and ruin
and loss that was written all over the assembled people. Many of the
women were in mourning, and the men had a jaded, haggard, hopeless look.
They had all been through with four years of harrowing, and they showed
it. In the Temple pew Mrs. Temple and Judith were in the deepest
mourning, and General Temple wore around his hat the black band that
Mrs. Temple would never let him take off.

Throckmorton's eye rested for a moment in approval on Judith, and then
on Jacqueline, but he looked at Jacqueline the longest.

Then, after the hymn, Mr. Morford began his sermon. It was electrifying
in a great many unexpected ways. Throckmorton, who knew something about
most things, saw through Morford's shallow Hebraism, and inwardly
scoffed at the cheerful insufficiency with which the most abstruse
biblical problems were attacked. Morford's candor, confidence, and
perfect good faith tickled Throckmorton; he felt like smiling once or
twice, but, on looking around, he saw that everybody, except those who
were asleep, took Morford at his own valuation; except the young woman
with the widow's veil about her clear-cut face, whose eyes, fixed
attentively on Mr. Morford, had something quizzical in their expression.
Throckmorton at once divined a sense of humor in that grave young widow
that was conspicuously lacking in Jacqueline, who listened, bored but
awed, to the preacher's sounding periods.

The sermon was long and loud, and there was another hymn, sung in the
simple and touching way that went to Throckmorton's heart, and then a
dramatic benediction, after the Rev. Edmund had announced that the next
Sunday, "in the morning, the Lord will be with us, and in the evening
the bishop. I need not urge you, beloved brethren, to be prepared for
the bishop."

Then the congregation streamed out for their weekly gossip in the
churchyard. Throckmorton and Jack went out, too. No one spoke to them,
nor did they speak to any one. As a matter of fact, there were not half
a dozen people there that Throckmorton would have recognized; but he
was perfectly well known to everybody in the church, who, but for the
uniform he had worn, would have greeted him cordially and generously,
recalling themselves to him. But now they all held coldly and
determinedly aloof. Throckmorton, who was slow to imagine offense, did
not all at once take it in. But he would not lose a moment in speaking
to Mrs. Temple, one of the few persons he recognized, and the one most
endeared to him in his early recollections. The Temples, possibly to
avoid him, had made straight for the iron gate of the churchyard, and
stood outside the wall, waiting for the tumble-down carriage.
Throckmorton quickened his pace, and went up to Mrs. Temple, carrying
his hat in his hand.

"Mrs. Temple, have you forgotten George Throckmorton?" he asked in his
pleasant voice.

Mrs. Temple turned to him with a somber look on her gentle face.

"No, I have not forgotten you, George Throckmorton. But you and I are
widely apart. Between us is a great gulf, and war and sorrow."

A deep flush dyed Throckmorton's dark face. He was not prepared for
this, but he could not all at once give up this friendship, the memory
of which had lasted through all the years since his boyhood.

"The war is over," he said; "we can't be forever at war."

"It is enough for _you_ to say," she replied. "You have your son. Where
is mine?"

"As well call me to account for the death of Abel. Dear Mrs. Temple,
haven't you any recollection of the time when you were almost the only
friend I had? I have few enough left, God knows."

Here General Temple came to the front. In his heart he was anxious to
be friends with Throckmorton, and did not despair of obtaining Mrs.
Temple's permission eventually. He held out his hand solemnly to
Throckmorton.

"_I_ can shake hands with you, George Throckmorton," he said, and
then, turning to Mrs. Temple, "for the sake of what is past, my love,
let us be friends with George Throckmorton."

Throckmorton, who in his life had met with few rebuffs, was cruelly
wounded. In all those years he had cherished an ideal of womanly and
motherly tenderness in Mrs. Temple, and she was the one person in his
native county on whose friendship he counted. He looked down, indignant
and abashed, and in the next moment looked up boldly and encountered
Judith's soft, expressive eyes fixed on him so sympathetically that he
involuntarily held out his hand, saying:

"You, at least, will shake hands with me."

Judith, who strove hard to bring her high spirit down to Mrs. Temple's
yoke, did not always succeed. She held out her hand impulsively. The
spectacle of this manly man, rebuffed with Mrs. Temple's strange power,
touched her.

"And this," continued Throckmorton, out of whose face the dull red had
not yet vanished, turning to Jacqueline, "must be a little one that I
have not before seen.--Mrs. Temple, I can't force you to accept my
friendship, but I want to assure you that nothing--nothing can ever make
me forget your early kindness to me."

Mrs. Temple opened her lips once or twice before words came. Then she
spoke.

"George Throckmorton, you think perhaps that, being a soldier, you know
what war is. You do not. I, who sat at home and prayed and wept for four
long years, for my husband and my son, and to whom only one came back,
when I had sent forth two--_I_ know what it is. But God has willed it
all. We must forgive. Here is my hand--and show me your son."

Throckmorton, whose knowledge of Mrs. Temple was intimate, despite that
long stretch of years, knew what even this small compromise had cost
her. He motioned to Jack, who was surveying the scene, surprised and
rather angry, from a little distance. The young fellow came up, and Mrs.
Temple looked at him very hard, a film gathering in her eyes.

"I am glad you have such a son. Such was our son."

The carriage was now drawn up, and General Temple looked agonizingly at
Mrs. Temple. He wanted her to invite Throckmorton to Barn Elms, but
Mrs. Temple said not one word. Throckmorton, in perfect silence, helped
the ladies into the carriage. He did not know whether to be gratified
that Mrs. Temple had conceded so much, or mortified that she had
conceded so little.

Jacqueline in the carriage gave him a friendly little nod. Judith leaned
forward and bowed distinctly and politely. General Temple, holding his
hat stiffly against his breast, remarked in his most grandiose manner:
"As two men who have fought on opposing sides--as two generous enemies,
my dear Throckmorton--I offer you my hand. I did my best against you in
my humble way"--General Temple never did anything in a humble way in his
life, and devoutly believed that the exploits of Temple's Brigade had
materially influenced the result--"but, following the example of our
immortal chieftain, Robert Lee, I say again, here is my hand."

A twinkle came into Throckmorton's eye. This was the same Beverley
Temple of twenty-five years ago, only a little more magniloquent than
ever and a little more under Mrs. Temple's thumb. Throckmorton,
repressing a smile, shook hands cordially.

"Neither of us has any apologies to make, general," he said. "I think
that ugly business is over for good. I feel more friendly toward my own
unfortunate people now than ever before. Good-by."

The general then made a stately ascent into the carriage, banged the
door, and rattled off.

Short as the scene had been, it made a deep impression upon Judith
Temple. Throckmorton's dignity--the tender sentiment that he had
cherished for his early friends--struck her forcibly. The very tones of
his voice, his soldierly carriage, his dark, indomitable eye, were so
impressed upon her imagination that, had she never seen him again, she
would never have forgotten him. It was an instant and powerful
attraction that had made her hold out her hand and smile at him.

Throckmorton, without trying the experiment of hunting up any more old
friends, turned to walk home. It was a good four-mile stretch, and
usually he stepped out at a smart gait that put Jack to his trumps to
keep up with. But to-day he sauntered along so slowly, through the woods
and fields with his hat over his eyes and his hands behind him, that
Jack lost patience and struck off ahead, leaving Throckmorton alone,
much to his relief.

Throckmorton wanted to think it all over. In his heart there was not
one grain of resentment toward Mrs. Temple. He thought he understood
the workings of her strong but simple nature perfectly well, and he
did not doubt the ultimate goodness of her heart. And General
Temple--Throckmorton had heard something of the general's magnificent
incapacity during the war--the bare idea of General Temple as a
commander made him laugh. How sweet were Mrs. Beverley's eyes, and how
demure she looked when she dropped them at some particularly solemn
absurdity of the clergyman, as if she were afraid somebody would see
the tell-tale gleam in them! The little girl, though, was the most
fascinating creature he had seen for long. How strangely and how
pitifully altered was the congregation of Severn church from the merry
prosperous country gentry he remembered so long ago! And how quiet, how
still was life there! All his usual every-day life was shut out from
him. Within the circle of that perfect repose nothing disquieting could
come. He stopped in the country lane and listened. Nothing broke the
solemn calm except the droning of the locusts in the September noon.
Warm as it was, there was a hint of autumn in the atmosphere.
Occasionally the clarion cry of a hawk circling in the blue air pierced
the silence.

"This, then, is peace," said Throckmorton to himself, and thought of the
year of idleness and repose before him. "Nothing ever happens here," he
continued, thinking. "Even the tragedy of the war was at a distance. As
Mrs. Temple says, the men went forth, and those that came back will go
forth no more."

Then he began to think over the way in which the people had completely
ignored him in the churchyard, where they stopped and gossiped with each
other, eying him askance. He knew perfectly well the estimate they put
upon him. He could have supplied the very word--"traitor." This made him
feel a sort of bitterness, which he consoled with the reflection--

"Most men of principle have to suffer for those principles at some time
or other."

By this time he was at his own grounds, and Sweeney's honest Irish face,
glowing with indignation, was watching out for him.

"Be the powers," snorted Sweeney to the black cook, "the murtherin'
rebels took no more notice of the major than if he'd been an ould
hat--an' he's a rale gintleman, fit ter dine with the Prisident, as he
often has, an' all the g'yurls has been tryin' to hook him fur twinty
years, bless their hearts, an' the major as hard as a stone to the dear
things, every wan of 'em!"




CHAPTER III.


Within a week or two after, one afternoon Mrs. Kitty Sherrard made her
appearance at Barn Elms, with a great project in hand. She meant to give
a party.

Party-giving was Mrs. Sherrard's idiosyncrasy. According to the usual
system in Virginia, during the lifetime of the late Mr. Sherrard, there
was much frolicking, dancing, and hilarity at Turkey Thicket, the
Sherrard place, and a corresponding narrowness of income and general
behindhandedness. But since Mr. Sherrard's death Mrs. Sherrard, along
with the unvarying and sublime confidence in her husband, dead or alive,
that characterizes Virginia women, had yet entirely abandoned Mr.
Sherrard's methods. The mortgage on Turkey Thicket had been paid off,
the whole place farmed on common-sense principles, and the debts
declared inevitable by Mr. Sherrard carefully avoided. As a matter of
fact, the only people in the county who paid their taxes promptly were
the widows, who nevertheless continually lamented that they were
deprived of the great industry, foresight, and business capacity of
their defunct lords and masters. Mrs. Sherrard gave as many parties in
Mr. Sherrard's lifetime as she did after his death; but, since that
melancholy event, the parties were paid for, not charged on account.

When this startling information about the coming festivity was imparted,
Jacqueline, who was sitting in her own low chair by the fire, gave a
little jump.

"And," said Mrs. Sherrard, who was a courageous person, "I'll tell you
what I am giving it for. It is to get the county people to meet George
Throckmorton. Not a human being in the county has called on him, except
Edmund Morford, and I fairly drove him to it. He began some of his
long-winded explanations. 'Aunt Kitty,' he said, 'what am I, even though
I be a minister of the gospel, that I should set myself up against the
spirit of the community, which is against recognizing Throckmorton?'
'What are you, indeed, my dear boy,' I answered. 'I'm not urging you to
go, because it's a matter of the slightest consequence what you do or
what you don't, but merely for your own sake, because it is illiberal
and unchristian of you not to go.' Now, Edmund is a good soul, for all
his nonsense."

Mrs. Temple was horrified at this way of speaking of the young rector.

"And I've intimated to him that I'm about to make my will--I haven't the
slightest notion of doing it for the next twenty years--but the mere
hint always brings Edmund to terms, and so he went over to Millenbeck to
call. He came back perfectly delighted. The house is charming,
Throckmorton is a prince of hospitality, and I don't suppose poor Edmund
ever was treated with so much consideration by a man of sense in his
life before." Mrs. Temple groaned, but Mrs. Sherrard kept on, cutting
her eye at Judith, who was the only person at Barn Elms that knew a joke
when she saw it. Judith bent over her work, laughing. "I met
Throckmorton in the road next day. 'So you dragooned the parson into
calling on the Philistine,' he said. Of course I tried to deny it, after
a fashion; but Throckmorton won't be humbugged--can't be, in fact--and I
had to own up. 'You can't say Edmund's not a gentleman,' said I, 'and he
is the most good-natured poor soul; and if he had broken his nose, or
got cross-eyed in early youth, he really would have cut quite a
respectable figure in the world.' 'That's true,' answered George,
laughing, and looking so like he did long years ago, 'but you'll admit,
Mrs. Sherrard, that he is too infernally handsome for his own good.'
'Decidedly,' said I."

"Katharine Sherrard," solemnly began Mrs. Temple, who habitually called
Mrs. Sherrard Kitty, except at weddings and funerals, and upon occasions
like the present, when her feelings were wrought up, "the way you talk
about Edmund Morford is a grief and a sorrow to me. He is a clergyman of
our church, and it is not becoming for women to deride the men of their
own blood. Men must rule, Katharine Sherrard. It is so ordered by the
divine law."

"Jane Temple," answered Mrs. Sherrard, "you may add by the human law,
too; but some women--"

"Set both at naught," answered Mrs. Temple, piously and sweetly.

"They do, indeed," fervently responded Mrs. Sherrard, having in view
General Temple's complete subjugation. "But now about the party. The
general must come, of course. I wish I could persuade you."

"I have not been to a party since before the war, and now I shall never
go to another one."

"But Judith and Jacqueline will come."

At this a deep flush rose in Judith's face.

"I don't go to parties, Mrs. Sherrard."

"I know; but you must come to this one."

Mrs. Temple set her lips and said nothing, but Jacqueline, who sometimes
asserted herself at unlooked-for times, spoke up:

"If Judith doesn't go, I--I--sha'n't go."

"You hear that?" asked Mrs. Sherrard, delighted at Jacqueline's spirit.
"Stick to it, child; there is no reason why Judith shouldn't come."

Here General Temple entered and greeted Mrs. Sherrard elaborately. Mrs.
Sherrard immediately set to work on the general. She knew perfectly well
that he could do no more in the case than Simon Peter could, but she
poured her fire into him, thinking a stray shot might hit Mrs. Temple.
Judith remained quite silent. She was too sincere of soul to say she did
not want to go; and yet going to parties was quite out of that life of
true widowhood she had laid down for herself; and life was intolerably
dull. She loved gayety and brightness, and her whole life was clothed
with somberness. She was full of ideas, and loved books, and nobody in
the house ever read a line except General Temple, and his reading was
confined to the science of war, for which he would certainly never have
any use. She was full of quick turns of repartee, that, when she
indulged them, almost frightened Mrs. Temple, who had the average
woman's incapacity for humor. Mrs. Sherrard and herself were great
friends--and friends were not too plentiful with Mrs. Sherrard, whose
tongue was a two-edged sword. Nevertheless, Mrs. Temple and Mrs.
Sherrard had been intimate all their lives, and Mrs. Sherrard was one of
the few persons who ever took liberties with Mrs. Temple. Mrs. Sherrard
was clear-sighted, and she knew what nobody else did--how starved and
blighted was Judith's life by that stern repression to which she had set
herself; and she had known Beverley Temple, too, and sometimes said to
herself: "Perhaps it is better for Judith as it is, for Beverley, brave
and handsome as he was, yet was a dreadfully ordinary fellow. Luckily,
she was hustled into marrying him so quickly, and she was so young, she
didn't find it out; but if he had lived--"

Mrs. Sherrard departed, impressing upon General Temple that she should
certainly expect to see him at the party, with Judith and Jacqueline.
Simon Peter in the kitchen reported the state of affairs to Delilah, who
remarked:

"Miss Kitty She'ard, she know Miss Judy cyan go twell ole mistis say so.
Ole marse, he got a heap o' flourishes an' he talk mighty big, but
mistis she doan' flourish none; she jes' go 'long quiet like, an' has
her way."

"Dat's so," answered Simon Peter, rubbing his woolly head with an air of
conviction. "Mistis su't'ny is de wheel-hoss in dis heah team."

"An' ain' de womenfolks allus de wheel-hosses? Ole marse he set up an'
he talk 'bout de weather an' de craps, an' he specks de 'lection gwine
discomfuse things, an' he read de paper an' he know more 'n de paper do,
an' he read de Bible an' he know more 'n de Bible do, an' all de time he
ain' got de sperrit uv a chicken."

"De womenfolks kin mos' in gen'ally git dey way," cautiously answered
Simon Peter.

"Yes, dey kin; an' dey is gwine ter, 'long as menfolks is so triflin'
an' owdacious as dey is."

Jacqueline developed a strange obstinacy about the party. She declared
she was dying to go, but she never wavered from her determination not to
go without Judith.

"But your sister does not wish to go, Jacqueline," her mother said to
this.

"But I want her to go, mamma. You can't imagine how I _long_ to go to
this party. It is so very, very dull at Barn Elms--and I have my new
white frock."

"Judith has no frock."

"Oh, yes she has. She has that long black dress, in which she looks so
nice, and she is so clever at sewing she could cut it open at the neck
and turn up the sleeves at the elbow."

Mrs. Temple said nothing more. Jacqueline went about, eager-eyed, but
silent, and possessed of but one idea--the party. A day or two after
this she said bitterly to her mother, when Judith was out of the room:

"Mamma, I know why you are willing to disappoint me about this party. It
is because you love your dead child better than your living one."

Mrs. Temple turned a little pale. The thrust went home, as some of
Jacqueline's thrusts did.

"And if I don't go, I will cry and cry--I will cry that night so loud
in my room that papa will come in, and you know how it vexes him to have
me cry; and it will break my heart--I know it will."

Mrs. Temple went about all day with Jacqueline's words ringing in her
ears. That night, after Jacqueline was in bed, her mother went into the
room. It was a large, old-fashioned room, and Jacqueline's little white
figure, as she sat up in bed, was almost lost in the huge four-poster,
with dimity curtains and valance. The fire still smoldered, and the
spindle-shanked dressing-table, with the glass set in its mahogany
frame, cast unearthly shadows on the floor in the half-light. Mrs.
Temple sat down by the bed. Something like remorse came into the
mother's heart. This child was the least loved by both father and
mother. Jacqueline began at once, in her sweet, nervous voice:

"Mamma, I have been thinking about the party."

"So have I, child."

"And may we go?"

Mrs. Temple paused before she spoke.

"Yes, you and Judith may go," she said presently in a stern voice--ah!
the sternness of these gentle women!

Jacqueline held out her arms fondly to her mother, but Mrs. Temple could
not be magnanimous in defeat. She went out, softly closing the door
behind her, without giving Jacqueline her good-night kiss, but
Jacqueline called after her in a voice tremulous with gratitude and
delight, "Dear, sweet mamma!"

The moment she heard the "charmber-do'," as the negroes called it, shut
down-stairs, Jacqueline slipped out of bed and flew across the dark
passage into Judith's room to tell the wonderful news. Judith was
sitting before the fire, holding her sleeping child in her arms. The boy
had waked and had clung to his mother until she lifted him out of his
little bed. He had gone to sleep directly, but Judith held him close; he
was so little, so babyish, yet so soft and warm and clinging.

"We are going to the party, Judith," said Jacqueline, excitedly,
kneeling down by her.

"Are we?" answered Judith. A gleam came into her eyes very like
Jacqueline's.

"And--and--" continued Jacqueline with a sly, half-laughing glance, "we
will meet Major Throckmorton again."

"Go to bed, Jacqueline," replied Judith in the soft, composed voice that
invariably crushed Jacqueline.

Next morning General Temple showed the most unqualified delight at Mrs.
Temple's capitulation. He considered it becoming, though, to make some
slight protest against going to the party. He thought, perhaps, with his
tendency to gout, it would scarcely be prudent to expose himself to the
night air, and--er--to Kitty Sherrard's chicken salad; and, besides, he
really was not justified in postponing the drawings of some maps to
illustrate the position of Temple's Brigade at the battle of
Chancellorsville; for, like all other dilettanti, General Temple's work
was always of present importance and admitted of no delay whatever.

Mrs. Temple did not smile at this, but treated it with great
seriousness.

"Quite true, my dear; but now that I have promised Jacqueline, I can not
disappoint her. You must go for her sake."

"Rather let me say, my dear Jane, that I go for your sake--your wishes,
my love, being of paramount importance."

For a henpecked man, it was impossible to be more imposing or agreeable
than General Temple. So on the night of the party he was promptly on
hand, at eight o'clock, in his old-fashioned evening coat, the tails
lined with white satin, and wearing a pair of large, white kid gloves.

Jacqueline and Judith soon appeared. Jacqueline, in her new white frock,
looked her prettiest, albeit it showed her youthful thinness and all her
half-grown angles. Judith's beauty was of a sort that could stand the
simplicity of her black gown that revealed her white neck, and, for the
first time since her widowhood, she wore no cap over her red-brown hair.
Delilah and Simon Peter yah-yahed and ki-yied over both of them.

"Dem little foots o' Miss Jacky's in de silk stockin's ain' no bigger
'n little Beverley's, hardly, and Miss Judy she look like de Queen o'
Sheba," delightedly remarked Delilah.

Judith could scarcely meet Mrs. Temple's eyes. She felt inexplicably
guilty. Mrs. Temple examined them critically, though, and the general
was loftily complimentary.

"And, Delilah," said Judith, gathering up her gloves nervously, "be sure
and look after Beverley. He has never been left alone in his life
before."

"I will look after Beverley, Judith," said Mrs. Temple, and Judith
blushed faintly at something in the tone.

All the way, going along the country road in the moonlight, Judith could
feel Jacqueline's little feet moving restlessly with excitement. As they
drove up to the house, and caught glimpses through the open hall-door of
the dancers and heard the sound of music, Jacqueline began to bob up and
down with childish delight.

Like most Virginia country-houses, Turkey Thicket had an immense
entrance hall, which was not heated and was of no earthly use the best
part of the year, and for which all the rooms around it were
unnecessarily cramped. Mrs. Sherrard's hall was of more use to her than
most people's, owing to her party-giving proclivities, and was brightly
lighted up for dancing. As Judith came down the broad stairs on General
Temple's arm, a kind of thrill of surprise went around among the guests.
Nobody expected to see her. Many of them had never seen her except in
her widow's veil and cap. Judith, remembering this, could not restrain a
blushing consciousness that made her not less handsome; and, besides,
her good looks were always full of surprises. One never knew whether she
would be simply pale and pretty, or whether she would blaze out into a
sudden and captivating beauty.

They made their way through the dancers, Jacqueline alternately pale and
red with excitement, and the general bowing right and left, until they
entered the small, old-fashioned drawing-room. Mrs. Sherrard, in a plain
black silk, but with a diamond comb in her white hair and a general air
of superbness, was delighted to see Judith. It was a victory over Jane
Temple. She detained her for a moment to whisper: "My dear, I am
dreadfully afraid I shall make a failure in trying to get George
Throckmorton accepted here. The girls, who most of them never saw so
fine a man before, will hardly have a word to say to him; the men are a
little better, but it isn't a pronounced success by any means. I have
been longing for you to come. You have so much more sense than any of
the young people I know, I thought you would be a little less freezing
to him."

At this a warmer color surged into Judith's cheeks. She could not
remember ever to have seen a man who impressed her so instantly as
Throckmorton. With her clear, feminine instinct, she had seen at the
first glance what manner of man he was. As Mrs. Sherrard spoke to her,
she turned and saw him standing by the fireplace, talking with Edmund
Morford. Throckmorton could not have desired a better foil than the
young clergyman, with his faultless red and white skin, his curling dark
hair, his mouth full of perfect teeth, and his character as a clerical
dandy written all over him. Throckmorton, whose good looks were purely
masculine and characteristic, looked even more manly and soldierly by
contrast. Both men caught sight of Judith at the same moment. Morford
was thrown into a perfect flutter. He wondered if Judith had put on that
square-necked, short-sleeved black gown to do him a mischief.
Throckmorton, obeying a look from Mrs. Sherrard, came forward and was
formally introduced. Judith offered her hand, after the Virginia custom,
which Throckmorton bowed over.

"Mrs. Temple did not present me to you on Sunday," he said, with a smile
and a slight flush; "but I guessed very readily who you were."

Judith, too, colored.

"Poor mother, you must not take her too hardly. You know how good she
is, but--but she is very determined; she moves slowly."

"Yes," replied Throckmorton, with his easy, man-of-the-world manner;
"but I am afraid there are others as unyielding as Mrs. Temple, and not
half so kindly--for she is a dear soul! It seemed to me the carrying out
of a sort of dream to come back to Millenbeck. My boy Jack--that young
fellow yonder--looks rather old to be my son, don't you think?"

"Y-e-s," answered Judith, with provoking dubiousness and a wicked little
smile.

"Oh, you are really too bad! I am very tired of explaining to people
that Jack is nothing like as old as he looks. Well, the boy, although
brought up at army posts, rather wanted to be a Virginian, and to own
the old place; you know that sort of thing always crops out in a
Virginian."

"Yes," smiled Judith; "I see how it crops out in _you_. You are
immensely proud of being a Throckmorton, and you would rather own
Millenbeck, if it were tumbling down about your ears, than the finest
place in the world anywhere else."

"Now, Mrs. Beverley," said Throckmorton, determinedly, "I can't have my
weaknesses picked out in this prompt and savage manner. I own I am a
fool about Millenbeck, but I'd have sworn that nobody but myself knew
it. I've got a year's leave, and I've come down here with Sweeney, an
old ex-sergeant of mine, who has owned me for several years, and my old
horse Tartar, that is turned out to grass; and if I like it as well as I
expect, I may resign"--Throckmorton was always talking about resigning,
as Mrs. Sherrard was about making her will, without the slightest idea
of doing it--"and turn myself out to grass like Tartar. But my reception
hasn't been--a--exactly--cordial--or--"

"I am sorry you have been disappointed," said Judith, gently; "but it
seems to me that we are all in a dreadful sort of transition state now.
We are holding on desperately to our old moorings, although they are
slipping away; but I suppose we shall have to face a new existence some
time."

"I think I understand the feeling here--even that dead wall of prejudice
that meets me. One look around Severn church, last Sunday, would have
told me that those people had gone through with some frightful crisis. I
thought, perhaps being one of their own county people originally might
soften them toward me, but I believe that makes me blacker than ever."

Judith could not deny it.

Throckmorton, who was worldly wise, read Judith at a glance, besides
having learned her history since first seeing her. He saw that she was
under a fixed restraint, and that a word would frighten her into the
deepest reserve. He treated her, therefore, as if she had been a Sister
of Charity. Judith, who made up for her lack of knowledge of the world
by rapid perceptions and natural talents, had seen more quickly than
Throckmorton. Here was a man the like of whom she had not often met.
Throckmorton knew perfectly well the solitary lives these country women
led, and he had often wondered at the singular fortitude they showed. He
set himself to work to find out what chiefly interested this young
woman, who showed such remarkable constancy to her dead husband, but who
gave indications to his practiced eye of secretly loving life and its
concerns very much. He had heard about her pretty boy. At this Judith
colored with pleasure and became positively talkative. Her boy was the
sweetest boy--she would like never to have him out of her sight. Major
Throckmorton, with a sardonic grin, confided to Judith that he would
frequently be highly gratified at having _his_ son out of his sight,
because Jack made the women think he, the major, was a Methuselah, and
covertly made much game of him, for which he would like to kick Jack,
but couldn't.

Judith laughed merrily at this--a laugh so clear and rippling, and yet
so rare, that the sound of it startled her. Was Mrs. Beverley fond of
reading? Mrs. Beverley was very fond of reading, but there was nothing
newer in the array of books at Barn Elms than 1840. Major Throckmorton
would be only too happy to supply her with books. He had had a few boxes
full sent down to Millenbeck. At this Judith blushed, but accepted,
without reflecting how Major Throckmorton was to send books to a house
where he was not permitted to visit.

She also protested that she had read nothing at all scarcely; but
Throckmorton came to find out that, for want of the every-day modern
literature, she was perfectly at home in the English classics, and knew
her Scott and Thackeray like a lesson well learned. He began to find
this gentle intelligence and cordiality amazingly pleasant after the
cold shyness of the girls and the unmistakable keep-your-distance air of
the older women. They sat together so long that Mr. Morford began to
scowl, and think that Mrs. Beverley, after all, was rather a frivolous
person, and with every moment Judith became brighter, gayer, more her
natural charming self.

Meanwhile Jack Throckmorton had carried Jacqueline off for a quadrille,
and was getting on famously. First they remarked on the similarity of
their names, which seemed a fateful coincidence, and Jacqueline
complained that the servants and some other people, too, often shortened
her liquid three syllables with "Jacky," but she hated it. Jack, who had
a sweet, gay voice, and was an inveterate joker, which Jacqueline was
not, amused both her and himself extremely.

"Will you look at the major?" he whispered. "Gone on the pretty widow--I
beg your pardon," he added, turning very red.

"You needn't apologize," calmly remarked Jacqueline. "Judith _is_ a
pretty widow, and the best and kindest sister in the world, besides. It
is all mamma. Mamma loved my brother better than anything, and wants us
all to think about him as much as she does."

Jack, rather embarrassed by these family confidences, parried them with
some confidences of his own.

"I shall have to go over soon and break the major up. You see, there
isn't but twenty-two years' difference between us, and the major is a
great toast among the girls still, which is repugnant to my filial
feelings."

Jacqueline listened gravely and in good faith.

"So, when I see him pleased with a girl, I generally sneak up on the
other side, and manage to get my share of the girl's attention, and call
the major 'father' every two minutes. A man hates to be interfered with
that way, particularly by his own son, which doesn't often happen. The
major has got a cast in one eye, and, whenever he is in a rage, he gets
downright cross-eyed. Sometimes I work him up so, his eyes don't get
straight for a fortnight."

"But doesn't he get very mad with you?" asked Jacqueline in a shocked
voice.

"Of course he does," chuckled Jack; "and that's where the fun comes in.
But, you see, he can't say anything; it is beneath his dignity; but his
temper blazes up, although he doesn't say a word. Sometimes, when I've
run him off two or three times close together, he hardly speaks to me
for a week--not that he cares about the girl particularly, but he hates
to be balked."

"What a nice sort of a son you must be!"

Jack laughed his frank, boyish laugh.

"Why, the major and I are the greatest chums in the world. I would do
anything for him. And if he ever presents me with a step-mother, I'll do
the handsome thing--go to the wedding, and all that. And he's a
fascinating old fellow, too--just takes the girls off their feet."

When the dance was over, Jack brought Jacqueline back to Judith, who
still sat with Throckmorton. Jacqueline's eyes were shining with
childish delight, and she arched her thin white neck restlessly from
side to side.

"I have had such a nice dance!" she cried, breathlessly.

Judith, smiling, said, "Major Throckmorton, this is my little sister
Jacqueline."

Throckmorton, having once fixed his eyes on Jacqueline, seemed unable
to take them off, as on that Sunday he had first seen her in Severn
church. Delilah, who noticed in her primitive way the wonderful power of
attraction that Jacqueline had, used to say, "Miss Jacky she allus
cotches de beaux." She certainly "cotched" Throckmorton's attention from
the first. Something in this slim, unformed, provincial girl was
suddenly captivating to him. His genuine but sane admiration for Judith
seemed tame beside it. Jacqueline, however, only saw a rather striking
man, well on toward old age, in her infantile eyes, and wished herself
back with Jack, when Major Throckmorton took her for a little promenade.
Morford then made up to Judith, but found her singularly cold and
unresponsive, and her eyes and smile were quite far away, over Morford's
head, as it were. The truth is, the Rev. Edmund Morford was a
considerable let-down from George Throckmorton; and, in Judith's starved
and pinched existence, it was something to meet a man of Throckmorton's
caliber. So in place of the charming sweetness Morford had learned to
expect from Judith, he received a cold douche of listlessness and
indifference. All the rest of the evening people noticed that Judith,
who had a good deal of smoldering vivacity under her quietness, was
remarkably cold and silent and rather bored, and they supposed it was
because of her aversion to anything like gayety. In truth, Judith had
realized rather more startlingly than usual the bareness and
colorlessness of her life.

Mrs. Sherrard's effort was a strong one, but, as she said, it was
scarcely a success. General Temple ostentatiously sought out
Throckmorton, and tasted the delights of a discussion regarding the
trans-Alpine campaigns of Hannibal, in which Throckmorton was a modest
listener, and the general a most fiery, earnest, and learned
expounder--a past grand-master of military science. But, on shaking
Throckmorton's hand at saying good-night, with solemn but genuine
effusiveness, he said not one word about calling at Millenbeck.
Throckmorton went home feeling rather bitter toward all his county
people, except his stanch friend Mrs. Sherrard; Judith, so gentle,
clever, and well-read; and that fascinating child, Jacqueline.




CHAPTER IV.


For a week after the party Jacqueline lived in a kind of dream. She
could do nothing but talk of the party. The whole current of her life
had been disturbed. Since this one taste of excitement there was no
satisfying her. The daily routine was going down to a solemn breakfast,
and then getting through the forenoon as best she might, with her
flowers, and her pets among the ducks and chickens, and romping with the
little Beverley--for this unfortunate Jacqueline had no regular
employments--and then the still more solemn three o'clock dinner, after
which she practiced fitfully on the wheezy piano in the dark
drawing-room; then a country walk with Judith, if the day was fine,
coming back in time to watch the creeping on of the twilight before the
sitting-room fire. This was the happiest time of the day to Jacqueline.
She would sit flat on the rug, clasping her knees, and gazing into the
fire until her mother would say, with a smile:

"What do you see in the fire, Jacky?"

"Oh, endless things--a beautiful young man, and a new piano, and a
diamond comb like Mrs. Sherrard's, and--Oh, I can't tell you!"

"Miss Jacky she see evils, I know she do," solemnly announced Simon
Peter. "When folks sits fo' de fire studyin' 'bout nuttin' 'tall, de
evils an' de sperrits dat's 'broad come sneakin' up ahine an' show 'em
things in de fire."

General Temple, a few days after the party, fell a victim to a seductive
pudding prepared by Delilah, and was immediately invalided with the
gout. Dr. Wortley was sent for, and at once demanded to know what
devilment Delilah had been up to in the way of puddings and such, and
soon found out the true state of the case. A wordy war ensued between
Dr. Wortley and Delilah, and the doctor renewed the threat he had been
making at intervals for twenty-five years.

"Temple," he screeched, "you may take your choice between that old
ignoramus and me--between ignorance and science!"

"Ef ole marse was ter steal six leetle sweet 'taters an' put 'em in he
pocket," began Delilah, undauntedly.

"Why don't you advise him to steal a wheelbarrowful instead of a
pocketful?" retorted the doctor.

"Kase he doan 'quire but six, an' he got ter _steal_ 'em, fur ter make
de conjurin' wuk. Den ev'y day he th'ow 'way a 'tater, an' when he th'ow
de 'tater 'way he th'ow de gout 'way, too. De hy'ars from a black cat's
tail is mighty good, too--"

"Temple, how do you put up with this sort of thing being uttered in your
hearing?" snapped the doctor.

General Temple looked rather sheepish. He had never actually tried
stealing six potatoes, or testing the virtue in hairs from a black cat's
tail, as a relief from gout, but he had not been above a course of tansy
tea, and decoctions of jimson-weed, and other of Delilah's remedies that
scientifically were on a par with the black cat's tail. But, being
racked with pain, he took refuge in pessimism and profanity.

"Excuse me, Wortley, but all medicine is a damned humbug!--I
mean--er--an empirical science. What is written is written. The Great
First Cause, that decrees from the hour of our birth every act of our
lives, has decreed that I should suffer great pain, anguish, and
discomfort from this hereditary disease."

"Marse, ef you wuz ter repent an' be saved--"

"Hold your infernal tongue!"

"An' jine de Foot-washers--"

"Damn the Foot-washers!" howled the general.

"Plague on it!" snarled Dr. Wortley, whirling round with his back to the
fire. "If you've got as far as predestination, you're in for a six
weeks' spell. I can cure the gout, but I'll be shot if I can do anything
when it's complicated with religion and black cats' tails and a
constant diet like a Christmas dinner!"

In the midst of the discussion, the doctor's shrill voice rising high
over Delilah's, who, with arms akimbo and a defiant air, only awaited
Dr. Wortley's departure to get in her innings with the patient, Mrs.
Temple, serene and sweet, came in and quelled the insurrection. Delilah
at once subsided, Dr. Wortley began to laugh, and the general directed
that Mrs. Temple's chair be put next to his.

"As your presence, my love, makes me forget my most unhappy foot," he
said.

Mrs. Temple's adherence to either Delilah or Dr. Wortley would have
caused victory to perch upon that side; but Mrs. Temple, like the
general, had more faith in Delilah than she was willing to own up to.
So, between Delilah's feeding him high all the time, while the doctor
only saw him once or twice a week, General Temple bade fair to remain an
invalid for a considerable time. The attack of gout, though, just at
that time, had its consolatory aspects. General Temple really wished to
call at Millenbeck, but Mrs. Temple showed no sign of yielding. For the
present, however, there could be no notion of his stirring out of doors.
As long as the gout lasted there was a good excuse. But General Temple
worried over it.

"My love," he said one night, while Mrs. Temple and Jacqueline and
Judith sat around the table in his room, where they had assembled to
make his evening less dull, "I am troubled in my mind regarding George
Throckmorton. It unquestionably seems heathenish for us to have one so
intimately connected with our early married life--that truly blissful
period--within a stone's throw of us, and then to deny him the sacred
rites of hospitality."

Jacqueline gave a half glance at Judith which was full of meaning, and
Judith could not for her life keep a slight blush from rising in her
cheek.

Mrs. Temple said nothing, but looked hard at the fire, sighing
profoundly. She had made herself some sort of a vague revengeful
promise, that no man wearing a blue uniform should ever darken her
doors. She had yielded first one thing, then another, of that scrupulous
and daily mourning and remembrance she had promised herself, for
Beverley--but this--

The pause was long. Mrs. Temple, looking at General Temple, was touched
by something in his expression--a longing, a patient, but genuine
desire. Occasionally she indulged him, as she sometimes relaxed a little
the discipline over Jacqueline in her childish days. She put her hand
over her eyes and waited a moment as if she were praying. Then she said
in broken voice, "Do what seems best to you, my husband."

General Temple took her hand.

"But, my own, I do not wish to coerce you. No matter what I think is our
duty in the case, if it does not satisfy you, it shall not be done. I
would rather anything befell Throckmorton, than you, my beloved Jane,
should be grieved or troubled."

Mrs. Temple received this sort of thing as she always did, with a shy
pleasure like a girl.

"I have said it, my dear, and you know I do not easily recede. Like you,
this thing has been upon me ever since Throckmorton's return. I have
felt it every day harder to maintain my attitude. Now, for your sake, I
will abandon it. Have Throckmorton when you like. I will invite him over
to tea on Sunday evening."

General Temple fairly beamed. When Mrs. Temple gave in to him, which was
not oftener than once a year, she gave in thoroughly.

"Thank you, my wife. It certainly seems unnatural that Millenbeck and
Barn Elms should be estranged. It shall be so no longer, please God. And
that George Throckmorton is a high-toned gentleman"--General Temple
paused a little before saying this, hunting for a term magniloquent
enough for the occasion--"no one, I think, will deny."

This was early in the week. The very next afternoon, Jacqueline finding
time more than usually hard to kill, went up into the garret and began
rummaging over the remains of Mrs. Temple's wedding finery of thirty
years before. She dived down into a capacious chest, and brought forth
two or three faded silk dresses, the bridal bonnet and veil, yellowed
from age; and, among other antiques, a huge muff almost as big as
Jacqueline herself. This suddenly put the notion of a walk into her
head. Judith was engaged in reading Napier's History of the Peninsular
Wars to General Temple, and Jacqueline had only herself for company. So,
carrying her huge muff in which she plunged her arms up to her elbows,
she started off. It was a raw autumn afternoon. The leaves had not yet
all fallen, although the ground was dank with them, and the peculiar
stillness of a lonely and lowland country was upon the monotonous
landscape. The entire absence of sounds is a characteristic of that sort
of country, and it makes a gloomy day more gloomy. Jacqueline, tripping
along very fast, did not find it cheerful. She would go as far as the
gate of the lane that led into the main road, and then turn back. This
lane was also the entrance to Millenbeck, and Jacqueline had some sort
of a faint expectation that she might run across Jack Throckmorton. She
looked longingly toward Millenbeck, visible at intervals through the
straggling fringe of pines. What an infinity of pleasure could be had,
if her mother only came round thoroughly regarding the Throckmortons!
What rides and dances she could have with Jack, and Judith could talk to
the major! "What a dull life Judith must lead!" she thought, stepping
lightly along. It was true, Judith liked to read; but Jacqueline, who
frankly confessed she could not read a novel through from cover to
cover, hardly appreciated reading as a resource. Jacqueline's
imagination, with this superstructure to build upon, went ardently to
work, and in a few minutes had installed Judith as mistress of
Millenbeck, and herself as the young lady of the establishment. To do
Jacqueline justice, she longed for Judith's happiness, who, she
sometimes bitterly felt, was her only friend. Just as she had arranged
this scheme to her satisfaction, she looked up, and saw, not twenty feet
ahead of her, Major Throckmorton coming out of the underbrush at the
side of the lane. A big slouch hat half concealed his face. His usual
trim and natty dress, with that unmistakable "military cut," was
exchanged for a shooting suit of corduroy, much stained, and otherwise
the worse for wear. His stylish and immaculate hat was replaced by the
flapping felt, and his gun and game-bag proclaimed his day's employment.
Yet Jacqueline thought she had never seen him look so handsome, and in
some way she was not half so much afraid of him in his shooting-togs as
in his perfectly fitting evening clothes. Jacqueline's face turned a
rosy red. As for Throckmorton, he too felt a thrill of pleasure. This
pretty child, as he called her, had been in his mind rather constantly
since he saw her at the party. He quickened his pace, and took his hat
off while still some distance away.

"Any more parties in prospect?" he asked, smiling, as he took her little
hand in his.

"No, I don't suppose there will be. Delicious parties like that don't
happen very often," answered Jacqueline, quite seriously, and not in the
least understanding Throckmorton's smile as she said this. "And--and
young Mr. Throckmorton--oh, how I enjoyed dancing with him!"

The major did not smile at this. To have "young Mr. Throckmorton" thrust
at him by a charming young girl was not particularly pleasing.

"Jack is a very jolly young fellow," he replied, shortly. "We are great
friends, Jack and I."

Jacqueline had turned around, and they were now walking together toward
Barn Elms.

"I--I should think," said Jacqueline, giving him one of her half-glances
from under the dark fringe of her eyelashes--"that J--Jack would be
afraid of you."

Throckmorton laughed aloud.

"Why should he be afraid of me?"

"Oh, I don't know. Everybody is afraid of one's father," replied
Jacqueline, candidly.

"Jack and I entertain sentiments of mutual respect," laughed
Throckmorton again. "The only fault I find with him is that he is unduly
filial sometimes. For example, when I am enjoying the society of a
charming young lady he thinks too young for me, he behaves as if I were
his great-grandfather instead of his father. Jack has a good deal of
Satan in him."

Jacqueline did not always follow Throckmorton's remarks, but she noticed
he had a rich voice, and he was the straightest, most soldierly-looking
man she ever saw in her life. Throckmorton slung his game-bag around and
held it open.

"Do you like robins?" he said. "They are delicious broiled on
toast"--and he took out a bird by the legs and showed it to her.

Jacqueline stood perfectly still. Her eyes dilated and her breath came
quickly. She took the bird out of his hand. It had long stopped
bleeding, and its little cold head, with half-closed eyes, fell over
piteously. Jacqueline took out her handkerchief and wrapped the poor
robin in it.

"Oh, the poor bird!" she said, and suddenly two large tears ran down her
cheeks.

Throckmorton stood surprised, touched, delighted, and almost ashamed. He
had been a sportsman all his life, and could see no harm in knocking
over a few birds in the season; but the picture of this tender-hearted
child, that could not see a dead bird without weeping, struck him as
beautifully feminine. But what could he say? If he was a bloodthirsty
brute to shoot a robin, what must all the slaughter of birds he had
been guilty of in his lifetime make him? He could only say, half
shamefacedly and half laughing "My dear little friend, you wouldn't have
men as squeamish as women, would you?"

But to this Jacqueline only responded by pressing the poor bird's cold
breast to her cheek.

Throckmorton, however, with an air of gentle authority, took the bird
from her and put it back in the bag.

"If you cry for such things as this, you will have a hard time in life,"
he said.

Jacqueline's face did not clear up at once.

"I want you to do something for me--to promise me something," she said,
gravely.

"What is it?" asked Throckmorton. Jacqueline had laid her charm upon him
in the last ten minutes, but he did not forget his caution entirely.

"It is," said Jacqueline, punctuating her words with tender, appealing
glances, "that you won't kill any more robins--never, never, as long as
you live."

Throckmorton refrained from smiling, as he felt inclined, but it was
plainly no laughing matter to Jacqueline. And if he gave the
promise--nobody knew the absurdity of it more than Throckmorton--suppose
Jack heard of it, what endless fun would he poke at his father on the
sly! Nevertheless, Throckmorton, calling himself an old fool, made the
promise.

Jacqueline, flushed with triumph, now conceived a bold design. She
would--that is, if her courage held out--tell him that her mother had at
last come round. This delightful information she proceeded to impart.

"Do you know," she said, smiling and showing her little even white
teeth, "that mamma has at last agreed to--to let us have something to do
with you and Jack?"

"Has she, indeed?" replied Throckmorton, with rather a grim smile.

"Yes," continued Jacqueline, with much seriousness. "Occasionally she
gives papa a little treat. You know she always liked you, and papa has
been dying to call to see you. But mamma can't forget the war and
Beverley. At last, though--she's been thinking about it ever since that
first day at church--she concluded to give in--and--and--you're to be
asked to tea next Sunday evening!"

The way this was told was not particularly flattering to Throckmorton,
but he was sincerely grateful and attached to Mrs. Temple, and he knew
and pitied the state of feeling that had caused her to intrench herself
in her prejudices. She must indeed remember those old days when she was
willing to do what Throckmorton suspected she had promised herself never
to do. "I want to be friends with Mrs. Temple--that's plain enough," he
said, "and if she asks me I shall certainly come."

"Do you know," said Jacqueline, after a pause, in a very confidential
voice, "I sometimes wish--now this is a secret, remember--that papa and
mamma would forget Beverley a little--and think--of Judith and me? They
seem to expect Judith to wear black all the time, and never to smile or
to laugh or to sing, as if Beverley could know. I don't believe the dead
in their graves know or care anything about us."

She was on delicate ground, but, her tongue being unloosed,
Throckmorton's attempt to check her was a complete failure.

"Judith, you know," she continued, cutting in on Throckmorton's awkward
remonstrance, "only knew Beverley a little while. Her father and mother
were dead, and papa was her guardian. She came to Barn Elms to live
after she left school, and Beverley came home from the war, and they
were married right away--almost as soon as they were acquainted. It was
so sudden because Beverley's leave was up, and Delilah says that
Beverley knew he was going to be killed soon. She says he dreamed it, or
something. Do you believe in dreams?"

"No, and you mustn't believe all Delilah tells you."

"Anyhow, he went away, and he never came back. That broke papa and
mamma's hearts. And you know--little Beverley--Judith's child--is like
her--and not a bit like Beverley, and mamma talks sometimes as if it was
a crime on the child's part. She says to everybody, 'Don't you think
the child is like his father?' and nobody answers her quite truthfully,
and she knows it."

Throckmorton hardly knew how to receive these family confidences, but he
could not but admire the color coming and going in Jacqueline's cheeks,
and the fitful light that burned in her eyes as she talked.

"And Judith--I do love Judith. It seems hard--now this is another
secret--that she should never have any more pleasure in this world. And
she is so bright and clever. She understands the most wonderful books.
And there's something--I can't help telling you this."

"Perhaps you had better not tell me," said Throckmorton in a warning
voice.

"But I can't help it, you are so--so sympathetic: I don't believe Judith
cared for Beverley much."

Jacqueline drew off to see the effect of this on Throckmorton. She did
not at all suspect him of any interest in Judith; but this family
tragedy, that had stalked beside her nearly all her life, she thought
was of immense importance, and she wanted to see how it affected
Throckmorton. In fact, it only embarrassed him. He said, rather briefly:

"Mrs. Beverley is very handsome--very charming."

"She's the best sister in the world," exclaimed Jacqueline. "Some people
think that sisters-in-law can't love each other. Sometimes I would
throw myself in the river if it wasn't for Judith."

"Why should such a tender little thing as you want to throw herself in
the river?" he asked; and if Jack had heard the tone in which this was
spoken, he would, no doubt, have found food for ungodly mirth in it.

"You don't know what sorrows I have," responded Jacqueline, gravely. And
then they were almost at the gate of Barn Elms, and Throckmorton bade
her good-by, and tramped back home, while Jacqueline scudded into the
house to confide the wonderful adventures of the afternoon to Judith.

In a day or two a note from General Temple came, inviting Throckmorton
and Jack to tea at Barn Elms the following Sunday evening. It was rather
a letter than a note, General Temple spreading himself--his honest soul
loved a rhetorical flourish--and containing many references to their
early association. Throckmorton accepted, in a reply in which he told,
much more glibly than his tongue could, the grateful affection he had
cherished from his neglected and unhappy boyhood toward the whole family
at Barn Elms. On the Sunday evening, therefore, Throckmorton, with Jack,
presented himself, and was effusively received by the general and Simon
Peter, who were not unlike in their overpowering courtesy to guests.
Judith was cordial and dignified, and Jacqueline full of a shy delight.
No doubt they would be invited to Millenbeck, and she would see with her
own eyes the Bruskins carpets and other royal splendors Delilah was
never weary of recounting.

General Temple was able to be down in the drawing-room, but Mrs. Temple
was not present. Delilah, however, soon put her head in the door, and,
crossing her hands under a huge white apron she wore, brought a message.

"Mistis, she say, won't Marse George please ter come in de charmber."

Throckmorton at once followed her. The "charmber" at Barn Elms was a
sort of star chamber, and utterances within its precincts were usually
of a solemn character. As Throckmorton entered, Mrs. Temple rose from
the big rush-bottomed chair in which she sat. Throckmorton remembered
the room perfectly, in all the years since he had been in it--the dimity
curtains, the high-post mahogany bed, the shining brass fender and
andirons, the tall candlesticks on the high wooden mantel. He
remembered, with a queer, boyish feeling, sundry moral discourses gently
administered to him in that room on certain occasions when he had been
caught in the act of fishing on Sunday, or poking a broomstick up the
chimney to dislodge the sooty swallows that built their nests there in
the summer-time, and other instances of juvenile turpitude. And he well
recollected once, when Mrs. Temple was ill, he had hung about the
place, a picture of boyish misery; and when at last he was admitted into
the room where she lay, white and feeble, on the broad, old-fashioned
lounge, how happy, how glad, how honored he had felt. He went forward
eagerly and raised Mrs. Temple's hand to his lips.

"George Throckmorton, this is nearer forgiveness than I ever expected
to come," she said.

"Dear Mrs. Temple, don't let us talk about forgiveness. Let us
only remember that we are friends of more than thirty years'
standing--because I can't remember the time when I was a boy that I
didn't love you."

"And I loved you, too--next to my own Beverley. I sent for you here that
I might tell you my trouble as you used to tell me yours so long ago.
Often you have sat on that little cricket over there and told me of your
grandfather's cruel ways to you--he was a godless man, George."

"He was indeed," fervently assented Throckmorton.

"And now I want to tell you of _my_ sorrows, George."

Throckmorton listened patiently while she went over all of Beverley's
life. She told it with a touching simplicity. Throckmorton well saw how
that still stern unforgiveness might rankle in her gentle but immovable
mind. Then he told her of his marriage--something he had never in all
his life spoken of to any one in that manner; but the force of sweet and
early habit was upon him--he could talk to Mrs. Temple about the young
creature so much loved and so long dead. Mrs. Temple, who knew what such
revealing meant from a man of Throckmorton's strong and self-contained
nature, was completely won by this. An hour afterward, when they came
into the drawing-room, and found Jack and Jacqueline in a perfect gale
of merriment, with Judith looking smilingly on, Mrs. Temple laid her
hand on Throckmorton's shoulder, and said to General Temple, with sweet
gravity, "He is the same George Throckmorton."

Judith was leaning a little forward in her chair, with her arm around
her child. The boy was a beautiful, manly fellow, and gazed at
Throckmorton with friendly, serious eyes. Throckmorton, whose heart was
tender toward all children, smiled at him. Beverley at this marched
forward and climbed upon Throckmorton's knee, his little white frock,
heavy with embroidery worked by Judith's patient fingers, spreading all
around him. The boy immediately launched into conversation, eying
Throckmorton boldly, although his eyes usually had the shy expression of
his mother's. He wanted to know if Throckmorton had a gun, and could he
beat the drum; also, if he could ride a horse. Sometimes grandfather
would take him up and let him ride as far as the gate. Throckmorton
answered all these questions satisfactorily, and then told about a pony
he had at Millenbeck--a pony that had been Jack's, when Jack was no
bigger than Beverley, and that was now too old and slow for any but a
very little boy. While Throckmorton talked to the child, Judith listened
with a smiling look in her eyes. Throckmorton could not but be struck by
the pretty picture the young mother and her child made. He saw the
resemblance between them at once, and when he told of a tragic adventure
Jack had with the pony, falling through a bridge, both pairs of large,
soft eyes grew wide with grave amazement. Unconsciously Judith assumed
the child's expression. Beverley seemed determined to monopolize his new
acquaintance, but presently Judith with a little air of authority sent
him off with Delilah. Beverley paused at the door to say:

"You come again and bring the pony."

Presently they went into the dining-room, and the old-fashioned tea was
served. There was enough to feed a regiment, and all of the best kind,
but nothing approaching vulgar display. Mrs. Temple put Throckmorton at
her right, and every time she spoke to Jack she called him George.
Throckmorton had forgotten nothing of the old days, and he not only
began to feel young himself, but he made General and Mrs. Temple feel
that time had turned backward. Jacqueline, on the opposite side of the
table, smiled at him and talked a little. In her heart she could not
quite make out Throckmorton. He had arrived at an age that seemed to her
almost venerable; yet he quite ignored the fact that he ought to be old,
and certainly was not old, nor could anybody say that he was young.
Jack's boyish fun she understood well enough, but Throckmorton's shrewd
humor, his confident, experienced way of looking at things, was rather
beyond her. And as the case had been, whenever Throckmorton saw her, he
had to exercise a certain restraint, lest everybody should see how
strangely and completely she magnetized him. If anybody had asked him to
compare Judith and Jacqueline, he would have given Judith the palm in
everything--even in beauty; but Jacqueline's young prettiness in some
way caught his fancy more than Judith's deeper and more significant
beauty.

But Judith had her charm too for him. She captivated his judgment as
Jacqueline captivated some inner sense to which he could give no name.
Judith's talk was seasoned with liveliness, and Throckmorton, who
possessed a dry and penetrating humor of his own, could always count on
a responsive sparkle in Judith's eye.

When they returned to the drawing-room, Mrs. Temple said:

"Judith, my dear, sing us some of your sweet hymns."

Judith sat down to the piano and in her clear and bell-like soprano sang
some old-fashioned hymns, so sweetly and unaffectedly that Throckmorton
thought it was like angels singing. The sound of the simple music, the
soft light of fire and lamp, the atmosphere of love and courtesy that
seemed to breathe over the quaint circle, had a fascination for him. It
was the poetry of domestic life. He had often dreamed of what "home"
might be, but he had never known it, for that brief married life of his
had been too short, too flickering; they were boy and girl lovers, and,
before the new life had had time to crystallize, he was left alone. But
here he saw the sweet privacy of home, the repose, the family nest, safe
and warm. He sighed a little. Money could not buy it, else he would have
had it at Millenbeck, comfortable handsome country-house that it was.
But here, at this shabby old Barn Elms, it was in perfection, in all its
naturalness and simplicity. After all, women were necessary to make a
home; even money, with a Sweeney as presiding genius, couldn't do it.

It was late when they left. Mrs. Temple's parting was as solemn as her
greeting:

"I have done that which I never expected to do, and all because in my
heart I can't but love you, George Throckmorton!"

Throckmorton's keen pleasure showed in his dark eyes.

"I always knew, if you would only listen to that dear, kind heart of
yours, you would forgive the Yankees," he laughed.




CHAPTER V.


Miracles usually happen in cycles. They unquestionably did in the Severn
neighborhood. Before the hurricane of talk over Throckmorton's arrival,
Jack's audacity, and Sweeney's brogue had fairly reached a crisis, a
letter came one day to General Temple, from his nephew, Temple Freke,
announcing his intention of paying a visit to his dear uncle and aunt at
Barn Elms.

General Temple handed the letter to Mrs. Temple with a sort of groan.

"This is he--I mean, my love, this is most discomposing."

At this Mrs. Temple shook her head in a manner expressing perfect
despair. The problem whether Throckmorton should be admitted within the
doors of Barn Elms was a mere nothing compared with this. Both of them
firmly believed in a personal devil; and Temple Freke, with his
extravagance, his vices, his unprincipled behavior, stood for Satan
himself. This Freke was very unlike the conservative, home-keeping type
of a gentleman that prevailed in Virginia. He was born and brought up
in Louisiana, and was fifteen years old when, by the death of his
father, General Temple became his guardian, and he was brought to Barn
Elms to lead the staid Beverley into all sorts of scrapes, and to
torment General Temple's honest soul almost to madness. The elder Freke,
perhaps, knowing the boy's disposition, had made General Temple's
guardianship to extend until Temple Freke's twenty-fifth birthday.

Of the horrors of that guardianship, nobody but the kind and
simple-hearted general could tell--of Freke's extravagance, of his
gambling and betting and drinking, and one frightful scene, when Freke,
with a loaded pistol in his hand, swore that, unless a certain debt of
honor was paid, he would kill himself on the spot; and General Temple,
who was not easily frightened, promptly paid it, with the conviction
that the young fellow was quite capable of carrying out the threat.
Immediately after this, General Temple shipped him off to Europe, but
apparently it made bad worse. For six whole years was General Temple
commanding, entreating, praying, and wheedling to get Freke back to
Virginia. It was true, he might have cut off supplies, but Freke made no
bones of saying that, if he couldn't get his own money, he would
contrive to get somebody else's; so the poor general, with groans and
moans, would cash Freke's drafts on him as long as money could be
screwed out of the Louisiana sugar plantations to do it with.

But, as Mrs. Temple often said, Freke was unquestionably a gentleman; he
was mild-mannered to a degree, and his very impertinences were brought
out with a diffidence that frequently hoodwinked General Temple. He was
not nearly so handsome as Beverley, being much shorter and sandy-haired,
in contrast with Beverley's blonde beauty; but Mrs. Temple always
felt in the old days, with a little pang of jealousy, that this
ordinary-looking boy, with his exquisite manners--not the least affected
or effeminate, but simply the perfection of personal bearing--could put
Beverley at a disadvantage. The two had little in common, and had never
met after their school-days, when General Temple, in the innocence of
his heart, had sent Freke abroad, to reform, until the very time of
Beverley's death. Freke, whose courage was as flawless in its way as
General Temple's, had come home during the war and enlisted in the
Southern army. A strange fate had placed him close to Beverley when he
was killed. He had held Beverley's dying hand, and to him were intrusted
the last messages to the mother and the young wife, who waited and
prayed at Barn Elms. Nothing on earth but this could have brought Mrs.
Temple to tolerate Freke at all, after the sensational career which
had begun with the pistol scene. Moreover, to increase the abnormal
conditions about this unregenerate being, as the Temples considered
him, he was perfectly irresistible. How it was, General Temple gloomily
declared, he didn't know, but Freke had the most extraordinary way of
insinuating himself into the good graces of both men and women--not
by any affectation of goodness, for there was a frankness about his
wickedness that was peculiarly appalling to General Temple. Freke was no
handsomer as a man than as a boy; he had been steadily making ducks and
drakes of his fortune since he was twenty-five; yet, somehow, Freke
always seemed to have a plenty of friends, solely by the charm of his
personality. The most serious escapade that had come to General Temple's
knowledge since Freke was of age was his running away with a Cuban girl
in New Orleans, and afterward getting a divorce by some hocus-pocus, and
thereafter, with serene confidence, he bore himself as an unmarried man.
Now, divorce was practically unknown in that old part of Virginia, and
the Temples regarded it as in the category with murder and arson; so
that this final iniquity of Freke's would have quite put him beyond the
pale, but for those hours he spent kneeling on the ground with the dying
Beverley.

General Temple had a sort of Arab hospitality that would not have
begrudged itself to the Evil One himself, and to tell Freke that he was
not welcome under the roof of Barn Elms, where his grandfather and his
grandfather's father had lived, was an enormity of which he was not
capable. And Mrs. Temple was no manner of use to him in the case. In
vain he tried to shuffle the decision off on her. Mrs. Temple would
not accept it. Like the general, she sighed and groaned, and turned it
over in her mind; but always came back that picture of Beverley lying
bleeding and dying, and Freke risking his life to stay by him. So at
last, after a week of mutual misery, one night, in the privacy of the
"charmber," Mrs. Temple, watching the general stalking up and down
during one of his fits of midnight restlessness, said, tremulously:

"My love, we must let Freke come. We can not refuse it--for--for
Beverley's sake."

So the next morning a letter was dispatched to Freke, written by General
Temple with considerably less cordiality than usual, and very feeble
rhetorically, expressing the pleasure his uncle and aunt felt at the
prospect of a visit from their nephew.

The next day, as soon as the direful news of his coming was made known
to Jacqueline, she rushed off, as she always did, to give Judith the
startling information.

Judith heard it with a strange feeling of repulsion, which she at first
imagined was that infinite disapproval she felt for Freke; but, if he
came, all of that terrible story about Beverley would have to be told
over. Judith had not yet come to a clear understanding of herself, but
she had begun to shrink from that dwelling on Beverley which seemed to
give Mrs. Temple such exquisite comfort.

"Everything that looked at Freke fell in love with him," announced
Jacqueline. "Of course, he is as handsome as a dream--something like Mr.
Morford, I dare say."

There were two or three faded photographs of him at Barn Elms, and none
of them gave the idea of great beauty; but photographs in those days
were not very artistic reproductions.

Judith laughed a little uneasily.

"I wish he wern't coming, Jacky," she said. "He is too--too startling a
person for quiet people like ourselves. There is one comfort, though: he
will soon get tired of us."

Within a week or two came a very well-expressed letter from Freke,
thanking his uncle and aunt for their hospitable invitation, and saying
that on a certain day he would land from the river steamer at Oak Point.
Jacqueline was immensely taken with the letter, which was written on
paper the like of which she had never seen before, and was sealed with a
crest.

Two immense trunks arrived in advance of the expected visitor. Mrs.
Sherrard happened to be at Barn Elms when the luggage appeared. Mrs.
Temple's face expressed her misery.

"Jane, you have my sympathy. A more unmitigated scamp than Freke doesn't
live," was Mrs. Sherrard's remark.

"Kitty," feebly protested Mrs. Temple, "he is my husband's nephew."

"The more's the pity."

As a rule, the reputation of incalculable wickedness hurts nobody, in
the opinion of the very young. The more Mrs. Temple preached and warned,
holding on to that one saving clause, Freke's devotion to Beverley in
his dying hours, the more attractive he seemed to Jacqueline. At last
one afternoon, when the carriage returned from Oak Point Landing with
the much-talked-of Freke, Jacqueline, who had been curling her hair and
prinking all day for the visitor, came down into the drawing-room, and
the expression of acute disappointment on her face said loudly:

"Is this all?"

For Freke was neither surpassingly handsome nor any of the superlative
things Jacqueline had fondly imagined him to be. He was not even as
handsome as Throckmorton, and Jacqueline thought him no beauty. Freke
was under middle height, and his hair was as sandy as of old, and not
too abundant. His features were ordinary; and Jacqueline, not being a
physiognomist, did not take in the piercing expression, the firmness and
intelligence that redeemed them from commonplaceness. He did look
unmistakably the gentleman, Jacqueline grudgingly admitted. _This_ the
adorable, the irresistible, the--But Jacqueline was too disgusted to
continue.

Freke, who read Jacqueline like an open book, and suspected the advance
impression she had received, could hardly keep from laughing out aloud
at the girl's air and manner. He talked a little to her, somewhat more
to Judith, but chiefly to Mrs. Temple.

It was late in the afternoon when he had arrived, and tea was soon
announced. Directly it was over, Mrs. Temple marshaled a solemn
procession into "the charmber" to hear Freke's description of Beverley's
last hours. She went first with Judith, followed by Freke and General
Temple. Mrs. Temple had tried to get Jacqueline to come, too, but
Jacqueline, who had a horror of weeping and tragedies, begged off; and
Mrs. Temple, who really attached but little importance to the girl at
any time, did not press the point. The door of the room remained closed
for two hours. Jacqueline, who had got tired of Delilah's company and
the cat's, went up-stairs early, but not to bed. She waited until she
heard Judith's door open, and then went and knocked timidly at the door.

"Come in," said Judith, in an unfamiliar voice. Judith was sitting
before her dressing-table, and had already begun to unbraid her long,
rich hair. But her eyes were fixed with a hard, staring gaze on her own
image in the glass. The mother had wept at Freke's recital; the widow
had remained pale, tearless, and turning over in her troubled mind the
immaturity, the transitoriness of that first girlish love-affair that
had resulted, as so few first loves do, in a sudden marriage--a quick
widowhood. And she had a terrifying sense that she had betrayed herself
to Freke. There was one particular point in the narrative, when he
described how the dead man had got his death-wound. Beverley had run
across a small body of Federal cavalrymen, himself with only an advance
guard, and, _a la_ General Temple, had immediately dashed at them, as if
a cavalry scrimmage would affect one iota the great fight that was
impending the next day. Beverley himself had engaged in a hand-to-hand
tussle with a Federal officer--both of them had rolled off their horses,
and the struggle between them was more like Indian warfare than
civilized warfare--and Freke described, with cruel particularity, how
the two men fought in the underbrush, and crushed the wild rose and
hawthorn bushes, each one trying vainly to draw his pistol--and at last
a shot rang out, and Beverley turned over on his face with a wild shriek
and a death-wound. The Federal officer had got his arm entangled in his
bridle-reins, and Freke thought every moment the excited horse would
trample the wounded man to death; and then, a squad of Confederates
coming up, the Federals had made off, the officer mounting his horse and
getting out of the way with nothing worse than a few bruises. All the
time he was telling this he was eying Judith, who did not shed a single
tear. Mrs. Temple wept torrents, and even so did General Temple. For
poor Judith, whose reading of Freke was not less keen than his reading
of her, it was misery enough to feel that, after all, her widowhood was
not very real, and that the mourning, the entire giving up of the world,
the devotion to Beverley's parents, was, in some sort, a reparation; but
that it should escape her--for Judith with the eagerness to make amends,
of a generous nature, had readily adopted Mrs. Temple's view--that it
was a crime not to mourn for Beverley.

Jacqueline slipped down on her knees beside Judith, and, nodding her
head, gravely said:

"Mamma didn't get _me_ into the room. Ah, Judy, dear, why won't they let
us forget him--"

"Jacqueline!" cried Judith, turning a pale, shocked face on her.

"I say," persisted Jacqueline, who had one of her sudden fits of
courage, "why do they trouble us to remember him? I hardly knew him; he
was always off at college, and then in the war; why won't they let us
mourn decently for him? And then--and then--everybody wants to forget
griefs. I do."

Judith rose and shook her off impatiently. "I wish Temple Freke had
never come here," she said.

"I do, too," answered Jacqueline, getting up. "I am afraid of him. O
Judith, what two poor creatures are we!"

"I know I am," suddenly cried Judith, breaking into a storm of tears. "I
know there is no peace for me anywhere!--" Judith stopped as suddenly as
she had begun. How could she put it in words, the ghastliness of this
perpetual reminder of that which in her heart she longed to forget--this
feeling that had been growing on her for so long, that she ought to feel
more remorse for marrying Beverley Temple than grief at losing him--that
all this solemn mourning for him was like those state funerals, where
there is a great service, a catafalque, a coffin, mourners--everything
except a corpse? And to her candid soul how wicked, heartless, and
unnatural it seemed! Jacqueline's eyes, so full of meaning and fixed on
her, troubled her. She got up after a minute and walked over to the
window. The red glow of the fire and the dim candle-light did not
prevent her from seeing clearly into the moonlight night. She drew the
old-fashioned white curtains apart and looked out. The somber trees
loomed large and black, but up on the hill, a quarter of a mile away,
the light from Millenbeck gleamed cheerfully. From two windows on the
lower floor and two on the upper, as well as the great fan- and
side-lights of the hall-door, a ruddy glare streamed steadily. Presently
Jacqueline came and stood by Judith, timidly.

"Do you know," she said, "it seems queer that three strangers should
come into our lonely lives--in this quiet life here? And the one I
like--the one I like best--is Jack Throckmorton. I can't talk to the
others."

Judith, who had got back a little of her composure, smiled at this.

"You talked away fast enough with Major Throckmorton."

"Oh, yes, but I didn't feel at home with him. Jack and I understand each
other. I know what he means when he talks to me. I don't always
understand Major Throckmorton. Judith, is my cousin Freke a very wicked
man?"

"So people say," replied Judith in a subdued voice, which had not
altogether overcome its agitation.

"He isn't handsome enough to be very--very attractive," said Jacqueline
after a pause.

But the rule of contrary seemed to suddenly prevail at Barn Elms then.
Within a week everybody in the house had succumbed more or less to
Freke's charm. General Temple found him invaluable in the preparation of
the History of Temple's Brigade; and Freke, who had a store of military
knowledge among his great fund of general information, easily persuaded
the general that he was a military historian of the first order. When
the general began his evening harangues, Freke always had an example pat
of a certain occasion when Prince Eugene, or the Duke of Marlborough, or
some equally distinguished leader had successfully pursued General
Temple's tactics. All this General Temple laboriously transcribed in his
manuscript. Judith, who very much doubted whether Freke were not making
it up as he went along, had her suspicions confirmed when Freke would
occasionally turn his expressive face on her and actually wink with
appreciation of the general's simplicity. Judith was indignant, but she
could not help laughing at Freke's genuine humor. Mrs. Temple showed her
regard for the returned prodigal by taking him into the "charmber" one
day and reasoning in a motherly way upon Freke's duty to return to his
wife. Judith was astounded after a while to hear Mrs. Temple's gentle
but intense laughter making itself heard outside the room. Freke, with
the most good-natured manner in the world, sitting in the rush-bottomed
chair, with one foot over his knee, began to tell Mrs. Temple some of
his marital experiences with his Julia. Mrs. Temple at first put on her
severest frown and fairly groaned aloud at his declaration that he
didn't know whether he was married or not in Virginia, as his divorce
was got in one of the Northwestern States; but, divorce or no divorce,
he wouldn't tempt Fate again in another matrimonial venture even with a
creature as beautiful as Helen, as wise as Portia, and with a million in
her own right. Then he began to tell of the adventures between Julia and
himself which had led to their separation, winding up with a description
of their final scene, when Julia threw a dish at him and he in turn
threw a bucket of ice-water over Julia. Before this, though, Mrs.
Temple's laughter had been heard. Freke issued from the room the picture
of innocence, and at peace with himself and all the world. Mrs. Temple,
on the contrary, was an image of guilt. Never had she before in her life
been beguiled from a moral lecture into unseemly laughter--and laughter
on such a subject! Mrs. Temple's conscience rose up and fought her, and
she began to think that all her moral foundation was tottering.

Surprises were the order of the day. One night, just after family
prayers, when the gout, and the doubt whether anybody at all was to be
saved, had caused General Temple to make a more pessimistic, vociferous,
and grewsome prayer than usual, in which he called the Deity to account
for so grievously afflicting the Temple family, Freke, whom Judith had
caught smiling in the midst of General Temple's most telling periods,
quietly announced that he had that day bought Wareham, a place within
two miles of Barn Elms.

It was not much of a place, being at most about three hundred acres,
with a small, untenanted house on it--and property went for a song,
anyhow, in that part of the world--but, nevertheless, the news was
paralyzing to General and Mrs. Temple. Judith, who was developing a
certain dislike and distrust of Freke that grew daily, could hardly
forbear laughing at the mute horror of General and Mrs. Temple over this
unlooked-for news. Freke went on to say that a very little would make
the place habitable for him, and he liked the fishing and shooting to be
had--especially the shooting, as the birds had had four years' rest
during the war. Then he said good-night pleasantly, and went off to bed.

"This is the dev--I mean this is most unfortunate, my love," remarked
General Temple, dismally, to Mrs. Temple, at two o'clock in the morning
following this, as he paraded up and down the "charmber," declaiming
against Freke's iniquities.

Next day, Mrs. Sherrard came over, and the direful news was communicated
to her by Mrs. Temple, with a very long face. Mrs. Sherrard's eyes
danced.

"Now you'll know what it is to have a nephew that one would like to be
entirely unlike what he is. That's my trouble with Edmund Morford. You
know, I hate a humbug--and Edmund is a good soul, but a dreadful
humbug."

"Katharine!" exclaimed Mrs. Temple. "A minister of the gospel--"

"Go along, Jane Temple! You have no eyes in your head where ministers of
the gospel are concerned. Edmund is perfectly harmless--that's one
comfort."

"I wish I could say the same of Temple Freke," Mrs. Temple rejoined,
dolefully.

It would be a week or two yet before Freke could take possession of
Wareham. Some beds and tables and sheets and towels had to be procured,
and meanwhile he stayed on at Barn Elms. It would not have taken a very
astute person to see what the charm was. It was Judith.

When the knowledge first came to these two people--to Judith, that
Freke's eyes followed her continually; that, as if by some power beyond
his will, his chair was always next hers, his ear always alert to catch
her lightest word--to Freke, that this young country-woman, with her
spirited, expressive face, her untutored singing--for music was one of
his weak points, or strong ones, as the case might be--her gentle
sarcasm when he essayed a little sentiment, pretty and tender enough to
please a woman who knew twice as much as she; that at first sight,
without an effort, she had conquered his bold spirit--it is hard to say
which was the most vexed and disgusted. Judith found it easy enough to
play the inconsolable widow where a man who aroused a positive
antagonism like Freke was concerned, and denounced him in her own mind
as a wretch for daring to fall in love with her. And Freke--after New
York women and Creole women, French, Spanish, Russian, English, and
Italian women--to have been loved and petted, and virtually made free of
women's hearts; that this unsophisticated Virginia girl, who had never
seen six men in her life, should simply take him off his feet, and that,
without knowing it--was simply infuriating. In the privacy of his
bedroom, as he smoked his last cigar before turning in, he swore at
himself with a self-deprecation that was thoroughly genuine. What did he
want to marry again for, anyway? Hadn't he had all he wanted of that
pastime? And, of course, being a divorced man, Judith would see him
chopped into little pieces before she would marry him--and then the
staggering thought that, even if he were not divorced, the odds were
against her marrying him at all--it was altogether maddening. But he did
not lose his head completely. Judith's indifference--nay, dislike--saved
to him his discretion. But had she warmed to him for one little
moment--Freke, in thinking over this sweet impossibility, lay back in
his chair and watched the smoke curling upward, and was lost in a
delicious reverie--when suddenly, the utter preposterousness of it came
to him, and he threw the cigar into the fire with a savage energy that
nearly wrenched his arm off. No, the little devil--for he was not choice
of epithets in regard to this woman--would throw him away with as
little conscience and remorse as he threw that cigar away! Like all men
of many love-affairs, he regarded love-making as an aesthetic amusement;
and while it was absolutely necessary for its perfection that the woman
should be desperately in earnest--for Freke did not mind a tragic tinge
being given to the matter--it was nonsense for a man to permit himself
to be drawn into heroics--and yet--but for the indifference of this
girl, who was always half laughing at him--he would not answer for any
folly he might commit.

Then there was Jacqueline. She exactly suited him as a victim to his
charms, sardonically expressing it to himself. She, too, was not
particularly impressed with him as yet, but that was due to her
ignorance. He could easily enlighten her, and she would be led like a
slave by him; he could make her believe anything. So, in default of
Judith, he might as well amuse himself with Jacqueline; and, by
resolutely concealing his gigantic folly, he would in the end overcome
it. But he felt like a man who, having a head to stand champagne and
brandy and absinthe and every other intoxication, comes across something
that looks as harmless as water, but which sets his brain on fire and
makes him a madman.

The general and Mrs. Temple saw nothing; a man might have made love to
Judith and have run away with her under their very noses before they
would have realized that it was possible for any man to dare falling in
love with Beverley's widow; and if Jacqueline's eyes saw anything, she
kept it wisely to herself.

Freke certainly added a new and picturesque element to their lives; even
Judith could not deny that, although she habitually denied Freke the
possession of any of the graces as well as the virtues. But that Freke
was a wonderful, a gifted, a fascinating talker, she was forced to
admit. His conversation was quite different from Throckmorton's manly
plainness of speech, who, with more brains than Freke, had not them as
readily soluble in talk. Judith was acute enough to see the difference
between the two men--one the man of conversation, and the other the man
of action. Throckmorton knew many things, and one thing surpassingly
well--his profession. Freke excelled in conversation; what he knew was
imposing, but what he could do was not. However, he had not only
traveled, but he had observed as well as read. He never made himself the
hero of his own stories; and there was a sparkle in his eyes, an
animation that gave a deeper tone to his voice, and Judith, in her dull
and colorless life, could not but feel the charm of it. Nevertheless, it
was not all charm. Judith felt as strongly as ever the incongruity of
Freke with his surroundings.

So, some days more passed. Judith found that in finesse she was no
match for Freke. Indifferent to him as she might be, he could always
place himself where he wanted--he managed to have a great deal more of
her society than she would willingly have given him; but she reasoned
shrewdly with herself--women being naturally clever in these things: "He
will soon give it up. The game is not worth the candle." And so it
proved; for in a little while he began to shadow Jacqueline, and
Jacqueline succumbed like a bird to the charmer. If Freke was present,
Jacqueline, who was wont to be impatient when not noticed, would sit
quite quietly by her sister-in-law's side, sewing demurely, or walk
beside her gravely, not opening her mouth but listening intently, as her
changing color showed. One day, when Jacqueline went into the gloomy,
darkened drawing-room to play, Freke followed her. Jacqueline sat down,
and began some short familiar piece, but she could not render it. She
missed notes, became confused, and finally gave up and left the piano in
mortification.

"It is because you are here," she said to Freke, with a child's
resentment.

"Is it, little girl?" he asked.

He was sitting quite at the other end of the room and did not come near
her, but something in his tone made Jacqueline halt, and brought the
ever-ready blood into her cheeks. Freke, after a moment, rose and
sauntered toward her. As he came up to her he took a stray lock of hair
that had escaped, in curly perversity, from the comb; and, just as he
stood with it in his fingers, the door opened and Simon Peter announced:

"Walk right in, Marse George. Mistis, she countin' de tuckeys in de
coop, but Miss Judy, she be 'long pres'n'y. Hi! Here Miss Jacky!"

Throckmorton walked in. His eye, which was as quick as a hawk's, caught
the whole thing in an instant, and a sort of jealousy sprang into life.
Of course, he did not display the smallest symptom of it. He shook hands
pleasantly with Jacqueline, and also with Freke, whom he had met several
times. With his easy, worldly judgment, he by no means ranked Freke as
the chief of sinners, but, without regarding him as a model citizen,
found him extremely good company, which Freke certainly was. Jacqueline
looked painfully embarrassed, but Freke's coolness was simply
indomitable. The two men made conversation naturally enough, while
Jacqueline, awkwardly silent, sat and twisted the unlucky lock of hair
in her fingers until a diversion was created by Judith's entrance, with
little Beverley clinging to her skirts. A faint, girlish blush came into
Judith's face when she met Throckmorton; and for his part he felt always
the charm, the refinement, the sprightliness, more piquant because
subdued, that exhaled like a perfume wherever Judith was. Beverley made
for Throckmorton, and, before his mother could interpose a warning
hand, was perched on the arm of Throckmorton's chair, whence both of
them defied her. Jacqueline made but one remark. She asked Throckmorton,
timidly:

"How is young Mr. Throckmorton?"

At which the major scowled, but responded carelessly that Jack was all
right, as far as he knew.

_Young_ Mr. Throckmorton! and from those lovely lips!

Presently there was a grinding of wheels, and a commotion at the front
door.

"Mrs. Sherrard, I know!" said Judith. "She always begins her salutations
at the gate."

Sounds were distinguishable.

"Mistis be mighty glad ter see you an' Marse Edmun'. She down at de
fattenin'-coop countin' de tuckeys, kase we didn't have no luck wid de
tuckey-aigs lars' season, an' de wuffless hen-tuckeys--"

So much for Simon Peter, when Delilah's voice broke in:

"Miss Kitty, 'twan' de hen-tuckeys 'tall. Ef de gobblers wuz ter take
turns, like de pigeons, a-settin' on de aigs--"

"I allus did think dem he-pigeons look like de foolishest critters _I_
ever see a-settin' on de nes' while de she-pigeons hoppin' roun' de
groun' 'stid o' mindin' dey business--"

"You are right, Simon Peter," answered Mrs. Sherrard, still invisible.
"I wonder that Delilah hasn't profited by Mrs. Temple's example. You've
got visitors. Whose hat is this?"

"Marse George Throckmorton's an' Marse Temple Freke's. I gwi' tell
mistis you here. Marse c'yarn leave de charmber yet, he gout so bad."

Mrs. Sherrard marched in, followed by Edmund Morford. She wore her most
commanding and hostile air. She had pooh-poohed Mrs. Temple's dread of
Freke, but she meant to give him to understand that his goings on, and
particularly his matrimonial difficulties, were perfectly well known in
the Severn neighborhood, and properly reprobated. So she shook hands all
around, followed by the Rev. Edmund, who never trusted himself at Barn
Elms, with those two pretty young women, alone and unprotected.

"I understand you have bought Wareham," remarked Mrs. Sherrard, tartly,
to Freke.

"I have," answered Freke, very mildly.

"You'll repent it."

"Not if you make yourself as agreeable as you ought," answered Freke.

The impudence of this tickled Mrs. Sherrard.

"I hear you are an entertaining fellow," she said. "Come and talk to
me."

Just then Mrs. Temple entered, but Mrs. Sherrard kept fast hold of
Freke. In half an hour he had won her over. Judith, responding with an
intelligent glance to a rather cynical smile on Throckmorton's part, saw
it. Not satisfied with winning Mrs. Sherrard over, Freke applied himself
to Morford, and that excellent but guileless person fell an instant
victim to Freke's tact and power. Mrs. Sherrard was so pleased with her
morning's visit, that she invited them all over to Turkey Thicket to
spend the following Thursday evening.




CHAPTER VI.


In the few days that followed, Judith saw more plainly that Freke was
deliberately casting his spell over Jacqueline, and, from the soft and
seductive flattery he had tried on her, Judith, at first, he exchanged
something like sarcasm. He would discuss constancy before her, Judith
meanwhile keeping her seat resolutely, but she could not prevent the
tell-tale color from rising into her face. But when, as Freke generally
did, he surmised that all the so-called constancy in this world wasn't
exactly what it purported to be, she grew pale beneath his gaze. He
watched her intently whenever she was with Throckmorton, and the mere
consciousness of being watched embarrassed while it angered her. Freke,
whose perceptions were of the quickest, saw far into the future, and
often repeated in his own mind the old, old truth that all the passions
of human nature--love, hope, despair, jealousy, and revenge--could be
found within the quietest and most peaceful circle.

The very next evening after Mrs. Sherrard's visit, Freke appeared in the
dusky drawing-room, where Jacqueline sat crouched over the fire, and
Judith, with her child in her arms, sang him quaint Mother Goose
melodies. When Freke came within the fire's red circle of light, Judith
observed that he had a violin and bow under his arm. Jacqueline jumped
up delightedly.

"Oh, oh! do you know any music?"

"I can fiddle a little," answered Freke, smiling.

He settled himself, and, in the midst of the deep silence of twilight in
the country, began a concerto of Brahms. The first movement, an
_allegro_, he played with a dainty, soft trippingness that was fit for
fairies dancing by moonlight. The next, a _scherzo_, was full of tender
suggestiveness--a dream told in music. The third movement was deeper,
more tragic, full of sorrow and wailing. As Freke drew the bow across
the G-string, he would bring out tones as deep as the 'cello, while
suddenly the sharp cry of the treble would cut into the somber depths of
the basso like the shriek of a soul in torment. A melody like a
wandering spirit appeared out of the deep harmonies, and lost, yet ever
found, would make itself heard with a sweet insistence, only to be
swallowed up in a tempest of sound, like a bird lost in a storm. And
presently there was an abatement, then a calm, and the music died,
literally, amid the twilight dusk and gloom.

As Freke, with strange eyes, and his bow suspended, tremblingly, as if
waiting for the spirit to return, ceased, there was a perfect silence.
Jacqueline, who had never heard anything like it in her life, and who,
all unknown to herself, was singularly susceptible to music, gazed at
Freke as the magician who had made her dream dreams, and after a while
cried out:

"Why do you play like that? I never heard anybody play so before."

In answer, Freke again smiled, and played a wild Hungarian dance, fit
for the dancing of bacchantes, so full of barbaric clash and rhythm,
that Jacqueline suddenly sprang up and began to dance around the chairs
and tables. Freke half turned to glance at her; he retarded the time,
and softened the tones, when Jacqueline, too, danced slowly and
dreamily--until presently, with a storm and a rush of music,
_fortissimo_ and _prestissimo_, and a resounding blare of chords that
sounded like the shouts of a victorious army, he stopped and lay back in
his chair, still smiling.

But, although Judith had twice Jacqueline's knowledge of music, with all
her feeling for it, Freke was piqued to see that she did not for a
moment confound his music with his personality. She seemed to take a
malicious pleasure in complimenting him glibly, which is the last snub
to an artist. Freke was so vexed by her indifference, that he began to
play cats mewing and dogs barking, on his fiddle, to frighten little
Beverley, who looked at him with wide, scared eyes.

"Never mind, my darling," cried Judith, laughing. "Be a brave little
boy--only girls are scared at such things."

Beverley, thus exhorted, summoned up his courage and proposed to get
grandfather's sword to defend himself. Judith's laughter, the defiant
light in her eyes, the passionate kiss she gave the boy as a reward for
his bravery, annoyed Freke. His vanity as an artist, however, was
consoled by hearing Simon Peter's voice, in an awed and solemn whisper
from the door, through which his woolly head was just visible in the
surrounding darkness:

"I 'clar' ter God, dat fiddle is got evils in it. I hear some on 'em
hollerin' an' cryin' fur ter git out, an' some on 'em larfin' an'
jumpin'. Marse Temple, dem is spirits in dat fiddle. I knows it."

"They are, indeed; and, if I go down to the grave-yard at midnight and
play, all the dead and gone Temples will rise out of their graves and
dance around in their grave-clothes. Do you hear that?" said Freke,
gravely.

"Lord God A'mighty!" yelled Simon Peter, "I gwi' sleep wid a sifter" (a
sieve) "over my hade ev'y night arter dis. Sifters keeps away de evils,
kase dey slips th'u de holes." And, sure enough, a sieve was hung up
over Simon Peter's bed that very night, with a rabbit's foot as an
additional safeguard, and a bunch of peacock's feathers over the
fireplace was ruthlessly thrown into the fire to propitiate "de evils."

When Thursday evening came, General Temple was high and dry with the
gout, and Mrs. Temple, of course, could not leave him alone to fight it
out with Delilah.

"Ole marse, you gwi' keep on havin' de gout twell you w'yar a ole h'yar
foot in yo' pocket. I done tole you so, an' I ain' feerd ter keep on
tellin' you so," was Delilah's Job-like advice.

"That's true," snapped the general. "Gad, if I had had a thousand men in
my brigade as little 'feerd' as you, I'll be damned if I ever would have
surrendered at Appomattox! God forgive me for swearing."

"I hope and pray He will, my darling husband," responded Mrs. Temple,
with calm piety.

Jacqueline was in a fever of delight, as she always was when there was
any prospect of going from home. She danced up and down, romped with
little Beverley, and, hugging him, told him in a laughing whisper that
she would see "somebody" at Turkey Thicket, and "somebody had beautiful
black eyes, and was only twenty-two years old."

Judith, too, felt that pleasurable excitement of which she began to be
less and less ashamed. A few words dropped meaningly by Throckmorton,
full of that sound sense which distinguished him, made her look
differently at life. His philosophy was not Mrs. Temple's. He reminded
Judith that we should accept peace and tranquillity thankfully, and that
it was no sin to be happy; and everything that Throckmorton said
commended itself to Judith. For the first time in her narrow and
secluded life she enjoyed with him the pleasure of being as clever as
she wanted to be. He was no timid soul, like Edmund Morford, to fear a
rival in a woman. It never occurred to Throckmorton to feel jealous of
any woman's wit. One of his greatest charms to Judith was that he was
not in the least afraid of her. Her quick feminine humor, her natural
acuteness, her knack of pretty expression in speech and writing,
appeared in their true light, as mere accomplishments, contrasted with
Throckmorton's firm and masculine mind. The conviction of his mental
grasp, his will-power, all that goes to make a man fitted to command a
woman, had in it a subtile attraction for Judith, like the spell that
beauty casts over a man. He was the only man in all her surroundings
whose calm superiority over her was perfectly plain to her. It was only
necessary for him to express an opinion, that Judith did not at once see
its force. She sometimes differed courteously with him; but it began
soon to be a perilous pleasure to her to find that usually Throckmorton
was infinitely wiser, more liberal, more just than herself.

When the Thursday evening came, only Judith, Jacqueline, and Freke were
to go. It had turned bitterly cold. Simon Peter, sitting in solitary
magnificence on the box, handled the ribbons over the Kentucky horses,
who dashed along so briskly that the carriage, which was in the last
stage of "befo' the war" decrepitude, threatened to tumble to pieces and
drop them all in the road.

Going along, Jacqueline sat back in the carriage, very quiet and silent.
Freke, with his back to the horses, talked to Judith. Occasionally in
the darkness, by a passing gleam, he could see Jacqueline's eyes
shining.

"What do you think of Major Throckmorton," he asked Judith.

Although not versed in knowledge of the world, Judith was not devoid of
self-possession. The question, though, embarrassed her a little.

"I--I--think he is most interesting, kind--and--"

"Military men are, as a rule, rather narrow, don't you think?"

"I never saw enough to judge. I should think they ought to be the other
way."

"Every time I see Throckmorton, the consciousness comes to me that I
have seen him before--seen him under some tragical and unusual
circumstances. If I didn't know that those who have good consciences,
like myself, should be above superstition, I should say that in some
previous state of being I had known him; however, I am too strictly
orthodox in my beliefs to tolerate such notions. But some time or
other--perhaps to-night--I intend to find out from Throckmorton himself
if we haven't had the pleasure of meeting in another cycle or state of
being. There is, by the way, an ineffable impudence in Throckmorton
returning to this county now."

Judith suspected that Freke's peroration was made with the intention of
provoking a reply.

They were driving along an open piece of the road, and it was
comparatively light in the carriage, although there was no moon. Freke
glancing up to see the cause of Judith's silence, caught the gleam of
her white teeth in a broad smile. She was laughing at him. It certainly
was delicious to hear Temple Freke commenting on anybody's having
impudence in returning to the county. Freke, who hated to be laughed at,
promised himself he would be avenged. "I'll make you wince, my lady!" he
thought to himself. Presently, though, Judith said, in a tone with a
sharpness in it, like one who has been wounded:

"I can't imagine anybody applying the word impudence to Major
Throckmorton. He is very reserved--very dignified."

"Throckmorton, I see, has an advocate.--And little Cousin Jacky, what do
you think of the other Jacky--Jacky Throckmorton?"

"I think he's perfectly delightful," assented Jacqueline, after a pause.

Freke said no more about the Throckmortons. The women were evidently
against him there; and soon they were driving up to the door at Turkey
Thicket, and going up the hall stairs to take off their wraps, very much
as on that last evening, when Mrs. Sherrard took occasion to
rehabilitate Throckmorton in the good graces of the county people, as
she was now trying to do with Freke.

When Judith and Jacqueline came down the stairs, Freke met them at the
foot. Jacqueline had pleaded hard to wear a white dress, but Mrs. Temple
was inexorable. She might catch cold; consequently, she wore a little
prim, Quakerish gown of gray. Judith, as usual, was stately in black.

Throckmorton was standing on the rug before the drawing-room fire,
talking gravely with Mrs. Sherrard. Edmund Morford was there and Dr.
Wortley, who, with Jack Throckmorton, constituted the company. Mrs.
Sherrard drew Judith into the conversation that she had been carrying on
with Throckmorton. He said to Judith:

"I will continue what I was saying--but I assure you it is something I
could speak of to but few people. It is this absolute barring out on the
part of the county people toward me. Not a soul except Mrs. Sherrard and
Mrs. Temple has asked me to break bread. I thought I knew Virginians--I
thought them the kindest, easiest, least angular people in the world;
but, upon my soul, anything like this cold and deliberate ostracism I
never witnessed! Why, half the county is related to me--and I've been to
school with every man in it--and yet, I am a pariah!"

"You don't look at it from their point of view," replied Mrs. Sherrard,
with more patience than was her wont. "Think how these people have
suffered. You see yourself, never was there such ruin wrought, and then
remember that you are associated with that ruin. Can't you fancy the
dull and silent resentment, the cold anger, with which they must regard
all--"

"Blasted Yankees?" cheerfully remarked Throckmorton, recovering his
spirits a little.

"But you know," said Mrs. Sherrard, whose ideas on some subjects were
rudimentary, but speaking kindly though positively, "you mustn't wear
your uniform down here."

Throckmorton laughed rather harshly.

"As I'm not going to be married or buried, I can't see what chance I
would have to wear it. But what you say disposes me to put on my
full-dress uniform, with sword and chapeau, and wear it to church on
Sunday."

Then Mrs. Sherrard went off after her latest passion, Temple Freke, and
left Judith and Throckmorton standing together.

"I think _I_ understand you," said Judith, with her pretty air of
diffidence. "But, as you know, the people here have one principle
which stands for honor, and you have another. You have got power
and--and--victory out of _your_ principle, and we have got nothing
but ruin and defeat and wretchedness out of _our_ principle. How can
you hold us to a strict account?"

"I do not--God knows I do not!--but I want a little human kindness. I
get it from a few. Dr. Wortley, who was my tutor at my grandfather's,
and has licked me a hundred times--and Morford, and the families at
Turkey Thicket and Barn Elms--but none of them, I think," continued
Throckmorton, looking into Judith's eyes with admiration, "exactly
understand how _I_ feel as well as you. What kept me in the army was, as
you say, a principle of honor. It was like a knife in me, every Southern
officer who resigned. I respected them, because I knew, as only the
naval and military men knew, that they were giving up not only their
future and their children's future, for what they thought right, but
that they knew the overwhelming odds against them. I don't believe any
one of them really expected success--they knew too much--it was a
sacrifice most disinterested. I could not go with them; but I had to
face as much obloquy among my people by staying in the army as they
had to face in going out. But I swear I never gave one thought to the
advantage to me of staying where I was! I stayed because I could not, as
a man of honor, do otherwise, I thought my own people would recognize
this--that by this time the bitterness would be over."

"Never mind," said Judith, with a heavenly smile, "it will come--it will
come."

A little later, Mrs. Sherrard whispered to Throckmorton:

"Are not my two beauties from Barn Elms sweet creatures?"

"Very," answered Throckmorton, a dark flush showing under his tan and
sunburn. "Little Jacqueline is a charming creature."

"Oh, pooh! Jacqueline. You mean Judith."

"Mrs. Beverley is most dignified, charming, and interesting; but little
Miss Jacky--"

"I should think she would be a nice playmate for your Jack," remarked
Mrs. Sherrard.

Throckmorton looked awkward, not to say foolish. Had he forgotten his
forty-four years, his iron-gray hair, all the scars of life? Jacqueline
and Jack were inseparable from the start, and their two heads were close
together on the deep, old-fashioned sofa, at that very moment.

"The major stole a march on me the other day, going over to Barn Elms,"
remarked Jack, confidentially. "However, I'll get even with him yet."

"Oh, how can you talk so about your own father?"

"Why shouldn't I talk so about my own father?"

"Because it's not right."

"Look here, Miss Jacky. Nobody thinks as much of the major as I do--he's
the kindest, noblest, gamest chap alive--but you see, I'm a man, and
he's a man. When he got married at twenty-one, he took the risk of
having a son in the field before he was ready to quit himself."

"Do you--do you remember your mother?" asked Jacqueline, in a low voice.

"No," answered Jack, fixing his dark eyes seriously on Jacqueline. "I
have a miniature of her that my father gave me when I was twenty-one. He
keeps her picture in his room, and on the anniversary of her death he
spends the day alone. Once in a great while he has talked to me about
her."

Jacqueline glanced at Throckmorton with a new interest. He was still
talking to Judith. The pleased look on the major's face aroused the
mischievous devil in Jack. In five minutes Jacqueline, to her disgust
and disappointment, found herself talking to Dr. Wortley, while Jack had
established himself on the other side of Judith. Neither Throckmorton
nor Judith was pleased to see him.

"You ought to hear my father tell about some of his campaigns 'way back
in the fifties," remarked Jack. "It's a good while ago, but the major
isn't sensitive about his age like some men."

Perhaps the major was not, but Jack's observation was received in grim
silence.

"I am sure Major Throckmorton can tell us a great many interesting
things," answered Judith, smiling involuntarily--"particularly to us who
lead such quiet lives, and who know so little. I sometimes wonder how I
shall ever be able to bring up my boy; I have so few ideas, and they
seem to be all rusting away."

"I thought you were a great reader," said Throckmorton.

"I like to read, but--"

"My father is a Trojan of a reader," continued Jack, "and his eyesight
is really wonderful."

At this the major, with the cast in his eye very obvious, rose and
walked over to where Jacqueline was sitting. Jack had accomplished his
object, and ran his father out of the field. But Judith felt a sense of
bitter disappointment. However, with the sweetness of her nature, she
overcame her resentful feelings toward Jack, and, in spite of his boyish
disposition to make people uncomfortable, really began to like him.

Throckmorton, though, was not ill pleased on the whole. It was by an
effort that he had kept away from Jacqueline until then. But, after
talking with her awhile, he was not quite so well satisfied. Her
childishness was pretty, and the acuteness of her remarks sometimes
surprised him, but there was nothing to her--she talked and thought
about herself. Throckmorton tried once or twice to get her into the
channel of rational conversation, but Jacqueline rebelled. She
acknowledged with a pretty smile that she hated books, and that she was
poor company for herself. Throckmorton felt a tinge of pity for her.
What would become of her twenty years hence--so pretty, so charming, so
inconsequent?

Freke had in the mean time completed his conquest of Mrs. Sherrard.
Presently he went to the piano and trolled out songs in a rich barytone,
playing his own accompaniments. This musical gift was a revelation to
Mrs. Sherrard. It was not comparable, though, to his violin-playing.
Nevertheless, it was enough to turn Jacqueline's head a little. Freke
sang a sentimental song, with a tender refrain, and every time he sang
this refrain he cast a glance at Jacqueline.

Gradually the blood mounted to her face, until, when he stopped, she was
as rosy as the morning. Then Freke sat down by her, and after that
Jacqueline had no eyes for anybody else--not even Jack.

Throckmorton saw it, with a strong disgust for Freke, and with that same
strange pang of jealousy he had felt before. Judith's angry disapproval
burned within her, but she made no attempt to circumvent Freke until,
looking around after a while, she missed him and Jacqueline both.

Judith, watching her opportunity, slipped out into the hall, and there
found the culprits. Jacqueline made a little futile effort to pretend
that they were looking at some prints by the light of a solitary
kerosene-lamp; but Freke, who at least had no pretence about him, held
on boldly to Jacqueline's hand, until she wrenched it away.

"Jacqueline, dear," said Judith, trying to speak naturally, "it is cold
out here; come in!"

"I'm not cold," answered Jacqueline after a pause.

"But it is not polite to run away like this," urged Judith, casting an
angry look at Freke, who, with folded arms, was whistling softly.

"I can't help that, Judith," answered Jacqueline, pettishly. "Why do you
want me in that stiff drawing-room with old Dr. Wortley and Mrs.
Sherrard, and--"

"But Jacqueline, _I_ want you!"

There was no mistaking that tone.

"Go along, Jacky," said Freke, with cheerful submission. "You'll be
liable to catch some dreadful moral complaint if you breathe the same
atmosphere with me too long. I am a sinner of high degree, I am."

Jacqueline turned and sullenly followed Judith back, while Freke,
smiling and unruffled, walked by her side. And then supper was served,
but Jacqueline was perfectly distrait and could not keep her eyes off
Freke, who was the life and soul of the party. The supper was after the
Virginia order--very good--and so profuse it could not all be got on the
table.

On the drive home there was perfect silence. Freke made one or two
observations to Judith, but her cold silence convinced him that it was
useless. He was not afraid of her, but he saw no good in pretending to
placate her. When they reached Barn Elms and were standing in the cold
hall, Judith said to Jacqueline:

"Go on. I shall be up in a moment."

"I'll wait for you," replied Jacqueline, doggedly.

"You may wait, but I wish to speak to Freke privately. I shall take him
into the drawing-room."

At this, Jacqueline went slowly and unwillingly up the stairs.

Judith picked up the lamp and went into the dark drawing-room. The fire
still smoldered dimly in the great fireplace. Freke took up the tongs
and made a vigorous attack on the fire, and in two minutes the flames
were leaping around the brass firedogs. Then he settled himself
comfortably in the corner of the sofa.

Judith, although her determination was made, yet felt timid, and her
heart beat.

"What excuse can you give," she asked in an unsteady voice, "for your
behavior with that child to-night?"

"None whatever," answered Freke, coolly. "I am not bound to justify
myself to you, nor do I admit there was anything to be excused."

"You are right in saying you are not bound to justify yourself to me,"
said Judith; "but can you justify yourself to her father and mother? You
see how she is. You know what they--what we all--think of you. You are a
married man, remember."

"Am I?" asked Freke, laughing. "By Jove, I wish I knew whether I was or
not!"

"What right have you to fill Jacqueline's head with dreams and notions?
The child was well enough until you came. Why can't you go away and
leave her in peace?"

Freke smiled at this. "I don't feel like going away," he said, "and
particularly now that I see you wish me to go. I have rather different
plans in view now that I have bought property here. It doesn't look well
for a man to be cast off by his relations; and I intend to have, if I
can, the backing of the Temples."

"But how long, think you, could you stay, if the child's mother knew of
your behavior to-night?"

"That I don't know. But I wish to stay, Madam Judith; and, since you are
so prudish, I will promise you not look at Jacqueline again. Will that
satisfy you?"

"I will first see how you keep your promise. But I warn you, Freke, if
you remain here much longer, I shall use all the influence in my power
to get you out of this house. You are no advantage to the child. It
would be better for her if you went away and never came back."

Freke had been sitting all this time, while Judith, standing up, pale
and disdainful, spoke to him. But now he rose.

"Now," he said with sudden seriousness, "since you have expressed that
hospitable intention concerning me, let me tell you something--something
very interesting, that I have suspected for some time, but only found
out to-night. You remember I told you of that death-struggle of
Beverley's with an officer--how they rolled over and over and fought."

"Yes--yes--"

"And how the officer's horse, held by the bridle, I thought every moment
would trample--"

"Yes--yes--yes!" cried Judith.

"Well," said Freke, coming up close to her, "Throckmorton was that
officer!"

Freke had meant to give her one fierce pang; it was a delicious thing to
him to strike her through Throckmorton; but he was quite unprepared for
the result, for Judith, although young and strong, after standing for a
moment gazing at Freke with wild eyes, swayed and without a sound
dropped to the floor in a dead faint.

Freke, cursing his own folly, ran to her and called loudly. His voice
echoed through the midnight silence of the house. It brought Mrs.
Temple, frightened and half dressed, into the room, followed by Delilah,
struggling into her petticoats, and Simon Peter, scratching his wool and
but half awake.

Freke had raised Judith on his arm. Something strange, like pity, of
which he knew but little, came to him as he looked at her pallid face.

"You git 'way, Marse Temple," said Delilah, with authority. "Me an'
mistis kin manage dis heah.--Hi, Miss Judy! Open yo' eyes, honey, an'
tell what de matter wid you."

Mrs. Temple, who never lost her head in emergencies, in five minutes had
Judith in a fair way of coming to herself. Freke said truthfully that he
never was so surprised in his life as when Judith fell over. Mrs. Temple
could not account for it either, and proposed to leave the solution to
Dr. Wortley when he should be sent for in the morning. In a few minutes
more Judith came to and sat up. Almost her first conscious glance fell
on Freke. She gazed at him steadily, and in an instant the conviction
that what he had said was mere wanton cruelty came to her. Freke himself
avoided her glance uneasily.

"Honey, tell yo' ole mammy wh'yar hu'ts you," pleaded Delilah, anxious
to take charge of the case in advance of Dr. Wortley.

"Nowhere at all. I only want to get to bed.--Mother, I hope father
wasn't waked."

"My dear, nothing short of an explosion would wake him."

Mrs. Temple wisely refrained from tormenting Judith with questions. Her
fainting-fit was certainly unaccountable, but Mrs. Temple remembered
once or twice in her own early days when she had done the same thing. So
she merely gave Judith some brandy-and-water, and in a few minutes, with
Delilah's help, got her on the old-fashioned sofa.

While Mrs. Temple and Delilah were stirring about the room, shutting up
for the night and raking the fire down, Freke came up to Judith. Revenge
was familiar to him, but not revenge on women, and remorse was
altogether new to him.

"What I told you," he began, awkwardly, "the facts in the case--"

"Say no more about it; I don't believe you!" answered Judith in a low
voice, but scornful beyond description.

Freke's rage blazed up under that tone.

"You don't believe me? Then I'll make Throckmorton tell you himself. I
can find it out from him without his suspecting it, and I'll make him
tell you how he killed your husband."

Judith drew back and gave him a look that was equivalent to a slap in
the face. Just then Mrs. Temple and Delilah went out into the hall to
make fast the door.

"Well, then, if by any accident you have told me the truth, it was the
fortune of war--"

"Yes, but the hand that killed your husband! Ah! do you think I don't
see it all--all--all--not only what has happened, but what is happening
now?"

Judith rose slowly from her sofa, forgetting her weakness. At that
moment Freke thought he had never seen her look so handsome. Her eyes,
usually a soft, dark gray, were black with indignation; her cheeks
burned; she looked capable of killing him where he stood. She opened
her lips once or twice to speak, but no sound came. She had no words to
express what she felt at that moment. Freke felt a sensation of triumph.
At last he had brought this proud spirit to book; and Throckmorton--at
least if she scorned himself, Freke--she was forever out of
Throckmorton's reach. There was a gulf between them now that nothing on
earth could bridge over. He stood in a calm and easy attitude, his face
only less expressive than Judith's. Nobody who saw Freke then could say,
as Mrs. Temple sometimes had said, "What is there so interesting in
Freke's face?" It was full of power and passion.

It seemed an age to each as they stood there, but it was really only a
few moments. Mrs. Temple and Delilah came back. Judith nodded to Freke,
and walked off, disdaining Delilah's arm. She felt pride in showing him
her strength and composure. She even glanced back at him, and gave him a
smile from her pale lips.

"You have a spirit like a man!" he cried after her, involuntarily. Mrs.
Temple thought he meant because Judith had rallied so quickly from her
fainting-fit.

"Rather a spirit like a woman!" answered Judith, in a loud, clear voice,
as she went up the stairs.

It was some little time before she could get rid of Mrs. Temple and
Delilah. But presently the door was locked, and she was alone.

Some power beyond her will drew her steps to the window that looked
toward Millenbeck. The moon had gone down, and a few clouds scurried
across the pale immensity of the sky, whipped by the winds of night.
There was enough of the ghastly half-light to distinguish the dark
masses of the trees and even the outline of the Millenbeck house. From
the window which she knew well enough belonged to Throckmorton's own den
the cheerful light still streamed. He was sitting there, reading and
smoking, no doubt. She could imagine exactly how he looked. His face,
when he was silent, was rather stern, which made the charm of his smile
and his words more captivating by contrast. And what horror she ought to
feel of this man!--for, in spite of that first involuntary protest that
she did not believe Freke, the heart-breaking conviction came to her
every moment that he was telling the truth. But did she feel horror and
hatred of Throckmorton? Ah! no. And when she tried to think of Beverley,
the feeling that he was dead; that he would trouble her no more; that he
was forever gone out of her life, filled her with something that was
frightfully like joy.

But when she remembered that an open grave lay between her and
Throckmorton, it was not something like anguish she felt--it was anguish
itself. Here was a man she might have loved--a man infinitely worthy of
love--this much she acknowledged to herself; and yet Fate had married
her to a man she never could have loved. For at that moment she saw as
by a flash of lightning the falseness of her marriage and her widowhood.
She dared not think any longer; she could only throw herself on her
bed, and try and stifle among the pillows her sobs and cries. And,
remembering Beverley and Throckmorton and Freke, and his words to her
that night, this gentle and soft-hearted creature sounded all the depths
of grief, love, shame, hatred. She tried to pray, but her prayers--if
prayers they could be called--were mere outcries against the inexorable
and unpitying God. "Dear Lord, what have I done to thee that I should
suffer so?"

The night wore on, the candles burned out, the fire was a mere red glow
of embers. Anguish and despair, like other passions, spend themselves.
Judith had ceased to weep, and lay on her bed with a sort of icy torpor
upon her. Little Beverley, who rarely stirred in his sleep, waked up and
called for his mother; but even the child's voice had no power to move
her. The little boy, finding himself unnoticed, crawled out of his
small bed and came to his mother's side. The sound of his baby voice,
the touch of his little warm, moist hands, awakened something like
remorse in her. She tried to help him up on the bed, but her arms
fell helplessly--she, this strong young woman, was as weak as a child
with the conflict of emotions. The boy, however--a sturdy little
fellow--climbed up alone and nestled to her. She covered him up and held
him close to her, and kissed him coldly once or twice. "My child, he
killed your father," she said to him, thinking of Throckmorton, and that
perhaps, for the child's sake, she might arouse some feeble spark of
regret for the father--some dutiful hatred of Throckmorton. But she
could do neither the one nor the other.

At last, as a wet, miserable, gloomy dawn approached, she fell into a
wretched sleep. Judith's unexpected fainting-fit was a very good excuse
for her keeping her room for a day or two--a merciful provision for her,
as, along with other new experiences, she found for the first time that
her soul was stronger than her body, and that grief had made her ill.
She expected, in all those wretched hours that she lay in her darkened
room, that every time the door opened it would be Mrs. Temple coming
with a ghastly face to tell her the dreadful thing that Freke knew; and
the mere apprehension made her heart stand still. She, this candid and
sincere woman, rehearsed to herself the very words and tones that she
would express a grief and horror she did not feel. But when several days
passed, and the explosion did not come, she concluded that Freke, for
his own reasons, meant to keep it to himself.

For Freke's part, he had no intention of telling anybody except
Judith. He had no mind to bring about the storm that would follow his
revelation. He meant to show Judith that gulf between Throckmorton and
herself, and that was all. He would have been unfeignedly sorry had the
hospitable doors of Millenbeck been no longer open to him.

When Judith came down-stairs, he felt a great curiosity to know how she
would meet him. He himself was perfectly easy and natural in his manner
to her; and she, to his enforced admiration, was equally self-possessed
with him, although she could not always control the expression of her
eyes. "What a Spartan she is!" thought Freke to himself. "She could die
of grief and chagrin with a smile on her lips, and with her voice as
smooth and musical as the velvet wind of summer."




CHAPTER VII.


The autumn crept on. Freke had gone to Wareham, to Judith's delight, but
she found that she had rejoiced too soon, for he was at Barn Elms nearly
every day. The still, silent enmity between Judith and himself showed
itself, on her part, by a certain fine scorn--an almost imperceptible
raising of her narrow brows, that was infuriating to Freke. Still, he
could not shake her self-possession. She even listened to his talk, and
to his captivating violin-playing, with a cool and critical pleasure.
When, as often happened, his step was heard in the hall at twilight, and
he would walk into the drawing-room or the dining-room, as if Barn Elms
were his home, with his violin in his hand--for he kept one at Barn
Elms--and seating himself would begin to play in his masterly way,
Judith would listen as closely as Jacqueline. But the spell was merely
the spell of the music. She could listen to the celestial thrilling of
the strings, the soft lamenting, without in the slightest degree
succumbing to the player--not even when Freke, playing a wandering
accompaniment, like another air from the one he was singing, would sing
some of Heine's sea-songs, in which she could almost hear the sound of
the wind as it rose and wailed and died upon the waves. When the music
stopped, and Freke would look at her piercingly, she was no more moved
by it emotionally than General Temple was, who pronounced it "uncommon
fine fiddling, by George! Some of the tunes haven't got much tune,
though." This unbroken resistance on Judith's part piqued Freke
immeasurably; but quite naturally, as it often is with men of his
temperament, as he could not please her, he determined to spite her--and
he did it by a silent, furtive courtship of Jacqueline. Of this, neither
General nor Mrs. Temple suspected anything. In one sense, the girl had
suffered from neglect. Beverley had been the favorite of both parents.
He had been the conventional good son, the comfort of his parents'
hearts, while Jacqueline was more or less of a puzzle to both of them.
In vain Mrs. Temple tried to interest her in household affairs;
Jacqueline would have none of them. She shocked and mystified her mother
by saying that she hated Barn Elms--it was so old and shabby, and there
were not enough carpets and curtains in the house; and the hair-cloth
furniture in the drawing-room made her ill. Mrs. Temple, who excelled
in all sweet, feminine virtues, who would have loved and bettered any
home given her, thought this sort of thing on Jacqueline's part very
depraved. The mother and the daughter did not understand each other,
and could not. Judith's superior intelligence here came in. Jacqueline
loved her, and, while she obeyed her mother from sheer force of will
on Mrs. Temple's part, she rebelled against being influenced by
her. Judith, on the contrary, without a particle of authority over
Jacqueline, could do anything she wished with her. Mrs. Temple could
only command and be obeyed in outward things, but Judith ruled
Jacqueline's inner soul more than anybody else.

The county people, outside of the Severn neighborhood, still held
perfectly aloof from Throckmorton. This angered him somewhat, although,
as a matter of fact, the people who did recognize him supplied him with
all the company he wanted; for Throckmorton was always enough for
himself, and depended upon no man and no woman for his content. He had
bought Millenbeck and come there for a year, and a year he would stay,
no matter what the Carters and the Carringtons and the Randolphs thought
about it. Then he really had enough of company, and all the books and
cigars he wanted, and plenty of the finest shooting, although he never
killed a robin after that absurd promise he made to Jacqueline, but he
never saw one without giving a thought to her and a grim smile at
himself. And so the quiet autumn slipped away. Throckmorton felt every
day the charm of exquisite repose. In his life he had known a good
deal of excitement--the four years of the war he had been in active
service all the time--and this return to quiet and a sort of refined
primitiveness pleased him. He was charmed with the simplicity of the
people at Barn Elms--the simplicity of genuine country people, whose
outlook is upon nature. He had often heard that country people never
were really sophisticated, and he began to believe it. Even in the
stirrings of his own heart toward the place of his boyhood, after the
lapse of so many busy and exciting years, he recognized the spell that
Nature lays softly upon those whose young eyes have seen nothing but
her. Throckmorton, in spite of a certain firmness that was almost
hardness, was at heart a sentimentalist. He found content, pleasure,
and interest in this lazy, dreamy life. Of happiness he had discovered
that, except during that early married life of his, he had none, for
he was too wise to confound peace and happiness. At forty-four, when
his dark hair had turned quite gray, he acknowledged to himself
that nothing deserved the name of happiness but love. But all these
dreams and fancies he kept to himself, and revolved chiefly in his
mind when he was tramping along the country roads with a gun over his
shoulder, or stretched before a blazing wood-fire in the library at
Millenbeck smoking strong cigars by the dozen. He managed to keep his
sentimentalism well out of sight, not because he was ashamed of it, but
because he respected it.

Freke was a positive acquisition to him. Throckmorton had that sort of
broad, masculine tolerance that can find excuses for everything a man
may do except cheating at cards. Freke came constantly to Millenbeck,
much oftener than Throckmorton went to Wareham.

Millenbeck, though, was a pleasant place to visit. Throckmorton had left
the restoration and fitting up of the place to people who understood
their business well; and consequently, when he arrived, he found he had
one of the most comfortable, if not luxurious, country-houses that could
be imagined. His fortune, which at the North would have been nothing
more than a handsome competence, was a superb patrimony in the ruined
Virginia, and with ready money and Sweeney anybody could be comfortable,
Throckmorton thought. The Rev. Edmund Morford also gave him much of his
(Morford's) company, and obtained a vast number of household receipts
and learned many contrivances for domestic comfort from Sweeney.

"Be jabers, the parson's more of an ould woman than mesilf," Sweeney
would remark to his colored coadjutors. "He can make as good white gravy
as any she-cook going, and counts his sheets and towels every week as
reg'lar as the mother of him did, I warrant," which was quite true.
But the parson's good heart outweighed his innocent conceit and his
effeminate beauty with Throckmorton. Morford tried conscientiously to
get Throckmorton into the church, but with ill success.

"Sink the parson, Morford," Throckmorton would laugh. "Perhaps I'll get
married some day, and my wife will pray me into heaven, like most of the
men who get there, I suspect."

Nevertheless Throckmorton had a reverent soul, and, although he would
have turned pale and have been constrained by an iron silence had he
got up and tried to open his mouth on the subject of the inscrutable
problems that Morford attacked with such glib self-sufficiency, he
revered religion and did not scoff even at the callowest form of it.

Both Jack and himself got to going over to Barn Elms often;
Throckmorton, however, being an old bird, exercised considerable
wariness, so as not to collide with Jack at these times. Jack keptup a
continual fire from ambush at his father, regarding which of the young
women at Barn Elms the major would eventually capitulate to; but
Throckmorton treated this with the dignified silence that was the only
weapon against Jack's sly rallying. As for General Temple, he regarded
all of Throckmorton's visits as particularly directed toward himself,
for the purpose of acquiring military knowledge; and Throckmorton heard
more of the theory of war from General Temple at this time than he ever
heard in all his life before. While the general, who had all campaigns,
modern and ancient, at his finger-ends, declaimed with sonorous
confidence on the mistakes of Hannibal, Caesar, Scipio, and other
well-known military characters, Throckmorton listened meekly, seldom
venturing an observation. General Temple indicated a faint surprise that
Throckmorton, during his career, had never undergone any of the
thrilling adventures which had actually happened to General Temple, who
would have been a great soldier after the pattern of Brian de Bois
Guilbert; nor could Throckmorton convince him that he, Throckmorton,
conceived it his duty to stay with his men, and considered unnecessary
seeking of danger as unsoldier-like in the highest degree. Throckmorton,
however, did not argue the point. In place of General Temple's
innumerable and real hair-breadth escapes, and horses shot under him,
Throckmorton could only say that the solitary physical injury he
received during the war was a bad rheumaticky arm from sleeping in the
wet, and a troublesome attack of measles caught by visiting his men in
the hospital. But General Temple knew that Throckmorton had been
mentioned half a dozen times in general orders, and had got several
brevets, while General Temple had narrowly missed half a dozen
courts-martial for being where he didn't belong at a critical time. The
fact that he was in imminent personal danger on all these occasions,
General Temple considered not only an ample excuse, but quite a feather
in his cap.

Occasionally, though (during the general's disquisitions),
Throckmorton's eye would seek Judith's as she sat under the lamp, with
a piece of delicate embroidery in her hand, stitching demurely, and
something like a smile would pass between them. Judith understood the
joke. The mingled softness and archness of her glance was very beautiful
to Throckmorton, but it had not the power over him of Jacqueline's
coquettish air. Throckmorton was rather vexed at the charm this
kittenish young thing cast over him. He had always professed a great
aversion to young fools, who invariably turn into old bores, but he
could not deny that he was more drawn to sit near Jacqueline in her low
chair, than to Judith sitting gracefully upright under the lamp. That
Jacqueline was not far off from folly, he was forced to admit to himself
every time he talked with her, but the admission brought with it a
slight pang. Then he never lost sight of the disparity in their years;
and this was painful because of the secret attraction he felt for her.
Sometimes, walking home from Barn Elms, across the fields in autumn
nights, he would find himself comparing the two women, and wishing that
the older woman possessed for him the subtle charm of the younger one.
Any man might love Judith Temple--she was so gentle, so unconscious of
her own superiority to the average woman, so winning upon one's reason
and self-respect--and then Throckmorton would sigh, and stride faster
along the path in the wintry darkness. Suppose--suppose he should
seriously try to win Jacqueline? How long would he be happy? And what
sort of a life would it be for her, with that childish restlessness and
inability to depend for one moment on herself? And Throckmorton knew
instinctively that, although he possessed great power in bending women
to his will, it was not in him to adapt himself to any woman. He might
love her, indulge her, adore her, but he could not change his fixed and
immutable character one iota. It would be a peculiar madness for him to
marry any woman who did not possess adaptability in a high degree; and
this Throckmorton had known, ever since he had grown hair on his face,
went only with a certain mental force and breadth in women. He had the
whole theory mapped out, that the more intellectual a man was, the less
adaptable he was, while with women the converse was strikingly true--the
more intellectual a woman was, the more adaptable she was. He also knew
perfectly well that in women the emotions and the intellect are so
inextricably involved that a woman's emotional range was exactly limited
by her intellectual range; that there is nothing more commonplace in
a commonplace woman than her emotions. Nay, more. He remembered Dr.
Johnson's thundering against female fools: "Sir, a man usually marries a
fool, with the expectation of ruling her; but the fool, sir, invariably
rules the man." But all this went to pieces when he saw Jacqueline. She
was to him as if a figure of Youth had stepped out of a white Greek
frieze; and whenever he realized this charm of hers, he sighed to
himself profoundly.

People are never too old or too sensible to commit follies, but people
of sense and experience suffer the misery of knowing all about their
follies when they do commit them.

To Freke, who was incomparably the keenest observer in all this little
circle, the whole thing was a psychic study of great interest. He had
the art in a singular degree of getting outside of his own emotions; and
the fact that he had been guilty of the egregious folly of falling in
love with Judith at first sight made him only keener in studying out
the situation. He took an abstract pleasure in partly confiding his
discoveries to Mrs. Sherrard, who was a bold woman, and had become an
out-and-out partisan of his--the only one he could count on, except
Jacqueline, under the rose. It was a subject of active concern why
Freke ever bought Wareham in the beginning, and still more so why he
should continue to stay there. When pressed on the subject by Mrs.
Sherrard--they were sitting in the comfortable drawing-room at Turkey
Thicket, the blazing wood-fire making the dull wintry afternoon, and
the flat, monotonous landscape outside more dreary by contrast--Freke
declared that he had settled in the country in order to cultivate the
domestic virtues to advantage.

"Pooh!" said Mrs. Sherrard.

Freke then hinted at a possibility of his marrying, which, considering
his divorced condition, gave Mrs. Sherrard a thrill of horror. He saw in
an instant that this divorce question was one upon which Mrs. Sherrard's
prejudices, like those of everybody else in the county, were adamantine,
and not to be trifled with; so he dropped the obnoxious subject promptly
and wisely.

"The fact is," he said, standing up with his back to the fire, and
causing Mrs. Sherrard to notice how excellent was his slight but
well-knit figure, "I've got to live somewhere, and why not here? I don't
know whether I've got anything left of my money or not--anything, that
is, that my creditors or my lawyers will let me have in peace--but
there's excellent shooting on the place, and it only cost a song. I
think I can stay here as long as I can stay anywhere; you know I am a
sort of civilized Bedouin anyhow. And then I own up to a desire to see
that little comedy between--between--Millenbeck and Barn Elms played
through. It's an amusing little piece."

Mrs. Sherrard pricked up her ears. Freke's reputation as a conquering
hero had inspired in her the interest it always does in the female
breast. Was it possible that he shouldn't be making love to either
Judith or Jacqueline?

"I'll tell you what," he cried, smiling, "they are the most precious
pack of innocents at Barn Elms! There's my uncle--a high-minded,
good-natured, unterrified old blunderbuss--the most unsophisticated of
the lot. Then my aunt, who belongs properly to the age of Rowena and
Rebecca--and Judith."

Here Freke's countenance changed a little from its laughing
carelessness. His rather ordinary features were full of a piercing and
subtile expression.

"Judith fancies, because she has been a wife, a mother, and a widow,
that she knows the whole gamut of life, when actually she has only
struck the first note correctly a little while ago--no, I forget--that
young one. But that's very one-sided, although intense. She loves the
child because he is her own, not because he is Beverley's--rather in
spite of it, I fancy."

Mrs. Sherrard, in the excitement of the moment--for what is more
exciting than unexpected and inside discoveries about our
neighbors?--got up too.

"I knew it--I knew it!" she answered, her sharp old eyes getting bright.
"I saw Judith when she was a bride, and she wasn't in the least
rapturous. And the next time I saw her she had on that odd widow's cap
she wears, and that blessed baby in her arms; and if ever I saw secret
happiness painted on any human countenance it was hers; and all the time
she was trying to imagine herself broken-hearted for Beverley Temple."

"Fudge!" almost shouted Freke. "It's my belief she'd have traded off six
husbands like Beverley for one black-eyed boy like that young one."

"Beverley," began Mrs. Sherrard, delighted, yet fluttered by this plain
speaking, "you remember, was a big, handsome fellow--rode like a
centaur, danced beautifully, the best shot in the county--as polite
as a dancing-master or--General Temple--as brave as a lion--"

"Oh, good God, don't talk to me about Beverley Temple! He was the most
wooden-headed Temple I ever knew, and that's saying a good deal, ma'am!"
responded Freke, with energy.

"_You_ are no fool," said Mrs. Sherrard, as if willing to argue the
point.

"Yes, but you couldn't any more take me as a type of the Temples than
you could take Edmund Morford as a type of the Sherrards. Lord, Mrs.
Sherrard, what an ass your nephew is!"

"Isn't he, though? But he is a good soul," was Mrs. Sherrard's answer.

Was it Judith or was it Jacqueline that Freke was trying his charms on,
thought Mrs. Sherrard, taking her afternoon nap over the fire, after
Freke left. Freke, however, really could not have enlightened her. For
Judith his admiration increased every day--her very defiance of him was
captivating to him. He well knew that she hated every bone in his body,
and he had made up his mind, as a set-off to this, to get a description
of a certain scene during the war out of Throckmorton some time in her
presence. It was a species of vivisection, but she deserved it--deserved
it richly--for had she not brought it on herself by the way she treated
him, Temple Freke? And then Jacqueline--she was certainly a fascinating
little object, though not half the woman that Judith was--this Freke
magnanimously allowed, riding briskly along the country road in the
wintry twilight.

The family at Barn Elms had never yet dined with Throckmorton, owing
to General Temple's continued wrestle with the gout, that had now made
him a prisoner for four long weeks. Mrs. Temple, who every day got
fonder of George, as she called Throckmorton, had promised to dine at
Millenbeck when the general was able to go; but, as she invested all
their intercourse with Millenbeck with the solemnity of a formal
reconciliation, she delayed until the whole family could go in state
and ceremony. At last Dr. Wortley, having gained a temporary advantage
over Delilah, and brought General Temple to observe his (Dr. Wortley's)
regimen, instead of Delilah's, a week or two marked a decided
improvement. The general's Calvinism abated, his profanity mended, and
he became once more the amiable soldier and stanch churchman that he was
by nature.

"Now, Mrs. Temple," said Throckmorton one evening as he was going away,
"if you will keep the general out of mischief for a day or two longer,
you will be able to pay me that long-promised visit. Let me know, so I
can get Mrs. Sherrard and Dr. Wortley--and Morford and Freke; but you,
my dear friend, will be the guest of honor."

Mrs. Temple blushed like a girl, with pleasure--Throckmorton's way of
saying this was so whole-souled and affectionate.

"You say right, my dear Throckmorton," remarked General Temple, putting
his arm around Mrs. Temple's waist, "the tenderest, sweetest, most
obedient wife"--at which Simon Peter, putting wood on the fire,
snickered audibly, and Throckmorton would have laughed outright had he
dared.

So it was fixed that on the following Friday evening they were all to
dine at Millenbeck, Mrs. Temple promising to watch the general, lest he
should relapse into gout and gloom--and a promise from Mrs. Temple was a
promise. She went about, a little surprised at the complete way that
Throckmorton had brought her round. Here was one Yankee whom she loved
with a genuine motherly affection--and he was a Virginia Yankee,
too--which she esteemed the very worst kind.

Jacqueline, as usual, was off her head at the notion of going, and
Judith's suppressed excitement did not escape Mrs. Temple's eye. Both of
them, provincials of provincials, as they were, felt a true feminine
curiosity regarding the reputed splendors of Millenbeck, which was, in
fact, destined to dazzle their countryfied eyes.

On the Friday evening, therefore, at half-past six, they found
themselves driving down the Millenbeck lane. General Temple had begun,
figuratively speaking, to shake hands across the bloody chasm from the
moment he started from Barn Elms. He harangued the whole way upon the
touching aspect of the reconciliation between the great leaders of the
hostile armies, as typified by his present expedition. Going down the
lane they caught up with Mrs. Sherrard, being driven by Mr. Morford in a
top buggy.

"Jane Temple, are we a couple of fools?" called out Mrs. Sherrard,
putting her head out of the buggy.

"No, Katharine Sherrard, we are a couple of Christians," piously
responded Mrs. Temple.

General Temple thrust his bare head out of the carriage-window, holding
his hat in his hand, as it was his unbroken rule never to speak to a
woman with his head covered, and entered into a disquisition respecting
the ethics of the great civil war, which lasted until they drew up to
the very door of Millenbeck.

A handsome graveled drive led up to the door, and a _porte-cochere_,
which was really a very modest affair of glass and iron, had been thrown
over the drive; but, as it was the only one ever seen in the county, all
of them regarded it with great respect. Throckmorton, with old-time
Virginia hospitality, met them at the steps. Like all true gentlemen, he
was a model host. As he helped Mrs. Temple to alight, he raised her
small, withered hand to his lips and kissed it respectfully.

"Welcome to Millenbeck, my best and earliest friend," he said.

"George Throckmorton," responded Mrs. Temple, with sweet gravity, "you
have taught forgiveness to my hard and unforgiving heart."

Within the house was more magnificence. The inevitable great, dark,
useless hall was robbed of its coldness and bleakness by soft Turkish
rugs placed over the polished floor. There was no way of heating it in
the original plan, but Throckmorton's decorator and furnisher had hit
upon the plan of having a quaint Dutch stove, which now glowed redly
with a hard-coal fire. The startling innovation of lighting the broad
oak staircase had likewise been adopted, and at intervals up the
stairway wax-candles in sconces shed a mellow half-light in the hall
below.

General Temple was exuberant. He shook hands with Throckmorton half a
dozen times, and informed him that, strange as the defection of a
Virginian from his native State might appear, he, General Temple,
believed that Throckmorton was actuated by conscientious though mistaken
notions in remaining in the army after the breaking out of the war.

"Thank you," laughed Throckmorton, immensely tickled; "I haven't
apologized for it yet, have I, general?"

Up-stairs, in a luxurious spare bedroom, the ladies' wraps were laid
aside. Here, also, that perfect comfort prevailed, which is rare in
Virginia country-houses, although luxury, in certain ways, is common
enough. As they passed an open door, going down, they caught sight of
Throckmorton's own room. In that alone a Spartan simplicity reigned.
There was no carpet on the spotless floor, and an iron bedstead, a large
table, and a few chairs completed the furnishing of it. But it had an
air of exquisite neatness and military preciseness in it that made an
atmosphere about Throckmorton. Over the unornamented mantel two swords
were crossed, and over them was a pretty, girlish portrait of Jack's
mother. Judith, in passing, craned her long, white neck to get a better
look at the portrait, was caught in the act by Mrs. Temple, and blushed
furiously.

She had a strange sensation of both joy and fear in coming to
Throckmorton's house. In her inmost soul she felt it to be a crime of
great magnitude; and, indeed, the circumstances made it about as nearly
a crime as such a woman could commit. More than that, if it should ever
be known--and it was liable to be known at any moment--the deliberate
foreknowledge with which she went to Millenbeck, she would never be
allowed to remain another hour under the roof of Barn Elms: of that much
she was perfectly sure. This, however, had but little effect on her,
although she was risking not only her own but her child's future; but
the conviction that it was absolutely wrong for her to go, caused her to
make some paltering excuse when Throckmorton first asked her. He put it
aside with his usual calm superiority in dealing with her scruples about
going to places, and she yielded to the sweet temptation of obeying his
wishes. She took pains, though, to tell Freke herself that she was
going--a risky but delicious piece of braggadocio--at which Freke lifted
his eyebrows slightly. Inwardly he determined to make her pay for her
rashness. She was the only woman who had ever fought him, and he was not
to be driven off the field by any of the sex.

Judith's blush lasted until she reached the drawing-room, and made her
not less handsome. There the gentlemen were being dazzled by still
further splendors. This room, which was large and of stately
proportions, was really handsome. Throckmorton, who cared nothing for
luxury, and whose personal habits were simplicity itself, was yet too
broad-minded to impress his own tastes upon anybody else. Since most
people liked luxury, he had his house made luxurious; and his own room
was the only plain one in it. Jack's was a perfect bower, "more fit," as
Throckmorton remarked with good-natured sarcasm, "for a young lady's
boudoir than a bunk for a hulking youngster." In the same way
Throckmorton managed to dress like a gentleman on what Jack spent on
hats and canes and cravats; but nobody ever knew whether Throckmorton's
clothes were new or old. His personality eclipsed all his belongings.

Jacqueline was completely subdued by the luxury around her. No human
soul ever loved these pleasant things of life better than she loved
them. Comfort and beauty and luxury were as the breath of life to her.
She had hungered and thirsted for them ever since she could remember.
Going down the stairs she caught Judith's hand, with a quick, childish
grasp. The lights, the glitter, almost took her breath away; and when
she saw a great mound of roses on the drawing-room table, got from
Norfolk by the phenomenal Sweeney, she almost screamed with delight.

"God bless my soul, this is pleasant!" remarked Dr. Wortley, rubbing his
hands cheerfully before the drawing-room fire, where the gentlemen,
including Morford and Freke, were assembled. "Here we are all met again,
under Millenbeck's roof, as we were before the war. Let by-gones be
by-gones, say I, about the war."

"Amen," answered Mrs. Temple, after a little pause, piously and sweetly.

Sweeney, who could make quite a dashing figure as a waiter, now
appeared, dressed in faultless evening costume of much newer fashion
than Throckmorton's, and announced dinner. Throckmorton, with his most
graceful air--for he was on his mettle in his own house, and with those
charming, unsophisticated women--gave his arm to Mrs. Temple; the
general, with a grand flourish, did the same to Mrs. Sherrard; Judith
had the doctor of divinity on one hand and the doctor of medicine on the
other and Jacqueline brought up the rear with Jack Throckmorton and
Temple Freke. Judith, when she saw this arrangement, comforted herself
with the reflection that, if anybody could counteract Freke's influence
over Jacqueline, it was Jack Throckmorton, whom Jacqueline candidly
acknowledged was infinitely more attractive to her than the master of
Millenbeck.

But Jacqueline needed no counteraction. Freke, who read her perfectly,
was secretly amused, and annoyed as well, when he saw that Jacqueline
was every moment more carried away by Throckmorton's wax-candles and
carved chairs and embroidered screens and onyx tables, and glass and
plate. He felt not one thrill of the jealousy of Throckmorton, where
Jacqueline was concerned, that Throckmorton sometimes felt for him,
because he was infinitely more astute in the knowledge of human and
especially feminine weaknesses and follies; and he saw that the chairs
and tables at Millenbeck were much more fascinating to Jacqueline than
Throckmorton with his matured grace, his manly dignity. Freke, too,
having long since worn out his emotions, except that slight lapse as
regarded Judith, for whom he always _felt_ something--admiration, or
pity, or a desire to be revenged--had an acute judgment of women which
was quite unbiased by the way any particular woman treated or felt
toward him. Judith, although she hated him, and he frankly admitted she
had cause to, he ranked infinitely above Jacqueline. He had seen, long
before, that Jacqueline, if she ever seriously tried, could draw
Throckmorton by a thread, and it gave Freke a certain contempt for
Throckmorton's taste and perception. Any man who could prefer Jacqueline
to Judith was, in Freke's esteem, wanting in taste; for, after all, he
considered these things more as matters of taste than anything else.

The dinner was very merry. When the general had told his fifth
long-winded story of his adventures and hair-breadth escapes during the
war, Mrs. Temple, with a glance, shut him up. Freke was in his element
at a dinner-table, and told some ridiculous stories about the straits to
which he had been reduced during his seven years' absence in
Europe--"when," as he explained "my laudable desire to acquire knowledge
and virtue threatened to be balked at every moment by my uncle getting
me home. However, I managed to stay." He told with much gravity how he
had been occasionally reduced to his fiddle for means of raising the
wind, and had figured in concert programmes as Signor Tempolino, at
which stories all shouted with laughter except Mrs. Temple and the
general--Mrs. Temple sighing, and the general scowling prodigiously.
Edmund Morford, who was afraid that laughing was injurious to his
dignity, tried not to smile, but Freke was too comical for him.

Amid all the laughter and jollity and good-cheer, Jacqueline sat,
glancing shyly up at Throckmorton once in a while with a look that
Nature had endowed her with, and which, had she but known it, was a full
equivalent to a fortune. She had never, in all her simple provincial
life, seen anything like this--endless forks and spoons at the table;
queer ways of serving queerer things; an easy-cushioned chair to sit in;
no darns or patches in the damask; and the aroma of wealth, an easy
income everywhere. The desire to own all this suddenly took possession
of her. At the moment this dawned upon her mind, she actually started,
and, opening her fan in a flutter, she knocked over a wine-glass, which
Jack deftly replaced without stopping in his conversation. Then she
began to study Throckmorton under her eyelashes. He was not so old,
after all, and did not have the gout, like her father. And then she
caught his kind eyes fixed on her, and flashed him back a look that
thrilled him. Jack was talking to her, but she managed to convey subtly
to Throckmorton that she was not listening to Jack, which pleased the
major very much, who had heretofore found Jack a dangerous rival in all
his looks and words with Jacqueline.

Freke, telling his funny stories, did not for one moment pretermit his
study of the little comedy before him--Jacqueline and Throckmorton and
Judith. It was as plain as print to him. Judith, in her black gown,
which opened at the throat and showed the white pillar of her neck, and
with half-sleeves that revealed the milky whiteness of her slender arms,
sat midway the table, just opposite Jacqueline. Usually Judith's color
was as delicate as a wild rose, but to-night it was a carnation flush.

"Is Throckmorton a fool?" thought Freke, in the midst of an interval
given over to laughter at some of his stories, which were as short and
pithy as General Temple's were sapless and long drawn out; for
Throckmorton, who did nothing by halves, and was constitutionally
averse to dawdling, returned Jacqueline's glances with compound
interest. Before they left the table, two persons had seen the promising
beginning of the affair, and only two, none of the others having a
suspicion. These two were Freke and Judith.

The knowledge came quickly to Judith. Women can live ages of agony in a
moment over these things. Judith, smiling, graceful, waving her large
black fan sedately to and fro, by all odds the handsomest as well as the
most gifted woman there, felt something tearing at her heart-strings,
that she could have screamed aloud with pain. But even Freke, who saw
everything nearly, did not see that; he only surmised it. It was nearly
ten o'clock before they went back into the drawing-room. Throckmorton
gave nobody occasion to say that he devoted himself particularly to any
of the four women who were his guests; but his look, his talk, his
manner to Jacqueline underwent a subtile change; and when he sat and
talked to Judith he thought what a sweet sister she would make, and
blessed her for her tenderness to Jacqueline. Judith's color had been
gradually fading from the moment she caught Throckmorton's glance at
Jacqueline. She was now quite pale, and less animated, less interesting,
than Throckmorton ever remembered to have seen her. At something he said
to her, she gave an answer so wide of the mark that she felt ashamed
and apologized.

"I was thinking of my child at that moment and wondering if he were
asleep," she said.

From the moment of that first meaning glance of Throckmorton's at
Jacqueline, the evening had spun out interminably to Judith. Mrs. Temple
noticed it with secret approval, as a sign of loyalty to her widowhood.

At eleven o'clock a move was made to go, when Throckmorton suddenly
remembered that he had not showed them his modest conservatory, which
appeared quite imposing to their provincial eyes. He took Judith into
the little glass room opening off the hall. It was very hot, very damp,
and very close, as such places usually are, and full of a faint, sickly
perfume. Freke followed them in. At last he had got his chance. He began
to talk in his easy, unconstrained way, and in a minute or two had got
the conversation around to something they had been speaking of the night
of the party at Turkey Thicket.

"You were saying," said Freke, "something about a bad quarter of an hour
you had with that old sorrel horse of yours--"

"Well, I should say it was a bad quarter of an hour," answered
Throckmorton. "To be ridden down and knocked off my horse was bad
enough, with that strapping fellow pinioning my arms to my side so I
couldn't draw my pistol; and old Tartar, perfectly mad with fright--the
only time I ever knew him to be so demoralized--tearing at the reins
that wouldn't break and that I couldn't loose my arm from, and every
time I looked up I saw his fore-feet in the air ready to come down on
me--"

"And what sort of a looking fellow was it you say that rode you down?"

"A tall, blonde fellow--an officer evidently.--Good God! Mrs. Beverley,
what is the matter?" For the color had dropped out of Judith's face as
the mercury drops out of the tube, and she was gazing with wide, wild
eyes at Throckmorton. How often had she heard that grewsome story--even
that the plunging horse was a sorrel! But at least Freke should not see
her break down. She heard herself saying, in a strange, unnatural voice:

"Nothing. I think it is too warm for me in here." Throckmorton took her
by the arm and led her back into the hall, and to a small window which
he opened. He felt like a brute for mentioning anything connected with
the war--of course it must be intensely painful to Judith--but she
stopped his earnest apologies with a word.

"Don't blame yourself--pray, don't. It was very warm--and Freke--oh, how
I hate him!"

Throckmorton had been afraid she was going to faint, but the energy with
which she brought out her last remark convinced him there was no
danger. It brought the blood surging back to her face in a torrent.

Nobody else had known anything of the little scene in the conservatory;
and then Throckmorton had to show Jacqueline over it, and Judith caught
sight of him, standing in one of his easy and graceful attitudes,
leaning over Jacqueline in expressive pantomime; and then came the
general's big, musical voice: "My love, it is now past eleven o'clock;
we must not trespass on Throckmorton's hospitality." Throckmorton felt
at that moment as if the evening had just begun; while to Judith it
seemed as if there was a stretch of years of pain between the dawn and
the midnight of that day--a pain secret but consuming.

There was the bustle of departure, during which Judith managed to say to
Freke:

"You have had your revenge--perfect but complete."

"That's for calling me a liar," was Freke's reply. It was, moreover, for
something that Judith had made him suffer--absurd as it was that any
woman could make Temple Freke suffer. But, after what he had seen that
night, he reflected that it was perhaps a work of supererogation to
build a barrier between Judith and Throckmorton. The major had other
views.

Throckmorton handed the ladies into the carriage; and, in spite of the
light from the open hall-door, and _not_ from the carriage-lamps--for
the Barn Elms carriage had long parted with its lamps--he pressed a
light kiss on Jacqueline's hand, under General and Mrs. Temple's very
eyes, without their seeing it. Judith, however, saw it, and was thankful
that it was dark, so that the pallid change, which she knew came over
her, was not visible.

Throckmorton went back into the house, shut himself up in his own den,
and smoked savagely for an hour. Yes, it was all up with him, he
ruefully acknowledged.




CHAPTER VIII.


A day or two after this, however, came a snow, deep and lasting, more
like a midwinter snow in New England than a December flurry in lower
Virginia. For four weeks the sun scarcely shone, and the earth was
wrapped in white. The roads were impassable, the river-steamers stopped
running, and the mails were delayed for days at a time. The country
people were much cut off from each other. Mrs. Temple missed four
successive Sundays at church--a thing she had never done in her life
before. Nobody could get to Barn Elms except the Throckmortons and
Freke, but they came often in the evenings. Throckmorton saw what was
before him with Jacqueline, yet held back, as engineers put down the
brakes on a wild engine on a down grade--it does not, however,
materially alter the result. He sometimes thought, with a sense of the
grotesqueness of human affairs, how strange it was that things had not
arranged themselves so that Jack had not been Jacqueline's victim, and
himself Judith's. For Jack was undeniably fond of Jacqueline, and so far
did not in the slightest degree suspect his father's infatuation, as
Throckmorton frankly and bitterly acknowledged it to be. As for Judith,
Nature leaves no true woman unarmed for suffering like hers. Even
Jacqueline, who was sharp-eyed, only noticed that Judith at this time
was, if anything, a little sweeter and kinder than before--even a little
more gay. Little Beverley found his mother better company than usual,
and more ready for a romp than ever before. The child, whom she had
thought everything to her before, became now more passionately dear to
her. Alone with him, she would take him in her arms and hold him close
to her; she felt an actual softening of the pain at her heart when the
child's curly head rested over it. Then she would talk to him in a way
the child only half understood, as he gazed at her with grave, mystified
eyes, and, while laughing at his childish wonder, she would almost
smother him with kisses. Judith was positively becoming merry. In her
voice was a ring, in her eyes a light that was different from that calm,
untroubled composure that had once marked her. Her manner to
Throckmorton was perfect; the same gentle gayety, the same graceful
dignity. She did not avoid him; pain wrung no such concession from
Judith Temple. But Judith's invincible cheerfulness was strangely
antagonized by Jacqueline. Jacqueline, who talked to her own heart in a
very primitive, open fashion, was vexed at the notion that, in order to
be mistress of Millenbeck, she would have to marry Throckmorton. How
much nicer, thought Jacqueline, with great simplicity, if it were Jack
who gave her those looks, those words, who had pressed that kiss upon
her hand! Throckmorton was too old, and had too much sense; Jacqueline
made no secret in acknowledging that mature men of sense bored and
restrained her. It was very hard, she thought, disconsolately. Ever
since that dinner at Millenbeck, Barn Elms had appeared shabbier and
sorrier than ever before. Although Mrs. Temple continued to have five
kinds of bread for breakfast, and had invited a regiment of poor
relations to spend the coming summer with her, under the Virginia
delusion that it costs nothing to harbor a garrison for an indefinite
time, things were certainly going very badly at Barn Elms; a condition
of affairs, though, to which General Temple was perfectly accustomed,
and who knew no other way of paying Peter than by robbing Paul. The old
carriage went all to pieces just about that time, and there was no money
to buy another one. As for a new piano, that was an impossible dream;
and there were two splendid new pianos at Millenbeck, and not a soul to
touch them! And Jacqueline wanted a new frock, and endless other things,
which were distinctly out of the question, and the only way to get them,
that she could see, was to encourage Throckmorton's attentions and be
mistress of Millenbeck. All this was not lost on Freke, who, with his
eyes open, began to play with Jacqueline, and like Throckmorton got his
wings scorched. The girl certainly had a power of compelling love. Had
Judith ever relented toward Freke, Jacqueline would have had cause for
jealousy if she loved him. But, in truth, as it came to pass, Freke cast
as much of a spell upon Jacqueline as she did upon him. If Freke owned
Millenbeck, instead of that wretched old Wareham, that actually was not
as good as Barn Elms! So Jacqueline fretted to herself.

The loneliness of those cold, snowy days was killing to Jacqueline. The
long afternoons when she sat by the drawing-room fire and dreamed
dreams, were almost intolerable to her. When she heard Beverley's
shouts, as Judith romped with him in the cold hall, and hid from him in
the dusk until the child set up a baby cry, it was the only living
cheerful noise about the house. Judith would come to her and say, "Now,
Jacky, for a walk in the hall!" Jacqueline would answer fretfully:

"What do I want to walk for?"

"Because it is better than sitting still."

Judith would take her by the waist and run her up and down the long,
dusky hall. It was so cold they shivered at first, and the rattling of
the great windows let icy gusts of air in upon them; and sometimes the
moon would glare in at them in a ghastly way. Presently they would hear
Simon Peter bringing in wood for the night by the back way, shaking the
snow off his feet, and announcing to Delilah: "I tell you what, ole
'oman, 'tis everlastin' cole an' gwine ter keep so, fer I seed de hosses
in de stable kickin' de lef' hine-foots; an' dat's sho' an' suttin sign
o' freezin'."

"You better kick dat lef' hine-foot o' yourn, an' stop studyin' 'bout de
hosses, fo' mistis come arter you! Ez long ez ole marse holler at you,
you doan' min'; but jes' let mistis in dat sof' voice say right fine,
'Simon Peter!' I lay you jes' hop," was Delilah's wifely reply.

General Temple, confined to the house by the weather, drew military maps
with great precision, and worked hard upon his History of Temple's
Brigade. The fact that he knew much more about the Duke of Marlborough's
campaigns, or Prince Eugene's, or anybody's, in fact, than he did about
any he had been directly engaged in, in no wise set him back. Mrs.
Temple, who thought the general a prodigy of military science, was
rejoiced that he had something to divert him through the long wintry
days, when Barn Elms was as completely shut in from even the little
neighborhood world as if it were in the depths of a Russian forest. Jack
Throckmorton, who after a while began to see that the major was
certainly singed, as he expressed it to himself, did not carry out his
usual tactics of making his vicinity too hot for his father, but when he
wished to see Jacqueline went over in the mornings. If the weather was
tolerable, they were pretty sure to find their way to the ice-pond.
Jack, carrying on his arm a little wooden chair, and putting Jacqueline
in it, would push it over the ice before him as he sped along on skates.
Then Jacqueline's fresh, young laugh would ring out shrilly--then she
was happy. Sometimes Judith and Throckmorton, smiling, would watch them.
Jack liked Mrs. Beverley immensely, but he confided to Jacqueline that
he was a little afraid of her--just as Jacqueline candidly admitted she
was in awe of Major Throckmorton. Throckmorton, watching this childish
boy and girl fun, would sometimes laugh inwardly and grimly at himself.
How true was it, as Mrs. Sherrard had said, that Jacqueline would make a
good playmate for Jack! And then he would turn to Judith, and try to
persuade himself of her sweetness and truth. But love comes not by
persuasion.

Jack had been giving Jacqueline glowing accounts of the sleigh-rides he
had had in the Northwest. Jacqueline was crazy for a sleigh-ride, but
there was no such thing as a sleigh in the county. One evening, after
tea, as Jacqueline sat dolefully clasping her knees and looking in the
fire, and Judith, with hands locked in her lap, was doing the same; Mrs.
Temple knitting placidly by the lamp, while General Temple held forth
on certain blunders he had discovered in the Retreat of the Ten
Thousand--a strange tinkling sound was heard far--far away--almost as if
it were in another world! Jacqueline sat perfectly still and gazed into
Judith's eyes. Judith got up and went into the hall. A great patch of
moonlight shone through the uncurtained window, and outside it was
almost as light as day. The limbs and trunks of the great live-oaks
looked preternaturally dark against the white earth and the blue-black,
star-lit sky. Suddenly Simon Peter's head appeared cautiously around the
corner of the house, and in a minute or two he came up the back way and
planted himself at Judith's elbow.

"Gord A'mighty, Miss Judy, what dat ar'? What dem bells ringin' fur? I
'spect de evils is 'broad. I done see two Jack-my-lanterns dis heah
night."

Judith fixed her eyes on the long, straight lane bordered with solemn
cedars; she saw a dark object moving along, and heard the sharp click of
horses' shoes on the frozen snow.

"It's somebody coming," she said, and in a moment, she cried out
joyfully:

"O Jacky, come--come! it's a sleigh--I see Jack Throckmorton
driving--Major Throckmorton is there--and there are four seats!"

Jacqueline jumped up and ran out. She had never seen a sleigh in her
life, and there it was turning into the drive before the house. Jack had
the reins, and the major's two thoroughbreds were flying along at a
rattling pace, and the bells were jingling loudly and merrily.
Jacqueline almost danced with delight. By the time the sleigh drew up at
the door, Simon Peter was there to take the reins, and Throckmorton and
Jack jumped out and came up the steps. The general and Mrs. Temple were
also roused to come out and meet them. As the hall-door swung open, a
blast of arctic air entered. Throckmorton's dark eyes looked black under
his seal-skin cap. Jack plunged into business at once.

"Now, Mrs. Temple, you must let me take Miss Jacqueline for a spin
to-night; never saw better sleighing in my life. The major's along, and
you know he is as steady as old Time"--the major at heart did not relish
this--"and, if Mrs. Beverley will go, it will be awfully jolly."

Mrs. Temple began some mild protest: it was too cold, or too late, or
something; but for once Jacqueline did not hear her, and bounded off
up-stairs for her wraps. Even Judith, usually so calm, was a little
carried away by the prospect.

"Come, mother, Major Throckmorton and I will take care of them."

Mrs. Temple yielded.

"I will take care of Beverley while you are gone," she said, and Judith
blushed. Was she forgetting the child?

In five minutes both of them were ready. Judith had pressed her soft
cheeks to Beverley's as she leaned over the sleeping child. Surely
nobody could say she was a forgetful mother.

The sleigh was Jack's. He had sent away and bought it, and it had
arrived that evening. Jacqueline sat on the front seat with him, her
face glowing with smiles on the clear, cold night, as he wrapped the fur
robes around her. Throckmorton did the same for Judith. For once she had
left off her widow's veil, and for once she forgot that secret pain and
determined to be happy. Jack touched up the horses, and off they flew.
As for Jacqueline and himself, their pleasure was of that youthful,
effervescing sort that never comes after twenty-five; but Throckmorton
and Judith began to feel some of the exhilaration and excitement.
Throckmorton had lately heard Mrs. Sherrard's views about Judith's
marriage, and it had made him feel a very great pity for her.

"Where are we going?" cried Jacqueline, as they dashed along.

"Anywhere--nowhere--to Turkey Thicket!" replied Jack, lightly touching
the flying horses with his whip.

"We will frighten Mrs. Sherrard to death!" said Judith, from the back
seat, burying her face in her muff.

It was not a time to think about anybody else, though. The five miles
to Turkey Thicket sped away like lightning. When they dashed through the
gate and drew up before the house, half a dozen darkies were there
gaping; and Mrs. Sherrard, with a shawl thrown over her head, was
standing in the doorway, and standing behind her was Freke.

As they all got out, laughing, huddling, and slipping up the stone
steps, Mrs. Sherrard greeted them with her characteristic cordiality,
demanding that they should take off their wraps before they were half up
the steps. She gave Throckmorton a comical look, and whispered to him as
he shook hands with her: "Out with the Sister of Charity, hey? Or is it
the child Jacky?" Throckmorton laughed rather uneasily. He had never got
over that remark of Mrs. Sherrard's about Jacqueline being a playmate
for Jack.

They all went trooping into the dining-room, where a huge fire blazed.
Mrs. Sherrard called up her factotum, a venerable negro woman, Delilah's
double, and in ten minutes they were sitting around the table laughing
and eating and drinking. The colored factotum had brought out a large
yellow bowl, a big, flat, blue dish, and a rusty bottle. Eggs and milk
followed.

"Egg-nog," whispered Jack to Jacqueline.

So it was. Freke broke up the eggs, and Mrs. Sherrard, with a great
carving-knife, beat up the whites, while she talked and occasionally
flourished the knife uncomfortably near Freke's nose. Throckmorton
poured in the rum and brandy with such liberality that Judith with great
firmness took both bottles away from him. The egg-nog was a capital
brew. Then Freke produced his violin, and saying, "Hang your Brahms and
Beethovens!" dashed into waltzes of Strauss and Waldteufel that made the
very air vibrate with joy and gayety and rhythm. Jack seized Jacqueline,
and, opening the door, they flew out into the half-lighted hall and spun
around delightedly. As Freke's superb bow-arm flashed back and forth,
and the torrent of melody poured out of the violin, his eyes flashed,
too. He did not mean to play always for Jacqueline to dance.

Judith, standing at the door, watched the two young figures whirling
merrily around in the half-light to the resounding waltz-music. She was
altogether taken by surprise when Throckmorton came up to her, and said,
half laughing and half embarrassed:

"My dancing days are over, but that waltz is charming."

Judith did not quite take in what he meant, but without a word he
clasped her waist, and she was gliding off with him. Throckmorton would
have scorned the characterization of a "dancing man," but nevertheless
he danced well, and Judith moved like a breeze. She went around the big
hall once--twice--before the idea that it was inconceivably wicked of
her to dance with Throckmorton came to her; not, indeed, until she saw
Freke's wide mouth expanded into a smile that was infuriating. And then,
what would Mrs. Temple say to her dancing at all?

"Oh, pray, stop!" she cried, blushing furiously. "I can't dance any
more; I ought never to have begun. I haven't danced for--for years."

Throckmorton stopped at once, with pity in his eyes. He suspected the
sort of angelic dragooning to which she was subject from his dear Mrs.
Temple.

"Why shouldn't you dance?" he said. "I see you like it. Come, let's try
it again. I'm a little rusty, perhaps, but we got on famously just now."
But Judith would not try it again.

Freke now meant to have his innings.

"Do you know this is Twelfth-night--the night for telling fortunes?" he
said, laying down his violin.--"Come, Jacky, let me take you out of
doors and show you the moon and tell yours."

"In this snow!" screamed Mrs. Sherrard; but by that time Freke had
thrown a shawl over Jacqueline's head, and had dragged her out of the
room, and the hall-door banged loudly after them.

Outside, in the cold, white moonlight and the snow, Freke pointed to the
moon.

"Now make your wish," he said; "but don't wish for Millenbeck."

Jacqueline's face could turn no redder than it was, but she looked at
Freke, and answered on impulse, as she always did:

"Millenbeck is finer than Barn Elms--"

"Or Wareham," responded Freke, fixing her attention with a stare out of
his bold eyes. "See here, Jacqueline, I know how it is. You think you
will be able to put up with Throckmorton for the sake of Millenbeck. My
dear, he is old--"

"He is only forty-four," answered Jacqueline, defiantly.

"And you are only twenty-one. You would be happier even at Wareham with
me, than at Millenbeck with Throckmorton."

"I couldn't be happy in a five-roomed house," quite truthfully said
Jacqueline.

"Yes, you could. I could make you forget whether it had five or ten
rooms."

At this, he put two fingers under her chin, and, tilting up her rosy
face, kissed her on the mouth. "Come!" cried Freke, after a little
while, remembering how time was flying, which Jacqueline had evidently
forgotten, and making for the steps; but Jacqueline stopped him with a
scared face.

"Aren't you married, Freke?" she asked.

"Not a bit of it," answered Freke, stoutly. "Don't you believe all the
old women's tales you hear about me, Jacky. I'm no more married than you
are this minute. I have been, I admit, but I slipped my head out of the
noose some time ago. Do you believe me?"

"Yes," answered Jacqueline, who could believe anything, "if--if--people
can really be divorced."

They had not been gone ten minutes, when they returned, yet Freke saw a
danger-signal flying in Judith's cheeks. She did not mean to have any
more of this. Mrs. Sherrard, who had become an active partisan of
Freke's, asked, as soon as they came in:

"What wish did you make, Jacky?"

Jacqueline started. She had made no wish at all.

"Freke ran me out of the house so fast," she began complainingly, "I was
perfectly out of breath."

"And of course couldn't make a wish," said Jack Throckmorton, laughing.

"I wished for everything," replied Jacqueline.

Presently they were driving home through the still, frosty night. Judith
felt a complete reaction from the ghost of merriment that had possessed
her in going that road before. Even Throckmorton noticed the change. She
laughed and talked gayly, but her speaking eyes told another story.
Throckmorton could not but smile, and yet felt sorry, too, when
Jacqueline, fancying herself unheard, whispered to Judith:

"I won't tell mamma about the waltz."

But Jacqueline was absent-minded too. When they had got home and had
gone up-stairs, instead of Jacqueline following Judith to her room, as
she usually did when she had anything on her mind, she went straight to
her own room, and, locking the door, began to walk up and down, her
hands behind her back. How strange, fascinating, overpowering was Freke,
after all! Was a divorced man really a married man? Divorces were
dreadful things, she had always known--but--suppose, in some other world
than that about the Severn neighborhood, it should be considered a
venial thing? Jacqueline became so much interested in these puzzling
reflections that she unconsciously abandoned the cat-like tread which
she had adopted for fear of waking her mother, and stepped out in her
own brisk way up and down the big room. Mrs. Temple, hearing this,
quietly opened her own chamber-door beneath. That was enough. The walk
stopped as if by magic, and in ten minutes Jacqueline was in bed.




CHAPTER IX.


Throckmorton made one short, sharp struggle with himself, and then
yielded to Jacqueline's fascination.

Without Freke's keen perceptions, Throckmorton knew enough to doubt
whether he ought to congratulate or curse himself if he won Jacqueline;
and that he could win her, his own good sense told him soon enough.
Jacqueline's nature was so impressionable that a strong determination
could conquer her at any time and at any thing for a season.
Throckmorton, tramping about the country roads with his gun on his
shoulder; having jolly bachelor parties at Millenbeck, which were
confined strictly to the Severn neighborhood; in church on Sunday,
half-listening to Morford's pyrotechnics in the pulpit; smoking at
unearthly hours in his own den; riding hard after the hounds--the
thought of Jacqueline was never far away, and never without a suspicion
of pain and dissatisfaction. He was not given to paltering with himself,
and nothing could utterly blind his strong common sense--a common sense
that was so imperative to be heard, so difficult to answer, so
impossible to evade. It was not in him to surrender his judgment
absolutely. He faced bravely the discrepancy in their ages, but he soon
admitted to himself that there were other incongruities deeper and more
significant than that. Nevertheless, although Reason might argue and
preach, Love carried the day. Throckmorton reminded himself that
miracles sometimes happened in love. He did not suffer himself to think
what Jacqueline would be twenty years from then. Time is always fatal to
women of her type. Even her beauty was essentially the beauty of youth.
In twenty years she would be stout and florid. Here Throckmorton, in his
reflections, unexpectedly went off on Judith. Hers was a beauty that
would last--the beauty of expression, of _esprit_. Then his thoughts,
with a sort of shock, reverted to Jacqueline.

As for Freke, Throckmorton did not once connect him with Jacqueline.
Freke was a black sheep, and, as Throckmorton devoutly and thankfully
remembered, the daughter of General and Mrs. Temple would not be likely
to regard a divorced man as a single man. So, in the course of two or
three weeks, Throckmorton had gone through all his phases, and had made
up his mind. He could not but laugh at Mrs. Temple's unsuspecting
security. She had always regarded Jacqueline as a child, and indeed
regarded her very little in any way.

This excellent woman, whose gospel was embodied in her duty to her
husband and her children, had always been a singularly unjust mother;
but she thought herself the most devoted mother in the world, because
she regularly superintended Jacqueline's changes of flannels, and made
her take off her shoes when she got her feet wet. Both Mrs. Temple and
the general were absolutely incapable of entertaining the idea that
Freke was growing fond of Jacqueline; and Freke was not only astute
enough to keep them in the dark, but to keep Judith, too, who fondly
imagined that she herself had reduced Freke to good behavior as regarded
Jacqueline. Freke's estimate of the two young women had not changed in
the least--only Jacqueline was come-at-able and Judith was not--and he
loved to cross Judith and vex her, and give her pin-sticks as well as
stabs in return for the frank hatred she felt for him. She had elected
her own position with him--so let her keep it.

It never took Throckmorton long to act on his determinations. Jacqueline
saw what was coming. He had a way of looking at her that forced her to
look up and then to look down again. He said little things to her,
instinct with meaning, that brought the blood to her face. He performed
small services for her that were merely conventional, but which were
from him to her acts of adoration. And Judith saw it all.

He did not have to wait long for an opportunity. One evening he went to
Barn Elms. The general was threatened with a return of his gout, which
had got better, and Mrs. Temple had imprisoned him in the "charmber,"
where she mounted guard over him. Only Jacqueline and Judith, with
little Beverley, who had been allowed to stay up until eight o'clock, as
a great privilege, were in the drawing-room when he walked in. The boy
and Throckmorton were such chums that there was no hope of getting
Beverley off under a half-hour. He stood between Throckmorton's knees,
perfectly happy to be with him, asking endless questions in a subdued
whisper, and frowning out of his expressive eyes when Throckmorton
wanted to know when his mother intended to cut off his long, yellow
curls, so that he would be a real boy. Judith, sitting in her usual
place, smiling and calm, soon settled that the winged word would be
spoken that night. What better chance would Throckmorton have than when
she should be gone to put the child to bed? She watched the tall clock
on the high mantel with a fearful sinking of the heart, that drove the
color out of her face. Presently it was half-past eight.

"Come, dearest," she said to the child.

Beverley held back.

"I don't want to go with you," he said. "I want to stay and play."

This childish treason to her at that moment was a stab. She got up with
a smile, and opened her arms wide, her eyes shining under her straight
brows.

"Come, dear little boy," she said.

The tone was so winning, so compelling, it went to the child's baby
heart. He ran to his mother, with wide-open arms, who caught him and
held him tight, covering his yellow mop of hair with kisses.
Throckmorton looked on surprised and admiring. He had never seen Judith
yield to anything emotional like that; she was laughing, blushing, and
almost crying, as Beverley swung round her neck. And Throckmorton
thought he had never seen her look so handsome as when she ran out of
the room, carrying the child, who was a sturdy fellow, in her slender
arms, her face deeply flushed. Throckmorton, as he held the door open
for her to pass out, gave her a meaning smile; but Judith would not look
at him. Up-stairs, Beverley was soon in his little bed. Judith, sitting
on the floor, with both arms crossed on the crib, held one of the
child's little warm hands in hers; the only real and comforting thing in
life then seemed that childish hand.

"I will stay an hour," she said. "Mother will be vexed"--Mrs. Temple had
old-fashioned ideas about leaving girls to themselves--"but he shall be
happy. I will see that he has his chance." But, like Throckmorton
himself, she feared for his happiness. Nobody knew better than she
Jacqueline's weakness. She had, indeed, a sort of childish cleverness,
which was, however, of no practical good to her; but then, as Judith
remembered, Throckmorton's love could transform any woman. "Yes, I shall
go through it," she thought, still kneeling on the carpet, and pressing
her face to the child's in the crib; "Jacqueline will insist that I
shall take off the mourning I wear for the man I never loved, at the
wedding of the man I do love. If Throckmorton has any doubts or troubles
with Jacqueline, he will certainly come to me. I will help him loyally,
and he will need a friend. So far, though, from making me suffer more,
the hope of befriending him is the only hope I have left in the world. I
wonder how it feels to have one's heart aching and throbbing for another
woman's husband--to be counting time by the times one sees him? For
assuredly a few words spoken by a priest can not change this." She
struck her heart. "And in everything Jacqueline will be blest above me.
See how poor and straitened we are, and Jacqueline's life will be free
from any care at all! However, to be loved by Throckmorton must mean to
be rich and free and happy." And then, with a sort of clear-eyed
despair, she began to look into the future, and see all of Jacqueline's
and Throckmorton's life spread out before her. "And how unworthy she
is!" she almost cried out aloud. She had now risen from the crib and
was gazing out of the window at Millenbeck, that was plainly visible
across the white stretch of snow between the two places. "Of course, she
will love him--no woman could help that--but she can't understand him.
She will not have the slightest respect for his habits, and will always
be wanting him to alter them for her. She never will understand the
reserves of Throckmorton's nature. She will tease him with questions. I
would not care if Jacqueline were the one to be unhappy"--for so had
pain changed her toward the child that had been to her almost as her
own--"but in a few years the spell will have vanished. Throckmorton will
find out that she is no companion for him. There can be no real
companionship for any man like Throckmorton except with a woman
somewhere near his own level--least of all now, when he is no longer
young."

Then she came back and took the child out of his little bed, and held
him in her arms and wept passionately over him. "At least I have you,
darling; I have you!" she cried.

Down-stairs, in the drawing-room, Throckmorton made good use of his
time. With very little apprenticeship, he knew how to make love so that
any woman would listen to him.

He told Jacqueline that he loved her, in his own straightforward way;
and Jacqueline, whose heart beat furiously, who was frightened and half
rebellious, suffered him to get a few shy words from her. Throckmorton
did not stoop to deny his age, but he condescended to apologize for it.
In a dim and nebulous way Jacqueline understood the value of the man who
thus offered his manly and unstained heart, but she felt acutely the
want of common ground between them.

Throckmorton's love-making was not at all what simple Jacqueline fancied
love-making to be. He did not protest--he did not talk poetry, nor abase
himself; he made no exaggerated promises, nor did he sue for her love.
At the first sign of yielding, he caught her to his heart and devoured
her with kisses. Yet, when Jacqueline wanted to escape from him, he let
her go. He would not keep her a moment unwillingly. Jacqueline did not
understand this masterful way of doing things. She fancied that a lover
meant a slave, and apparently Throckmorton considered a lover meant a
master.

At the end of an hour, Judith returned to the room. Throckmorton was
standing alone on the hearth-rug, in a meditative attitude. In his eyes,
as they sought Judith's, was a kind of passionate, troubled joy; he
doubted much, but he did not doubt his love for Jacqueline. He went
forward and took Judith's hand, who lifted her eyes, strangely bright,
to his face. She was smiling, too, and a faint blush glowed in her
cheeks. There were no visible signs of tears.

"I am a happy man," said Throckmorton to her. "Jacqueline has promised
to marry me."

His words were few, but Judith understood how much was conveyed in his
sparing speech.

"I am happy, too," she returned, pressing his hand. "You deserve to be
happy, and you will make--Jacqueline happy."

As she said this, she smiled tremulously. Throckmorton was too much
absorbed to notice it.

"I will, so help me Heaven!" he answered.

In all his life before, Throckmorton did not remember ever to have felt
the desire of communion about his inner thoughts and feelings. Was it
because he himself had changed, or that Judith had that delicate and
penetrating sympathy that drew him on to speak of what he had never
spoken before? Anyway, he sat down by her, and talked to her a long
time--talked of all the doubts and pitfalls that had beset him; his
plans that Jacqueline might be happy; his confidence that Judith would
be his strongest ally with Mrs. Temple, who was by no means a person to
be counted on. She might object to Throckmorton's profession, to his
being in what she continued to call the Yankee army, to his twenty-odd
years' seniority, to his not being a member of the church; as like as
not this was the very rock on which Throckmorton's ship would split.
Judith, with the same heavenly smile, listened to him; she even made a
little wholesome fun of him; and when he rose to go, Throckmorton felt,
even at that time--and nobody could say that he was a laggard in
love--that he had gained something else besides Jacqueline, in the sweet
friendship of a woman like Judith. He took her little hand, and was
about to raise it to his lips with tender respect, when Judith, who had
stood as still as a statue, suddenly snatched her hand away and gave
Throckmorton a look so strange that he fancied her attacked by a sudden
prudery that was far from becoming to her or complimentary to him. She
slipped past him out of the door, and he heard her light and rapid
footfall as she sped up the stairs. As there was nobody left to
entertain the newly accepted lover, he put on a battered blue cap, for
which he had a sneaking affection, and sometimes wore under cover of
night, and let himself out of the front door and went home across the
snow-covered fields, in an ecstasy.

Meanwhile, Jacqueline, as soon as she had heard the bang of the
hall-door after Throckmorton's quick, soldierly step, stole out of her
own room into Judith's. In answer to her tap, Judith said, "Come in."

Judith was seated before the old-fashioned dressing-table, her long,
rich hair combed out, and was making a pretense of brushing it, but
occasionally she would stop and gaze with strange eyes at her own image
in the glass. She rose when Jacqueline entered, and took the girl in
her arms as Jacqueline expected.

"Judith," Jacqueline said, "I am to be married to Major Throckmorton. I
wonder what Freke will say!"

Judith held her off at arm's length, and looked down at her with eyes
full of anger and disdain.

"Don't mention Throckmorton and Freke in the same breath, Jacqueline!
What does Freke's opinion count for--what does Freke himself? It is an
insult to Throckmorton to--to--"

"But, Judith," said Jacqueline, "Freke talks better than Major
Throckmorton--"

"And plays and sings better. Ah! yes. At the same time, Throckmorton's
little finger is worth more than a dozen Frekes."

"But it troubles me about Freke. I know Major Throckmorton can manage
mamma--he can do anything with her now; and mamma, of course, will
manage papa; but nobody can do anything with Freke."

"Jacqueline," said Judith, sitting down and taking Jacqueline in her
lap, and changing all at once into the sweetest sisterly persuasion, "no
other man on earth must matter to you now but Throckmorton. Let me tell
you what a true marriage is. It is to love one man so much that with him
is everything--without him is nothing. It is to study what he likes, and
to like it too. It is to make his people your people, and his God your
God. I think one need not know a great deal in order to be worthy of a
man--for his love makes one worthy; but one should know a great deal in
order that one may be creditable to him in the eyes of the world. Think
how Throckmorton's wife should conduct herself; fancy how frightful the
contrast, if she should not in some degree be like him! I tell you,
Jacqueline, a woman to sustain Throckmorton's name and credit should be
no ordinary woman. If you do not love him, if you do not make him proud
and happy to say, 'This is my wife,' you deserve the worst fate--"

One of Jacqueline's fits of acuteness was on her. She looked hard at
Judith.

"It seems to me, Judith, that you would make a much more fitting wife
for him than I."

"Don't say that!" cried Judith, breathlessly. "Never, never say that
again!"

Jacqueline, who knew well enough when to stop, suddenly halted. After a
little pause, she began again:

"I know it will be dreadfully lonely at Millenbeck. Major Throckmorton
loves to read, and I shall be a great interruption to his evenings. I
don't know how I shall treat Jack. Don't you think it would be a good
idea to get a companion--somebody who knows French?"

"You musn't think of such a thing. Good heavens! a companion, with
Throckmorton? You can learn more from him in one week than all the
governesses in creation can teach you."

"I didn't say governess," replied Jacqueline, with much dignity. "I said
companion."

Then, as Jacqueline leaned her head on Judith's shoulder, Judith talked
to her long and tenderly of the duty, the respect, the love she owed
Throckmorton. Jacqueline listened attentively enough. When the little
lecture was finished, Jacqueline whispered:

"I feel differently about it now. At first, I could only think of
Millenbeck and a new piano, and doing just as I liked; but now, I will
try--I will really try--not to vex Major Throckmorton."

That was all that could be got out of her.

Judith went with her to her room, and did not leave it until Jacqueline
was tucked in her big four-poster, with the ghastly white tester and
dimity hangings. Jacqueline kissed her a dozen times before she went
away. Judith, too, was loath to leave. As long as she was doing
something for Jacqueline, she was doing something for Throckmorton. For
was not Jacqueline Throckmorton's now?




CHAPTER X.


Throckmorton, who was modesty and respectfulness itself in the presence
of the woman he loved, was far from being nervous or diffident with her
family. Next morning, having devoted all his smoking hours, which
comprised the meditative part of his life, to Jacqueline, it occurred to
him that he would have to tackle Mrs. Temple. That quite exhilarated and
amused him. He knew well enough the Temple tradition, by which the
master of the house was the nominal ruler, while the mistress was the
actual ruler, and he also knew it would not be repeated at Millenbeck.
He was indulgent toward women to the last degree--indulgent of their
whims, their foibles, their faults and follies; but it was an
indulgence, not a right. Jacqueline would find she had as much liberty
as ever her mother had, but it would not be by virtue of a strong will
over a weak one, but the free gift of affection. The major was not a
person subject to petticoat government. In fact, he did not exactly know
what it meant, and the woman did not live who could make him understand
it. He rather looked forward to a brush with Mrs. Temple. He knew that
Millenbeck and all the worldly advantages of the match would not
influence her one iota. The conviction of this, of her entire
disinterestedness and integrity, gave him pleasure. He knew that it was
he--George Throckmorton--who would be weighed by Mrs. Temple, if not by
Jacqueline; this last an afterthought that came to him unpleasantly.

At breakfast, Throckmorton could not but feel a sense of triumph over
Jack, who, unconscious of an impending step-mother, sat opposite his
father, and talked in the free, frank way to him that Throckmorton had
always encouraged. The young rascal would see, thought Throckmorton,
with much satisfaction, that it was possible for a man of forty-four,
with more gray hairs than black in his head, to hold his own even
against a fellow as fascinating as Jack fancied himself to be. As luck
would have it, Jack began to talk about the Temples.

"Major, don't you think Mrs. Beverley a very captivating woman? By
George! she looks so pretty in that little black bonnet she wears, if it
wasn't for interfering with you, sir, I would be tempted to go in and
win myself."

The boy's impudence tickled Throckmorton. He could not but laugh in
spite of himself at the idea--Jack, whom Judith treated very much as she
did Beverley! But Jack evidently thought his father had designs in that
quarter, which misapprehension still further amused the major.

"Mrs. Beverley is indeed a charming woman," he answered.

Jack, however, became serious. In his heart he sincerely admired and
revered Judith, and his blessing was ready whenever the major informed
him that she would be the future mistress of Millenbeck.

"Mrs. Beverley has more sense and sprightliness than any other woman I
know. If she could be persuaded to take off those black things she wraps
herself up in, and be _herself_--which she isn't--I should think she
would be--great fun."

Jack knew Throckmorton well enough to see that the shot had not hit the
bull's-eye. Throckmorton was too ready to praise, discuss, and admire
Judith. "What does the old fellow want, anyway?" thought Jack to
himself, "if Mrs. Beverley doesn't suit him?" So then and there he
entered into a disquisition on women in general and Judith Temple in
particular, which caused Throckmorton to ask sarcastically:

"May I ask where you acquired your knowledge of the sex?"

"It would be impossible to associate with you, major, without learning
much about them," answered Jack, "you are such a favorite with the
ladies. You are a very handsome man, you know, sir--"

Here Throckmorton smiled.

"For your age, that is--"

The major frowned slightly.

"They all like you--even little Jacqueline."

To save his life, Throckmorton could not prevent a flush from rising to
his face, which he hated; for the emotions of forty-four are infinitely
ridiculous to twenty-two. But it was just as well to have things settled
then. A queer glitter, too, showing understanding, had come into Jack's
eyes.

"I may say to you," said Throckmorton, after a little pause, "that you
would do well to be guarded in your references to Miss Temple. She has
promised to marry me."

They had finished breakfast by that time, and were about to separate for
the morning. Jack got up, and Throckmorton noticed his handsome young
face paled a little. He had not escaped Jacqueline's spell any more than
Throckmorton and Freke; but it was not an overmastering spell, and in
his heart he loved his father with a manly affection that he never
thought of putting into words, but which was stronger than any other
emotion. He walked up to Throckmorton and shook hands with him,
laughing, but with a nervousness in his laugh, an abashed look on his
face, that told the whole story to Throckmorton's keen eye.

"I congratulate you, sir. She is a--a--beautiful girl--and--and--I hope
you will be very happy."

"I think I shall," gravely responded Throckmorton. "I can not explain
things to you that you can only learn by experience. I have not
forgotten--I never can forget--your mother, who made my happiness during
our short married life. I have been twenty years recovering from the
pain of losing her enough to think of replacing her."

Jack had recovered himself a little while Throckmorton was speaking. The
wound was only skin-deep with him.

"And is it to be immediately?" he asked.

"As soon as I can bring it about," replied Throckmorton; "but I have got
to bring my dear, obstinate old friend Mrs. Temple round first"--here
both of them laughed--"so you will see the necessity of keeping the
affair absolutely quiet."

"You had better join the church, sir," said Jack, who was himself again.
"That will be your best card to play."

"Very likely," responded Throckmorton, good-humoredly, "but I think I
can win the game even without that."

In the bright morning sunshine out-of-doors Throckmorton began to take
heart of grace about Jacqueline. Jack did not seem to think it such an
unequal match. With love and patience what might not be done with any
woman? Throckmorton began to whistle jovially. He went out to the stable
lot to take a look at the horses, as he did every morning. Old Tartar,
that had carried him during four years' warfare, and was now honorably
retired and turned out to grass, came toward him whinnying and ready for
his morning pat--all horses, dogs, and children loved Throckmorton.
Tartar, who had lost an eye in the service of his country, turned his
one remaining orb around so as to see Throckmorton, and rubbed his noble
old head against his master's knee. Throckmorton noticed him more than
usual--his heart was more tender and pitiful to all creatures that
morning.

Toward noon he went over to Barn Elms. The morning was intensely cold,
though clear, and the fields and fences and hedges were still white with
snow. For the first time Throckmorton noticed the extreme shabbiness of
Barn Elms.

"Dear little girl," he said, "she shall have a different home from
this."

When he reached the house he was ushered straight into the plain,
old-fashioned drawing-room, and in a moment Mrs. Temple appeared,
perfectly unsuspicious of what had happened or what was going to happen.

"Good-morning," cried Throckmorton--something in his tone showing
triumph and happiness, and in his dark face was a fine red color. "Mrs.
Temple, I came over to make a clean breast to you this morning!"

"About what?" asked Mrs. Temple, sedately.

They were both standing up, facing each other.

"About--Jacqueline." Throckmorton spoke her name almost reverently.

A sudden light broke in upon Mrs. Temple. She grew perfectly rigid.

"Jacqueline!" she said, in an undescribable tone.

"Yes, Jacqueline," answered Throckmorton, coolly. "I love her--I think
she loves me--and she has promised to marry me. You may depend upon it,
I shall make her keep her promise."

Mrs. Temple remained perfectly silent for two or three minutes before
recovering her self-possession.

"You are forty-four years old, George Throckmorton."

"I know it. I never lied about my age to anybody."

"You are in the Yankee army!"

"Yes, I am," responded Throckmorton, boldly, "and I shall stay in it."

"And my daughter--"

"For God's sake, Mrs. Temple, let us talk reasonably together! I am not
going to take your daughter campaigning."

"It isn't that I mean, George Throckmorton. I mean the uniform you
wear--"

"Is the best in the world! Now, my dear old friend--the best friend I
ever had--I want your consent and General Temple's--I want it very much,
but it isn't absolutely necessary. Jacqueline and I are to be married.
We settled that last night."

Mrs. Temple, with whom nobody had ever taken a bold stand before, looked
perfectly aghast. Throckmorton saw his advantage, and pressed it hard.

"Have you any objection to me personally? Am I a drunkard, or a gambler,
or a cad?"

"You are not," responded Mrs. Temple, after a pause. "I think you are,
on the whole, except my husband and my dead son, as much of a man--"

Throckmorton took her hand and pressed it.

"Thank you! thank you!" His gratitude spoke more in his tone than his
words. "And now," he cheerfully remarked, "that you have given your
consent--"

Mrs. Temple had given no such thing. Nevertheless, within half an hour
she had yielded to the inevitable. She had met a stronger will than her
own, and was completely vanquished.

Jacqueline came down, and Throckmorton had a half-hour of rapture not
unmixed with pain. If only his reason could be silenced, how happy he
would have been! He did not see Judith; he had quite forgotten her for
the time.




CHAPTER XI.


Throckmorton, who was nothing if not prompt, had infused so much life
and spirit into his love-affair that at the end of a week it was settled
that the wedding should take place the last of February--only a month
off. Jacqueline's trousseau was not likely to be imposing, and the few,
feeble reasons which Mrs. Temple urged for delay were swept away by
Throckmorton's impetuosity. It was not the custom in that part of the
world for engagements to be formally announced; on the contrary, it was
in order to deny them up to the very last moment, and to regard them as
something surreptitious and to be hid under a bushel. General Temple had
magniloquently given his consent, when Throckmorton went through the
form of asking it. Mrs. Temple still shook her head gravely over the
matter, particularly over the brief engagement, which was quite opposed
to the leisurely way in which engagements were usually conducted in her
experience; but Throckmorton seemed to have mastered everybody at Barn
Elms. For himself that period was one of deep joy, and yet full of
harassing doubts. The more he studied Jacqueline under her new aspects,
the stranger things became. It cut him to see how little real
consequence either her mother or her father attached to her. Judith
seemed to be the only person who was concerned to make Jacqueline love
him; to regard the girl as a woman, and not as a child. For Jacqueline
herself, she was as changeable as the weather. Had she been steadily
indifferent to him, Throckmorton would have thought nothing necessary
but a manly fight to win her; but sometimes she showed devoted fondness
for him, and, without rhyme or reason, she would change into the coldest
indifference or teasing irritability. Throckmorton told himself it was
the coyness and fickleness of a young girl in love; but sometimes a
hateful suspicion overcame him that there was in Jacqueline an innate
levity and inconstancy that went to the root of her nature. The evident
delight she took in the luxury and pleasures that were to be hers--the
horses, carriages, pianos, and flowers at Millenbeck--was rather that of
a child dazzled with the fineries of life. Her love for them was so
unthinking and uncalculating that it did not shock Throckmorton; yet how
could he, with his knowledge, his experience of men, women, and things,
help seeing the differences between them--differences that, had his
infatuation been less complete, would have appalled him? As it was, just
as Judith had predicted to herself, he often came to her for sympathy
and encouragement--not expressed in words, but in the subtile
understanding between them. Judith always spoke in praise of Jacqueline;
she artfully managed to show Throckmorton the best of her. But for
Judith the marriage could never have been hastened on, as Throckmorton
desired; for, as soon as she found out Throckmorton's wish, she went to
work on Jacqueline's trousseau with a sort of desperate energy that
carried things through. Jacqueline could have no fine silk gowns, but
she was to have piles of the daintiest linen, of which the material cost
little, but the beautiful handiwork lavished upon it by Judith was worth
a little fortune. Jacqueline herself, spurred on by Judith's industry,
sewed steadily. As for Judith, the fever of working for Jacqueline
seized her, and never abated. She even neglected her child for
Jacqueline, until Mrs. Temple, with stern disapproval, took her to task
about it. Judith, blushing and conscience-stricken, owned to her fault,
although nobody could accuse her of lacking love for the child. But
still she managed to sew for Jacqueline, sitting up secretly by night,
and with a pale, fixed face--stitch, stitch, stitching! Jacqueline could
not understand it at all; and when she asked Judith about it once, she
was so suddenly and strangely agitated that Jacqueline, a little
frightened, dropped the subject at once. But, in truth, this was to
Judith a time of new, strange, and terrible grief and disappointment.
How she had ever permitted Throckmorton to take up her whole heart and
mind she did not know any more than she could fathom now how she ever
came to mistake an early and immature fancy for a deep and abiding
passion, and had suffered herself to be married to Beverley Temple. She
endured agonies of remorse for that, and yet hourly excused herself to
herself. "How could I know," she asked herself in those long hours of
the night when men and women come face to face with their sorrows. But
all her remorse was for Beverley. As for the hatred she ought to feel
for Throckmorton as the slayer of her husband, she had come to laugh it
to scorn in her own mind. But, like all true women, she respected the
world--the narrow circle which constituted her world--and she felt
oppressed with shame at the idea that the whole story might all one day
come out, and then what would they think of her? What would they do to
her? She could not say, as she had once said, "I do not believe it." She
had heard it from Throckmorton's own mouth. She would have to say, "I
knew it, and went to his house, and continued to be friendly with him,
and spoke no word when he wished to marry Beverley's sister." She could
not divine the reason of Freke's silence, but, torn and harassed and
wearied with struggles of heart and conscience, she simply yielded to
the fatalism of the wretched, and let things drift. Sometimes in her
own room, after she had spent the evening with Throckmorton and
Jacqueline, seeing clearly under his perfectly self-possessed exterior
his infatuation for Jacqueline, she would be wroth with him. Judith, the
most modest and unassuming of women, would say to herself, with scorn of
Throckmorton: "How blind he is! To throw away on Jacqueline, who in her
turn throws it to the wind, what would make me the proudest creature
under heaven! And am I unworthy of his love, or less worthy than
Jacqueline?" To which her keen perceptions would answer rebelliously,
"No, I am more worthy in every way." She would examine her face
carefully in the glass, holding the candle first one side, then the
other. "This, then, is the face that Throckmorton is indifferent to. It
is not babyish, like Jacqueline's; there are no dimples, but--" Then
the grotesqueness of it all would strike her, and even make her laugh.
The fiercest pain, the most devouring jealousy never wrung from her
the faintest admission that there was anything to be ashamed of in
cherishing silently a profound and sacred love for Throckmorton. He
was worthy of it, she thought, proudly. Toward him her manner never
changed--she was mistress of some of the nobler arts of deception--but
sometimes, although working for Jacqueline, and tending her
affectionately, she would be angry and disdainful because Jacqueline
did not always render to Throckmorton his due. She almost laughed to
herself when she compared this horror of pain and grief which she now
endured with the shock and pity of Beverley's death. She remembered that
the joy her child gave her seemed almost wicked in its intensity at
that time. What passions of happiness were hers when she would rise
stealthily in the night and, taking him from his little crib, would hold
him to her throbbing heart; and often, from the next room, she could
hear Mrs. Temple pacing her floor, and could imagine the silent wringing
of the hands and all the unspoken agonies the elder mother endured for
_her_ child! Then she would swiftly and guiltily put the child back in
his cradle, and, with remorse and self-denial, lie near him without
touching him. Often in that long-past time, when she met him in his
nurse's arms, she would fly toward him with a merry, dancing step,
laughing all the time--she was so happy, so proud to have him--and,
looking up, would catch Mrs. Temple's eyes fixed on her with a still
reproach she understood well enough. Then she would turn away from him,
and, sitting down by Mrs. Temple, would not even let her eyes wander to
the child, and would remain silent and unanswering to his baby wail.

But in this first real passion of her life, the child, much as she
adored him, was secondary. He was her comfort--she would not, if she
could, have let him out of her sight or out of her arms--but he could
no more make her forget Throckmorton than anything else; he could only
soften the intolerable ache a little, when he leaned his curly head upon
her breast; and as for that easy and conventional phrase, the goodness
of God, and that ready consolation that had seemed so apt at the time of
Beverley's death, she began to substitute, for the mild and merciful
Divinity, a merciless and relentless Jehovah, who had condemned her to
suffer forever, and who would not be appeased.

At first, the secret of the engagement was well kept. Only Jack
Throckmorton, who behaved beautifully about it, and Freke, knew of the
impending wedding. Freke's behavior was singular, not to say mysterious.
He was so cool and unconcerned that Jacqueline was furiously piqued, and
could scarcely keep her mind off her grievance against him for not
taking her engagement more to heart, even when Throckmorton was with
her. Freke's congratulations were quite perfunctory--as unlike Jack
Throckmorton's whole-souled good wishes as could be imagined. One
morning, soon after the news had been confided to Freke, he came into
the dining-room, where Judith was sewing, with Jacqueline, also sewing,
sitting demurely by her side.

"Making wedding finery, eh?" was Freke's remark as he seated himself.

"Yes," answered Judith, quietly, without laying down her work.

"I want to see how much Jacqueline will be changed by marriage--You
mustn't flirt with Jack, little Jacky."

He said this quite good-humoredly, and Jacqueline turned a warm color.

"And don't let me see you running after the chickens, as I saw you the
other day. That wouldn't be dignified, you know; it would make Major
Throckmorton ridiculous. You must do all you can to keep the difference
in your ages from becoming too obvious."

Judith felt a rising indignation. Jacqueline's head was bent lower. She
dreaded and feared that people would tease her about Throckmorton's age.
Freke saw in a moment how it was with her, and kept it up.

"Throckmorton is sensible in one way. His hair is plentifully sprinkled
with gray, but he doesn't use art to conceal it."

"I do not think forty-four is old," said Judith, indignant at
Jacqueline's tame submission to this sort of talk. "I think, with most
women, Major Throckmorton would have the advantage over younger men."

As soon as she said this, she repented. Freke glanced at her with a look
so amused and so exasperating that she could have burst into tears of
shame on the spot.

"Come, Jacqueline," cried Freke, rising, "let us go for a walk. I don't
know whether Throckmorton will permit this after you are married.
Marriage, my dear little girl, is more of a yoke than a garland. I am
well out of mine, thank Heaven!"

Judith cast a beseeching look at Jacqueline, but Freke had fixed his
eyes commandingly on her. That was enough. Jacqueline rose and went out
to get her hat.

Judith sat quite silent. She rarely spoke to Freke when she could help
it.

"What do you think of this ridiculous marriage?" he asked.

"I, at least, don't think it ridiculous. There are incongruities much
worse than a difference in age."

"Yes, I understand," assented Freke, with meaning. "I have found it so.
If I were as free as Throckmorton, though, I would be in no hurry to put
my head in the noose."

"You said just now you were free."

"Did I? Well, in fact I am free in some States and not in others. You
people down here seem to regard me as an escaped felon. That sort of
thing doesn't exist any longer in civilized communities." Judith made no
reply. She hated Freke with a kind of unreasoning hatred that put a
guard upon her lips, lest she should be tempted to say something rash.
And in a moment Jacqueline was back, and, with a defiant look at Judith,
went off with Freke. Freke caught a glance from Judith's eyes as they
went out. The fact that it expressed great anger and contempt for him
did not make him overlook that her eyes were remarkably full of fire and
the turn of her head something beautiful.

"Judith is a thoroughbred--there's no mistake about that," he said to
Jacqueline--and kept on talking about Judith until he reduced Jacqueline
to a jealous silence, and almost to tears--when a few words of praise
restored her to complete good humor. Throckmorton never played off on
her like this--it was quite opposed to his directness and
straightforwardness.

Freke was more constantly at Barn Elms than ever before. It often
occurred to Judith that he took pains to keep secret from Throckmorton
all the time he passed with Jacqueline. Sometimes she even suspected
that Jacqueline had some share in keeping Throckmorton in the dark, so
constant was Freke's presence when Throckmorton was absent, and so
unvarying was his absence when Throckmorton was present.

After a while, though, a hint of the engagement got abroad in the
county, and the people generally, who had never relaxed in the slightest
degree their forbidding exterior to Throckmorton, now somewhat included
the Temples in the ban. Throckmorton, engrossed with his own affairs,
had ceased to care for himself, being quite content with the few people
around him who took him into their homes. But he felt it acutely for
Jacqueline, who told him, with childish cruelty, without thinking of the
pang she inflicted, of the strange coolness that all at once seemed to
have fallen between her and her acquaintances. And Judith was sure that
Freke put notions of that kind and of every kind into the girl's head.
Once, after one of Freke's daily visits--for, if anything, he came
oftener than Throckmorton--Jacqueline said, quite disconsolately, to
Judith:

"Freke says I shall never have any more girl friends after I am married.
Throckmorton is too old; and, besides, the people in this county will
never, never really recognize him."

"This county is not all the world--and, Jacqueline, pray, pray don't
listen to anything Freke has to say."

"I know you don't like Freke."

"I hate him."

Judith, when she said this, looked so handsome and animated that
Throckmorton, entering at that moment, paid her a pretty compliment,
which she received first with so much confusion and then with so much
haughtiness that Throckmorton was as completely puzzled as the night he
offered to kiss her hand, and concluded that Judith was as freakish as
all women are.

Among the smaller irritations which Throckmorton had to bear, at this
strange time, was Jack's sly rallying. Jack assumed his father to be a
love-sick octogenarian. Anything less love-sick than Throckmorton's
simple and manly affection, or less suggestive of age than his alert and
vigorous maturity, would be hard to find. But Jack had always possessed
the power of tormenting his father where women were concerned--the
natural penalty, perhaps, of having a son so little younger than
himself. Jack felt infinite respect for Jacqueline, and never once
indulged in a joke calculated to really rouse Throckmorton; but some
occasions were too good for him to spare the major. Such conversations
as these were frequent:

"Major, are you going over to Barn Elms this evening?"

"No, I was there this morning."

"I understand, sir, that two visits a day, when the young lady is in the
immediate neighborhood, is the regulation thing."

"You are at liberty to understand what you please. With youngsters like
yourself, probably three visits would hardly be enough."

"I have been told that these things affect all ages alike."

Throckmorton scowled, but scowls were wasted on Jack, whose particular
object was to put the major in a bad humor; in which design, however, he
rarely succeeded.

In spite of the silence that had been maintained by the Barn Elms people
regarding the engagement, Mrs. Sherrard, who had what is vulgarly called
a nose for news, found it out by some occult means, and Throckmorton was
held up in the road, as he was riding peacefully along, to answer her
inquiries.

"I think you and Jacky Temple are going to be married soon, from what I
hear," was her first aggressive remark, putting her head out of the
window of her ramshackly old carriage.

"Do you?" responded Throckmorton, with laughing eyes. "You must think me
a deuced lucky fellow."

Mrs. Sherrard did not speak for a moment or two, and a cold chill struck
Throckmorton, while the laugh died out of his eyes.

"That's as may be," she replied, diplomatically; "but the idea of your
marching about, thinking you are deceiving _me_!"

"I am young and bashful, you know, Mrs. Sherrard."

"You are not young, but you are younger than you are bashful. You always
were one of those quiet dare-devils--the worst kind, to my mind."

"Thank you, ma'am."

"And Jane Temple--ha! ha!"

Throckmorton joined in Mrs. Sherrard's fine, ringing laugh.

"A Yankee son-in-law!" screamed Mrs. Sherrard, still laughing; then she
became grave, and beckoned Throckmorton, sitting straight and square in
his saddle, to come closer, so the black driver could not hear. "Jane,
you know," she said, confidentially, "was always daft about the war
after Beverley's death; and, let me tell you, Beverley was a fine, tall,
handsome, brave, silly, commonplace fellow as ever lived. Judith has
more brains and wit than all the Temple men put together, and most of
the women. Hers was as clear a case of a winged thing that can soar
married to a Muscovy drake as ever I saw. Luckily, she hadn't an
opportunity to wake up to it fully, before he was killed; and then, just
like a hot-headed, romantic thing, she wrapped herself in crape, and has
given up her whole life to Jane and General Temple, and Jacky."

Throckmorton felt a certain restraint in speaking of Judith to Mrs.
Sherrard, who had assumed that it was his duty to fall in love with
Judith instead of Jacqueline. So he flicked a fly off his horse's neck
and remained silent.

"I do wish," resumed Mrs. Sherrard, pettishly, "that Jane Temple would
act like a woman of sense, and send for me over to Barn Elms, and show
me Jacky's wedding things."

"Very inconsiderate of Jane, I am sure. If it would relieve your mind at
all, you might come to Millenbeck, and I would be delighted to show you
my coats and trousers. They are very few. I always have a plenty of
shirts and stockings, but my outside wardrobe isn't imposing."

"I don't take the slightest interest in your clothes. You don't dress
half as much as Jack does."

"Of course not; I can't afford it."

"One thing is certain. If you have any sort of a wedding at Barn Elms,
they'll have to send over and borrow my teaspoons. There hasn't been a
party at Barn Elms for forty years, that they haven't done it, and I
always borrow Jane Temple's salad-bowl and punch-ladles whenever I have
company."

"I don't think there will be any wedding feast there," answered
Throckmorton.

"Jacky wants one, _I_ know," said Mrs. Sherrard, very knowingly. "Jacky
loves a racket."

"Quite naturally--at her age."

"Oh, yes, of course--her age, as you say. I shall tell Edmund Morford to
pay you a pastoral visit, as he always does upon the eve of marriages,
to instruct you in the duties of the married state."

"Then I shall tell Edmund Morford that I know considerably more about my
duties in the premises than he does; and I'll shut him up before he has
opened his mouth, as Sweeney would say."

"If anybody _could_ shut my nephew up, I believe it is you, George
Throckmorton. Has Jane Temple suggested that you should join the church
yet?"

"She suggests it to me every time I go to Barn Elms, and whenever I go
off for a lover's stroll with Jacqueline, Mrs. Temple tells me I ought
to go home and seek salvation."

"And do you mind her?" asked Mrs. Sherrard, quite gravely; at which
Throckmorton gave her a look that was dangerously near a wink.

Mrs. Sherrard drove off, triumphant. She had got at the whole thing, in
spite of Jane Temple.

The wedding preparations went bravely along; carried on chiefly by
Judith. Jacqueline had set her heart on a white silk wedding dress,
which for a time eclipsed everything else on her horizon. Mrs. Temple
declared that it was extravagant, but Judith, by keen persuasion,
succeeded in getting the wedding-gown. She made it with her own hands,
and across the front she designed a beautiful and intricate embroidery,
to be worked by her.

"Judith, you will kill yourself over that wedding-gown," Mrs. Temple
once remarked. "You have drawn such an elaborate design upon it that you
will have to work night and day to get it finished."

"I shall simply have to be a little more industrious than usual,"
replied Judith, with the deep flush that now alternated with extreme
paleness.

Jacqueline herself was deeply interested in this gown; more so than in
any particular of the coming wedding. Judith had marked off for herself
a certain task of work each day upon the embroidery of the gown. Every
night, when she stopped at the end of her task, it was as if another
stone were laid upon her heart. Throckmorton had noticed her industry,
and had admired her handiwork, which she proudly showed him.

"But you are getting white and thin over it," he said. "Wouldn't it be
better that Jacqueline should not have such a beautiful frock, than for
you to work yourself ill over it? I have a great mind to speak to Mrs.
Temple about it."

"No, no, pray don't!" cried Judith, with a kind of breathless eagerness.
"It would break my heart not to finish it."

Throckmorton looked at her closely. She was not given to that kind of
talk. But suddenly she began telling him a funny story of Mrs. Sherrard
coming over to pump Mrs. Temple about the coming event, and then she
laughed and made him laugh too. Walking back home that night, he found
himself speculating on this development of fun and merriment in
Judith--a thing she had always suppressed and kept in abeyance until
lately.

"Certainly she is in better spirits--more like what one can see her
natural self is in the last month or two," he thought; and then he began
to think what a very sweet and natural woman she was, and to hope that,
when Jacqueline was her age, she would have developed into something
like Judith. But he never liked to look very far into the future with
Jacqueline.

As the time drew nearer for the wedding, Freke's continued presence at
Barn Elms became more marked. He did not avoid Throckmorton any longer,
who thought no more of it than he did of Jack's frequent visits. Jack
had quite got over any chagrin or disappointment he might have felt, and
was kindness and attention itself to Jacqueline. Throckmorton sometimes
felt annoyed and discouraged at seeing how much more Jacqueline had in
common with Jack than with himself. They were on the terms of a brother
and sister--Jack teasing and joking, yet unvaryingly kind to her, and
Jacqueline always overflowing with talk to him, while with Throckmorton
she was sometimes at a loss for words. But one glance from her dark
eyes--that peculiar witching glance that had fixed Throckmorton's
attention on her that very first Sunday in church--could always make
amends to him. As for Freke, he came and went with his violin under his
arm, and nobody attached any importance to him except Judith, who
honored him with the same still, guarded ill-will that Freke perfectly
recognized, and did not apparently trouble himself about. His eternal
presence in the house was a nightmare to Judith. She wondered if he
would keep on that way after Jacqueline was gone--when Jacqueline was
mistress of Millenbeck; but she could not dwell on that without a
tightening at her heart. At all events, it would soon be over.

Mrs. Temple had at last got interested in the wedding preparations, and
everything was going on famously until about two weeks before the
wedding, when one day General Temple got a letter. There was to be a
reunion of Beverley's old command at Richmond, and it was desired that
the Temple family should attend.

Such a request was sacred in the eyes of General and Mrs. Temple. It was
at once decided that General Temple must go, and he insisted that Mrs.
Temple should go also. She was only too willing. Inconvenient as it
might otherwise be to leave home, the idea of having Beverley talked of,
eulogized, remembered, was too near the idolatrous mother's heart to be
foregone. The invitation also included Judith, but it was clearly
impossible for both Judith and Mrs. Temple to leave Barn Elms at the
same time just then; so it was quickly settled, to Judith's infinite
relief, that Mrs. Temple should be the one to go. Mrs. Temple was helped
to a decision by the reflection that Judith, being young and handsome,
it was not impossible that some miscreant might suggest the possibility
of her marrying again; and, without uttering this impious thought, it
had its influence upon her. So it was fixed that, within a day or two,
they were to start, and would be gone probably four days. Throckmorton
was vexed at the decision--vexed at the entire readiness to sacrifice
Jacqueline's convenience to that of the dead and gone Beverley. But he
wisely said nothing; in a little while Jacqueline would have some one
that would always consider her first. But suddenly Jacqueline raised a
tempest by declaring that she wanted to go with her father and mother as
far as a certain station on the railroad, near Richmond, and thence to
pay a visit to her Aunt Susan Steptoe. Now, Jacqueline had never showed
the slightest fondness for this Aunt Steptoe, and, in fact, was
singularly lacking in family affection, after the Virginia pattern,
which takes in a whole family connection. Consequently, the notion was
the more remarkable. When it was first broached, it was simply
pooh-poohed by the general, and calmly ignored by Mrs. Temple. Judith
looked at her with reproachful eyes.

"You know, Jacqueline, there is no earthly reason for such a whim; and I
am sure Major Throckmorton would not like it."

"It's of no consequence what Major Throckmorton thinks about it!" cried
Jacqueline, unterrified by a warning light in Judith's eye--it always
made Judith angry when Jacqueline spoke slightingly of Throckmorton.

But Jacqueline held to her notion with the most singular and startling
pertinacity. Usually a word or two from Judith would bring her back to
the basis of common sense; but in this case, nothing Judith could say
would alter Jacqueline's determination. She was tired of wedding
clothes--tired of Barn Elms--tired of everybody; in fact, she made no
secret to Judith of being tired of Throckmorton, and wanting to escape
from him for a time, if only for four days. She forced her mother to
listen to her, and would take no denial. At last she hit upon the
argument to move Mrs. Temple. It was the last request she had to make
until she was married, and, if Mrs. Temple could do so much for the dead
Beverley, she certainly could not refuse this trifling request from the
living Jacqueline. Mrs. Temple turned pale at this; and she faltered out
that, childish and unreasonable as the scheme was, she would
agree--provided Throckmorton gave his consent.

That night, when Throckmorton came for his usual visit, Jacqueline met
him at the hall-door with a tenderness that surprised and charmed him.
It was so sweet, he could hardly believe it to be true. But, before the
evening was over, Jacqueline demanded payment in the shape of his
consent that she should pay this little visit to her Aunt Susan.

"Damn Aunt Susan!" was Throckmorton's inward remark at this; and he
managed to convey practically the same idea to Jacqueline. But it did no
good. Jacqueline had the scheme in her head, and it must be carried out.
It was in vain that Throckmorton reasoned gently with her. He had often
heard that weak women were the most intractable in the world, and the
recollection made him wince when he saw how dense this lovely young
creature was to common sense. But she was so ineffably pretty--she
leaned her bright head on his shoulder and pleaded--and, of course,
after a while, Throckmorton yielded, ostensibly because Jacqueline asked
him so sweetly, but really because she was utterly impervious to reason.

When the consent was at last wheedled out of him, Throckmorton felt sore
at heart and humiliated. He also felt, for a brave man, a little
frightened. How often was this sort of thing going to happen? It was
true that, after he was married, he could use his authority as
Jacqueline's husband to prevent her from doing anything particularly
foolish, but it did not please him that he should rule his wife as if
she were a child. Jacqueline saw nothing of Throckmorton's secret
dissatisfaction; but Judith, with the clairvoyance of love, saw it in an
instant. For the first time in her life, she followed him out into the
hall, where he was getting into his overcoat, with rather a black
countenance.

"Don't be troubled about it," she said, in her charming way. "She is so
young--she will learn so much from you!"

Throckmorton took Judith's hand in his. She made no resistance this
time--that quick inner sense told her instinctively that there was
something comforting to him in her gentle and womanly clasp. He looked
at her with a somber expression on his face that gradually lightened.

"Do you think she will ever be different?"

"Yes," cried Judith, gayly. "How perfectly ignorant you are of love! I
declare you are worse than Jacqueline. It's the greatest reformer in the
world--the most cunning teacher as well. It will teach Jacqueline all
she ought to know; but it can't do it at once."

"But does she love me?" asked Throckmorton, smiling a little.

"How could she help it?" answered Judith, turning her head archly, and
implying that Throckmorton considered himself a lady-killer--which made
him laugh, and sent him off home in a little better humor with the world
and himself.

Meanwhile, back in the drawing-room, Jacqueline was having a
conversation with Simon Peter, who was raking down the fire for the
night. General and Mrs. Temple had left the room. Usually Jacqueline
slipped off to bed an hour before they did; but to-night she lingered,
standing over the fire with one little foot on the brass fender.

"How does it look to-night, Uncle Simon?" she asked, meaning how did the
sky look, and what were the chances for good weather.

"Hit looks mighty cu'rus to me, Miss Jacky," answered Simon Peter, in a
queer sort of a voice that made Jacqueline stare at him. "I seed two
tuckey-buzzards flyin' ober de house tog'er'r--and dat's a sign--"

"A sign of what?"

"A sign 'tain' gwi' be no weddin' at Barn Elms dis year."

Jacqueline turned a little pale. It had not been a great many years
since she had fully believed every one of Simon Peter's signs and omens;
and even now, his solemn prophecies sent a chill to her childish heart.

"An'," continued Simon Peter, advancing and raising a prophetic
forefinger, "dis heah night I done heah de owls hootin' 'Tu-whoo,
tu-whoo, tu-whoo!'--three times, dat ar way--dat doan' means nuttin'
but a funeral, when owls hoots dat away."

Jacqueline shuddered.

"O Uncle Simon, hush!"

"I tole you kase you arsk me," replied Simon Peter, stolidly; and at
that moment Delilah came in.

"O mammy," cried Jacqueline, fairly bursting into tears, "you don't know
what awful signs and things Uncle Simon has been seeing--funerals, and
buzzards, and no wedding!"

"He have, have he!" snapped Delilah, with wrath and menace. "Simon
Peter, he su't'ny is de foolishest nigger I ever seed. He ain' never
got 'ligion good; he allus wuz a blackslider, an' heah he come skeerin'
my little missy ter def wid he buzzards an' he things!"

Simon Peter, who bore this marital assault with meekness, copied from
General Temple, only remarked sheepishly:

"I done see de signs; an', Miss Jacky, she arsk me, an' I done tole her
'bout de two buzzards."

"Wid de tails tied tog'er'r, I reckon!" answered Delilah, with withering
sarcasm; "an' maybe dey wuz gwi' fly ter Doc Wortley's ter see ef
anybody gwi' die soon.--Doan' you min' Simon Peter, honey; jes' come wid
mammy up-sty'ars an' she holp you to ondress an' put you in yo' bed."

Jacqueline went off, and in half an hour was tucked snugly in the great
four-poster. But she would not let Delilah leave her. She kept her
pulling the window-curtains this way and that, then raking down the fire
because the light from the blazing logs hurt her eyes, and then
stirring the flames into a blaze so that she might see the shadows on
the wall. At last, however, Delilah got out, Jacqueline calling after
her disconsolately:

"O mammy, do you believe in the two buzzards flying--"

"You jes' shet dat little mouf, an' go ter sleep, honey," was Delilah's
sensible reply, as she went out.

The next day the whole party got off, General Temple leaving directions
enough behind him to last if he were going to Turkey instead of to
Richmond. Jacqueline at the last seemed loath to part from Judith. She
said good-by half a dozen times, and wept a little at parting. There
would be no need of letters, as they would only be gone four days.
Jacqueline was to stop off at the station, and join her father and
mother there on their return from Richmond, getting home ten days before
the wedding. There was some talk of asking Mrs. Sherrard to come over
and stay with Judith during the absence of General and Mrs. Temple, but
Judith protested. With her child she would not suffer for company, and
the work on Jacqueline's wedding-dress would keep her busily employed,
while Delilah and Simon Peter were protection enough for her at night.
Besides this, Throckmorton and Jack would be over every day to look
after her. When it was all arranged, Judith felt a sensation of
gladness. She would have four days in which she would not be compelled
to play her silent and desperate part. She could weep all night without
the fear that Mrs. Temple's clear eyes would notice how pale and worn
she was in the morning; she could relax a little the continual tension
on her nerves, her feelings, her expression. So, when they were gone,
she came back into the lonely house, and, leaving Beverley with his
mammy, went up to her own room, and taking out the white silk
wedding-gown went to work on it with a pale, unhappy face; she had dared
not show an unhappy face before.

The day passed quickly enough, and the short winter afternoon closed in.
Judith would no longer take time for her usual afternoon walk; every
moment must be devoted to Jacqueline's gown. About eight o'clock, as
she sat in the drawing-room, stitching away, while overhead in her
own room Delilah watched the little Beverley as he slept, she heard
Throckmorton's step upon the porch. As she heard it, she gave a slight
start, and put her hand on her heart--something she always felt an
involuntary inclination to do, and which she had to watch herself to
prevent. Throckmorton came in, and greeted her with his usual graceful
kindness.

"I thought I would come over and see that nobody stole you and
Beverley," he said.

"There's no danger for me," answered Judith; "but for a beautiful boy
like my boy--why, he's always in danger of being stolen."

Throckmorton scoffed at this.

In five minutes they were seated together, having the first real
_tete-a-tete_ of their lives. Judith sat under the mellow gleam of the
tall, old-fashioned lamp, the light falling on her chestnut hair and
black dress and the billowy expanse of white silk spread over her lap,
making high white lights and rich shadows. Throckmorton had often
admired her as she sewed. Sewing was a peculiarly gracious and feminine
employment, he thought, and Judith's sewing, when he saw it, was always
something artistic like what she was now doing. Throckmorton lay back in
one corner of the great sofa, his feet stretched out to the fire. They
talked occasionally, but there were long stretches of silence when the
only sound was the crackling of the wood-fire and the dropping of the
embers. Yet the unity was complete; there is no companionship so real
as that which admits of perfect silence. Throckmorton, on the whole,
though, talked more than usual. Something in Judith always inspired him
to speak of things that he rarely mentioned at all. They talked a little
of Jacqueline, but there were innumerable subjects on which they found
themselves in sympathy. The evening passed quickly for both. When
Throckmorton had gone, and the house was shut up for the night, Judith
felt that she had passed the evening in a sort of shadowy happiness; it
would have been happiness itself, except that in ten days more it would
be wrong even to think of Throckmorton.

Two days more passed. Every evening Throckmorton found himself making
his way toward Barn Elms. Each evening passed in the same quiet, simple
fashion, but yet there was something different to Throckmorton from
any evenings he had ever spent in his life. As for Judith, after the
first one, she began to look forward with feverish eagerness to the
evening. She lived all day in expectation of that two hours' talk with
Throckmorton. She dressed for him; she hurried little Beverley to bed
that she might be ready for him. Her eyes assumed a new brilliancy, and
she became handsomer day by day.

On the day that the general and Mrs. Temple were to leave for home a
letter arrived from Mrs. Temple. The general had been seized with an
acute attack of gout, and it would probably take two or three days
nursing to bring him around, so that they would not be home until the
last of the week. Mrs. Temple had written to Jacqueline, and would write
again in a day or two, notifying Judith when to send to the river
landing for them. The delay was peculiarly inconvenient then, but it was
God's will. Mrs. Temple never had any trouble in reconciling herself to
God's will, except where Beverley was concerned.

Not a line had been received from Jacqueline. It did not surprise
Judith, because Jacqueline hated letter-writing; but Throckmorton
admitted, in an embarrassed way, that he had written to her, but she had
not answered his letter.

During all this time Freke had not put in an appearance, for which
Judith was devoutly thankful.

On the fifth evening that Throckmorton went his way to Barn Elms, it
occurred to him that he went there oftener when Jacqueline was away than
when she was there, and he was glad there were no gossiping tongues to
wag about it. But luckily little Beverley, Delilah, and Simon Peter were
the only three persons who knew where Throckmorton spent his evenings,
and none of them were either carping or critical.

He found Judith as usual in the drawing-room, and as usual embroidering
on the wedding-dress. But there was something strange about her
appearance; she looked altogether different from what she usually
did--more girlish, more unrestrained. Throckmorton could not make it out
for a long time. Then he said, suddenly, "You have left off your widow's
cap."

Judith let her hands fall into her lap, and looked at him with
glittering eyes.

"Yes," she said, calmly. "I grew intolerably tired of being a hypocrite,
and to-night I determined for once to be my true self, so I laid aside
my widow's cap. I believe, if I had owned a white gown, I should have
put it on."

Throckmorton was so startled that he rose to his feet. Judith rose, too,
letting the white silk fall in a heap on the floor.

"Are you surprised?" she asked, with suppressed excitement. "Well, so am
I. But I will tell you--what I never dared breathe before--I am no true
widow to Beverley Temple's memory. I never loved him. I married him
because--because I did not know any better, I suppose. I spent two
miserable weeks as his wife. I was beginning to find out--and then he
went away, and almost before I realized it, he was killed." She
hesitated for a moment; the picture of Throckmorton and Beverley in
their life-and-death struggle came quickly before her eyes. Throckmorton
was too dazed, astounded, confounded, to open his mouth. He only looked
at her as she stood upright, trembling and red and pale by turns.

"I had no friends but General and Mrs. Temple; he was my guardian. You
know, I had neither father nor mother, brother nor sister. I felt the
most acute remorse for Beverley, and the most intense pity for him, cut
off as he was, and I fancied I felt the profoundest grief. One suffers
in sympathy, you know, and, when I saw his mother's pitiable sorrow, it
made me feel sorry too. The world--_my_ world--saw me a broken-hearted
widow--a widow while I was almost a bride. Don't you think any woman
of feeling would have done as I did--tried to atone to the man I had
mistakenly married by being true to his memory? I determined to devote
my life to his father and mother; and, in some way I can't explain,
except that you know how Mrs. Temple is, I pretended that my heart was
broken; but I tell you, Beverley Temple never touched my heart, either
in life or death, although I did not know it then. But for--for some
time the deceit has lain heavy upon me. I am tired of pretending to be
what I am not. I wish for life, for love, for happiness."

She stopped and threw herself into a chair with an _abandon_ that
Throckmorton had never seen before. Still, he did not utter a word. But
Judith knew that he was keenly observing her, feeling for her, and even
deeply moved by what she told him.

"So to-night the feeling was so strong upon me, I took off my widow's
cap and threw it on the floor; it was a sudden impulse, just as I was
leaving my room, and I took Beverley's picture from around my neck, and
I didn't have the courage to throw it in the fire as I wanted to; I
only"--with a nervous laugh--"put it in my pocket."

She took the picture from her dress and handed it him. Throckmorton
received it mechanically, but, the instant his eyes fell upon it, his
countenance changed. In a moment or two he said, in an indescribable
voice:

"I know this face well; he was killed on the 14th of April. I shall
never forget that face to my dying day."

"I know all about it," responded Judith, rising and coming toward him;
"Freke told me."

Her excitement was no longer suppressed, and Throckmorton was deeply
agitated. He took Judith's hand.

"But did he tell you all? _I_ did not fire the shot that killed your
husband; it was fired by one of his own men--probably aimed for me. I
never succeeded in drawing my pistol at all. The first I knew, in those
frightful moments, was when he shrieked and threw up his arms. I thought
he would never breathe again."

"But he lived some hours," continued Judith, "and--and--I thought it was
you, and I ought to have hated you for it, but I could not; I could not;
and now, God is so good!"

She dropped into a chair. Throckmorton felt as if the world were coming
to an end, his ideas about Judith were being so quickly and strangely
transformed. He was too stupefied to speak, and for five minutes there
was a dead silence between them. Then Throckmorton's strong common sense
awoke. He went to her and took her hand.

"For your own sake, for your child's sake, be careful. Do not tell any
one what you have told me. The penalty of deception is great, and your
penalty will be to keep it up a little while longer. When I am married
to Jacqueline, you will have a friend, a home. Then, if you want to take
off those black garments, to be yourself, you may count on me; but, for
the present, be prudent. You are so impulsive."

But Judith now was weeping violently and accusing herself. The reaction
had come. Throckmorton felt strangely thrilled by her emotion. He
comforted her, he held her hands, and even pressed kisses on them. In a
few minutes he had soothed her. The old habits of self-control came back
to her. She rallied bravely, and in half an hour she was quite composed.
But it was the composure of despair. She remembered, then, had
Throckmorton but loved her, the only obstacle between them would have
been shown to be imaginary.

Throckmorton stayed late. In spite of Judith's quietness, he felt
unhappy about her. She was too quiet, too deathly pale. He felt an
intense pity for her, and he feared that she and her child would not
much longer find a home under the roof of Barn Elms.

Three days more passed. There was still no word from Jacqueline, and
Mrs. Temple wrote that the general's gout bade fair to be a much more
serious matter than they had first anticipated. It might be that the
wedding--which was to be of the quietest sort--might have to be
postponed. But that was nothing to Mrs. Temple and the general, who
reveled in the luxury of a meeting where Beverley was remembered,
praised, and eulogized as can be done only by Southerners. Nor did it
seem to matter to Jacqueline. In fact, Throckmorton and Judith appeared
to be the only persons particularly interested in it. As for Freke, he
had not been seen by either of them since the day the Barn Elms people
left.

Throckmorton continued to spend his evenings at Barn Elms. The idea of
Judith sitting solitary and alone in the drawing-room the whole long,
dull evening, drew him irresistibly. Not one line had Jacqueline
written, either to him or to Judith. Nor had Throckmorton written again
to her. He was not the man to give a woman more than one opportunity to
snub him. In his heart he was cruelly mortified; his pride, of which he
had much, was hurt. He feared that it was a part of that arrogance which
first youth shows to maturity.

On the eighth day after Jacqueline's departure something like alarm
began to possess Judith. She called it superstition, and tried to put it
away from her. The day had been dull and gloomy--a fine, drizzling rain
falling. The flat, monotonous landscape looked inexpressibly dreary in
the gray mist that hung low over the trees. It was dark long before six
o'clock. The night had closed in, and Judith, sitting alone in the
drawing-room, had risen to light the lamp, when she heard the front door
open softly, and the next instant she recognized Jacqueline's peculiar
light step--so light that even Mrs. Temple's keen ears could not always
detect it when fits of restlessness seized the girl at night, and she
would walk up and down her room over her mother's head. And in a moment
Jacqueline came into the room, and up to Judith, and looked at her with
strange, agonized eyes.

The surprise, the shock of seeing her at that hour and in that way, was
extreme; and Judith's first words as her hands fell on Jacqueline's
shoulder were:

"Jacqueline, you are wet through."

"I know it," answered Jacqueline, in a voice as unlike her own as her
looks; "I have been out in the rain for hours and hours!"

"What is the matter with you?" cried Judith, taking hold of her.
"Something dreadful has happened!"

"Dreadful enough for me!" replied Jacqueline, white and dry-eyed.

"What is it?" Judith was not easily frightened, but she trembled as she
spoke.

"Everything!" answered Jacqueline. "In the first place, I have left
Freke. That broke my heart!"

"Left Freke!"

"Yes. I didn't go to Aunt Steptoe's. I got off at the station and Freke
was there. He took me to a minister's and got him to marry us. The man
could hardly read and write, and he said something about a license; but
Freke gave him fifty dollars, and he performed the ceremony."

Judith caught hold of her, to see if she were really in the flesh,
talking in this way.

"Don't hold me so hard, Judith. I will tell you all I can; but I feel as
if I should die, I am so weak and ill--" and she suddenly began to cough
violently. Judith ran and got her a glass of wine. The first idea in her
mind was, not the poor, deluded child, but Throckmorton.

"But where is Freke--and your father and mother?--O Jacqueline,
Jacqueline!"

"Don't reproach me, Judith. But for you I would never have returned. My
father and mother know nothing about it. Freke found out they were yet
in Richmond. If they had been at Barn Elms, I don't think I ever would
have had the courage to come back. The feeling soon came to me that I
had committed a great wrong in marrying Freke; and then--and then--he
told me perhaps we weren't married at all in Virginia, and so I would
have to go with him out to the place--somewhere in the West--and be
married to him straight and right."

"If Freke had never committed any other wrong in his whole life, his
telling you that made him deserve to be killed!" cried Judith.

"Don't say a word against Freke," said Jacqueline, a new anger blazing
up in her eyes. "I love Freke; it almost kills me when I think I may
never see him again, for I ran away from him. At first I thought all the
time of the trouble I should bring upon you all. I could see my father's
gray head sink down in his hands. I could imagine how my mother would
shut herself up in her room as she did when Beverley died. They had
always thought so little of me that it gave me a kind of triumph when I
remembered, 'They'll have to think about me now!'"

"And Throckmorton?"

"I never thought about him at all. As Freke said, he was entirely too
old for me. But I will not speak of him. He knew I never loved him--or
he ought to have known it. Then, when Freke found out that mamma and
papa were still in Richmond, it came to me like a flash that I could get
home, and I was sure of one friend, and only one in the world
now--yourself. And I thought you were so clever you could manage to keep
anybody from finding out where I had been. I seemed to hear your voice
calling to me all the time, and every moment it seemed to crush me more
and more that Freke was a divorced man, and that, however he might say
he was free, he was not. So, we were staying at a little town through
which the railroad passed, and Freke had to go into Richmond yesterday
to get some money, and my conscience suddenly rose up and tortured me,
and I couldn't stay another moment--and, mind you, Judith, I love Freke.
So I took the train all alone, and made the boat, and landed at Oak
Point about twelve o'clock. I pretended to be surprised that nobody was
there to meet me, and said I would walk as far as Turkey Thicket--you
know it is only a little way from the landing. But, of course, I did
not. Then I was so afraid that some one would see me that, instead of
taking the main road, I came through the fields and by-paths. I believe
I have walked ten miles instead of six, from Oak Point--and it was
raining, too. I was nearly frightened out of my life--frightened by
negroes and stray dogs, and afraid that I should see Freke every moment
before me, and, if he should overtake me, I knew I should go back with
him. I can no more resist him when he is with me than I can stop
breathing. Well, with weakness--for I felt ill from the moment I
started--and with fear, and being so tired, and the rain, I thought I
should die before I reached here. But now I am home--home!--"
Jacqueline's voice rose in a piteous cry. She had been weeping all the
time, but now she burst into a perfect tempest of sobs and tears that
shook her like a leaf.

In her quiet life Judith had never been brought face to face with any
terrible emergency, and this one unnerved and horrified her so that for
a time she was as helpless as Jacqueline. She walked the floor,
struggling with the wild impulse to send for Throckmorton; that he alone
could tell them what to do; and else she and the poor child would sink
under the horror of the situation, for to her simple and straightforward
mind both conscience and the social code were unalterably opposed to
considering a divorced man as a single man. But some instinct of common
sense saved her--saved her even from calling Delilah, and caused her to
face the thing alone. She gave Jacqueline brandy, she rubbed her
vigorously; she even got her up-stairs alone and into her bed. By that
time the violence of her emotions was spent; Jacqueline lay in the large
four-poster perfectly calm and white. After a while even a sense of
physical well-being seemed to possess her; warmth and light and
stimulation had their effect. She fell into a heavy sleep, but Judith
was terrified to notice her pallor give place to a crimson flush on her
face, and her icy hands grow burning hot. By that time Judith's
composure had partly returned. She called Delilah, who came in
wondering, and told her briefly that Jacqueline had come home
unexpectedly and was not well, without mentioning how she had come from
the river-landing. Delilah, who was not of a curious turn, saw for
herself that part of Judith's statement was true, for Jacqueline had a
burning fever. It was impossible to get Dr. Wortley before morning, but,
like most women who live in the country, Judith could cope with ordinary
ailments, and, whenever the doctor was called in, he always found that
the proper thing had been done beforehand.

But, besides Jacqueline's undeniable illness, the thought that tormented
Judith was how to keep the dreadful thing that had happened from
Jacqueline's father and mother and from the world. It must inevitably
come out that she had not been near Mrs. Steptoe's, and only the fact
that Jacqueline was a poor correspondent had kept it from being known
already. On the impulse of the moment, Judith sat down and wrote Mrs.
Steptoe a letter, begging her, for General and Mrs. Temple's sake, not
to mention until she heard further from Barn Elms, that Jacqueline had
not been with her; and as she wrote hurriedly and nervously, she could
hear Jacqueline's heavy and fitful breathing. Some simple remedies had
been applied, but Judith knew that the best thing for her was to sleep,
and so her troubled slumber was undisturbed except by her own feverish
mutterings. All the time it hung like a sword over Judith. "What will
Throckmorton say?" for, of course, he must be the first one to know it;
there could be no mercy in deceiving him. Judith, sitting before the
fire, gazing into it with troubled eyes and aching heart, began
thinking, pitying, praying for Throckmorton. Yes, it would be a
frightful blow to him. There would be no need for the wedding-gown now.
As this thought occurred to her, Judith rose and, going softly toward
the wardrobe where she kept her dainty work, took out the dress, and,
unwrapping it from the white cloth in which she laid it away so
carefully every night, spread it over her knees. How much love, despair,
and torture had been worked into that embroidery! "It is so pretty, it
is a pity it can't be used," she said to herself, absently, turning the
silk about in her fingers; and at that moment she heard a choking,
gurgling sound from the bed. Jacqueline was half sitting up, her head
supported on her arm, and a thin stream of blood was trickling from her
lips.

Judith, who for once lost her presence of mind, ran toward the bed, and,
supporting Jacqueline's head, called loudly for help. In her haste she
had thrown the dress almost across Jacqueline, and a few drops of blood
fell upon it.

"Look, look!" gasped Jacqueline; "my dress is being ruined!"

Judith heard Delilah running up the stairs in response to her frightened
call, but Jacqueline's eyes had such a strange expression in them that
she asked her involuntarily, as she tremblingly supported her:

"Jacqueline, do you know me?"

"Perfectly," answered Jacqueline. "I know everything about me."

Delilah, who was a natural-born nurse, was as calm as Judith was
agitated.

"'Tain' nuttin' tall, chile; 'scusin' 'tis er leetle speck o' blood fum
yo' th'oat. I kin stop it righter way"; and, sure enough, in ten minutes
she had applied some simple remedy and the blood ceased to flow.
Meanwhile Jacqueline, unable to speak, had motioned eagerly and
violently to Judith to remove the white silk dress. Judith threw it on a
chair. Jacqueline's eyes filled with tears.

"It is such a pity to have it ruined--and one's wedding-dress, too!"

"Hush-hush! you must not talk," cried Judith.

The flow of blood apparently was a trifle, and in a little while
Jacqueline lay back in the great, old-fashioned bed silent, deadly
white, but composed.

Judith, with overflowing eyes, folded up the white dress, but she could
not prevent some tears falling on it, and the dress, already stained
with blood, was also stained with tears. The thought of Jacqueline,
though, could not banish the thought of Throckmorton; the more so when
Jacqueline, beckoning, brought Judith close to her. Judith thought she
wanted something for her comfort.

"_You_ must tell him; he will take it better from you."

Jacqueline, lying wide awake in the bed, and Judith, sitting by her,
holding her hand, were both expectant of Throckmorton. At last, about
half-past eight, his firm step was heard on the porch. Judith's heart
leaped into her mouth; she did not exactly take in all the bearings of
what Jacqueline had told her, or whether she was or was not married to
Freke; and Throckmorton, with his knowledge of affairs, would know all.

She rose silently and went down-stairs, leaving Delilah with Jacqueline.
Throckmorton was standing before the fire in the drawing-room. There was
something in his determined eye and in his tone as he spoke to her that
struck a chill to Judith's heart.

"Jacqueline, has come, you know," she said.

"Yes, Simon Peter told me so at the door. It does not surprise me."

Judith remained silent for a few moments, when Throckmorton, suddenly
wheeling toward her, and looking her straight in the face, said, curtly:

"What is all this? She never was near Mrs. Steptoe's. I found out, by
having my letter returned to me by Mrs. Steptoe herself. What has made
her ill? Don't tremble so, but tell me--you know I have a right to know
it all."

But Judith continued to be silent and to tremble. She even began to
weep; but Throckmorton, taking her hand, said, firmly:

"There must be no concealments."

His own stern composure controlled Judith's agitation.

"All?" she asked, faintly.

"Yes--all!" he answered.

When Throckmorton used an authoritative tone with her, he could always
compel her; and so, scarcely knowing how she did it, with tears and
sobs, and faint deprecations for Jacqueline, she told him all. She
noticed Throckmorton's dark skin growing paler and paler; he began to
gnaw his iron-gray mustache--always a sign of extreme agitation with
him.

"Now, tell me this--collect your thoughts and don't cry so--does
she--does she love that--" He could not bring himself to utter Freke's
name.

Judith remained silent. Throckmorton, in his determination to make her
answer, seized her arm. It hurt her so that she could have cried out,
but she made no sound.

"Tell me!" he said, in a voice and manner so unlike his own gentle
courtesy, that Judith could scarcely have recognized it. But Judith was
obstinately silent. Nevertheless, she lifted her eyes to his with so
eloquent a plea for mercy for Jacqueline, that he was unconsciously
softened.

"You will not tell me!" he said, relaxing his fierce hold. "I can't make
you answer--you have a spirit like a soldier. But it makes no difference
now whether she loves him or not. If she were free to-morrow, I could
kill her with my own hands easier than I could marry her!--and yet--I
loved her well."

"But," cried Judith, putting her hand on his arm in her eagerness,
"something must be done. It must be managed so that people shall not
know it, until her father and mother have decided what is to be done. It
will almost kill them!"

"Yes. But if you can manage with Mrs. Steptoe--"

"I have already written to her."

"I am no lawyer, but it seems to me that it rests with Jacqueline
whether it is a marriage or not. But General and Mrs. Temple would
rather see her in her grave than married to any divorced man--and to
him!"

"And there is a good deal of doubt about his divorce, I believe," added
Judith.

"There is at present nothing to be done. General and Mrs. Temple will no
doubt be here as soon as possible; it is hardly worth while to alarm
them. Is she very ill, do you think?"

"I don't know--Jacqueline was always delicate. And--what of him--of
Freke?" continued Judith, in a trembling voice. "Is there to be no
punishment for him?"

Like a woman, Judith could not look at the case in its practical light;
but like a man, Throckmorton, in the midst of his horror, grief, and
surprise, yet retained his balance.

"Any punishment of him would react on her--to have her name made public
with his--Good God! But there is no power on earth to keep General
Temple from committing some frightful folly when he knows of it."

This was a new horror to Judith. A painful pause followed. Then Judith
said:

"How like Freke it was--how perfectly reckless of consequences! He is
unlike any man I ever saw or heard of. I believe, in his strange way, he
loves Jacqueline; but what does any one know of such a man!"

The absence of vindictiveness toward Freke, on Throckmorton's part,
surprised Judith; but, in truth, he scarcely thought of Freke: a
creature as weak and impressionable as Jacqueline was bound to succumb
to the first overmastering influence. Throckmorton himself had never
been able to get any real influence over her. Presently Judith said:

"One thing I do know--she wants your forgiveness."

"She has it, poor child!"

Then there was another pause. Throckmorton, after a while, rose to go.

"If you want anything, send for me. I shall be over early in the
morning." He hesitated a moment, and then said: "This has been a
strange experience for me; but it is over--" And then, as if checking a
confession, went out of the room and out of the house.

When Judith went up-stairs, Jacqueline was still sleeping, but presently
she wakened, and turned her lovely, troubled eyes on Judith.

"He is very sorry, Jacqueline, and he forgives you and will trouble you
no more," she whispered. A look of relief came into Jacqueline's face.
She closed her eyes as if to sleep.




CHAPTER XII.


The next day Jacqueline was better, and about noon General and Mrs.
Temple arrived. Mrs. Temple showed no surprise when she heard that
Jacqueline had come the day before; and when Judith said, falteringly,
that Jacqueline had probably misunderstood their plans, Mrs. Temple
accepted it quite naturally. About the same time Dr. Wortley, who had
been sent for, came, and pronounced Jacqueline's attack to be nothing
but cold and fever, and raised the prohibition against her talking. The
first time Mrs. Temple was out of the room, Jacqueline called Judith to
her.

"Judith, I have been thinking about this, and I have made up my mind."

This was so unlike Jacqueline that Judith stared.

"If I thought Freke was really a single man, I would give up
everybody--even you--for him. But nobody on earth knows what I suffered
from my conscience while I was with him! And I believe Freke told the
truth when he said we weren't married, after all, in spite of that
minister and the fifty dollars. And now, dear Judith, it seems so easy
to keep papa and mamma from knowing it."

"Easy, Jacqueline?--"

"Yes, easy, if you will only write to Aunt Steptoe; and it would kill me
to have to face them!"

"But, Jacqueline, suppose--suppose Freke should claim you, or you might,
in years to come, want to marry some one else?"

"I will promise you I will not--I will swear it--if I can't marry Freke,
you may depend upon it I sha'n't marry anybody else! But, Judith, will
you promise me to say nothing to papa and mamma until you have seen
Freke, for he knows what ought to be done? I know--and I am sure--he
will come back in a day or two. He knows well enough where I have run
away to."

Judith was loath to making any promise at all, but Jacqueline became so
violently agitated and distressed that at last, almost beside herself,
Judith promised that for a few days, at least, she would say nothing
about it.

Mrs. Temple was so full of Beverley, and the proceedings at Richmond,
that she troubled Jacqueline but little with questions; and Judith was
amazed at hearing Jacqueline describe to her mother a visit to her aunt,
as if it had really been paid. The idea of concealment had taken
complete possession of Jacqueline's mind, and she stopped at nothing.

Of course, the wedding had to be postponed; and Jacqueline surprised her
mother, after two letters had passed between Throckmorton and herself,
by telling her quite calmly one day that the wedding was off, and that
Throckmorton would shortly leave the county. General and Mrs. Temple
were stunned; and Mrs. Temple, who had secretly thought the marriage
preposterous from the start, now suddenly changed front, and was
bitterly disappointed at this strange and unaccountable breaking off.
Jacqueline would only say, "I found I didn't love him, and couldn't
marry him"; and she repeated this with a sort of childish obstinacy--so
it seemed to Mrs. Temple. Throckmorton accepted his supposed bad news
with the firmness and dignity that always characterized him. He told
Mrs. Temple, when she and the general, sitting in solemn conclave in the
drawing-room, had sent for him to give him this unalterable
determination of Jacqueline's:

"Her happiness should be first always. The difference in our years I
always felt; but, when she began to feel it, she was right in breaking
with me. It is better that it should come now than later on."

Mrs. Temple was thoroughly puzzled by Throckmorton. She could not make
out his quiet acquiescence in Jacqueline's decision--it was so unlike
his usual vigorous way of overcoming obstacles. But, before he left,
Freke had reappeared, and the dreadful truth had come to him and to
Throckmorton and to Judith that, after all, according to the statutes of
Virginia, he was not at liberty to marry again. Dreadful it was to
Freke, who, light-minded and evil as he was, had really believed himself
free, and whose implied doubt to Jacqueline was merely for the purpose
of frightening her into submission. Freke went up to Richmond one day
and returned the next. Half an hour's interview each with half a dozen
lawyers had settled a hypothetical case that covered Freke's exactly:
not all the clerks and licenses and ceremonies in Virginia could make
his marriage to anybody good as it stood. It was true that there was an
excellent chance that in the course of time various defects in the
somewhat informal divorce proceedings that Freke had really thought
sufficient might be remedied, and he would be a free man; but, for the
present, he certainly was not.

Freke, who had thought his courage impeccable, found it failed him when
he met Judith, for the first and last time, to settle upon the best
course to pursue. Judith had Throckmorton's advice and assistance to
back her up. Freke positively cowered under her gaze. It was settled
that he was to go to the Northwest immediately, and devote all his
energies to straightening out the strange tangle in which he had left
his matrimonial affairs there; and, when it was settled, he was to
return to Virginia, and then let Jacqueline decide what was to be done.
He swore--and swore so that Judith believed him--that he thought himself
a free man, and only despised the narrowness of people who believed
there was no such thing as divorce. Why he should have fallen in love
with Jacqueline did not puzzle Judith: had she not, with those
irresistible glances of hers, ensnared a much stronger man? But one
thing was decided as much by Jacqueline's agony of fear as anything
else: nothing was to be said about the terrible complication to General
and Mrs. Temple. Mrs. Steptoe's answer to Judith's letter gave a promise
that nothing should be said about Jacqueline's non-appearance; and that
removed any immediate danger of discovery. And, in a little while, both
Freke and Throckmorton were gone--Freke, to move heaven and earth to get
his divorce in proper shape; and Throckmorton, merely to be out of the
way, and as far out of the way as possible.

To Judith it seemed as if the world were coming to an end. How a thing
so dreadful, so unlike anything she had ever known before, could happen
in their quiet lives, seemed more and more extraordinary. Here was
Jacqueline--last year a child in heart, and now the first person in a
tragedy. Never had she anything to conceal before; and now, with the
most perfect art and premeditation, she was concealing, every day and
hour, something that would be even more overwhelming to her father and
mother than Beverley's death, and would convulse the little world in
which they lived. As for the innumerable chances that it might be found
out any day, Judith was abnormally alive to them. Every morning, when
she went down-stairs, she half expected that the disclosure would come;
every night she thanked Heaven it had been postponed a day.

Meanwhile Jacqueline, lying in her great four-poster, progressed slowly
but gradually toward recovery. One night she called Judith to the
bedside. She was fast getting well then.

"Judith," she said, "you know what queer notions I take? Well, I have
been lying here thinking, thinking, perhaps you won't be able to keep
the whole county from knowing about--"

The haunting fear of this never left Judith, but she could not but try
and comfort Jacqueline.

"We will try--O Jacqueline, we will try!"

"And do you know it has troubled me even more than losing Freke; for I
feel he is lost to me, even if he were to come to-morrow morning and say
he was a free man; the fear that when I get well I shall be avoided; the
people will leave me alone at church, and the county people will stop
visiting us. That would indeed kill me."

"Dear child, we will hope and pray. I believe it would kill me too."

Jacqueline at this worked herself up into such a violent fit of weeping
that Judith was frightened into giving her a great many more assurances
of safety than her own anxious heart believed, but Jacqueline at last
was quieted. In both of them, so widely unlike, was that profound
respect for their neighbors, characteristic of simple and provincial
souls. They knew no other world but that little neighborhood around
Severn church, and its opinion was life or death.

But it troubled Judith that by degrees visitors began to fall off and
inquiries ceased for Jacqueline. The temper and habit of the people were
such that Judith knew Jacqueline could never hope for any forgiveness if
that week's journey should be known. Jacqueline too, although she was
entirely silent afterward upon the subject, was thinking and dreading
and fearing. It was the custom for many kindly and neighborly visits to
be paid the sick, many flowers and delicacies to be sent them; but after
a while Jacqueline ceased to have either flowers or visitors. She was
nearly well, though, or at least she protested that she was. But,
although Jacqueline declared to Judith that, if Freke were legally free
to-morrow, she would not marry him as long as that other woman lived, it
was plain that he had completely captivated her imagination. She loved
him in her own wild, unreasoning way. Judith was hourly amazed at the
sudden self-control, finesse, the power to deceive, that Jacqueline
developed regarding him. Usually her composure was perfect, but once in
her own room, Jacqueline threw herself on the rug before the fire and
wept and sobbed so that Judith was seriously alarmed. But, still trying
to keep the burden from the unconscious father and mother, she remained
with Jacqueline until a calm had come after the storm.

"I love him! I love him!" was all Jacqueline would say, and Judith
believed her.

"You told me how I ought to love Throckmorton," she said that night,
with a melancholy smile; "it is exactly how I love Freke. Don't look at
me in that indignant way, Judith. It is not my fault."

Jack Throckmorton had remained at Millenbeck when his father left.
Throckmorton had briefly announced to him that the wedding was off. Jack
came at last to see them, looking very sheepish. Judith suspected that
he came in obedience to Throckmorton's wishes. But Jacqueline at once
slipped back into her old friendly way, if a little less gay and
thoughtless than before. Jack sent her flowers, and would have brought
his dog-cart over every day to take her to drive, so much touched was he
by Jacqueline's illness, but Judith would not let him. Nevertheless, he
was in and out of the house very much as he had been ever since that
first night he was there. Judith, who had come to love him for his
sweet, bright, boyish nature, he felt was his friend, as indeed
everybody at Barn Elms was. The whole affair was intensely puzzling to
Jack. He dared not show Throckmorton the awkward sympathy that he was
struggling first to express and then to repress; but Jacqueline was
young and ill, and had few pleasures, and he had once been a little gone
on her, so it seemed the most natural thing in the world that he should
be kind to her.

There were mysterious hints, though, flying about the county regarding
Jacqueline's affairs. Mrs. Sherrard was dying with curiosity, and made
many visits to Barn Elms for the purpose of gratifying it. But she soon
found out that, beyond knowing that Jacqueline had tired of her
engagement and had thrown Throckmorton over, neither General nor Mrs.
Temple knew anything to communicate. About this time, too, the
party-giving fever, which was never long in abeyance with Mrs. Sherrard,
seized her. A party she must give. General Temple brought a note to that
effect, coupled with a request for Mrs. Temple's salad-bowls and ladles,
one day from the post-office. Jacqueline, who had been out-of-doors
several times and had quite given up her invalidism, showed the keenest
and the most unexpected delight when she heard of the party. She jumped
up and down, clapped her hands, and began to dance.

"Oh, how glad I am! It has been so stupid lately. I do want to dance
again dreadfully. How I wish I could go to a ball every night in the
week!"

Judith was surprised at Jacqueline's eagerness about the party. Mrs.
Temple had first said decidedly that Jacqueline should not go, at which
Jacqueline threw her hands up to her face and burst into such a passion
of stormy weeping that Mrs. Temple was completely puzzled, and so was
Judith.

"But, my child, you are not strong enough!"

"I am!--I am!" cried Jacqueline. "I will ask Dr. Wortley if I can't go
to the party. I am sure I will cry myself ill if I don't go; and I am so
well and strong."

Mrs. Temple, who had got a little indulgent to Jacqueline since her
illness, agreed to leave it to Dr. Wortley. The next time he came over
to pay a friendly visit, Jacqueline took him off to herself, and came
back triumphant. Dr. Wortley had agreed. The old doctor had a queer look
in his face.

"I consented, madam," he said to Mrs. Temple, "because this young lady
promised me that she would make herself ill if she did not go; and I
have known young women to keep that promise. She has given me her word
she will be very prudent--will not overexert herself; and Mrs. Beverley
is to watch her."

"And I'll come home the instant Judith proposes it!" cried Jacqueline.

Mrs. Temple finally agreed, upon condition that the weather was fit.
For some days before the party it threatened to be very unfit. Dark
clouds overhung the sky, and a biting March wind swept over the bare
fields and through the somber aspens and Lombardy poplars, as yet
leafless and wintry, around the house. Jacqueline seemed to have but one
idea in her head, and that was the party. She haunted the windows where
the cutting wind came in through the open chinks and crannies, until
Judith warned her that she would soon begin to cough again, and worse,
if she did not take care of herself. She pestered Simon Peter with
asking for weather signs. When the morning broke, cloudy and overcast,
Jacqueline was almost in despair; she could eat no breakfast, but sat at
the table watching the clouds. Presently the sun came out upon the
dreary landscape, and the sun in Jacqueline's eyes came out too. From
the deepest gloom she passed to the wildest gayety. Her eyes shone; and
taking little Beverley into the great, empty drawing-room, she waltzed
around with him, singing and capering about until the boy, like herself,
was in a gale of good humor. Judith had never ceased being puzzled by
it. Still another obstacle, though, seemed to arise in Jacqueline's
path. General Temple had a suspicion of gout, and declared that the
party was out of the question for him. At this, Jacqueline looked so
pale and disappointed that even Mrs. Temple's heart melted toward her.

"But I can take care of Jacqueline, mother," said Judith; "we are safe,
you know, with Simon Peter on the box, and we will come home before
twelve o'clock."

Mrs. Temple consented, and for the second time that day Jacqueline's
spirits rose. Toward twilight, when the fires had been lighted in their
rooms for the two girls to dress, for early hours prevail in the
country, Judith went into Jacqueline's room. Jacqueline was twisting up
her beautiful blonde hair into a knot on top of her head, taking
infinite pains; her eyes were shining, her whole air one of quick
expectancy.

"Why are you so anxious about this party, Jacqueline?" asked Judith, to
whose lips the question had often risen during the last week.

"Wait a moment and I will tell you," replied Jacqueline, still intent on
her hair.

Judith waited until the last tress was in place, and Jacqueline came
over to the fireplace.

"Because--because, Judith, I have a feeling--I don't know where it comes
from--that everybody knows about--" She stopped and cast down her eyes
in a troubled way, but without blushing. "And I thought if I went to
this party I would be convinced that it was all a mistake. I know it is
very silly, but it has kept me awake at night ever since I was first
ill, thinking how the people would eye me at church. You know how sick
people take up those fancies. Well, I am determined to prove to myself
it isn't so. Jack Throckmorton won't be at the party, but I shall no
doubt have a plenty of partners, and this horrible feeling--that I am
disgraced in some way--will leave me; I am sure it will. You know
mamma's way of treating these notions. 'Just give your secret fears an
airing, and see how they will disappear,' that's what I mean to do. Like
ghosts, they vanish when you speak to them and try to handle them, and
then you are rid of them for good."

Judith said not a word. The same horrible fear had been with her. Freke
and Throckmorton were safe--General and Mrs. Temple suspected
nothing--it made her sick at heart as she thought about the news
traveling over the county.

When Jacqueline was dressed in the same white frock she had worn the
evening she had captivated Throckmorton, she preened like a young
peacock before the admiring eyes of Delilah and Simon Peter. She whirled
round on her toes like a ballet-dancer. She courtesied to the ground,
showing them how she would do at the party. She walked away from the
little glass on her dressing-table, arching her neck and fluttering her
fan.

"I allus did say Marse George Throckmorton wuz too ole fur little Miss
Jacky," Simon Peter remarked to Delilah, after the performance. Delilah,
who was bound to differ with Simon Peter, promptly took issue.

"Marse George, he ain' ole, he jes' in he prime. Dat's de way wid you
wuffless niggers--call a man ole in he prime."

"But whar' _he_ gwi' be, when she in her prime? You heah me, 'oman?"

Delilah, for once, had no answer to make. The reflection had occurred to
her.

As Judith and Jacqueline were jolted along the road, in the darkness,
toward Turkey Thicket, both of them were reminded of that other party
there, when Throckmorton had been present. Neither of them said
anything, though. Judith, as she watched the shadowy trees slip past,
began to think how strangely things had gone with her since then. Almost
from that time she had felt a steady and ceaseless pain associated with
Throckmorton. She then suffered, she thought, with him, and for him,
although not one word had come from him since he had left the county, a
month ago. Where was he? What was he doing at that very moment? Then she
tried to fancy how it would have been with her had she seen daily before
her Throckmorton and Jacqueline's married happiness. The sight of it
would have been intolerable to her. "And nobody in the world suspects me
of being the most impressionable, emotional, jealous, and miserable
woman on earth," she thought to herself.

Jacqueline sat back in the carriage, occasionally speculating on who
would be at the party, and how often she might dance without breaking
Dr. Wortley's orders.

When they drove up to the door and got out, Jacqueline ran lightly up
the steps, like her old self. Judith followed her. In Mrs. Sherrard's
own comfortable old-fashioned room, where the ladies' wraps were
removed, a number of girls about Jacqueline's age were laughing,
chattering, getting their wraps off and their slippers on. Jacqueline
ran up to them, and was about to join their circle; but by a slight,
indescribable motion, they all drew back. It was a mere gesture, but it
froze Jacqueline as she stood. She turned a frightened, piteous glance
on Judith, who, with a flushed face, walked straight up to the little
group.

"How do you do?" she said, calling each one by name, and holding out her
hand. If there were any cloud upon the Temple family, she would force
them to come out boldly and define it. Her fine nostrils dilated with
anger--for not only was it her duty to stand by Jacqueline, but was not
she, Judith, a Temple, too? And Judith had one of those proud and
self-respecting souls to whom everything and everybody closely connected
with her was due a certain deference. Something in her eye and manner
commanded civility--then her greetings were answered even more cordially
than she had given them.

But there was still an ominous change toward Jacqueline. The color had
all dropped out of her face, and she had not recovered the plumpness she
had lost during her illness. She looked nearer ugly than at any time in
her whole life.

Judith was soon ready to go down-stairs. She no longer wore black
dresses, but white ones. They were as severely simple as the black ones,
though. She turned with Jacqueline following her, and went slowly out
the door, and down the broad, old-fashioned stairs. In the large,
uncarpeted hall, dancing was going on. As Judith, tall and stately in
her white dress, holding gracefully a large white fan in her hands,
passed through the hall, she was greeted with the hearty kindness she
had always met with; but Jacqueline at her side, who was wont to run the
gantlet of laughter and jokes and merry salutations, was met with a
strange and distant politeness that blanched her face, and brought a
glitter to Judith's usually soft eyes. She could have borne it better
for herself; but for this unthinking child--this young creature
Throckmorton loved--it was too much.

Mrs. Sherrard, with her diamond comb shining in her gray hair, and
looking as she always did superbly dressed, without anything splendid
about her, received them. In her there was no change. She met Jacqueline
just as she always did.

"Why, little Jacky," she cried, "how glad I am to see you out again!
You must let me see your little feet tripping about as if you had never
been ill."

Jacqueline responded with a faint smile. Suppose she should not be asked
to dance?

Judith, taking in at once this universal shyness shown toward
Jacqueline, did not move from her side. People came up and spoke to them
civilly enough, but chiefly the older people. Out in the hall beyond,
the black fiddlers were scraping, and Jacqueline could see a large
quadrille forming. But no partner appeared for her. Until the very last
she hoped desperately. Never before had Jacqueline, in the few parties
she had been to in her short life, failed to be asked to dance--she
was so pretty, so undeniably captivating. She turned two despairing
dark eyes and two pale cheeks on Judith. It was indeed cruel and
heart-breaking. Jacqueline's evident anguish almost took away Judith's
self-possession.

"Perhaps you will have better luck next time, dear," she whispered.

"No," replied Jacqueline, trembling, "I feel it. I know what it means.
They all know it. Heavens! what do they think I am?"

The quadrille was soon over, but the time seemed interminable to Judith
and Jacqueline. Some of the dancers, flushed and excited, were walking
around the hall, while others, more indefatigable, whirled around in a
waltz. It was all quite plain to Jacqueline, watching them with strange
and miserable eyes. Was she then barred out forever from those people,
and all for Freke, while even the happiness of being with him was denied
her? Mrs. Sherrard, seeing Jacqueline sitting so still and quiet by
Judith, came over to them.

"My dear, I see you are not dancing; shall I get you a partner?"

Mrs. Sherrard's sharp eyes saw something was amiss.

"No, please, Mrs. Sherrard," cried Jacqueline, in an eager voice. "I
promised Dr. Wortley not to dance much; perhaps I will dance a little
after a while."

But she did not. Nobody came near her to ask her; and even to Judith it
was plain that people avoided them both. Most of the county people they
knew came up and talked a little, but there was a changed atmosphere
around them. Judith looked wonderingly at these people. In all the years
they had lived in that county there had been nothing but neighborly
kindness, good-will, and friendliness; and now, not one among them,
seemed to feel the slightest spark of pity or charity for Jacqueline.
They had all condemned her unheard. What version of the story had got
abroad, she could not tell; but it was enough to blast the friendship
of generations.

It was getting on, hour after hour.

"Shall we go home, Jacqueline?" whispered Judith.

"Not yet--not yet!" Jacqueline would answer, with trembling lips. She
kept on hoping against hope. By that time everybody in the rooms had
seen it all, except Mrs. Sherrard. She supposed she had done her best,
coming up and talking to them incessantly; but, Jacqueline having
refused a partner when offered one, Mrs. Sherrard naturally supposed she
did not dance from preference, and accepted the idea that Dr. Wortley
was responsible. It was past midnight before Jacqueline would agree to
go. Judith, as stately, if paler and haughtier than ever in her life,
went up to Mrs. Sherrard, made her farewells, and walked the whole
length of the rooms, holding Jacqueline's hand. The poor child tried to
hold her head up, inspired by Judith's courage, but it drooped, and she
could not raise her eyes from the floor. A slight thrill of remorse
seemed to come over those who saw her, at the piteous sight; but it was
now too late. Jacqueline only longed to escape.

The instant they were in the carriage and alone, Jacqueline threw her
arms around Judith and began to weep and sob desperately. Judith could
only hold her to her heart and say: "Never mind, Jacqueline; if all the
world should be against you, I would not be--nor Throckmorton."

But Jacqueline did not cease to sob and weep with a sort of despair
that struck a chill to Judith's heart. She had never seen anybody weep
so. When they reached home, Judith got her up-stairs to her room and
undressed her, taking off the little chain around her neck that held the
pearl pendant Jacqueline only wore on great occasions, uncurling the
bright hair she had dressed so carefully, and laying away the simple
white dress--Jacqueline's only ball-dress--that she had admired herself
in so much. Jacqueline submitted, still sobbing a continual sob, that
showed no signs of abatement. Judith put her in bed, turned out the
lamp, and kissing her affectionately went out, thinking Jacqueline would
soon cry herself to sleep.

An hour afterward Judith, who had keen hearing, fancied she heard a
sound from Jacqueline's room. She went in softly. In the ghastly light
that came through the closed shutters she saw Jacqueline sitting up in
the great, white bed, still weeping.

"My darling," said Judith, taking the girl in her arms, "you will be
ill!"

"Ill!" cried Jacqueline; "I am ill now--so ill, I never shall be well
again! Judith, I can't live under this. I am going to die; and I am glad
of it."

"Hush, hush! what nonsense are you talking?"

"Nonsense or not, those wicked people will see that they have killed
me!"

Judith did not leave her any more, nor did Jacqueline sleep one moment,
or cease her weeping. She held Judith tightly about the neck, and her
warm tears dropped incessantly. Toward daylight Judith began to be
alarmed. But nothing was to be done. It would simply break the hearts of
the unconscious father and mother if they knew what had happened, and if
she roused them they must know. Judith went to her own room and brought
back some brandy, which she forced Jacqueline to take. In a little while
it began to show its effect. Jacqueline stopped sobbing, and lay in the
great dawn, with her face white and drawn and tear-stained. Judith,
again hoping she might sleep, left her.

All that day Jacqueline lay in her bed dumb and motionless. Judith said
the child was tired after the ball; perhaps she would get up later on.
Mrs. Temple, supposing she was resting after her dissipation, did not go
up to see her in the morning. In the afternoon, as Jacqueline showed no
signs of getting up, Mrs. Temple went up to her. One look at her pallid
face, and Mrs. Temple, calm and self-possessed as she usually was,
almost shrieked, Jacqueline was so changed.

"Tell your master to come here at once!" she cried to Delilah.

General Temple came up-stairs, hurried and flurried, and felt for
Jacqueline's pulse, but could detect no beating. And then Delilah
owned up:

"Dat ar chile ain' tech a mou'ful dis day. I bring her up nice hot
breakfus', an' she jes' tu'n her face ter de wall an' say, 'Go 'long,
mammy, I c'yarn eat.' Now, huccome she c'yarn eat?"

"My daughter, what is the matter with you?" asked Mrs. Temple,
anxiously.

Of late this half-forgotten child had been steadily forcing herself upon
Mrs. Temple's notice.

"Nothing," answered Jacqueline, quietly.

But Jacqueline would not eat anything to speak of. In vain Mrs. Temple
commanded, General Temple prayed her; Judith also pleaded with her, and
Delilah--even little Beverley, climbing on the bed, said:

"Jacky, won't you eat a piece o' mammy's ash-cake if she bake it for
you?"

Jacqueline smiled a faint smile that made Judith almost weep.

"I can't, dear," she said.

It was impossible to force her to eat, and the next morning Dr. Wortley
was sent for. He came up in his cheery way; he had heard something of
the Turkey Thicket party, but he would say no word to the anxious father
and mother. He talked cheerfully to Jacqueline, without assuming to
doctor her, and called her attention to the beautiful spring weather. It
was March, but the air was as mild as April.

"All my hyacinths and jonquils are out," he said. "There is a bed in my
garden that is protected on the north by a hedge and an arbor, and
everything in that bed is a week ahead of the rest of the neighborhood.
I will bring you everything that is blooming there to-morrow. By the
way, what would you fancy to eat, Jacky?"

"I can't eat anything," replied Jacqueline, with quiet obstinacy.

Next day Dr. Wortley came again, with a great bunch of hyacinths and
jonquils, and laid them on Jacqueline's bed. Her large and lusterless
eyes gazed at them with indifference. Usually they danced with delight
at the sight of flowers. Delilah put a spray of pink hyacinths in her
hand.

"Doan' you 'member, honey, how you useter like dese heah hy'cints, an'
plague yo' mammy when you wuz little ter plant 'em fur you?"

"Yes, I remember," said Jacqueline, calmly.

Judith and Mrs. Temple were present. Dr. Wortley said nothing about
Jacqueline's refusing to eat, but talked away, telling all the
neighborhood gossip. Then, in a careless way, he felt for Jacqueline's
pulse and listened to the beating of her heart. Both were so faint that
Dr. Wortley's eyes became grave. After he left the room, he beckoned to
Mrs. Temple to follow him. Delilah came, too.

"Marse Doctor, she ain' tech nuttin' but a leetle bit o' toast an' tea
since yistiddy, an' it wan' 'nough to keep a bird 'live, let 'lone a
human."

Dr. Wortley wheeled round on his old enemy and snapped out:

"If you'll just use some of your persuasive eloquence and stuff her up
with jellies and custards as you do your master when he ought to be
living on tea and toast, she'll be all right."

Delilah flounced back into Jacqueline's room, her head-handkerchief
bobbing about angrily. Mrs. Temple being present, she could not
retaliate on Dr. Wortley.

"But, doctor," said Mrs. Temple, trembling strangely, "this is so unlike
Jacqueline. I don't know what has been the matter with her lately. She
isn't grieving for Throckmorton, but something is on her mind, that
is--that is--"

The doctor waited, thinking Mrs. Temple would finish what she was
saying. But she did not. This was, indeed, unlike Jacqueline--unlike any
instance Dr. Wortley, in his simple experience, had ever known.

"Let her alone for a few days," he said. "We will see."

At the end of a few days Jacqueline had indeed consented to take enough
food to keep life in her, but she had lost ground frightfully. Her
round, girlish face was sharp and pinched.

Judith tried persuasion, to which Jacqueline responded, "How can I eat
anything, when all night long I cry and cry, thinking of the
hard-hearted people who--"

Then she stopped suddenly.

"Mise Judy," said Delilah, after a while, "I lay on de pallet by de
baid, an' all night long I heah her cryin', jes' cryin' quiet--she doan'
make no noise. I say: 'What de matter, honey? Tell yo' ole mammy dat
nuss you?' an' she make 'tense den she 'sleep. But I know she ain'
'sleep--she jest distrusted at de way dem folks treat her at that
ungordly party at Tuckey Thicket."

General and Mrs. Temple were anxious about Jacqueline, but by no means
despairing. Neither of them thought that anybody could die without
having anything ostensibly the matter. Judith, on the contrary, thought
this the most alarming thing about Jacqueline. There she lay, steadily
losing her hold on life, without any reason in the world that she should
not be up and about--except, indeed, that sickness of the soul which
saps the very foundations of life. This fear that Jacqueline was
slipping away from them impelled her to write Throckmorton a few
lines--guarded, but without disguising anything.

Meanwhile, the day that was to have been the wedding-day had come and
gone. Jacqueline had not noticed it--she seemed to notice nothing in
those days--but toward noon she said to Judith:

"I want to see my wedding-dress--to see if it is quite ruined."

Judith, without protesting, went and got it. She spread it out on the
bed. It was rich and white and soft, and was beautiful with Judith's
handiwork; but it was bloodstained in many places.

"That blood, I think, came from my heart," said Jacqueline; her eyes
were soft and luminous. "I've been thinking about Throckmorton in the
last two or three days--for the first time. I have been so busy with my
own sorrow and Freke's that I haven't had time to think about anything
else. Now, though, I want to see him--if he can get here in time."

"He will soon be here," answered Judith, folding up the dress. "I wrote
him four days ago."

"That is so like you! None of the others know what I want, or will let
me have my own way, but you."

And that very day Freke appeared.

The hatred that Judith had always felt for him was now intensified into
a horror of him--he was the murderer of the poor child lying on her
death-bed up-stairs--and she had thought her heart so hard toward him
that nothing could soften it; but, strange as it might seem, she did
soften toward him when she saw how acute was his misery.

Remorse was new to him. He had rather gloried in going against the
antique notions and prejudices of the people in that shut-in, provincial
place; but that anything tragic could come of it never really dawned
upon him until he saw the terrible consequences before his eyes. He was,
indeed, a free man, legally, when he came back; but the moral law, the
social prejudice, stood like an everlasting wall between him and
Jacqueline. Moreover, there could be no talk of marriage with Jacqueline
then--she was the bride of death!

Judith herself told him this. Whether Jacqueline had ever had any deep
hold upon him or not, there was no doubt of the sincerity of his grief
and his remorse. He said but little, but one look at his changed and
agitated face was enough. He asked to see her--a request Judith could
not refuse. But the sight of him threw Jacqueline into such a paroxysm
of agitation, that Judith almost forced him from the room. There was
something a little mysterious about the whole thing, to General and
Mrs. Temple, but mercifully they suspected nothing of the real state of
affairs. After one more attempt to see Jacqueline, and the extreme
agitation into which it threw her, it became plain that it could not be
repeated. Jacqueline herself begged that she might not see him.

"Not that I don't love him--don't think that for a moment, Judith!" she
cried; "but the sight of him nearly kills me. Then I am sorry that I am
going to die--I am so sorry for myself that I feel as if I should cry
myself into convulsions."

Judith tried gently to check this sort of talk, but Jacqueline, with a
shadowy smile, laughed at her.

"Don't be silly, Judith--_you_ know how it is. All that I hope is, that
those hard-hearted people will be sorry when they have killed me with
their cruelty."

Freke, still coming every day, walked about the lower floor dismally.
Jacqueline, whose senses became preternaturally sharp, soon recognized
his footsteps. Even that unnerved her. Judith told him so kindly, and
afterward he would sit motionless before the dining-room fire, always
turning his head away from Jacqueline's little chair. Like Judith, he
was clear-sighted about her. Of them all, General and Mrs. Temple were
the only ones who would not or could not see that Jacqueline would soon
be gone. Mrs. Temple had never seen anybody die without being ill, and
could not believe that Jacqueline, who suffered no pain, should go. She
had been in truth much frightened at the time of Jacqueline's illness;
but, now, there was nothing to prevent her getting well except--except--

"That she is determined to die," Dr. Wortley inwardly remarked when Mrs.
Temple talked to him in this way.

Jacqueline began to show a strange eagerness for Throckmorton's arrival.
He was somewhere in the Northwest; but Jack, acting on his own
responsibility, telegraphed his father, and put him on the track of
Judith's letter.

The news of Jacqueline's illness had got abroad in the county, and
something like remorse was felt by many who had seen her at the Turkey
Thicket party. By degrees the impression that she was indeed in a bad
way became general.

If Judith and Jacqueline had never loved Jack Throckmorton before, they
would have loved him then. The sweetness, tenderness, and gentleness of
the boy came out every day. There had always been an affinity between
Jacqueline and him, and, as other ties weakened, this seemed to grow
stronger. He never tired or bored or agitated her. Regularly he came
twice a day, with flowers, or game, or with a new book. Dr. Wortley
encouraged Jacqueline to see him, as it was plainly through her mind
that her body must be cured. So every day Mrs. Temple or Judith would
take Jack up to Jacqueline's room, and he would sit down by the bed and
tell her his droll stories. Sometimes the ghost of a laugh would come
from Jacqueline, and when, at parting, Jack would stand over her,
holding her hand and saying, "Miss Jacky, I swear this is not to be
stood for another day!--I'm coming over to-morrow to take you to drive!"
Jacqueline would almost laugh aloud. Jack never mentioned Throckmorton
to her, though; but one day, when he had brought her a great bunch of
violets and narcissus, which had actually brought a little color to
Jacqueline's cheeks, and had induced her to eat a piece of bread about
as big as a silver dollar, he turned to Judith as he got out of the
room: "The major is coming," he said, with an altogether different look
in his handsome, boyish face. "I got a dispatch from him to-day. If he
makes connections, he can be here by day after to-morrow."

"How glad I am--and how glad Jacqueline will be!" answered Judith.

For the first time, that day Judith had begun to hope that Jacqueline
would get well. She had certainly brightened, and this strange interest
in Throckmorton's arrival was encouraging. Perhaps, after all, she cared
for him more than she thought--and if he came--

Till that day Jacqueline seemed to be brighter and better. The next day
the weather turned suddenly cold and blustering, with violent gusts of
snow and sleet. Jacqueline, who could see out of the window from her
bed, seemed singularly depressed by the weather, although the pleasant,
old-fashioned room was a nest of warmth and comfort.

Delilah sat in the great rush-bottomed chair by the sparkling fire,
knitting, while Judith, with some work in her lap, sat close by the bed,
and occasionally talked hopefully to Jacqueline.

"How sad it is!" presently said Jacqueline; "the peach-trees are all in
bloom, and the buds will be killed by this snow--and the little
hyacinths that are just coming up--all the young growing things will die
to-day."

"Not the plants, dear--only the blossoms," replied Judith, cheerfully.
"In a week they will have forgotten all about this snow."

"It is very sad," sighed Jacqueline.

All day Jacqueline seemed affected by the weather. Barn Elms, never a
cheerful place at any time, was apt to be funereal when winter blasts
swept the branches of the melancholy poplars and elms against the sides
of the house, and when the wind howled amid the loosely built chimneys.
A blackbird had begun building her nest in the tree nearest Jacqueline's
window; and often, during the long days when she had lain in her bed,
she had watched the bird flying and fluttering back and forth. The wind,
which raged fitfully, came on stronger toward the afternoon. It lashed
the still bare branches of the trees, beating them frantically about.
The nest soon went. The poor bird, flying wildly around the place where
it had been, was suddenly caught by a swaying branch, and, numbed with
the cold, was dashed against the window. Jacqueline almost shrieked.
Judith ran down-stairs, and out bareheaded in the sleet and snow, and
found the bird--but it was already dead. When she went back, Jacqueline
was crying.

"See how it is, Judith--everything that is young and weak will die in
this weather."

A book lay on the bed beside Jacqueline--Jack Throckmorton had brought
it over to her a day or two before. Jacqueline, laboriously--for she was
very weak--turned over the pages and showed a paragraph to Judith:

"And the fire is lighted and the hall warmed, and it rains and it snows
and it storms without. Then cometh in a sparrow and flieth about the
hall. It cometh in at one door and goeth out at another. While it is
within, it is not touched with the winter storm. _But that is only for a
moment, only for the least space._"

Judith thought that Jacqueline, in her simplicity, had taken it
literally; but she had not.

"Once, Throckmorton read some in this book to me. He said that meant
human life--that little moment. Why can't people let other people be
comfortable in that least space, instead of--of--killing them as--being
so unkind to them?" Jacqueline stopped. Her mind was ever working on
that deep resentment against her county people. "And Throckmorton, too,"
she continued, after a pause, "you know, Judith, how noble he is--and
see how they have treated him!"

"My dearest," answered Judith, "you don't understand. These people are
really kind and tender-hearted; but they move very slowly--and they
have queer prejudices--notions--that they will die with, and die for, I
think; but don't think about that--think about getting well, and running
about again with Beverley. You ought to see him, trotting around
down-stairs, saying: 'Where is my Jacky? I want my Jacky.' He was so
naughty to-day that Delilah threatened to whip him, and even mother had
to take a stand against him. He is getting thoroughly spoiled while I am
up here with you."

Jacqueline smiled slightly, but soon returned to watching the gloomy day
without. At twilight she would not have the shutters closed, but lay
striving to catch the last fading glimpses of the somber daylight.
Judith began to feel an intense longing for Throckmorton to come.
Jacqueline, too, who had been so strangely forgetful and neglectful of
Throckmorton until lately, had asked a dozen times that day, when it was
possible for him to get there, and what if he should miss the boat, and
many other questions. About seven o'clock Judith went down to tea,
leaving Delilah with Jacqueline.

Delilah, sitting up black and solemn, listened to Jacqueline's faint and
sorrowful talk.

"Doan' you fret, honey, 'bout dem blackbirds, an' dem peach-blossoms,
an' dem little lambs out in de cold. De Lord gwi' teck keer on 'em. He
gwi' meck de sun ter shine, an' de win' ter blow; an' He gwi' down in
de rain an' de gloomerin' fur ter fin' de po' los' sheep. He ain' gwi'
lef 'em out d'yar ter deyselves. He gwi' tote 'em home outen' de rain
an' de darkness."

"Do you think so, mammy?"

"I knows hit, chile."

Down-stairs, General and Mrs. Temple, with little Beverley and Judith,
were all that were present around the table. Not yet even had Mrs.
Temple begun to be alarmed about Jacqueline, who had not had a pain or
an ache.

Jacqueline's vacant chair struck Judith more painfully than usual.
Scarcely had she taken her place at the table, when she saw Delilah peer
in at the door, a queer, ashy tinge over her black face. Judith rose and
went out quietly, Mrs. Temple looking surprised, but saying nothing.
Judith, Mrs. Temple thought, coddled Jacqueline rather too much for her
own good, so Kitty Sherrard and Dr. Wortley both said.

"Miss Judy," whispered Delilah, "Miss Jacky is a-gwine--she done start
on de road--"

Judith, without a word, flew up-stairs. Jacqueline lay, scarcely
breathing, her face perfectly white, her dark and beautiful eyes wide
open. Judith raised her up, Jacqueline protesting feebly.

"Judith, it is come! I feel it. I am not at all frightened. It was those
cruel people at Mrs. Sherrard's party--"

"Don't--don't say that, Jacqueline! You are only a little faint and
discouraged. Here is Delilah coming."

"Tell Throckmorton I tried to live until he came, but my breath won't
hold out any longer, and my heart has scarcely beat at all for a week,
it seems to me."

Judith made a sign to Delilah to go for Mrs. Temple. Scarcely was she
out of the room, before Jacqueline's head fell back on Judith's
shoulder. Judith, brave as she was, began to tremble and to weep.

"I did so want to see Throckmorton, to tell him something. I wanted to
say to him--Judith--"

Mrs. Temple came in swiftly, followed by the general. Jacqueline had
strength enough left to hold out a thin little hand. A smile like
moonlight passed over her face. She gasped once, and all was over.




CHAPTER XIII.


The next night at midnight there was a solemn stir, a painful and
heart-breaking commotion, at Barn Elms. Throckmorton had come. He had
indeed missed the boat, and had driven seventy miles rather than wait a
day. Mrs. Temple, as when Beverley died, had shut herself up in the
"charmber" with General Temple. Most people thought it was to comfort
General Temple, but in those two dreadful tragedies of her life it was
General Temple who comforted Mrs. Temple. Both parents felt something
like remorse in their grief. They had been good parents after their
lights, but the wayward, capricious Jacqueline, although their child,
was outside of their experience. Her nature had eluded both of them.

"Ole marse," said Delilah, in a solemn whisper to Judith, sitting in
Jacqueline's peaceful room, "he set by mistis. He hole her han' an' he
read de Bible ter her, an' he tell her she ain' got no reproachments fur
ter make. Mistis, she jes' lay in the bed, ez white ez de wall, an' her
eyes wide open, a-hole'in' ole marse like she wuz drowndin'. It seem
like ole marse ain' got no sort o' idee, 'cep 'tis ter comfort mistis.
She do grieve so arter her chillen. She ain' got none now."

To Judith, whose grief was poignant and complex, was left the task of
watching by Jacqueline. With tender superstition, she got out the
wedding-gown--it could be put to no other use--and she and Delilah put
it on Jacqueline, deftly hiding the blood-spots.

"My pretty little missy," said Delilah, smoothing down the frock with
her hard black hand. "Arter all, you gwi' w'yar dis pretty little frock
Miss Judy done wuk for you to git married in."

And to Judith also fell the task of showing Freke into the white and
darkened room.

As they looked into each other's eyes, and realized that, after all,
they were the chiefest mourners, Judith's old enmity melted away.

"You and I have struggled for this child's soul," he said. "Had you but
let me see her--had she but gone with me--she would be alive this day."

"And wretched!" Judith could not help saying.

"No--most happy. I understood her better than anybody else. It was that
which gave me my power over her. She wanted nothing in this world except
to be loved."

He went in and stayed so long that Judith opened the door softly two or
three times. Sometimes, by the dim light, he was kneeling by the bed,
holding the cold little hand in his. Again, he sat on a chair, stroking
the bright hair that rippled over the forehead. Judith had not the heart
to speak to him until midnight, when the sound of Throckmorton's step in
the hall told her he had come. She went in and said to Freke hurriedly,
but not unkindly, "You must go--Throckmorton is here."

"Then I will go," he said. But with a queer sort of triumph in his voice
he added: "She never was Throckmorton's, living or dead. She was mine as
far as her heart and her soul and her will went." And so saying, he went
down the stairs and out and away, without meeting Throckmorton.

Judith went down into the dining-room, where Throckmorton sat before the
decaying fire, with only the light of two tall candles to pierce the
darkness. He arose silently and followed her. At the door of the room
his courage, which Judith had thought invincible, seemed suddenly to
leave him. He, the strong man, turned pale, and clung to the weak
woman's arm. Something of the divine pity in Judith's face went to his
soul. He stayed only a few minutes. It came to Judith, like a flash,
that his grief was not like Freke's. Throckmorton pitied Jacqueline.
Freke pitied himself, for the sharp misery of life without her. When
Throckmorton came out, Judith went in and resumed her watch.

The day of the funeral was as stormy as the day of Jacqueline's death.
But for that, the whole county would have been at the funeral. Something
of the truth had leaked out, and the people were conscience-stricken.
Poor Jacqueline, who two weeks before had in vain asked for a little
human pity from them, now had her memory deluged with it. But the storm
was so violent that but few persons could be present. As Judith stood at
the head of the small grave in the wind and the rain, listening to
Edmund Morford's rich voice, now touched with real feeling, she glanced
toward Freke, standing by himself, with his hands clasped behind his
back, his eyes fixed devouringly upon the coffin. As the first damp
clods fell resounding on the lid, he said to himself: "Jacqueline!
Jacqueline!"

Throckmorton, with folded arms and his iron jaw set, gave no sign of his
feelings through his stern composure. Judith's heart was wrenched as if
she were burying her own child. When they left the grave, Freke remained
standing alone, his hat off, and the sleety rain pelting his bare head.
At that sight Judith, for the first time, forgave him from her heart.




CHAPTER XIV.


Throckmorton's year of leave was not up, yet he went immediately back to
his post. Everything that had happened to him in the last six months had
been so unreal, so out of all his previous experiences, that he needed
the every-day routine of duty to enable him to get his bearings. He
wanted to find out if he himself was changed. There was certainly a
change in him, which everybody saw; but he was not a man to be
questioned. He went about his duty, quietly and self-containedly. He had
always found a plenty to do, and wondered at the idleness that he
sometimes saw around him; and now he was busier than ever. He was not a
philanthropic meddler, and was as loath to offer his advice unasked to a
soldier as to an officer, but he earnestly desired, now more than ever,
to be of help to his fellow-men, and Throckmorton's help was always
efficient because it never hurt the self-respect of those who received
it. Certain of the non-commissioned officers at his post were competing
for a commission. To his surprise and gratification, he found them
anxious to be instructed by him. So he turned schoolmaster, and
patiently and laboriously, night after night, gave them the advantage of
all he knew. Only one got the commission, but all were qualified when
Throckmorton got through with them. He was not any less alert and
attentive than before, but in all his waking moments, when his mind was
not imperatively drawn to other things, he was thinking over those six
months at Millenbeck--the hopes with which he went back; the strangeness
of finding himself under the ban among his own people; the renewal of
the link with Barn Elms, after thirty years' absence; his complete
infatuation with Jacqueline--and, out of it all, rose Judith's face. How
hard had been her lot; and how strange it was that he had made
confidences to her, and that, of all the women he had ever known, she
was the only one of whose sympathy he had ever felt the need! He
considered his somewhat barren life--his reserved habits--and sometimes
thought Heaven was kind to Jacqueline in not giving her to him, for he
could not bend his nature to any woman's--the woman must conform to him;
and it was not in Jacqueline to be anything but what Nature had made
her.

Jack was off at the university, and Millenbeck was shut up, silent and
deserted.

Freke was gone. He disappeared apparently from the face of the earth. He
wanted neither to see nor hear anything of anybody connected with
Jacqueline. Throckmorton, on the contrary, clung to the ties at Barn
Elms.

But to Judith Temple life had become infinitely sadder and poorer than
ever before. She had caught one glimpse of paradise, and that had
changed the whole face of life for her, and she seemed all at once to be
very much alone. But in one sense she was less alone than ever before.
Mrs. Temple's will and courage and purpose seemed gone. She changed
strangely after Jacqueline's death. She, who had once silently resented
the slightest forgetfulness of Beverley, now seemed to feel acutely that
the living should not be sacrificed to the dead. She began to urge
Judith to go from home; to take off her mourning at the end of a year.
Judith gently protested. The truth was that, although Mrs. Temple had at
last come out of that strange forgetfulness of Jacqueline and mourned as
other mothers do, Jacqueline took nothing out of her life. With Judith
it was as if her child had been taken. She could not pass Jacqueline's
empty room without remembering how she would waylay her, and draw her in
to sit by the fire and dream and romance. She could not sew or read or
do anything without feeling the loss of the childish companionship. Even
when she laid aside her seriousness for her child and romped and played
with the boy, he was apt to say, "I wish Jacky would come back and play
with me again."

At intervals Mrs. Temple received kind and sympathetic letters from
Throckmorton, and replied to them with letters worded with her own
simple eloquence. In Throckmorton's letters he spoke of Jacqueline
rather as if she had been his child than his promised wife. Among them
all Jacqueline's memory was that of a child. Throckmorton sent kind
messages to Judith; and Mrs. Temple, when she wrote, conveyed short but
expressive replies from Judith.

Two years had passed. So quiet and uneventful had been their lives,
that Judith would have had difficulty in persuading herself that the
years were slipping by, but for little Beverley, now a handsome,
sturdy urchin, whose long, fair hair had been cut off, and who emerged
from dainty white frocks into kilts. The grandfather and grandmother
daily more adored the child. Judith thought sometimes they were fast
forgetting Jacqueline. The grass was quite green over Jacqueline by this
time, and the head-stone had lost its perfect whiteness. But to Judith
there was no forgetting. She had loved the child as if she had been her
own, and she loved Throckmorton still. Jack wrote to her at intervals,
his letters always containing some allusion to Jacqueline. Judith
thought sometimes, with wonder, that Fate should not in the first
instance have united those two young creatures, boy and girl.

One night, two winters after Jacqueline had gone away, Judith, who
every night before going to bed went to her window, and, drawing the
curtain, looked long toward Millenbeck, saw a bright light shining from
the hall-door and two of the lower windows of the house. Every night, as
she gazed at it, she had seen it black and tenantless, and utterly
deserted; but, now--

"Throckmorton has come!" she said to herself.

Next morning he came over early to see them. He found General Temple the
same General Temple--courteous and verbose. His health being very good,
he was an Episcopalian for the time being; but, whenever the gout
appeared, he had his old way of lapsing into Presbyterianism. Mrs.
Temple was the same, and yet not the same. Throckmorton saw a change in
her. She, the most unyielding of women, had become easy and indulgent.
Simon Peter and Delilah came in to speak to him, and a wifely rebuke,
administered in the pantry, was distinctly audible to Throckmorton:

"Huccome you ain' taken off dat ole coat, nigger, an' put on dat one
mistis give you, fur ter speak ter Marse George Throckmorton? He su't'ny
will think we all's po', ef you keep on dat er way."

"We _is_ po', but we is first quality, 'oman!"

Judith, who had great self-command, could control her eyes, her voice,
her manner; but happiness, the outlaw, at seeing Throckmorton again,
brought the red blood surging to her cheeks. Throckmorton, who was
exactly like his old self, was surprised and inwardly agitated at it.
They spoke some tender words of Jacqueline, all of them sitting together
in the old-fashioned drawing-room. Her little chair was in its old
place, but Judith sat in it; and even the ragged footstool on which
Jacqueline had toasted her little feet was near it. Throckmorton noticed
all these things with tenderness in his dark eyes. He was a little
grayer than before, but he was the same erect, soldierly figure; he had
the same simple but commanding dignity.

He walked home in a curious state of emotion. In those two years he had
not ceased thinking deeply over that short episode, so full of happiness
and pain--the happiness a little unreal, and vexed with many pangs; the
pain very real, but with strange suggestions that, after all, the
happiness held more possibilities of wretchedness. He could think, for
Jacqueline's sake, how much better off she was, lying so peacefully in
the old grave-yard, than if she had lived, so weak, so captivating, so
unthinking. What would life have been to her? And so, at forty-six,
after having experienced more than most men, he began the analysis of
his own emotions, and realized that all he had known of love was
perilously like a mirage. He had entered into a fool's paradise, but he
knew that he of all men could least be satisfied there. His reason, his
intellect, always overmastered him in the end; and what was there in
this bewitching child to satisfy either? Jacqueline, young, was a dream;
Jacqueline, old, was a fantasm. All this had come to him soon after
Jacqueline's death, in that period of self-searching that followed. But,
when he had got thus far, which was some time before his return to
Millenbeck, a great change came upon him. He began to feel a sort of
acute disappointment. He had loved and suffered much for that which he
felt would not have made him happy had he gained it. All that love,
grief, passion, had been vain; here he checked himself; the memory of
his girl-wife was sacred from even his own questionings; and so was that
later love, but the necessity for checking himself told volumes. And
then, by slow degrees, the image of Judith Temple had stolen upon him.
It was very gradual, it was many months in coming, but, when at last it
dawned upon him, it was a sort of glorious surprise. How stupid, how
blind had he been! Where were his doubts and questionings? Could anybody
doubt Judith Temple's sympathy and understanding? He remembered the
quaint words of the Jewish king, "The heart of her husband doth safely
trust." He had seen enough of the way these weaker women had striven to
bend him, but Judith had the beautiful charm of bending herself. She
could be whatever the man she loved desired her to be. Throckmorton at
once felt that any man married to Judith Temple would indeed be free,
and how sweet would it be to see that proud spirit that yielded but
seldom bend to his will! That homage, so rare and precious, was what
women of her type paid to the master-passion. Most women that he had
ever seen yielded to the predominant influence; but women like Judith
Temple bent their heads and smiled and played at humility, but yielded
not one inch of their soul's standing-ground until the moment came.
Throckmorton, who possessed true masculine courage, admired this kind of
feminine bravery. He felt that to conquer such a woman would be like
capturing a Roman standard. And how utterly those proud women
surrendered when they did surrender! He could fancy Judith's brave
pretenses melting away; how charming would be her sweet inexperience!
How quickly she would persuade herself that there was nothing so wise,
true, just as love! Throckmorton, although he had silenced his
discernment, had never strangled it, and he began to study and know
Judith. But there was no suspicion in his mind that she cared anything
for him; and, when he made up his mind to return to Millenbeck and see
her again, he was anything but sanguine. He felt that if he failed it
would make infinitely more difference to him than anything that had ever
happened to him in life before. He was absolutely afraid, and fear, he
knew, when it came to men like him, meant something overmastering.
Throckmorton sighed when he realized his want of courage. He knew it
would be forthcoming in an emergency; he had felt that in battle, where
his first tremors never made him doubt for an instant that when the time
came to use his courage it would be there; but it was a new thing to
fear his fate at the hands of a woman. But the woman had become much
more to him than any other woman had ever been; she was so much to him
that it rather appalled him.

Nevertheless, anxieties or no anxieties, he went about winning Judith
with the same coolness and deliberation he did everything else. He had
two months' leave, and he determined to spend it all at Millenbeck.
Judith might break his heart, but she should not defraud him of those
months in her society that he had promised himself for a good while
before. For a long time past in his pleasant quarters at his post, in
his regular round of duty, in the part he took in social life, he had
comforted himself with the idea that, whether he was destined to this
greater happiness or not, he would at least see this woman of all women;
he would hear her soft voice, listen to her talk, seasoned with a
dainty, womanly wit. Nobody should deprive him of that. He began to
remember with a frown Jack's turpitude about Judith's letters. As soon
as Jack found out that his father wanted to see those friendly, kindly
letters, he made great ado about showing them, playing the major very
much as he would a peculiarly game and warlike salmon. The cast in
Throckmorton's eye was apt to come out so savagely at these times that
he was, as Jack said, positively cross-eyed. But after Jack had worked
him up into a silent rage, he would then produce the letters.
Throckmorton had always taken women's letters as highly indicative, and
Judith's were so refined, so sparkling in spite of the narrow round in
which she lived, that Throckmorton's countenance immediately cleared and
the cast disappeared from his eye as soon as he had got hold of one of
these cherished epistles, all of which had been by no means lost on
Jack.

Throckmorton went and came between Barn Elms and Millenbeck in the most
natural and neighborly way in the world. He brought books over to
Judith, and often read aloud at Barn Elms in the evenings. General
Temple, still hard at work on the History of Temple's Brigade, which now
approached its seventh volume, found Throckmorton a mine of information.
A soldier from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot,
Throckmorton had a queer diffidence about speaking of his profession, in
marked contrast to General Temple, who declaimed the science of war with
same easy confidence with which Edmund Morford explained the inscrutable
mysteries of religion. As Throckmorton watched General Temple stalking
up and down the quaint old drawing-room, haranguing and expounding, the
idea that this man had been intrusted with the fate of battle perfectly
staggered him. His sense of humor was keen, and, between his
professional horror of General Temple's methods and the utter absurdity
of the whole thing, he would be convulsed with silent laughter. Judith,
the picture of demureness, would give him a glance that would almost
create an explosion. With much simplicity General Temple would add:

"At that time, my dear Throckmorton, I was unfortunately separated from
my command. I conceive it to be the duty of the commander of troops to
set them an example of personal courage, and so I occupied a slightly
exposed position."

Throckmorton did not doubt it in the least. The general's incapacity was
only exceeded by his courage.

Throckmorton's native modesty, as well as the fact that he knew a great
deal about the war and his profession, kept him comparatively silent;
but finding that, when he talked with General Temple about battles and
campaigns, Judith's face gradually grew scarlet with suppressed
excitement, and that like most women she was easily carried away by the
recitals of adventure, he artfully took up the thread of conversation
and surprised himself by his own eloquence. It was not like the almost
forgotten Freke's polished and charming periods, but it was none the
less eloquent for being rather brief and pointed; and once or twice
when Judith paid him some little compliment, her speaking eyes conveying
more meaning than her words, Throckmorton would be seized with a fit of
bashfulness, and clapping his rusty but still cherished blue cap on his
head would go home and never say "war" for a week.

Their lives were so quiet, so shut out from even the small world of a
provincial neighborhood, that nothing was known or talked of about them.
Judith, who was capable of revenge, felt a deep resentment against the
county people. She, who before Jacqueline's death had been all sweetness
and affability, showed a kind of haughtiness to the people who were well
enough disposed to make amends to the Barn Elms family. Throckmorton
noticed, when she went out of church behind General and Mrs. Temple,
holding her boy by the hand, that the father and mother stopped and
talked as neighbors in the country do, but Judith made straight for the
rickety carriage which Simon Peter still drove.

The two months were nearly over. Throckmorton and Judith had seen much
of each other, but there had been no exchange of intimate thoughts
between them but once. This was one afternoon when they were alone at
Barn Elms, that Throckmorton talked openly of Jacqueline.

"It is not treason to her, poor child," he said, "but--it was--a
mistake. I truly loved her. I had thought that love was impossible to me
after the loss I suffered so many years ago. But it was a madness; and,
however delicious the madness of youth may be, when a man has reached my
time of life he knows it to be madness. I have never dared to think what
would the ultimate end have been had she lived and married me. The
certainty one has of happiness is the life of love; but that certainty I
never had. I never knew whether Jacqueline's love would be enough for
me, even had it been mine; and I could never shake off a horrible fear
that mine would not be enough for her."

Judith, who had listened silently to this, suddenly leaned forward and
gazed at him involuntarily. The thought in her mind was, that no
ordinary woman would be enough for Throckmorton. He could give much, but
he would ask for much. Like all men of commanding sense and character,
he was exacting.

Throckmorton could not follow her thought--he only saw her deep and
expressive eyes, the pensive droop of her mouth, all the refined beauty
of her face. He began to think how she would blossom out under the
influence of happiness; what a happy, merry, delightful creature she
would be if she loved; and something in his fixed and ardent gaze made
Judith draw back, and brought the slight flush to her face, that meant
much for her. She trembled a little, and Throckmorton saw it. When he
returned to Millenbeck, he sat up half the night smoking strong
cigars--the prosaic way in which his agitations always worked themselves
off--lost in a delicious reverie of what might be. Here was a woman who
appealed to his pride as much as to his love. Throckmorton, who was
practical as well as romantic, thought it a very good thing for a man to
marry a woman he could be proud of. Yet, when the last embers of the
library fire had died out, and the cigars had given out too, and he
began to be chill and stiff, sitting in his great arm-chair, he felt
discouraged, and said almost out aloud, "I don't believe she will marry
me."

It grew toward the last days of Throckmorton's stay. He had gone to but
few places in the county. The temper of the people toward him had
changed since he first came there; every year had brought its crop of
tolerance, but it had ceased to be of importance to him. Indeed, but one
thing mattered to him then--whether Judith would marry him. But he
deliberately put off the decisive moment until the very afternoon before
he was to leave. He had in vain tried to find out whether the friendly
regret at his going that she expressed concealed a deeper feeling, but
Judith was too clever for him. She had gone through the whole range of
feeling since she first knew him, and now was better armed than she had
ever been before.

He walked over to Barn Elms on that last afternoon, feeling very much
as he had done years before, when, after long waiting, with the thunder
of cannon in his ears and the smoke of musketry before his eyes, the
order had come for him to move forward. It was well enough to think and
plan before--but now, it was time to act; and, just as in that time of
battle, he became cool and confident as soon as he was brought face to
face with danger.

He timed his visit just when he knew Judith would be taking her
afternoon walk with little Beverley. Sure enough, she was out. He stayed
a little while with General and Mrs. Temple. When he rose to go, he
said, quite boldly, to Mrs. Temple:

"I am going to find Judith."

He had never called her by her name before, and did it unconsciously.
Mrs. Temple, though, who was acute as most women are about these things,
looked at him steadily. Throckmorton colored a little, but his eye had
never drooped before any woman's, not even Mrs. Temple's. But she, after
a little pause, laid her hand on his shoulder--he was not a tall man,
like General Temple, and she could easily reach it--and said: "I hope
you--will find Judith, George Throckmorton."

He went forth and struck out toward the belt of fragrant pines, where he
knew Judith oftenest walked. It was spring again--April, with the
delicious smell of the newly plowed earth in the air, and the faint
perfume of the coming leaves--the putting-forth time. The entrancing
stillness that all people born and nurtured in the country love so much
was upon the soul of Nature. The dreamy and solemn murmur of the pines
seemed only to make the greater silence obvious. In a little while he
saw Judith's graceful figure coming his way. She wore a pale-gray gown,
and a large black hat shaded her face. In her hand she carried a branch
of the pale-pink dogwood, that does not grow by open roads and
farm-fields, but in the depths of the woods. Beverley, with another
branch of dogwood across his shoulder, like a gun, marched sturdily
ahead of her. Throckmorton, who had carefully guarded his behavior since
he had been home, was quite reckless now. He meant to risk it, and since
all depended on the cast of a die, prudence was superfluous. He took
Judith's hand and held it until he saw the red blood steal into her
face. He looked at her so, that she could not lift her eyes from the
ground. Beverley, however, claimed his rights. He and Throckmorton were
great friends.

"How you _is_?" he asked, offering his chubby hand and looking up
fearlessly into Throckmorton's face. The child had lost his mother's
shy, appealing glance. He was a little man, instead of a baby, as he
often told her proudly. "I'm going to be a soldier, I am," was his next
remark, "and I'm going to be a brave soldier."

"That's right," said Throckmorton, "and, as I'm a soldier, too, perhaps
I'll help you along."

"Will you make me a soldier?" asked Beverley, pushing his cap back off
his curly head.

"Yes, if you will go immediately home--all by yourself. You see--it
isn't far--just along the path and through the gap, to the orchard, and
then to the house."

Beverley looked meditatively at the distance. It seemed a perilous way
for a six-year old. Judith stood, crimson and helpless. Throckmorton was
a masterful man, and, when he took things in his own hands, he was apt
to have his own way. She knew at once what he meant, and it gave her a
kind of shock--she seemed about to be transported to another world. This
sending away of her child was what nobody had ever done before.
Throckmorton, smiling, said to the boy, "A soldier shouldn't be afraid."

"I'm not afraid of nothin'," answered Beverley, stoutly. Judith stooped
toward him, and the child threw his arms about her and kissed her--a
kiss she passionately returned. She felt it to be her farewell to him as
the first object of her existence. She knew that he was to be
supplanted. The boy trotted off, not looking behind once.

"See how brave he is, for a little fellow," she said, still blushing.

"Yes, very brave. But you are a woman of great courage. You gave some of
it to that boy."

Throckmorton was no laggard in love. He lost not a moment. He, who was
by nature reticent, became, under the influence of the master-passion,
bold and ready of speech. Judith, who was by nature of a sweet and
humorous talkativeness, became eloquently silent--her heart seemed to
melt into an ineffable softness and yielding. She said one thing,
though, as they turned to walk home through the delicious purple
twilight:

"I think men can love more than once; but I don't think women can love
but once."

Throckmorton perfectly understood her.

When they walked together across the lawn, under the gnarled locusts and
poplars, they saw General and Mrs. Temple standing on the steps of the
old house, with little Beverley between them. Throckmorton watched
Judith jealously to see if there was anything like shame or apology in
her look; but she, who could not look him in the face when they were
alone in their secret paradise, now held her head up proudly. Nobody
could have told, from Throckmorton's quiet self-possession, that
anything unusual had occurred; but never before had he known anything
like the deep delight that now enthralled him.

                         THE END.




FAMOUS COPYRIGHT BOOKS IN POPULAR PRICED EDITIONS


Re-issues of the great literary successes of the time. Library size.
Printed on excellent paper--most of them with illustrations of marked
beauty--and handsomely bound in cloth. Price, 75 cents a volume,
postpaid.

A SIX-CYLINDER COURTSHIP, By Edw. Salisbury Field

     With a color frontispiece by Harrison Fisher, and illustrations
     by Clarence F. Underwood, decorated pages and end sheets.
     Harrison Fisher head in colors on cover. Boxed.

A story of cleverness. It is a jolly good romance of love at first sight
that will be read with undoubted pleasure. Automobiling figures in the
story which is told with light, bright touches, while a happy gift of
humor permeates it all.

"The book is full of interesting folks. The patois of the garage is used
with full comic and realistic effect, and effervescently, culminating in
the usual happy finish."--_St. Louis Mirror._

AT THE FOOT OF THE RAINBOW, By Gene Stratton-Porter Author of "FRECKLES"

     With illustrations in color by Oliver Kemp, decorations by
     Ralph Fletcher Seymour and inlay cover in colors.

The story is one of devoted friendship, and tender self-sacrificing
love; the friendship that gives freely without return, and the love that
seeks first the happiness of the object. The novel is brimful of the
most beautiful word painting of nature and its pathos and tender
sentiment will endear it to all.

JUDITH OF THE CUMBERLANDS, By Alice MacGowan

     With illustrations in colors, and inlay cover by George Wright.

No one can fail to enjoy this moving tale with its lovely and ardent
heroine, its frank, fearless hero, its glowing love passages, and its
variety of characters, captivating or engaging, humorous or saturnine,
villains, rascals, and men of good will. A tale strong and interesting
in plot, faithful and vivid as a picture of wild mountain life, and in
its characterization full of warmth and glow.

A MILLION A MINUTE, By Hudson Douglas

     With illustrations by Will Grefe.

Has the catchiest of titles, and it is a ripping good tale from Chapter
I to Finis--no weighty problems to be solved, but just a fine running
story, full of exciting incidents, that never seemed strained or
improbable. It is a dainty love yarn involving three men and a girl.
There is not a dull or trite situation in the book.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, .. NEW YORK




FAMOUS COPYRIGHT BOOKS IN POPULAR PRICED EDITIONS


Re-issues of the great literary successes of the time. Library size.
Printed on excellent paper--most of them with illustrations of marked
beauty--and handsomely bound in cloth. Price, 75 cents a volume,
postpaid.

     BEVERLY OF GRAUSTARK. By George Barr McCutcheon. With Color
     Frontispiece and other illustrations by Harrison Fisher.
     Beautiful inlay picture in colors of Beverly on the cover.

"The most fascinating, engrossing and picturesque of the season's
novels."--_Boston Herald._ "'Beverly' is altogether charming--almost
living flesh and blood."--_Louisville Times._ "Better than
'Graustark'."--_Mail and Express._ "A sequel quite as impossible as
'Graustark' and quite as entertaining."--_Bookman._ "A charming love
story well told."--_Boston Transcript._

     HALF A ROGUE. By Harold MacGrath. With illustrations and inlay
     cover picture by Harrison Fisher.

"Here are dexterity of plot, glancing play at witty talk, characters
really human and humanly real, spirit and gladness, freshness and quick
movement. 'Half a Rogue' is as brisk as a horseback ride on a glorious
morning. It is as varied as an April day. It is as charming as two most
charming girls can make it. Love and honor and success and all the great
things worth fighting for and living for the involved in 'Half a
Rogue.'"--_Phila. Press._

     THE GIRL FROM TIM'S PLACE. By Charles Clark Munn. With
     illustrations by Frank T. Merrill.

"Figuring in the pages of this story there are several strong
characters. Typical New England folk and an especially sturdy one, old
Cy Walker, through whose instrumentality Chip comes to happiness and
fortune. There is a chain of comedy, tragedy, pathos and love, which
makes a dramatic story."--_Boston Herald._

     THE LION AND THE MOUSE. A story of American Life. By Charles
     Klein, and Arthur Hornblow. With illustrations by Stuart
     Travis, and Scenes from the Play.

The novel duplicated the success of the play; in fact the book is
greater than the play. A portentous clash of dominant personalities that
form the essence of the play are necessarily touched upon but briefly in
the short space of four acts. All this is narrated in the novel with a
wealth of fascinating and absorbing detail, making it one of the most
powerfully written and exciting works of fiction given to the world in
years.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, .. NEW YORK




FAMOUS COPYRIGHT BOOKS IN POPULAR PRICED EDITIONS


Re-issues of the great literary successes of the time. Library size.
Printed on excellent paper--most of them with illustrations of marked
beauty--and handsomely bound in cloth. Price, 75 cents a volume,
postpaid.

     THE AFFAIR AT THE INN. By Kate Douglas Wiggin. With
     illustrations by Martin Justice.

"As superlatively clever in the writing as it is entertaining in the
reading. It is actual comedy of the most artistic sort, and it is
handled with a freshness and originality that is unquestionably
novel."--_Boston Transcript._ "A feast of humor and good cheer, yet
subtly pervaded by special shades of feeling, fancy, tenderness, or
whimsicality. A merry thing in prose."--_St. Louis Democrat._

     ROSE O' THE RIVER. By Kate Douglas Wiggin. With illustrations
     by George Wright.

"'Rose o' the River,' a charming bit of sentiment, gracefully written
and deftly touched with a gentle humor. It is a dainty book--daintily
illustrated."--_New York Tribune._ "A wholesome, bright, refreshing
story, an ideal book to give a young girl."--_Chicago Record-Herald._
"An idyllic story, replete with pathos and inimitable humor. As
story-telling it is perfection, and as portrait-painting it is true to
the life."--_London Mail._

     TILLIE: A Mennonite Maid. By Helen R. Martin. With
     illustrations by Florence Scovel Shinn.

The little "Mennonite Maid" who wanders through these pages is something
quite new in fiction. Tillie is hungry for books and beauty and love;
and she comes into her inheritance at the end. "Tillie is faulty,
sensitive, big-hearted, eminently human, and first, last and always
lovable. Her charm glows warmly, the story is well handled, the
characters skilfully developed."--_The Book Buyer._

     LADY ROSE'S DAUGHTER. By Mrs. Humphry Ward. With illustrations
     by Howard Chandler Christy.

"The most marvellous work of its wonderful author."--_New York World._
"We touch regions and attain altitudes which it is not given to the
ordinary novelist even to approach."--_London Times._ "In no other story
has Mrs. Ward approached the brilliancy and vivacity of Lady Rose's
Daughter."--_North American Review._

     THE BANKER AND THE BEAR. By Henry K. Webster.

"An exciting and absorbing story."--_New York Times._ "Intensely
thrilling in parts, but an unusually good story all through. There is a
love affair of real charm and most novel surroundings, there is a run on
the bank which is almost worth a year's growth, and there is all manner
of exhilarating men and deeds which should bring the book into high and
permanent favor."--_Chicago Evening Post._

GROSSET & DUNLAP, .. NEW YORK




FAMOUS COPYRIGHT BOOKS IN POPULAR PRICED EDITIONS


Re-issues of the great literary successes of the time. Library size.
Printed on excellent paper--most of them with illustrations of marked
beauty--and handsomely bound in cloth. Price, 75 cents a volume,
postpaid.

     THE CIRCULAR STAIRCASE, By Mary Roberts Reinhart With
     illustrations by Lester Ralph.

In an extended notice the _New York Sun_ says: "To readers who care for
a really good detective story 'The Circular Staircase' can be
recommended without reservation." The _Philadelphia Record_ declares
that "The Circular Staircase" deserves the laurels for thrills, for
weirdness and things unexplained and inexplicable.

     THE RED YEAR, By Louis Tracy

"Mr. Tracy gives by far the most realistic and impressive pictures of
the horrors and heroisms of the Indian Mutiny that has been available
in any book of the kind *** There has not been in modern times in the
history of any land scenes so fearful, so picturesque, so dramatic, and
Mr. Tracy draws them as with the pencil of a Verestschagin or the pen of
a Sienkiewics."

     ARMS AND THE WOMAN, By Harold MacGrath With inlay cover in
     colors by Harrison Fisher.

The story is a blending of the romance and adventure of the middle ages
with nineteenth century men and women; and they are creations of flesh
and blood, and not mere pictures of past centuries. The story is about
Jack Winthrop, a newspaper man. Mr. MacGrath's finest bit of character
drawing is seen in Hillars, the broken down newspaper man, and Jack's
chum.

     LOVE IS THE SUM OF IT ALL, By Geo. Cary Eggleston With
     illustrations by Hermann Heyer.

In this "plantation romance" Mr. Eggleston has resumed the manner and
method that made his "Dorothy South" one of the most famous books of its
time.

There are three tender love stories embodied in it, and two unusually
interesting heroines, utterly unlike each other, but each possessed of a
peculiar fascination which wins and holds the reader's sympathy. A
pleasing vein of gentle humor runs through the work, but the "sum of it
all" is an intensely sympathetic love story.

     HEARTS AND THE CROSS, By Harold Morton Cramer With
     illustrations by Harold Matthews Brett.

The hero is an unconventional preacher who follows the line of the Man
of Galilee, associating with the lowly, and working for them in the ways
that may best serve them. He is not recognized at his real value except
by the one woman who saw clearly. Their love story is one of the
refreshing things in recent fiction.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, .. NEW YORK




FAMOUS COPYRIGHT BOOKS IN POPULAR PRICED EDITIONS


Re-issues of the great literary successes of the time. Library size.
Printed on excellent paper--most of them with illustrations of marked
beauty--and handsomely bound in cloth. Price, 75 cents a volume,
postpaid.

     THE SPIRIT OF THE SERVICE. By Edith Elmer Wood. With
     illustrations by Rufus Zogbaum.

The standards and life of "the new navy" are breezily set forth with a
genuine ring impossible from the most gifted "outsider." "The story of
the destruction of the 'Maine,' and of the Battle of Manila, are very
dramatic. The author is the daughter of one naval officer and the wife
of another. Naval folks will find much to interest them in 'The Spirit
of the Service.'"--_The Book Buyer._

     A SPECTRE OF POWER. By Charles Egbert Craddock.

Miss Murfree has pictured Tennessee mountains and the mountain people in
striking colors and with dramatic vividness, but goes back to the time
of the struggles of the French and English in the early eighteenth
century for possession of the Cherokee territory. The story abounds in
adventure, mystery, peril and suspense.

     THE STORM CENTRE. By Charles Egbert Craddock.

A war story; but more of flirtation, love and courtship than of fighting
or history. The tale is thoroughly readable and takes its readers again
into golden Tennessee, into the atmosphere which has distinguished all
of Miss Murfree's novels.

     THE ADVENTURESS. By Coralie Stanton. With color frontispiece by
     Harrison Fisher, and attractive inlay cover in colors.

As a penalty for her crimes, her evil nature, her flint-like
callousness, her more than inhuman cruelty, her contempt for the laws of
God and man, she was condemned to bury her magnificent personalty, her
transcendent beauty, her superhuman charms, in gilded obscurity at a
King's left hand. A powerful story powerfully told.

     THE GOLDEN GREYHOUND. A Novel by Dwight Tilton. With
     illustrations by E. Pollak.

A thoroughly good story that keeps you guessing to the very end, and
never attempts to instruct or reform you. It is a strictly up-to-date
story of love and mystery with wireless telegraphy and all the modern
improvements. The events nearly all take place on a big Atlantic liner
and the romance of the deep is skilfully made to serve as a setting for
the romance, old as mankind, yet always new, involving our hero.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, .. NEW YORK




FAMOUS COPYRIGHT BOOKS IN POPULAR PRICED EDITIONS


Re-issues of the great literary successes of the time. Library size.
Printed on excellent paper--most of them with illustrations of marked
beauty--and handsomely bound in cloth. Price, 75 cents a volume,
postpaid.

     LAVENDER AND OLD LACE. By Myrtle Reed.

A charming story of a quaint corner of New England where bygone romance
finds a modern parallel. One of the prettiest, sweetest, and quaintest
of old-fashioned love stories *** A rare book, exquisite in spirit and
conception, full of delicate fancy, of tenderness, of delightful humor
and spontaneity. A dainty volume, especially suitable for a gift.

     DOCTOR LUKE OF THE LABRADOR. By Norman Duncan. With a
     frontispiece and inlay cover.

How the doctor came to the bleak Labrador coast and there in saving life
made expiation. In dignity, simplicity, humor, in sympathetic etching of
a sturdy fisher people, and above all in the echoes of the sea, _Doctor
Luke_ is worthy of great praise. Character, humor, poignant pathos, and
the sad grotesque conjunctions of old and new civilizations are
expressed through the medium of a style that has distinction and strikes
a note of rare personality.

     THE DAY'S WORK. By Rudyard Kipling. Illustrated.

The _London Morning Post_ says: "It would be hard to find better reading
*** the book is so varied, so full of color and life from end to end,
that few who read the first two or three stories will lay it down till
they have read the last--and the last is a veritable gem *** contains
some of the best of his highly vivid work *** Kipling is a born
story-teller and a man of humor into the bargain."

     ELEANOR LEE. By Margaret E. Sangster. With a frontispiece.

A story of married life, and attractive picture of wedded bliss *** an
entertaining story or a man's redemption through a woman's love *** no
one who knows anything of marriage or parenthood can read this story
with eyes that are always dry *** goes straight to the heart of everyone
who knows the meaning of "love" and "home."

     THE COLONEL OF THE RED HUZZARS. By John Reed Scott. Illustrated
     by Clarence F. Underwood.

"Full of absorbing charm, sustained interest, and a wealth of thrilling
and romantic situations. So naively fresh in its handling, so plausible
through its naturalness, that it comes like a mountain breeze across the
far-spreading desert of similar romances."--_Gazette-Times, Pittsburg._
"A slap-dashing day romance."--_New York Sun._

GROSSET & DUNLAP, .. NEW YORK.




FAMOUS COPYRIGHT BOOKS IN POPULAR PRICED EDITIONS


Re-issues of the great literary successes of the time. Library size.
Printed on excellent paper--most of them with illustrations of marked
beauty--and handsomely bound in cloth. Price, 75 cents a volume,
postpaid.

     THE FAIR GOD; OR, THE LAST OF THE TZINS. By Lew Wallace. With
     illustrations by Eric Pape.

"The story tells of the love of a native princess for Alvarado, and it
is worked out with all of Wallace's skill *** it gives a fine picture of
the heroism of the Spanish conquerors and of the culture and nobility of
the Aztecs."--_New York Commercial Advertiser._

"_Ben Hur_ sold enormously, but _The Fair God_ was the best of the
General's stories--a powerful and romantic treatment of the defeat of
Montezuma by Cortes."--_Athenaeum._

     THE CAPTAIN OF THE KANSAS. By Louis Tracy.

A story of love and the salt sea--of a helpless ship whirled into the
hands of cannibal Fuegians--of desperate fighting and tender romance,
enhanced by the art of a master of story telling who describes with his
wonted felicity and power of holding the reader's attention *** filled
with the swing of adventure.

     A MIDNIGHT GUEST. A Detective Story. By Fred M. White. With a
     frontispiece.

The scene of the story centers in London and Italy. The book is
skilfully written and makes one of the most baffling, mystifying,
exciting detective stories ever written--cleverly keeping the suspense
and mystery intact until the surprising discoveries which precede the
end.

     THE HONOUR OF SAVELLI. A Romance. By S. Levett Yeats. With
     cover and wrapper in four colors.

Those who enjoyed Stanley Weyman's _A Gentleman of France_ will be
engrossed and captivated by this delightful romance of Italian history.
It is replete with exciting episodes, hair-breath escapes, magnificent
sword-play, and deals with the agitating times in Italian history when
Alexander II was Pope and the famous and infamous Borgias were tottering
to their fall.

    SISTER CARRIE. By Theodore Drieser. With a frontispiece, and
    wrapper in color.

In all fiction there is probably no more graphic and poignant study of
the way in which man loses his grip on life, lets his pride, his
courage, his self-respect slip from him, and, finally, even ceases to
struggle in the mire that has engulfed him. *** There is more tonic
value in _Sister Carrie_ than in a whole shelfful of sermons.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, .. NEW YORK




FAMOUS COPYRIGHT BOOKS IN POPULAR PRICED EDITIONS


Re-issues of the great literary successes of the time. Library size.
Printed on excellent paper--most of them with illustrations of marked
beauty--and handsomely bound in cloth. Price, 75 cents a volume,
postpaid.

     NEW CHRONICLES OF REBECCA, By Kate Douglas Wiggin With
     illustrations by F. C. Yohn.

Additional episodes in the girlhood of the delightful little heroine at
Riverboro which were not included in the story of "Rebecca of Sunnybrook
Farm," and they are as characteristic and delightful as any part of that
famous story. Rebecca is as distinct a creation in the second volume as
in the first.

     THE SILVER BUTTERFLY, By Mrs. Wilson Woodrow With illustrations
     in colors by Howard Chandler Christy.

A story of love and mystery, full of color, charm, and vivacity, dealing
with a South American mine, rich beyond dreams, and of a New York
maiden, beyond dreams beautiful--both known as the Silver Butterfly.
Well named is _The Silver Butterfly_! There could not be a better symbol
of the darting swiftness, the eager love plot, the elusive mystery and
the flashing wit.

     BEATRIX OF CLARE, By John Reed Scott With illustrations by
     Clarence F. Underwood.

A spirited and irresistibly attractive historical romance of the
fifteenth century, boldly conceived and skilfully carried out. In the
hero and heroine Mr. Scott has created a pair whose mingled emotions and
alternating hopes and fears will find a welcome in many lovers of the
present hour. Beatrix is a fascinating daughter of Eve.

     A LITTLE BROTHER OF THE RICH, By Joseph Medill Patterson
     Frontispiece by Hazel Martyn Trudeau, and illustrations by
     Walter Dean Goldbeck.

Tells the story of the idle rich, and is a vivid and truthful picture of
society and stage life written by one who is himself a conspicuous
member of the Western millionaire class. Full of grim satire, caustic
wit and flashing epigrams. "Is sensational to a degree in its theme,
daring in its treatment, lashing society as it was never scourged
before."--_New York Sun._

GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, .. NEW YORK




FAMOUS COPYRIGHT BOOKS IN POPULAR PRICED EDITIONS


Re-issues of the great literary successes of the time. Library size.
Printed on excellent paper--most of them with illustrations of marked
beauty--and handsomely bound in cloth. Price, 75 cents a volume,
postpaid.

     BARBARA WINSLOW, REBEL, By Elizabeth Ellis With illustrations
     by John Rae, and colored inlay cover.

The following, taken from story, will best describe the heroine: A
TOAST: "To the bravest comrade in misfortune, the sweetest companion in
peace and at all times the most courageous of women."--_Barbara
Winslow._ "A romantic story, buoyant, eventful, and in matters of love
exactly what the heart could desire."--_New York Sun._

     SUSAN, By Ernest Oldmeadow With a color frontispiece by Frank
     Haviland. Medallion in color on front cover.

Lord Ruddington falls helplessly in love with Miss Langley, whom he sees
in one of her walks accompanied by her maid, Susan. Through a
misapprehension of personalities his lordship addresses a love missive
to the maid. Susan accepts in perfect good faith, and an epistolary
love-making goes on till they are disillusioned. It naturally makes a
droll and delightful little comedy; and is a story that is particularly
clever in the telling.

     WHEN PATTY WENT TO COLLEGE, By Jean Webster With illustrations
     by C. D. Williams.

"The book is a treasure."--_Chicago Daily News._ "Bright, whimsical, and
thoroughly entertaining."--_Buffalo Express._ "One of the best stories
of life in a girl's college that has ever been written."--_N.Y. Press._
"To any woman who has enjoyed the pleasures of a college life this book
cannot fail to bring back many sweet recollections; and to those who
have not been to college the wit, lightness, and charm of Patty are sure
to be no less delightful."--_Public Opinion._

     THE MASQUERADER, By Katherine Cecil Thurston With illustrations by
     Clarence F. Underwood.

"You can't drop it till you have turned the last page."--_Cleveland
Leader._ "Its very audacity of motive, of execution, of solution,
almost takes one's breath away. The boldness of its denouement is
sublime."--_Boston Transcript._ "The literary hit of a generation.
The best of it is the story deserves all its success. A masterly
story."--_St. Louis Dispatch._ "The story is ingeniously told, and
cleverly constructed."--_The Dial._

     THE GAMBLER, By Katherine Cecil Thurston With illustrations by
     John Campbell.

"Tells of a high strung young Irish woman who has a passion for
gambling, inherited from a long line of sporting ancestors. She has a
high sense of honor, too, and that causes complications. She is a very
human, lovable character, and love saves her."--_N.Y. Times._

GROSSET & DUNLAP, .. NEW YORK




FAMOUS COPYRIGHT BOOKS IN POPULAR PRICED EDITIONS


Re-issues of the great literary successes of the time. Library size.
Printed on excellent paper--most of them with illustrations of marked
beauty--and handsomely bound in cloth. Price, 75 cents a volume,
postpaid.

     THE SHUTTLE, By Frances Hodgson Burnett With inlay cover in
     colors by Clarence F. Underwood.

This great international romance relates the story of an American girl
who, in rescuing her sister from the ruins of her marriage to an
Englishman of title, displays splendid qualities of courage, tact and
restraint. As a study of American womanhood of modern times, the
character of Bettina Vanderpoel stands alone in literature. As a love
story, the account of her experience is magnificent. The masterly
handling, the glowing style of the book, give it a literary rank to
which very few modern novels have attained.

     THE MAKING OF A MARCHIONESS, By Frances Hodgson Burnett
     Illustrated with half tone engravings by Charles D. Williams.
     With initial letters, tail-pieces, decorative borders.
     Beautifully printed, and daintily bound, and boxed.

A delightful novel in the author's most charming vein. The scene is laid
in an English country house, where an amiable English nobleman is the
centre of matrimonial interest on the part of both the English and
Americans present.

Graceful, sprightly, almost delicious in its dialogue and action. It is
a book about which one is tempted to write ecstatically.

     THE METHODS OF LADY WALDERHURST, By Francis Hodgson Burnett
     A Companion Volume to "The Making of a Marchioness."
     With illustrations by Charles D. Williams, and with initial
     letters, tail-pieces, and borders, by A. K. Womrath.
     Beautifully printed and daintily bound, and boxed.

"The Methods of Lady Walderhurst" is a delightful story which combines
the sweetness of "The Making of a Marchioness," with the dramatic
qualities of "A Lady of Quality." Lady Walderhurst is one of the most
charming characters in modern fiction.

     VAYENNE, By Percy Brebner With illustrations by E. Fuhr.

This romance like the author's _The Princess Maritza_ is charged to the
brim with adventure. Sword play, bloodshed, justice grown the multitude,
sacrifice, and romance, mingle in dramatic episodes that are born,
flourish, and pass away on every page.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, .. NEW YORK




FAMOUS COPYRIGHT BOOKS IN POPULAR PRICED EDITIONS


Re-issues of the great literary successes of the time. Library size.
Printed on excellent paper--most of them with illustrations of marked
beauty--and handsomely bound in cloth. Price, 75 cents a volume,
postpaid.

     DARREL OF THE BLESSED ISLES, By Irving Bacheller With
     illustrations by Arthur Keller.

"Darrel, the clock tinker, is a wit, philosopher, and man of mystery.
Learned, strong, kindly, dignified, he towers like a giant above the
people among whom he lives. It is another tale of the North Country,
full of the odor of wood and field. Wit, humor, pathos and high thinking
are in this book."--_Boston Transcript._

     D'RI AND I: A Tale of Daring Deeds in the Second War with the
     British. Being the Memoirs of Colonel Ramon Bell, U. S. A., By
     Irving Bacheller With illustrations by F. C. Yohn.

"Mr. Bacheller is admirable alike in his scenes of peace and war. D'ri,
a mighty hunter, has the same dry humor as Uncle Eb. He fights
magnificently on the 'Lawrence,' and was among the wounded when Perry
went to the 'Niagara.' As a romance of early American history it is
great for the enthusiasm it creates."--_New York Times._

     EBEN HOLDEN: A Tale of the North Country, By Irving Bacheller.

"As pure as water and as good as bread," says Mr. Howells. "Read 'Eben
Holden'" is the advice of Margaret Sangster. "It is a forest-scented,
fresh-aired, bracing and wholly American story of country and town life.
*** If in the far future our successors wish to know what were the real
life and atmosphere in which the country folk that saved this nation
grew, loved, wrought and had their being, they must go back to such true
and zestful and poetic tales of 'fiction' as 'Eben Holden,'" says Edmund
Clarence Stedman.

     SILAS STRONG: Emperor of the Woods, By Irving Bacheller With a
     frontispiece.

"A modern _Leatherstocking_. Brings the city dweller the aroma of the
pine and the music of the wind in its branches--an epic poem ***
forest-scented, fresh-aired, and wholly American. A stronger character
than Eben Holden."--_Chicago Record-Herald._

     VERGILIUS: A Tale of the Coming of Christ, By Irving Bacheller.

A thrilling and beautiful story of two young Roman patricians whose
great and perilous love in the reign of Augustus leads them through the
momentous, exciting events that marked the year just preceding the birth
of Christ.

Splendid character studies of the Emperor Augustus, of Herod and his
degenerate son, Antipater, and of his daughter "the incomparable"
Salome. A great triumph in the art of historical portrait painting.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, .. NEW YORK




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

Minor changes have been made to correct typesetters' errors; otherwise,
every effort has been made to remain true to the author's words and
intent.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Throckmorton, by Molly Elliot Seawell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THROCKMORTON ***

***** This file should be named 36829.txt or 36829.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/8/2/36829/

Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
