The Project Gutenberg EBook of The War Trail, by Elmer Russell Gregor

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The War Trail

Author: Elmer Russell Gregor

Release Date: July 29, 2011 [EBook #36888]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WAR TRAIL ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Barbara Kosker, Michael and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  _By ELMER R. GREGOR_


  JIM MASON, BACKWOODSMAN
  JIM MASON, SCOUT

  _Western Indian Series_

  WHITE OTTER
  THE WAR TRAIL
  THREE SIOUX SCOUTS

  _Eastern Indian Series_

  SPOTTED DEER
  RUNNING FOX
  THE WHITE WOLF

[Illustration: NOW WE MUST WATCH OUT! [Page 186]]




  THE WAR TRAIL




  BY
  ELMER RUSSELL GREGOR

  AUTHOR OF "THE WHITE WOLF,"
  "RUNNING FOX," "WHITE OTTER," ETC.




  [Illustration]




  D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
  NEW YORK :: 1924 :: LONDON




  COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY
  D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




                    CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                    PAGE

      I. A COURIER FROM THE WEST                1

     II. OFF ON THE WAR TRAIL                  13

    III. THE COUNCIL FIRE                      30

     IV. AWAY INTO THE NORTH                   44

      V. SIOUX SCOUTS                          56

     VI. THE LONE RIDER                        68

    VII. SMOKE SIGNALS                         75

   VIII. A CLOSE CALL                          87

     IX. ANXIOUS MOMENTS                      101

      X. REBELLIOUS PONIES                    115

     XI. AN UNUSUAL ADVENTURE                 128

    XII. AN ENCOUNTER WITH THE FLATHEADS      147

   XIII. A CLEVER STRATAGEM                   158

    XIV. THE BLACKFEET CAMP                   167

     XV. A PERILOUS RECONNAISSANCE            181

    XVI. OFF WITH THE PONIES                  197

   XVII. HOTLY PURSUED                        207

  XVIII. THE STAMPEDE                         224

    XIX. TRAILING THE RUNAWAYS                236

     XX. SAFE AT LAST                         251




THE WAR TRAIL




CHAPTER I

A COURIER FROM THE WEST


The sun was setting behind the western rim of the plain, as White Otter,
a famous young war-chief of the Ogalala Sioux, drew near the low ridge
of foothills which he had been approaching since daylight. He was bound
on a hunting expedition for deer, having promised to kill a fat young
buck for his grandfather, old Wolf Robe, the aged Sioux chief.

White Otter approached the timber with his usual caution. He knew that
the forest often concealed foes as well as game, and he determined to
take no risks. He rode slowly toward the cover, therefore, watching for
the slightest warning of danger. He was within easy arrow range of the
woods when his pony suddenly stopped and snorted nervously. White Otter
instantly became alert. Drawing his bow, he slid to the ground, and
sheltered himself behind his pony. Then for some time pony and rider
watched the forest.

A loud crackling of undergrowth, and a number of soft, bounding
footfalls told him the cause of his alarm. He had startled a deer from
its feeding ground at the edge of the plain. Convinced that the place
was free of foes, he mounted his pony, and rode to the edge of the
timber.

This range of heavily timbered foothills was a favorite hunting ground
of the Ogalalas, and White Otter had visited the locality many times. He
was entirely familiar with the usual haunts of game, and knew the
location of every spring and salt lick. Once in the timber, therefore,
the young Sioux rode slowly along a well-worn game trail which brought
him to a small grassy park in the dip of the hills. A little stream
trickled through one end of it, and made it an ideal feeding ground for
deer and elk. As it was also an attractive and sheltered camp site, and
offered an abundance of feed for his pony, White Otter decided to remain
there for the night.

The twilight shadows were already gathering as the Sioux tied his pony
in the woods and seated himself at the edge of the little park to watch
and listen. Although the day was about gone he hoped that he might
secure his game before darkness finally settled down. It was not long
before he was roused by a rustling of wings above his head. Looking up,
he saw a pair of plump spruce grouse on a limb directly over him. As the
birds stretched their necks and cocked their heads to look at him, he
drove an arrow through the body of the cock grouse. The bird fluttered
helplessly to the ground, and White Otter immediately broke its neck.
The remaining grouse still sat peering down at him. He made no attempt
to kill it. It was a law of his people to kill only what they required
that there might always be sufficient game to replenish the supply.

"Wakantunka, the Great Mystery, has sent me something to eat," White
Otter said, reverently. "It is good."

As it was getting quite dark, and as there seemed little probability of
seeing game, the Sioux decided to abandon his vigil until daylight. He
brought his pony from the timber and tied it in the center of the park
to graze. Then he selected his camp site and made a tiny fire of dry
sticks. As a precaution against being seen by some prowling foe, he
inclosed it with a barricade of rocks to hide its feeble glow. He
plucked the grouse and spitted it on a forked stick before the fire.
Then he drew his elk skin robe about his shoulders and seated himself to
enjoy his evening meal.

After he had eaten the grouse White Otter allowed the fire to die out.
Then for a long time he sat in the darkness, listening to the night
sounds. The wind whispered softly in the tree tops. The shrill yelping
of the coyotes came from the open plain. Then the plaintive cry of the
little red owl sounded within bowshot. White Otter listened anxiously.
He knew that the call often was used as a signal, and he determined to
be on his guard. However, he soon convinced himself that it was genuine,
and dismissed it from his mind. Shortly afterward he brought his pony
from the park and tied it near him. Then he wrapped himself in his robe
and lay down to sleep.

White Otter awakened at daylight and crept stealthily to the edge of the
park. As he saw no game, he sat down to watch. He felt quite sure that
either deer or elk would soon come there for food and water. In fact he
had waited only a short time when he heard something approaching through
the undergrowth. Fitting an arrow to his bow, White Otter looked
anxiously in the direction of the sound. In a few minutes he saw an old
bull elk standing in the shadows at the edge of the woods. It was thin
and emaciated, and White Otter knew that its flesh would be tough and
unpalatable. It was well within bowshot, but he had no thought of
killing it. He had promised his aged grandfather a fat young buck, and
he had no intention of disappointing him. As the old bull walked slowly
into the open, White Otter grunted, and the elk instantly stopped and
looked toward him. Then as the Sioux rose to his feet and showed himself
the aged bull turned awkwardly and trotted stiffly into the cover.

"Go, old man," laughed White Otter. "You have lived a long time. I will
let you live on. I am----"

He stopped abruptly, for at that moment he heard a loud snort, and a
great crackling of brush, as the buck for which he had been waiting
raced safely away through the woods. The young hunter flushed with
anger.

"I am like a noisy old woman," he grumbled, savagely.

After he had gone to examine the trail of the buck, he again seated
himself at the edge of the woods to watch for game. A long time passed
before he heard anything. Then he was surprised to hear something coming
directly toward him through the woods. It made a great noise, and
sounded like a deer or an elk in wild flight. White Otter sprang to his
feet and held his arrow in readiness.

In a few moments a splendid blacktail buck leaped into the open. White
Otter was astonished to see a huge gray lynx clinging to the buck. As it
reached the park, the deer was dragged to its haunches. Then, apparently
unmindful of the interested young hunter, the lynx relaxed its hold and
sprang at the throat of its victim. The cruel fangs sank deep into the
flesh, and although the buck struggled desperately it was soon overcome.

Then White Otter drove his arrow through the lynx. It fell dead with the
arrow through its heart. A second arrow ended the agony of the blacktail
buck. Elated at his luck the Sioux ran forward to examine his game. He
lifted the head of the lynx and gazed intently into the cruel face. Then
he addressed the dead animal and made excuses for having killed it, so
that its spirit would not depart in anger and seek to avenge itself upon
him at some future time.

"Ho, old man, you were very fierce," White Otter said, softly. "You were
a good hunter. If I had not come here you would have had something good
to eat. Well, I saw you. I came here to get meat for my grandfather, the
great chief Wolf Robe. When I saw that buck I decided to take it. That
is why I killed you. But you must not feel bad about it. You have done
many bad things to my people. Yes, that is why I felt like killing you.
You have killed many young ponies. You have driven away many deer. You
have made it hard for our hunters to find meat. Now you know why I
killed you. But you must not feel bad about it. Now I am going to do
something good for you. I am going to give you some meat to take with
you on the Long Trail. Then I am going to tell my people about you. I
will speak good words about you. Now you must feel good about this
thing."

Having complied with the ancient custom of his people, White Otter
opened the carcass of the deer and placed the entrails beside the lynx.
Then he packed the buck upon his pony with a long lariat of twisted
rawhide and rode from the park.

When he reached the edge of the timber, White Otter stopped to search
the plain. A prairie wolf trotted slowly from sight over a rise of
ground. It was the only sign of life on the vast sage-grown waste.
Assured that there was nothing to fear, White Otter set out upon his
journey.

White Otter had covered two thirds of the distance to the Sioux camp
when his pony suddenly turned its nose toward the wind and whinnied
shrilly. White Otter looked about him with considerable alarm. He felt
certain that other horses were somewhere in the vicinity. The
possibility roused his suspicions. He dismounted and grasped his pony
by the nose to keep it silent. It was snorting and nervously watching a
low grassy knoll several arrow flights away.

"There are horses behind that hill," White Otter told himself.

Two possibilities suggested themselves. Perhaps there was a small bunch
of stray ponies grazing on the opposite side of the hill. Perhaps his
foes had discovered him and were lying in ambush behind the knoll. The
thought made him uneasy, as the day was far spent, and he was still a
considerable distance from his people. He had great confidence in the
ability of his pony, however, which was one of the best in the entire
Sioux tribe. He believed that in an open chase he would have little
difficulty in keeping well beyond range of any pursuers who might set
out upon his trail.

"I will find out about this thing," he declared.

He planned to ride about the knoll at a safe distance in the hope of
discovering what lay hidden on the other side. As he was about to mount
his pony, however, he saw a warrior rise to his feet, and stand boldly
outlined on the top of the hill. It was an entirely unexpected maneuver,
and White Otter instantly became suspicious. He feared that it was a
trick to lead him into a trap. He looked anxiously about the plain to
make sure that other crafty foes were not circling around behind him to
cut off his retreat. He saw no one except the mysterious stranger on the
top of the hill. He seemed to be watching White Otter as intently as the
latter was watching him. For some time neither moved.

White Otter finally decided that, as the unknown scout was too far away
to be identified, it would be foolish to waste more time watching him.
He determined to continue on his way toward the Sioux camp. If he
learned that he was being followed he planned to turn aside on a false
trail until it grew dark. Then he would circle back toward the Ogalala
village.

As White Otter mounted his pony and started away, however, the warrior
on the knoll suddenly showed signs of life. The Sioux had ridden less
than an arrow flight when the sentinel disappeared over the brow of the
hill. White Otter felt quite certain that his pursuit had begun. He
watched anxiously over his shoulder for the first glimpse of his foes.
The Crows had lately been seen in that vicinity, and he wondered if a
company of those hated enemies were about to come racing along his
trail. He did not force his pony, however, as he was eager to learn the
identity of his pursuers before he raced away for the Sioux camp.

White Otter did not have long to wait. In a few moments a solitary
horseman swept over a rise of the plain and galloped toward him. The
Sioux felt sure that it was the warrior who had been watching him. As
the stranger appeared to be alone, and eager to fight, White Otter
prepared for battle. Before venturing within arrow range, however, the
rider suddenly wheeled his pony, and raced around White Otter at great
speed. The Sioux immediately stopped and prepared to defend himself.
Then he suddenly discovered that the horseman was a friend.

"Ho, Dacotah! Ho, my brother!" shouted the rider.

"Yes, yes, now I see who you are," cried White Otter, as he lowered his
bow.

A moment later they dismounted beside each other. White Otter recognized
the rider as a Minneconjoux warrior named Lean Wolf, an old friend with
whom he had shared several perilous adventures.

"I have brought you some words from your brother, Sun Bird," said Lean
Wolf.

"It is good," White Otter replied, eagerly, as his eyes lighted with
pleasure.

"It is bad," Lean Wolf said, soberly.

"Has something bad happened to my brother Sun Bird?" the young Ogalala
inquired anxiously.

"No, I have not come to tell you that," Lean Wolf assured him. "I have
come to tell you that our enemies, the Blackfeet, came to our camp. They
crawled around the village in the dark like dogs. We did not hear them.
They ran off many ponies. Sun Bird is going to bring back those ponies.
He is the leader of a war party. He is going to fight the boastful
Blackfeet. He wants his brother White Otter to go with him."

Lean Wolf finished speaking, and looked inquiringly at the young Ogalala
war chief. For some moments the latter remained silent. He knew that a
warrior must not speak hastily, or pledge himself too eagerly. Although
his heart beat wildly at the thought of joining his friend in a war
expedition against the Blackfeet, he carefully concealed his emotion
lest he might lose respect in the eyes of the stern Minneconjoux scout.
Then, after the proper interval, White Otter replied:

"Lean Wolf, tell my brother Sun Bird that I will go with him to fight
the Blackfeet," he said, quietly.

"It is good," replied Lean Wolf.

"See, pretty soon it will be dark," said White Otter. "You must go with
me to my people."

"No, I will go back," Lean Wolf told him. "I was going to your village
to find you. Then I saw you here. It is good. I have brought you the
words of your brother Sun Bird. It is what I set out to do. I have done
it. Now I will turn back. Sun Bird is waiting."

"Go, my brother," replied White Otter. "Tell Sun Bird that I will come
to meet him at the end of three suns. If I do not come then he must wait
one sun more. Then if I do not come he will know that something bad has
happened to me. Now I am going away."

They parted without further ceremony, riding away into the twilight in
opposite directions. Once they had separated neither looked back. After
he had ridden a short distance, however, White Otter raised his head and
uttered the wild, piercing war cry of the Dacotahs. It echoed defiantly
across the plain, and the young war chief thrilled at the sound. Then,
after a short silence, it was answered from the west. White Otter
laughed gleefully as he raced his pony toward the Sioux camp.




CHAPTER II

OFF ON THE WAR TRAIL


When White Otter reached the Sioux camp he rode directly to the lodge of
old Wolf Robe, the famous Ogalala war chief.

"Ho, grandfather, see, I have brought you some meat," he cried gayly.

"Ho, I see that you have killed a fat young buck," said Wolf Robe, as
his eyes lighted with pleasure. "Come, woman, cut some meat."

At his command, old Singing Wind, the grandmother of White Otter, came
from the lodge. White Otter dragged the buck from his pony. Then, as
Singing Wind called some of the younger women to help her, White Otter
asked if he might talk with Wolf Robe.

"Yes, my son, come into the lodge and sit down with me," said Wolf Robe.

The old chief listened attentively while White Otter described his
unusual adventure with the lynx. Then he told of his meeting with Lean
Wolf, the Minneconjoux scout, and the message which the latter had
brought from Sun Bird. Wolf Robe looked sharply at his grandson.

"I am going with Sun Bird to fight the Blackfeet," declared White Otter.

Wolf Robe nodded understandingly, but made no reply. For a long time he
gazed thoughtfully at his battle-scarred war shield which hung on a
tripod of poles at the rear of the lodge. It appeared as if the aged war
leader was recalling his own glorious achievements on the war trail in
the days of his youth. White Otter waited patiently for him to speak.

"It is good," Wolf Robe said, finally. "The voice of a friend travels
far. The ears of a Dacotah are open for the words of a friend. Sun Bird
has called you. He is your friend. You must go."

Having given this advice, Wolf Robe again subsided into silent
meditation. As White Otter rose to leave, however, his grandfather
motioned for him to be seated.

"Wait, my son, I have some words for you," he said.

"It is good," replied White Otter.

"You say that you are going to fight the Blackfeet," said Wolf Robe.
"Those people are strong. They are braver than the boastful Pawnees. I
have fought with them many times. When I was a young man I was taken to
their village. They kept me there many moons. Those were bad days. Then
I got away. After that I fought many battles against those people. Once
I went to their camp, and took away some ponies. It was a hard thing to
do. Yes, my son, the Blackfeet are great warriors. Well, I have told you
about them. Now you can tell our brothers, the Minneconjoux, about it. I
believe you will have a big fight to get back those ponies. My son, you
are a Dacotah. It is enough. I have spoken. Go!"

The following day, at sunrise, White Otter set out to join the
Minneconjoux war party. He was dressed and decorated for the war trail.
Naked above the waist, he had daubed and streaked his face, chest and
arms with yellow clay. A great war bonnet of eagle plumes proclaimed his
rank as a famous Ogalala war chief. His dress consisted of buckskin
leggings, buffalo-hide moccasins, a buckskin breechcloth, and a silky
cow buffalo robe for protection against wind and storm. He carried a
wolfskin case containing his bow and arrows, a flint knife in a buckskin
sheath, his buffalo-hide war shield, and a weasel-skin pouch containing
his fire sticks and some dried meat. Mounted upon his best war pony,
the dashing young warrior made a striking appearance as he rode proudly
from the great Sioux camp.

Many friends shouted good wishes from the edge of the village. White
Otter turned his pony, and answered them with the thrilling war-cry of
the Dacotahs. Then he raced away toward the west.

Once beyond range of the camp, however, White Otter drew his pony to a
walk, and carefully scanned the plain. He had little fear of
encountering foes so near the Ogalala village, but he determined to take
every precaution. A small band of antelope were feeding far away toward
the south, and as they seemed to be the only living creatures on the
vast expanse of plain White Otter urged his pony into a canter and
proceeded on his way.

It was a glorious day in early summer. The sky was blue and cloudless.
The prairie was dotted with flowers. Birds sang gayly from the thickets.
The air was perfumed with the fragrance of blossoms, the sweet aroma of
growing grass, and the faint, spicy scent of distant sage.

White Otter rode on his way in high spirits. He was carefree, and happy,
and eager for adventure. The fact that he was about to expose himself
to the perils of the war trail caused him slight concern. He had
implicit confidence in the ability and courage of his tribesmen, the
fearless Minneconjoux, and he had little doubt that their expedition
against the powerful Blackfeet would be entirely successful. The thought
of being injured or killed in the adventure never entered his mind. If
it had he would have wasted little time upon it, as he had long since
learned to scoff at danger, and to accept injury and death as inevitable
possibilities in the life of every warrior.

Toward the end of the day White Otter came in sight of a familiar little
grove of aspens which marked a former camp site. He had encountered a
company of Ute warriors at that spot the previous year, and he was
somewhat suspicious of it. It offered a splendid hiding place to foes,
and the wily young Sioux determined to make sure that the place was
unoccupied before he ventured within arrow range. He stopped at a safe
distance out on the plain, and watched the grove with considerable
anxiety. Then, as he saw nothing to arouse his suspicions, he rode
slowly about the camp site, looking for fresh pony tracks. He soon
discovered them. They led away from the grove. White Otter dismounted,
and studied them with great care. He saw that it was the trail of a
single pony, and the tracks were several days old. Having learned that
much, he walked slowly ahead of his horse, watching carefully to
discover where the trail had entered the grove.

"Perhaps it was Lean Wolf," he told himself.

He soon learned otherwise, as the trail approached the grove from the
south. White Otter followed the tracks a short distance out on the
plain, and found evidence which convinced him that the pony had carried
a rider. As there seemed little to be gained by following the trail
farther in that direction, he turned and followed it to the grove.

The camp site was unoccupied, and as there was a spring, and plenty of
grass for his horse, White Otter decided to stop there for the night. He
picketed his pony, and then began to examine the place for signs. The
ashes from a small fire, and some charred bones scattered near by, told
him that some one had spent the night at that spot several days before.
He worked diligently to find a clew to the identity of the traveler, but
found nothing which would tell him what he wished to know. The little
mound of ashes, the remnants of a meal, and the pony tracks were his
only clews.

The fact that the unknown horseman had come from the south aroused White
Otter's interest. Both the Pawnees and the Utes lived to the southward.
As he had already encountered a war party of the latter at the grove he
wondered if it was a favorite stopping place for those mysterious foes.
However, as the signs were at least two days old, the possibility caused
him little concern.

Having finished his reconnaissance, White Otter seated himself at the
edge of the grove to watch the plain. The sun had already set, and the
purple evening shadows were creeping out of the east. The prairie
appeared lifeless. The Sioux was at a loss to account for the scarcity
of game. He feared that foes of some sort had driven it from the
locality. The thought suggested the possibility that the lone rider was
a scout, loitering behind a hunting party to watch for enemies.

At dark White Otter returned to his pony. He feared to make a fire, lest
the gleam might betray him to his foes. He sat beside the little spring,
and ate several cakes of pemmican, composed of dried meat and berries,
which he had brought for just such an emergency.

Before he ventured to sleep, White Otter returned to the edge of the
plain, and spent a long time listening for a warning of approaching
enemies. The howling of some distant prairie wolves, the gentle rustling
of the aspens, and an occasional grunt from his pony were the only
sounds. He continued to listen, however, until the night was half gone.
Then he returned to the camp site, and lay down to sleep.

Dawn was just breaking when White Otter was suddenly awakened by the
snorting of his pony. Seizing his bow, he moved cautiously to the edge
of the grove. A buck antelope was standing within easy bowshot. It had
scented the pony, and stopped to investigate. Unable to resist the
temptation, White Otter drove his arrow through its heart. It was a
yearling in prime condition, and he cut a choice steak from the carcass.
Then, as the light strengthened, and he saw no evidence of foes, he made
a tiny fire and broiled the antelope meat. He ate heartily, and gave
thanks to Wakantunka, the Great Mystery, for sending him food.

Shortly after sunrise White Otter resumed his journey toward the
Minneconjoux camp. As the pony tracks led in that direction he followed
them with keen interest. If the lone horseman really were a hostile
scout, White Otter knew that to follow him would be the surest and
safest way of locating any enemies who might be in the vicinity. He kept
a sharp watch, therefore, and approached the knolls and ridges with
great caution.

It was midday before he saw anything to make him suspicious. Then he
discovered a dense cloud of dust rising behind a slight elevation of the
plain. He immediately stopped to watch it. It suggested two
possibilities--a herd of frightened buffaloes or a company of horsemen.
White Otter longed to peep over the top of the ridge, but he realized
that it would be folly to take the risk until he knew what was before
him. He knew that hostile scouts might be watching from that spot, and
the possibility made him cautious.

"Perhaps some one is hunting buffaloes," he said.

Realizing that he might have been seen, White Otter looked for a place
of concealment. The plain was open and bare of shelter, however, and
there was no chance to hide. He determined to remain where he was,
hoping that something might appear along the crest of the ridge.

It was soon evident that whatever was raising the dust was moving
rapidly toward the north. White Otter felt quite certain that it was a
herd of buffaloes in wild flight. Perhaps they were pursued by wolves,
which were always loitering about the herds at that season to prey upon
the young calves. It was just as probable, however, that a hunting
party of foes had invaded the great Sioux hunting grounds.

"Well, I will wait here and see what comes of it," declared White Otter.

The dust cloud finally faded out some distance farther toward the north.
White Otter was perplexed. He was undecided as to what he should do. The
ridge extended like a barrier directly across his path, and it would be
necessary to cross it to continue his journey. Still, he realized the
peril of venturing within bow range.

White Otter waited a long time, and then finally turned his pony toward
the south, and rode along parallel with the ridge. Having seen nothing
which would lead him to suspect enemies, he planned to cross the ridge
some distance to the southward. When he believed that he had gone a
sufficient distance, he turned and approached the ridge. As he finally
came within arrow range he stopped and searched the top of the slope for
signs of foes. Although he failed to discover them, he realized that
they might be lying just below the top of the ridge, in which event it
would be impossible to see them. He rode forward with great caution,
therefore, and was prepared to flee at the first hint of danger.

White Otter had actually begun to climb the slope when he was startled
by a chorus of whoops and yells, and turning toward the left he saw a
company of horsemen racing toward him. He lashed his pony up the slope
and crossed the ridge. Then he rode furiously toward the west.

The maneuver completely fooled the Pawnees who had expected him to turn
down the ridge and flee in the opposite direction. Their confusion gave
White Otter a chance to get beyond arrow range before they dashed over
the ridge in pursuit of him. He looked over his shoulder and counted
eight riders whom he instantly recognized as Pawnees. His eyes flashed
dangerously as he thought of those hated foes.

White Otter was holding his lead over his pursuers when he suddenly saw
a solitary rider gallop from a little grove of trees, and race
diagonally across the plain in an effort to intercept him. The Pawnee
was mounted on a particularly fast little buckskin, and White Otter
realized that unless he swerved from his course he would soon come
within easy bow range of him. The Sioux however, refused to give way.

"I will kill that man," White Otter declared, grimly.

The other Pawnees had failed to come within bowshot, and although they
were yelling fiercely, and forcing their ponies to the limit, White
Otter gave little attention to them. His eyes were fixed on the daring
rider who was racing recklessly across the plain in an attempt to get in
front of him. The Pawnee seemed equally intent upon watching White
Otter. The ponies appeared well matched, and the race was a thrilling
one.

When they finally came within bow range, White Otter was sufficiently in
the lead to foil the plan of the Pawnee. The latter, however,
immediately began to shoot his arrows, and one of them penetrated deep
behind the shoulder of the Sioux pony. Mortally wounded, the unfortunate
animal made one great bound and then crashed to its knees, and White
Otter was thrown heavily over its head.

Jarred and stunned, the Sioux staggered to his feet to find the Pawnee
almost upon him. Quick to realize his peril, White Otter dropped behind
his dying pony as the Pawnee shot his arrow. The next moment he drove
his own arrow through the body of his foe, as the latter rode at him
with his war club raised for the fatal stroke. As the Pawnee toppled to
the plain, White Otter sprang forward and seized the bewildered pony. An
instant later he was racing away through a volley of Pawnee arrows.

Enraged at the fate of their comrade, the Pawnees were risking their
necks to overtake the Sioux. White Otter feared that at any moment
either he or the captured pony would be pierced by their arrows. In
their frenzy, however, they shot wildly, and their arrows flew wide of
the mark. White Otter lashed the Pawnee pony without mercy in an effort
to place himself beyond arrow range. He was astonished at the speed and
stamina of the buckskin, and he soon realized that it was the equal of
the horse he had lost. The discovery gave him confidence. A glance
backward told him that two of his pursuers were steadily losing ground,
and he was holding his lead against the others. He was still within
arrow range, however, and he crouched low upon the buckskin, and urged
it to still greater efforts. It responded nobly, and the fierce yells
from his enemies convinced him that they were falling farther behind.
The Pawnee pony was speeding over the plain with great bounds, and White
Otter was forced to admit that his favorite war pony would have been
sorely tried to maintain the pace.

Having begun to increase his lead, White Otter took hope. The little
buckskin had won his confidence, and he had little fear of being
overtaken. The day was far spent, and he believed that he would have
little difficulty in keeping well ahead of his pursuers until darkness
came to his aid. Then he knew that it would be a simple task to shake
them from his trail. Feeling sure of escape, therefore, he sat erect and
shook his bow defiantly at the helpless Pawnees. They replied with wild
yells of rage, and White Otter laughed mockingly.

The Pawnees continued the chase until darkness finally blotted them from
sight. Then White Otter turned sharply from his course, and rode
directly toward the north. Feeling confident that the maneuver would
baffle his foes, he slackened the pace of his pony to an easy canter.
Thus he rode until the night was half gone, and then he stopped and
dismounted from the tired little buckskin.

Fearing that the Pawnees might continue to search for him, White Otter
made no attempt to sleep. He sat close beside his pony, watching and
listening for a warning of his foes. He hoped that if they failed to
find him before daylight they would abandon the pursuit rather than
venture farther into the Minneconjoux hunting grounds.

Shortly before daylight White Otter mounted his pony and rode away
toward the west. Having heard nothing from the Pawnees he felt quite
certain that he had thrown them from his trail. His confidence was
rudely shaken, however, when he suddenly heard the sharp, husky bark of
the little gray fox a short distance at his left. A few moments
afterward a horse whinnied, and before he could interfere the little
buckskin replied.

"That is bad," White Otter murmured, uneasily.

He was fearful and perplexed. The signal was a favorite one among the
Sioux, and still under the circumstances he mistrusted it. He waited,
therefore, listening anxiously to locate whoever confronted him. In a
few moments the call was repeated at his right. He knew that either
friends or foes were on both sides of him. At length he answered the
challenge. A voice sounded from the darkness.

"Ho, Dacotah."

"Ho, my brother Sun Bird," White Otter replied, joyfully, as he
recognized the voice of his friend.

Then Sun Bird and his brother Little Raven rode forward to meet him. The
three young warriors had shared many perilous adventures, and they
greeted one another with boyish enthusiasm. Then Sun Bird repeated the
call of the little gray fox three times in quick succession, and fifteen
grim Minneconjoux warriors came to join them.

"Lean Wolf told us about this thing," Sun Bird explained. "Come, Lean
Wolf, here is White Otter, tell him about it."

"Ho, my brother," said Lean Wolf, as he rode up beside White Otter.

"Ho, my brother Lean Wolf," White Otter replied, heartily.

"When I was riding back to my people I saw some Pawnee hunters,"
explained Lean Wolf. "They saw me, but I was a long ways off. They did
not come after me. I told my people about it. Sun Bird said, 'It is bad.
Those Pawnees may kill White Otter. Perhaps we can help him. Come, my
friends, who will go with me to find White Otter?' That is how we came
here."

"It is good," said White Otter. "The brave Minneconjoux are my brothers.
I believe when the Pawnees heard your ponies they ran away. But see, my
friends, I am riding one of their ponies. It is very fast. I will tell
you how I come to have it."

The Minneconjoux listened with great interest while White Otter told of
his adventure with the Pawnees. When he finished speaking there were
many exclamations of approval from the stern warriors who had gathered
about him.

"White Otter, you have done a good thing," declared Sun Bird. "See, it
is getting light. Come, we will go and tell our people how you fooled
the boastful Pawnees."

They turned their ponies toward the west, and rode away singing
boastfully of White Otter's triumph over the Pawnees.




CHAPTER III

THE COUNCIL FIRE


Late the second day the Sioux came in sight of the great Minneconjoux
camp. It was situated beside a wide stream that flowed down from great
snowy peaks farther to the westward. The little company of riders
stopped on the summit of a grassy knoll and looked with pride on the
great circle of lodges which dotted the plain. Their pride was somewhat
humbled, however, by the absence of the vast herd of ponies which
usually were to be seen grazing near the village. The few horses that
had escaped the Blackfeet raid were carefully guarded within the camp.

The riders had already been discovered and recognized by watchers at the
edge of the village, and a company of horsemen was soon racing across
the plain to meet them.

"See! my people are coming to take you to their village," Sun Bird told
White Otter.

As the Minneconjoux dashed up to them White Otter recognized several old
friends in the company who had come out to welcome him. There was
Feather Dog, a famous scout, with whom he had shared a number of
thrilling adventures; and Sitting Eagle, another great scout, was in the
party. Then there was Kicking Bull, a renowned hunter, whom White Otter
had saved from death in a buffalo stampede. All those men greeted the
famous young Ogalala chief with great respect, and his heart filled with
pride as he realized the esteem in which he was held by those renowned
warriors.

"You have come to help us fight the Blackfeet," said Feather Dog. "It is
good. We will do some big things."

"I was going with my brother Sun Bird to find you, but the great chief
Curly Horse asked me to stay behind," explained Kicking Bull. "Some of
our young men saw smoke over near the mountains, and we were afraid that
the Blackfeet were coming back. That is why I held back."

"It is good," declared White Otter.

As the horsemen approached the camp the Minneconjoux began to shout the
name of White Otter and to sing songs of welcome. The daring exploits of
the young Ogalala war chief had made him famous throughout the great
Dacotah nation, and the Minneconjoux were prepared to honor him with
the courtesies due a great chief. When he reached the edge of the
village he was met by a delegation of noted warriors who led him through
the camp, so that all the people might have a chance to welcome him.

"See, here is White Otter!" cried the Minneconjoux. "It is White Otter,
the great chief of the Ogalalas. It is White Otter, the great war
leader. See, White Otter, our lodges are open. We have cooked much meat.
You must come to our lodges, and eat with us."

Men, women and children followed behind his pony, as his escort led him
toward the lodge of the famous chief, Curly Horse. The Minneconjoux war
chief was waiting to receive him. Beside him stood Rain Crow, the noted
Minneconjoux medicine man, who was the father of Sun Bird and Little
Raven. The most renowned men of the tribe composed the company which
Curly Horse had summoned to greet the Ogalala. They were dressed in
their choicest possessions and they made a splendid appearance. Each of
them wore the coveted war bonnet of eagle plumes, and carried his
coupstick with a record of his achievements on the war trail. It was a
notable gathering, and White Otter thrilled with pride as he looked upon
those splendid men of the great Dacotah nation.

Curly Horse, the chief, was particularly imposing. He was a middle-aged
man, tall, and of powerful physique, with stern features, and steady,
penetrating eyes. His voice was deep and commanding, and he carried
himself with the pride and dignity appropriate to his rank. He wore a
great headdress of eagle feathers which extended to the ground. Each
feather was tipped with a small tuft of hair taken from the scalps of
his foes. His buckskin shirt was decorated with weasel tails, and mystic
symbols traced with colored porcupine quills. His buckskin breeches were
deeply fringed, and ornamented with porcupine quills and elk teeth. A
breastplate composed of the leg bones of deer covered his breast. About
his neck was a necklace of bear claws. His moccasins were of buffalo
hide, beautifully decorated with porcupine quills and colored grass.
Over his arm he carried a magnificent robe of the grizzly bear.

"White Otter, you have come to my lodge--it is good," said Curly Horse.
"These great warriors have come here to meet you. Many moons have passed
since you came here before. My people have talked about you. They wanted
you to come back. Now I will tell you that we feel good because you have
come here."

"I have listened to the words of the great chief, Curly Horse," replied
White Otter. "They make me feel good. I will keep them in my heart. The
Minneconjoux are my brothers. When my brothers call, I come. My brother
Sun Bird called me. I am here. I am going with my brothers to fight the
Blackfeet. We will bring back many ponies."

As White Otter ceased speaking Curly Horse glanced at Rain Crow and the
famous medicine man stepped forward to greet the Ogalala.

Rain Crow appeared older and less robust than his chief, but he, too,
was of striking appearance. His face was seamed and scarred, and his
hair was streaked with gray. His eyes, however, flashed with the fire of
youth. He wore a large wolfskin cap decorated with a great pair of
buffalo horns. His face was painted with white clay. His hair was
divided into two braids bound with otter skin. His buckskin shirt and
breeches were decorated with mysterious medicine symbols. About his neck
was a necklace of sacred charms or tokens, each believed to possess some
strange power which would aid him in overcoming the Evil Spirits, and
preserve him from the attacks of his foes. In his right hand he carried
the sacred medicine pipe. Over his left arm was a handsome robe of
wolfskins.

"White Otter, Curly Horse has spoken," said Rain Crow. "Now I will give
you some words. I feel good when I see you here. You are a young man,
but you are a great chief. I believe you will do something big when you
meet the boastful Blackfeet. White Otter, you say that Sun Bird and
Little Raven are your brothers. It is good. I will make you my son. My
son, the lodge of Rain Crow is open for you. I have spoken."

"Rain Crow, you are a great Medicine Person," replied White Otter. "You
have done some big things. I have heard my people talk about you. It is
true that Sun Bird and Little Raven are my brothers. You have called me
your son. It is a great thing. I feel good about it. I will tell my
people about it. It will make them feel big. My father, I will bring you
some ponies from the Blackfeet camp. I have finished."

Many other noted warriors made speeches praising the ability and courage
of the young Ogalala, and welcoming him to the Minneconjoux camp. When
the ceremony was finally concluded Sun Bird escorted White Otter to the
lodge of Rain Crow.

"Now I will tell you how the Blackfeet ran off all those ponies," Sun
Bird said, when they were alone.

"Yes, tell me about it," urged White Otter.

"We were dancing the Buffalo Dance," said Sun Bird. "My father was
singing the Medicine Songs. The people were sitting near the fire. The
fast war ponies were tied near the lodges, but many good hunting ponies
were out on the plain. We left them there because our scouts did not see
any signs of enemies. Only a few boys were watching those ponies. Well,
while the people were dancing and singing we heard a great noise. There
were many shouts. Then we heard many ponies running. Pretty soon a boy
rode into the village. He was shouting, 'The Blackfeet! The Blackfeet!
They have run off the ponies!' Then we jumped upon the war ponies, and
were going out to chase the Blackfeet, but Curly Horse held us back.
'Wait!' shouted Curly Horse. 'Perhaps it is a trick. Perhaps a great war
party is about to rush into the camp. We will watch, and see what comes
of it.' We knew that those were good words, and we waited to guard the
camp. Well, no one came. Then we knew that the Blackfeet had gone away
with the ponies. When it got light one of the boys came back. His pony
fell down and died when he came into the village. He rode a long ways to
get away from the Blackfeet. The other boy did not come back. The
Blackfeet must have carried him away."

"Who is he?" inquired White Otter.

"He is Dancing Rabbit," Sun Bird told him.

"His father was Lame Wolf. He was killed by our enemies, the Crows. His
mother fell into the water, and was carried away by the fierce Water
Monsters. Old Spotted Face is his grandfather. He feels very bad about
this thing."

"I know Spotted Face," said White Otter. "He is a great man. We must try
to help him."

"Perhaps we will find Dancing Rabbit in the Blackfeet camp," replied Sun
Bird.

The day had already ended, and as the evening shadows fell upon the camp
the Minneconjoux began preparations for the great war dance. A large
fire was lighted in the center of the village, and the entire tribe
assembled to honor the men who were going to fight the Blackfeet. The
warriors who had enlisted in the war party marched noisily about the
camp, singing their war songs, and shouting boastful threats against
their foes. As they finally approached the council fire they were
greeted with wild yells of approval from the great company who awaited
them. Then all subsided into respectful silence as Curly Horse and the
principal chiefs of the tribe walked solemnly into the council circle.

After the chief and his escort had taken positions, the warriors lined
up before him and waited for him to address them. He looked upon them
with pride and affection. Most of them were young men in the prime of
their youth, and their bold, flashing eyes and fearless faces proclaimed
their courage. They were led by Sun Bird who had organized the war
party. He called White Otter to stand beside him, and the Minneconjoux
murmured approval of the honor.

"My brothers, I see that you are ready for war," said Curly Horse. "You
are going to fight the Blackfeet. It is good. They are our enemies. They
have carried off many of our ponies. You must bring them back. You must
also bring some good Blackfeet ponies. Perhaps you will find Dancing
Rabbit in the Blackfeet camp. Then you must carry him away. Spotted Face
is waiting for him. I will not tell you how to fight. You are Dacotahs.
It is enough. Now I will ask Rain Crow to give you some words."

Before speaking, Rain Crow drew an ember from the fire and lighted the
sacred medicine pipe. Then he puffed the smoke toward the heavens,
toward the earth, and toward each of the four winds. He kept up a weird,
high-pitched chant, and tossed small handfuls of dried sweet grass into
the flames. It was evident that he was asking success for the war party,
and the Minneconjoux watched him with grave interest. When he had
completed the ceremony, he stood some time staring fixedly at the stars.
Then he addressed the war company.

"My friends, you have seen me smoke the great Medicine Pipe," he said.
"It is good. It will help you. I have asked Wakantunka, the Great
Mystery, to make you strong. I have asked the Good Spirits to help you.
I have asked the Bad Spirits to do you no harm. I believe everything
will be good. I believe you will overcome the Blackfeet. Listen, my
friends, I hear the noise of many ponies running. Yes, yes, those are
Sioux ponies. Yes, I hear some Blackfeet ponies. They are running toward
the Minneconjoux camp. I see these brave young men riding behind them."

His prophecy roused the Minneconjoux. Men, women and children united
their voices in the war cry of the Dacotahs. It rang through the camp,
and echoed off across the plain as a challenge to their foes. Rain Crow
laughed, and shook his clenched hand toward the north.

"Hi, you Blackfeet people, do you hear that noise?" he cried, excitedly.
"Pretty soon you will know what it means. Then you will shake, and cry
like young deer when they hear the wolf cry."

His words again threw the people into a frenzy of excitement. The war
cry again rang out across the plain, and before the sound had died away
the warriors had assembled for the war dance. They formed a large circle
about the fire, and stood awaiting the word from Sun Bird, their leader.
A number of aged men had come forward with the war drums, and taken
places near the dancers. A hush fell upon the vast assemblage, as the
Minneconjoux watched eagerly for the interesting spectacle to begin.

Then Sun Bird raised his voice in the familiar strains of the great war
song, and the dance began. Keeping time with the solemn, rhythmical
throbbing of the war drums, the dancers moved slowly about the fire
chanting the boastful words of the war song, and flourishing their
weapons. They had not circled many times about the fire, however, before
they cast off restraint, and flung themselves into ecstasies of the
dance with wild abandon. The war song was forgotten, as the dancers
began to shout their boasts and threats against the powerful foes in the
north. Each moment added to their excitement, and as the war drums
throbbed in shorter, quicker beats, the dancers quickened their steps to
hold the rhythm. Although each held his place in the circle, they had
abandoned all attempt to dance in unison, and each man was interpreting
the spirit of the dance to suit himself. All, however, kept time to the
beats of the war drums, and the droning chants of the aged musicians. As
quick and sinewy as mountain cats, the young warriors pranced about the
fire in a frenzy of enthusiasm. Each tried to surpass his fellows in the
mad antics of the dance, and their maneuvers brought yells of approval
from the fascinated onlookers. At one moment the dancers would stoop
near the ground, and dance forward with short, mincing steps, shading
their eyes with their hands, as if searching for the trail of their
foes. Then they would suddenly spring upright and announce their success
with a piercing whoop. A moment afterward they would leap forward with
war club raised to deliver the fatal stroke. Then they would begin a
wild dance about the fallen foe. Some of the older warriors carried
their coupsticks with the trophies won on former war expeditions. As
they danced they shook these priceless possessions before the envious
eyes of their tribesmen. Sometimes one of those dancers would drive his
coupstick in the ground while he and several companions danced wildly
about it, rushing up to touch it and reciting some great achievement as
they did so. Then all would suddenly stand transfixed in their places
while they raised their faces toward the stars, and united their voices
in the piercing Dacotah war cry.

The spectacle was weird and fascinating. The grotesque contortions of
the dancers in the lurid glare of the fire, the fierce expression on
their faces, the solemn throbbing of the war drums, the picturesque
assemblage of spectators, the dim, ghostly outlines of the lodges in the
shadows, the gaunt, wolf-like dogs skulking along the edge of the camp,
made a striking impression on the memory.

White Otter, as a famous war chief of the Ogalalas, was entitled to
stand with Curly Horse and the prominent men of the tribe. He declined
the honor, however, and took his place in the circle of dancers. The
Minneconjoux watched him with approving eyes as he threw himself into
the spirit of the dance. When the ceremony was finally brought to an end
toward daylight, Curly Horse called the Ogalala to his lodge.

"White Otter, you are a great warrior," said Curly Horse. "A great
warrior must have a good horse. The Pawnees have killed your war pony.
It is true that you have taken a good pony from those boastful people.
Well, you are a Dacotah, and you must ride a Dacotah pony. I am going to
give you one of my fastest ponies to ride to the Blackfeet camp. I have
spoken."

"Curly Horse, you have done a big thing," White Otter replied,
gratefully. "You are a great chief, and I know that you have the fastest
ponies. Yes, I will ride your pony to the Blackfeet camp."

"It is good," declared Curly Horse.

When White Otter told Sun Bird of the gift which he had received from
Curly Horse, Sun Bird beamed with pleasure. He believed that there were
few, if any, ponies in the entire Dacotah nation which possessed the
speed and endurance of those owned by the great Minneconjoux chief.

"Perhaps when you ride that horse you will leave me far behind," Sun
Bird said, banteringly.

"Well, my brother, if I get to the Blackfeet camp ahead of you I will
leave some Blackfeet for you to kill," laughed White Otter.




CHAPTER IV

AWAY INTO THE NORTH


As White Otter and Sun Bird came from the lodge at dawn they found a boy
waiting with a fiery little piebald pony.

"Curly Horse has sent you this pony," said the lad, as he passed the
lariat to White Otter.

"Tell the great chief Curly Horse that White Otter feels good about this
thing," said the Ogalala.

"I know that pony," Sun Bird told him. "It is very fast, but it is very
wild. You must watch out for it."

"I will ride it," White Otter assured him.

He was no sooner upon its back, however, than the hot-tempered little
beast began to rear and plunge in a manner that would have proved
disastrous to a less expert rider. White Otter, however, refused to be
thrown, and Sun Bird whooped with boyish glee as he capered wildly about
the rearing pony and shouted encouragement to his friend. His shouts
soon brought an appreciative audience from the lodges, and White Otter
realized that his reputation as a horseman was at stake. He set his
sinewy thighs more closely behind the shoulders of the plunging piebald,
and pulled hard on the lariat which was twisted about the animal's lower
jaw. The Minneconjoux soon saw that he was an expert, and they offered
neither criticism nor advice. They watched with flashing eyes as horse
and rider fought for supremacy. Then the pony suddenly whirled about and
dashed among them, and they scattered like a covey of frightened quail
to avoid the flying hoofs. The piebald bucked its way through the center
of the camp, with a great company of men and boys racing along behind it
and yelling at the top of their voices. Some women were broiling meat
near the end of the village, and as they heard the wild commotion, and
saw the pony racing directly toward them, they fled to the lodges in a
panic, crying out that the Blackfeet had invaded the camp.

In the meantime the piebald had collided with a number of other
high-spirited ponies which were tied before the lodges of their owners,
and several of the animals broke loose and imitated the mad antics of
the piebald. In a few moments the entire camp was in an uproar. The
barking of the dogs, the shouts of the men, the screams of the women,
and the frightened cries of the children mingled in one great din which
turned the village into bedlam.

"It is bad," cried Curly Horse, as he watched the disorder from the
entrance to his lodge. "Some Evil Spirit must have gone into that
horse."

The piebald, however, had finally exhausted itself. It stood upon
trembling legs at the edge of the camp, with its head lowered in defeat.
White Otter reached over, and gently stroked the sweaty neck. Then he
raised its head and spoke sharply, and the piebald gave obedience to its
master. He rode directly to the lodge of Curly Horse.

"That is a bad horse," said Curly Horse. "I will give you another pony."

"No, no!" cried White Otter. "I will keep this pony. It is fast, and
strong. It will make a great war pony."

"Well, I see that you can ride it, so I will say no more about it,"
replied Curly Horse.

The wild escapade of the little piebald had aroused the camp, and as the
members of the war party finally rounded up the loose ponies, and
assembled in the center of the village, the entire tribe gathered to
witness the departure. When the gallant company was ready to leave,
Curly Horse came forward to address them.

"My brothers, you are about to ride away to the great Blackfeet camp,"
he said. "Before you lies a long and dangerous trail. We have many
enemies in that country. The Blackfeet are the strongest. They are very
sly. You must be as brave as great Matohota, the bear, and as cunning as
Tokala, the little gray fox. I see many brave warriors among you. I see
Sun Bird, your leader. He is a great warrior. I see White Otter, the
great Ogalala chief. I see Little Raven. He is very young, but he has
done big things. I see Short Bear. He is very brave. I see Feather Dog.
He is a great scout. I see Lean Wolf and Sitting Eagle. They have been
on many war trails. I see many more brave warriors. It is a great war
party. I believe you will do what you are setting out to do. I believe
you will bring back many ponies. I will ask Wakantunka, the Great
Mystery, to help you. I will ask our brother, Huya, the great war bird,
to lead you to the Blackfeet camp. Go, my brothers, Curly Horse has
spoken."

"Curly Horse, you have given us big words," replied Sun Bird. "We will
keep them in our hearts. We will remember that we are Dacotahs. It is
enough. We will go."

A few moments afterward the war party rode from the village. Many of the
older warriors who were remaining behind to guard the camp accompanied
the war party some distance across the plain. The old men, the boys, and
the women and children gathered at the edge of the camp, singing the war
songs, and calling upon Wakantunka to protect their warriors from the
fierce and warlike Blackfeet.

Sun Bird asked White Otter to ride with him at the head of the company.
The youthful Minneconjoux war leader fully realized his responsibility,
and he was glad to have the aid and counsel of the famous young war
chief whom he had asked to accompany him.

The war party was not a large one. It contained less than a third of the
fighting men of the tribe. The Minneconjoux feared to send a larger
force from the village, for they knew that their old enemies, the Crows,
as well as several scouting parties of Blackfeet, had recently been seen
within a day's travel of the Minneconjoux camp. They determined,
therefore, to send a small force of picked warriors against the
Blackfeet in the hope of recovering the stolen ponies, and learning the
fate of the young Minneconjoux who had been carried away. The company
chosen for the perilous undertaking was composed mostly of young
warriors famous for their courage and fighting ability, and a few older
veterans, like Lean Wolf and Sitting Eagle, whose mature judgment would
check the reckless impetuosity of their younger companions.

"Well, my brother, how do you feel about this thing?" Sun Bird suddenly
asked White Otter, as they cantered along in advance of the war party.

"The Blackfeet are very strong," White Otter replied, thoughtfully.
"Wolf Robe, my grandfather, has told me about them. I have never fought
those people. Wolf Robe says that they are braver than the Pawnees. Do
you know about them?"

"Yes, I have fought against them many times," Sun Bird told him. "They
are the enemies of my people. They are brave. Many Buffaloes is their
chief. He is a great warrior. He rides a mysterious war pony. It is as
swift as the wind, and as black as the night. Its eyes shine like the
little lights up there in the High Place. My people believe it must be a
Medicine Pony. Curly Horse would give many good presents for that pony."

At that moment their talk was interrupted by the appearance of a golden
eagle, the war bird of the Dacotahs, which was circling slowly some
distance toward the north. The superstitious Minneconjoux immediately
accepted it as a good omen, as they recalled the words of Curly Horse,
their chief.

"See, there is Huya, the great war bird," they cried. "Curly Horse has
sent him to lead us to the Blackfeet camp. Come, Huya, our brother, look
about you, and show us where our enemies are hiding."

The eagle, however, soon disappeared into the clouds, and the
Minneconjoux cried, "Huya has gone up there to look around. He is
looking for the Blackfeet. When he sees them he will fly over them, and
show us where they are."

As they moved farther from the camp Sun Bird began to take precautions
against the possibility of encountering foes. Two scouts were detailed
on either flank of the war party, and other riders dropped back to guard
the rear. Sun Bird, White Otter and Little Raven rode some distance in
front. Thus the courageous band of Dacotahs made their way across the
great plain that extended for unknown leagues into the northward, the
stronghold of the mighty Blackfeet nation.

The day was two thirds gone when White Otter suddenly discovered a
horseman on the summit of a low ridge far away toward the west. He
immediately stopped and showed him to Sun Bird and Little Raven.
Apparently aware that he had been seen, the distant rider began to ride
rapidly in a circle. It was the signal for danger. Sun Bird appeared
alarmed.

"It is one of our scouts," he said, uneasily. "Running Dog and Lean Wolf
went that way. That man is far away, but I believe he is Lean Wolf. He
has seen something bad. Come, Little Raven, go and find out about it."

As Little Raven raced away to meet the scout, the main company of riders
came up. They, too, had discovered the rider on the ridge, and many of
them were eager to go over there in the hope of finding foes.

"No, that would be foolish," Sun Bird said, firmly. "We will wait here
until Little Raven comes back and tells us about it. That scout has not
called us. He is telling us that he has seen something. See, Little
Raven is a long ways off. Pretty soon we will know about this thing. We
must wait."

"It is the only thing to do," agreed the famous warrior, Sitting Eagle.

They watched anxiously as the scout turned his pony down the ridge, and
rode to meet Little Raven. The distance made positive identification
difficult, but most of them agreed that it was Lean Wolf. When the two
riders finally met, the members of the war party watched them with
breathless interest. They also watched the plain in all directions for
the sudden appearance of foes. Then the warriors who had been loitering
in the rear overtook them.

"What has happened?" they inquired anxiously. "Who is over there?"

"Lean Wolf has made the danger signal," explained their comrades.
"Little Raven has gone over to find out about it. Did you see anything?"

"We saw some wolves," replied the scouts.

"Perhaps they were Pawnees," suggested Sun Bird.

"No, we saw them running on the plain, and they were wolves," declared
High Hawk, one of the warriors who had composed the rear guard.

"See, Little Raven is coming back," White Otter told Sun Bird. "He is
riding fast. He has something to tell us."

"Lean Wolf has gone back to the ridge," said Sun Bird.

They waited impatiently as Little Raven rode toward them at top speed.
In the meantime the other rider was cantering toward the ridge. When he
reached it he rode up the low slope and disappeared over the summit.

"Lean Wolf has gone to watch something," declared his tribesmen.

When Little Raven finally reached them they listened with eager
attention while he told Sun Bird what he had learned.

"That man is Lean Wolf," said Little Raven. "He found fresh pony tracks
over beyond that ridge. They were going the way we are going. There were
many ponies. They were riding ponies. There were no marks of lodge
poles. Lean Wolf says it must be a war party. He does not know who they
are. Running Dog is following the trail. Lean Wolf says that we must
watch sharp when night comes. He says that we must stop pretty soon at
the water place. Then he will know where to find us. Perhaps he will
come when it gets dark. Perhaps he will go to find the camp of those
people. My brothers, I have brought you the words of Lean Wolf."

"It is good," replied Sun Bird. "My friends, you have heard the words of
our brother, Lean Wolf. I believe that some of our enemies are over
there behind that ridge. Lean Wolf says there are many pony tracks.
There must be many riders. Perhaps it is a big war party. We must watch
sharp. We will go ahead until we come to the water place. Then we will
stop. Perhaps Lean Wolf will come there after it gets dark."

As they were about to resume their way they saw one of the scouts from
the east riding toward them. As he came nearer they recognized him as
Feather Dog.

"Why have you stopped?" Feather Dog inquired, curiously.

"Lean Wolf found many pony tracks over there behind that ridge," they
told him.

"Perhaps those are the ponies which the Blackfeet took away," said
Feather Dog.

"No, the tracks are fresh," Sun Bird explained.

"Then we must watch out," declared the famous scout.

"Did you see anything over there?" inquired the Minneconjoux.

"We saw some buffaloes, but they were far away," replied Feather Dog.

After he had learned where his comrades intended to stop for the night,
he immediately left them, and rode away to join his companion, a young
warrior named Proud Hawk. At the same time the war party resumed their
way toward the north. They were enthusiastic over the possibility of an
early encounter with their foes, and Sun Bird had considerable
difficulty in restraining some of the younger warriors who were eager to
ride after the unknown horsemen. His rank as war leader, however, gave
him authority to command. They accepted his orders, therefore, and
followed him across the plain, chanting their war songs, and boasting of
the deeds which they pledged themselves to perform.

The evening shadows were already falling when the Sioux finally came in
sight of the appointed camp site. It was a small water hole in the midst
of a straggling growth of stunted trees. However, as it offered good
pasturage for the ponies, it was a favorite stopping place. It marked
the northern boundary of the Minneconjoux hunting grounds, and few of
even the most venturesome hunters cared to risk going farther into the
north unless accompanied by a strong force of their tribesmen. It was
dangerous ground, as both the Blackfeet and the Crows were constantly
roaming about those boundless northern plains.

"Well, my friends, we will stop here until the next sun comes up," said
Sun Bird, as he dismounted from his pony.




CHAPTER V

SIOUX SCOUTS


Alert to their peril, the Sioux took every precaution against an attack.
As the twilight slowly faded, and the night shadows settled upon the
plain, the ponies were picketed in a circle about the camp site, and
details of warriors were appointed to take turns in watching through the
night. There was no fire, and the evening meal consisted of the usual
war rations of dried buffalo meat and berries.

The warriors who had been scouting behind the war party arrived at the
camp site before dark, but the scouts who had ridden along the flanks
failed to appear. The absence of Feather Dog and Proud Hawk, who had
been scouting toward the east, caused considerable comment. The Sioux
knew that some time might pass before Lean Wolf and Running Dog gained
the desired information about the mysterious horsemen to the westward,
but they were keenly curious to know what had detained Feather Dog and
his companion.

"Perhaps something bad has happened to them," suggested a young warrior
named Many Feathers.

"No, I do not believe it," Sun Bird declared, confidently. "Feather Dog
is a great scout. He has been on many war trails. It is hard to catch an
old wolf. Come, White Otter, you are a great war leader. Tell us how you
feel about it."

"My brothers, what Sun Bird says is true," declared White Otter,
"Feather Dog is a great scout. Perhaps he is trying to find out about
something. I believe he will come here."

While they were talking the familiar bark of the little gray fox sounded
from the eastward. It was speedily answered, and a few moments afterward
Feather Dog and Proud Hawk rode to the camp site.

"Well, my brother, what did you find?" Sun Bird asked Feather Dog.

"We saw three scouts," replied Feather Dog. "They were far away and they
did not see us. We hid behind a hill, and watched them a long time. Then
we followed them. When it got dark we could not find them. They did not
make a fire. I believe they were looking for enemies."

"Do you know who they are?" Sun Bird inquired, eagerly.

"No, we could not get close enough to find out about it," Feather Dog
told him.

"Which way were they going?" asked Sun Bird.

"They were going the same way we are going, but they were far away
toward the place where the sun comes up," replied the scout.

"My brothers, you have heard the words of Feather Dog," said Sun Bird.
"Our enemies are on two sides of us. We must be very cautious. We will
wait here until it gets light. Perhaps Lean Wolf will come and tell us
something."

In the meantime the wily Sioux prepared themselves against the
possibility of a sudden attack. The camp was surrounded by sharp-eared
scouts who stationed themselves some distance out on the plain to listen
for the approach of foes. The ponies were picketed inside the circle of
warriors, who lay upon the plain with their weapons beside them.

Sun Bird and White Otter, however, remained awake. The young
Minneconjoux war leader was anxious to consult his friend concerning the
perilous advance across the Blackfeet hunting grounds. The young
warriors moved beyond earshot of their companions, therefore, and seated
themselves to talk.

"White Otter, I believe we are in danger," said Sun Bird.

"It is true," White Otter replied, soberly. "There are many enemies in
this country. I believe we will have some big fights before we get to
the Blackfeet camp."

Sun Bird was about to reply when they were startled by a strange
rumbling noise toward the north. They listened a moment in anxious
suspense, and then they leaped to their feet in alarm. It sounded like
the hoofbeats of many ponies bearing down upon the camp site.

"Call our people! Call our people!" cried Sun Bird, as he rushed to
arouse the sleeping Minneconjoux.

At that moment they heard the guards, who had been stationed on the
plain, racing toward the camp. The picketed ponies were plunging and
snorting, and the alarmed Minneconjoux were frantically untying the
picket ropes.

"The Blackfeet! The Blackfeet!" they shouted, excitedly.

"Tatanka! Tatanka! The buffaloes! The buffaloes!" cried the sentinels
who had been watching on the north side of the camp.

Then the Sioux suddenly realized the truth. A vast herd of stampeded
buffaloes were thundering down upon them. There was not a moment to
spare. Springing upon the frightened ponies, the Sioux rode madly into
the night to escape from the great mass of panic-stricken beasts behind
them. The buffaloes were sweeping across the plain with the irresistible
force of an avalanche, and the horsemen knew that only the speed of
their ponies could save them. They kept close together, and rode at a
breakneck pace. A false step meant destruction for horse and rider, and
the Sioux made little attempt to guide the agile little beasts beneath
them.

Sun Bird and White Otter soon found themselves beside one another at the
head of the company. The two ponies were running evenly, and it was
apparent that neither of them had reached the limit of its speed.
Nevertheless, they were well in advance of all the other ponies, and
appeared to be increasing their lead with each stride.

"That wild horse can run," laughed Sun Bird as his blood tingled with
the excitement of the race. "Come, we will see what that pony can do."

"Hi!" shouted White Otter, as Sun Bird suddenly took the lead.

He had carefully estimated the ability of the little roan which Sun Bird
rode, and felt sure that it was a worthy competitor for the piebald.
Now, as Sun Bird applied his rawhide quirt, the roan began to show its
speed. The piebald, however, quickly accepted the challenge, and
although White Otter made no effort to force it the fiery little beast
was soon at the shoulder of the roan. Then they raced madly through the
darkness at a speed which few if any of the ponies in the great Dacotah
nation could equal. Sun Bird was leaning forward and vigorously applying
his whip. White Otter, however, was still allowing the piebald to make
its own pace. Inch by inch it crept steadily forward until the roan's
lead was cut to a nose length. Then, as he perceived that the roan had
reached the limit of its powers, White Otter pulled heavily against the
lower jaw of the piebald. He knew that a few more strides would take it
into the lead, and regard for the pride of his friend made him unwilling
to claim the victory.

"Listen," he cried, suddenly. "Our people have turned around. Come, we
must follow them."

"No! No! I see what you are trying to do," Sun Bird cried, impatiently.
"Come, let me see that pony run."

Then the Minneconjoux struck the piebald a sharp blow with his quirt,
and the marvelous beast bounded past him and raced away at a speed which
astounded its rider. White Otter could scarcely believe that he was
mounted upon a creature of real flesh and blood, for the piebald was
rushing through the night at a pace which seemed beyond the powers of
anything mortal. Carried away with enthusiasm, the Ogalala applied his
quirt for the first time, and the piebald reached the limit of its
speed. White Otter was forced to crouch close over the pony's neck to
keep his breath. He was dazed by the pace at which he was being carried
across the plain. It seemed as if he were flying through space on the
wings of a tempest.

"It must be a Medicine Horse," he whispered, superstitiously.

When he finally succeeded in pulling the piebald to a canter, he found
that he had completely lost Sun Bird, and the valiant little roan. He
had also raced beyond sound of the buffalo herd. The piebald was
breathing hard, but it showed no signs of exhaustion, and White Otter
believed that its stamina was equal to its speed. Then, as he stopped to
listen, he heard a signal some distance toward the east. He had heard
the Minneconjoux turn in that direction as Sun Bird forced him into the
last desperate sprint. It was evident, therefore, that having gained a
sufficient lead upon the buffaloes, the Minneconjoux were circling back
toward the camp site. He believed that the signal was from Sun Bird. To
reassure him, White Otter replied with the bark of the little gray fox.

"Hi! the buffaloes are coming," he said, as he heard the distant rumble
of their hoof beats.

Realizing that he was directly in their path, White Otter turned his
pony toward the east, and rode off at a brisk canter. The buffalo herd
was a long ways behind him, and he had little fear of being overtaken.
There were other perils, however, which caused him more concern. He had
heard Feather Dog tell of three mysterious riders to the eastward, and
it was possible that they were scouts from a larger company. Therefore,
White Otter determined to advance with caution. He believed that Sun
Bird was close at hand, and his first thought was to find him. It was
not long before he overtook him.

"Ho, my brother, that pony did not come back as fast as he went away,"
laughed Sun Bird.

"It is foolish to run when the race is finished," replied White Otter.

"That is the fastest horse I ever saw," Sun Bird declared,
enthusiastically.

"Do you believe that this pony could catch that great horse of Many
Buffaloes, the Blackfeet chief?" White Otter asked, eagerly.

"No," Sun Bird told him. "There is no Dacotah pony that can catch that
horse."

White Otter was not so sure about it. He could not believe that any
horse had greater speed than the piebald. He kept his opinion to
himself, however, as he did not wish to appear boastful before his
friend.

"Well, we got away from those buffaloes," said Sun Bird. "Now we must go
back to the water place. We will find our friends there."

Feeling sure that they had passed beyond the edge of the great buffalo
herd, they began to circle toward the camp site. They were riding at an
easy canter, when they were suddenly halted by the howling of a prairie
wolf directly ahead of them. Determined to take no chances, they
listened to convince themselves that the call was genuine.

"Yes, it is Mayash," declared Sun Bird.

As White Otter agreed that it really was a wolf which had raised the
cry, they advanced on their way. However, they neither saw nor heard
anything of the skulking gray prowler. It was evident that the wolf had
slunk away at their approach.

Then as they drew near the camp site the little piebald raised its head,
and whinnied softly. The cautious young Sioux again stopped to
investigate. They knew that the piebald had caught the scent of other
ponies. While they waited, listening for a clew, the familiar Dacotah
signal sounded within bow range of them.

"It is good," said Sun Bird. "We have found our people."

A few moments later they met the scout who had challenged them. He was
Hollow Bear, a famous Minneconjoux hunter.

"We have been watching for you," Hollow Bear told them. "There is much
buffalo meat at the water place. Some of the buffaloes ran against the
trees. Some fell into the water hole. Some were dead. Some we killed.
There must have been many buffaloes in that herd. The ground is all
broken up."

"Has Lean Wolf come here?" Sun Bird inquired, eagerly.

"No," replied Hollow Bear.

They left the scout, and rode on toward the camp site. They found the
members of the war party lying some distance out on the plain, as the
camp site was littered with the bodies of dead buffaloes. The Sioux said
that they had dragged several of the great beasts from the pool.

"It is good that we got away," said Sun Bird. "Those buffaloes would
have pounded us into the ground."

"Well, there is good meat over there but we cannot use it," complained
Sitting Eagle. "There are many robes, but there is little hair upon
them."

The Minneconjoux said that they had ridden far enough to get a safe
distance in front of the herd, and then they had turned eastward and
circled back to the camp site. They seemed rather curious to know why
Sun Bird and White Otter had been so long returning. Those crafty young
warriors, however, made no explanation. White Otter had no desire to
proclaim the superiority of his pony, and Sun Bird was quite content to
keep silent concerning the defeat of his famous little roan.

Dawn was breaking when Running Dog, the companion of Lean Wolf rode in
from the west. The war party crowded eagerly about him, asking for news
of the horsemen whom he and Lean Wolf had followed.

"We followed those people a long ways," Running Dog told them. "When it
got dark we saw their fire. We went pretty close. Then we got down from
our ponies. We turned their heads out of the wind so they would not
call. I held the ponies. Lean Wolf crawled up near the fire. He was
away a long time. Then he came back, and told me about those people.
They are Crows. They are carrying meat. It is a great hunting party.
They are going straight ahead. Lean Wolf says that you must watch sharp.
Perhaps the Crows will send out scouts. Perhaps they will see you. Then
there will be a fight. Lean Wolf says to go straight ahead. We will keep
following the Crows until we find out where they are going. Then we will
come and tell you about it. I cannot tell you any more."

"It is good," replied Sun Bird. "Tell Lean Wolf that we will do as he
tells us to do. We will keep a sharp watch for our enemies."




CHAPTER VI

THE LONE RIDER


After Running Dog had left them, Sun Bird made preparations to resume
their advance toward the distant Blackfeet camp. Profiting by the
warning which the scouts had brought, the cautious young war leader
determined to make every provision for the safety of the war party. In
addition to the two expert scouts riding along each flank, Sun Bird
appointed a strong rear guard under command of Sitting Eagle. Then, as a
further precaution against blundering into a trap, he asked White Otter
and Little Raven to accompany him on a reconnaissance far in advance of
the war party.

"My brothers, you must wait here until we are far ahead," he told the
Minneconjoux, as he rode away.

Once beyond sight of their comrades, the three young scouts realized
that their mission was a perilous one. They had little doubt that foes
were on both sides of them, and it was possible that the Sioux war
party had already been discovered. In that event there was great
probability that crafty foes might circle around behind them, and
separate them from their companions.

"We must watch sharp," cautioned Sun Bird.

He hoped to lead the war party within an easy day's travel of the
Blackfeet camp. Then he planned to go into hiding and send scouts under
cover of the darkness to locate the Blackfeet ponies and reconnoiter
about the village. In the meantime Sun Bird realized the constant peril
of colliding with his enemies. However, he relied upon the skill and
daring of his scouts to give him timely warning of an approaching war
party. As they were riding cautiously across the plain they again saw
the war eagle circling high up toward the eastward. They stopped and
watched it with great interest.

"See! our brother, Huya, has come down out of the clouds," said Sun
Bird. "I believe he is flying around over there to show us where our
enemies are hiding."

Soon afterward they saw a solitary horseman ride over a distant rise of
the plain. He quickly discovered them, and immediately stopped his pony.
For some moments he continued to watch them. Then he turned about and
galloped from view. The Sioux also had stopped at sight of the
stranger, and now that he had disappeared Sun Bird was at a loss to
determine just what to do. The rider had been too far away to be
identified, but his actions made it plain that he was neither Feather
Dog nor Proud Hawk.

"Perhaps he is one of the scouts that Feather Dog told about," suggested
Little Raven.

"Yes, that may be true," said Sun Bird. "White Otter, what do you make
of it?"

"I do not know what to make of it," acknowledged White Otter. "That man
saw us. If he is a scout he will go to tell his people about us. It is
bad. We must watch sharp."

"We are scouts," said Sun Bird. "We must tell our brothers about this
thing."

"It is the best thing to do," agreed White Otter.

"I will go back, and tell them about it," Little Raven volunteered.

As the others agreed, he immediately turned his pony, and rode back to
warn the war party. The main company of Minneconjoux had not come in
sight, and Sun Bird and White Otter felt somewhat anxious for the safety
of the youthful scout who had gone to meet his tribesmen. If a strong
force of foes were loitering in the vicinity, it would be easy for them
to intercept the solitary Minneconjoux. In spite of his youthfulness,
however, Little Raven was an experienced warrior, and Sun Bird felt
certain that he was competent to look after himself in an emergency.

"Sun Bird, I believe that warrior is watching over the top of that
hill," White Otter declared, suspiciously.

"How do you know that?" Sun Bird inquired, anxiously.

"I do not know it, but I believe I saw him peeping over the top of that
hill," replied White Otter.

They looked anxiously toward the grassy knoll, and strained their eyes
to discover the skulking foe. The thought that he was watching made them
uneasy, and they were eager to learn if their suspicions were true. It
was some moments before White Otter finally became convinced.

"Yes, I see him," he declared, positively. "He is peeping over the top
of that hill. I see his head over there near that little bush. Watch
sharp."

"Yes, yes, I see his head," Sun Bird declared, a moment later.

Convinced that the mysterious horseman really was watching them, they
believed that he was waiting to learn if they were followed by a larger
company. They had little doubt that he was a scout reconnoitering in
advance of a force of their foes.

"It is bad," White Otter said, uneasily. "That man saw Little Raven ride
away. He will know that some one is following behind us. He will watch
until our friends come. Then he will tell his people about it."

"Yes, I see that it is bad," said Sun Bird. "Perhaps if we ride over
there we can chase him away."

"Come," White Otter proposed, recklessly.

As they cantered briskly toward the knoll, the scout withdrew from
sight. They felt quite sure that he had merely slipped farther down the
opposite side of the ridge, and was still peering cautiously over the
top. As they felt convinced that the horseman was alone, they had little
fear of running into an ambush. When they got within arrow range,
however, they approached with great care. As a precaution against
attack, they separated and rode forward several arrow flights apart.
Once at the foot of the slope they rushed their ponies to the top, and
prepared to attack whoever confronted them. The scout, however, was
nowhere in sight. They searched the plain in vain; the mysterious
stranger had entirely disappeared. For a moment or so they were
completely baffled. Then White Otter suddenly smiled, and nodded
understandingly.

"I know about it," he told Sun Bird.

"Tell me," Sun Bird asked, eagerly.

"That scout is very sharp," declared White Otter. "He has thrown his
pony, and he is hiding over there in that high grass."

"Yes, I believe that is where he is hiding," agreed Sun Bird.

The spot where they believed the scout had concealed himself was many
arrow flights away, and they knew it would be difficult to discover him
at that distance. They felt almost certain, however, that he was still
watching them from his new hiding place. The thought disturbed them. His
persistence made them suspicious. They wondered if he were trying to
fool them with some wily bit of stratagem.

"Well, we will ride over there and chase him out," proposed Sun Bird.

They had not gone an arrow flight, when a pony suddenly rose to its feet
in the long grass. An instant later the rider sprang upon its back and
raced away toward the south. He was too far in the lead to be easily
overtaken, and besides, the Sioux realized that it would be perilous to
follow him. They watched, therefore, while he sped across the plain.

"We have chased him away--it is good," said Sun Bird.

"Perhaps something bad will come of it," White Otter warned him. "If
that man is a Blackfoot, he will tell his people about us. Then it will
be hard to get near the camp."

"Perhaps he is a Crow," Sun Bird suggested, hopefully.

"Lean Wolf has told us that the Crows are over there," White Otter
reminded him, as he pointed toward the west.

"That is true," agreed Sun Bird. "But perhaps they sent scouts over here
to look for the Blackfeet."

White Otter remained silent. The appearance and the actions of the
unknown scout had made him wary. He feared that the Sioux war party was
in imminent danger of being surrounded and attacked by a superior force
of foes. The possibility distressed him. There seemed little chance of
avoiding the peril.

"Sun Bird, I believe the best thing to do is to find our people," White
Otter declared, finally. "Perhaps Lean Wolf and Feather Dog have told
them something."

"Yes, we will go to find our brothers," agreed Sun Bird.




CHAPTER VII

SMOKE SIGNALS


As Sun Bird and White Otter rode cautiously over the ridge they saw the
Minneconjoux war party moving slowly across the plain. As soon as the
Minneconjoux discovered the two horsemen they immediately stopped to
watch them.

"Our brothers are as cautious as Hitunkasan, the weasel," laughed Sun
Bird. "Well, we will tell them who we are."

He raised his arms and clasped his hands together above his head. It was
the sign for friends. Then the two scouts rode rapidly toward the war
party. The Minneconjoux soon recognized them, and came across the plain.
Little Raven raced on in advance of his friends.

"Well, my brothers, I see that you have come back," he said, as he rode
up to them. "It is good. What became of that scout?"

"He has gone away," White Otter told him.

"Did you kill him?" Little Raven inquired, eagerly.

"No," replied Sun Bird. "When we rode after him he ran away."

"Well, when he saw that you were Dacotahs he was frightened," Little
Raven said, boastfully.

While they were talking the war party came up to them. Sun Bird found
Lean Wolf in command. He said that he had followed the Crows until he
felt sure that they were going to their village. Then he left Running
Dog to scout along the western flank of the war party, and returned to
his companions.

"Do you believe those people know about us?" Sun Bird asked, anxiously.

"No," Lean Wolf assured him. "They are far away. The scouts did not go
far from their people. Those Crows have killed plenty of game. They are
afraid the Blackfeet will catch them, and take it away."

"Have you seen Feather Dog?" inquired Sun Bird.

"No," replied Lean Wolf.

Then the Minneconjoux inquired anxiously about the solitary horseman.
They said that Little Raven had told them about him, but they were eager
to know who he was and where he had gone.

"I cannot tell you that," Sun Bird told them. "He was far away, and we
could not find out who he was. When we went after him he ran away.
Perhaps Feather Dog will tell us about him."

"Yes, yes, perhaps Feather Dog will find out about him," the
Minneconjoux told one another, hopefully.

"Well, my brothers, we will keep going ahead until we find a good place
to stop," said Sun Bird. "Then we will wait for Feather Dog and Proud
Hawk, and Running Dog. I believe they will have something to talk
about."

The day was little more than half gone, however, when they saw three
riders approaching from the east. As the horsemen did not stop when they
discovered the war party, the Sioux believed that two of the riders must
be Feather Dog and Proud Hawk. As they came nearer they recognized them.

"They are bringing a prisoner!" the Minneconjoux cried, excitedly. "It
must be that scout. Hi! now we will see who he is."

Then they were suddenly astonished into silence. The three horsemen had
come sufficiently near so that the Minneconjoux could plainly discern
the dress and features of the third rider. They could scarcely believe
their eyes. They looked many moments before they were convinced. Then
they were thrown into an ecstasy of joy.

"See! See! It is Dancing Rabbit!" they shouted.

The young Minneconjoux who had disappeared when the Blackfeet ran off
the band of Sioux ponies was riding between Feather Dog and Proud Hawk.
He was mounted on a pinto pony, and as Sun Bird and White Otter
recognized it the mystery of the lone horseman was solved.

"That is the pony we saw on the ridge," they told their friends.

As the riders joined the war party, the Minneconjoux crowded eagerly
about their young tribesman to learn the story of his adventures. He was
a tall, sinewy youth of about fifteen winters, and he exhibited the
dignity and reserve of a seasoned warrior.

"Come, Dancing Rabbit, tell us how you come to be here," said Sun Bird.

"My brothers, you are great warriors," replied Dancing Rabbit. "I am a
young man. I cannot talk big. I will tell you that the Blackfeet carried
me away to their village. Well, they treated me very bad. Then I found a
chance to get away. I took this pony. It is fast. I got far ahead and
the Blackfeet did not come up with me. I was going to our village. Then
I saw three riders. I hid behind a ridge and watched them. They were far
away, and I could not make out who they were. I said, 'Perhaps they are
Blackfeet scouts. Perhaps they are Crows.' Then they rode after me and
I ran away. Then I found Feather Dog. That is how I come to be here."

"It is good," Sun Bird told him. "Your words are the words of a
warrior."

Feather Dog then explained how he had chanced to encounter the young
Minneconjoux.

"I was watching for our enemies," said Feather Dog. "Then I saw some one
riding toward me. He was a long ways off, but he was coming fast. I rode
my pony down into a gully to hide. Then I crawled up the side of the
gully and peeped out. That rider was coming right where I was. I waited
for him. When he got near I was going to jump up and shoot my arrows at
him. Well, when I jumped up I saw who he was. Then we rode away and
found Proud Hawk. Then we came here. That is all I know about it."

"Did you see any Blackfeet?" Sun Bird asked him.

"Yes, we saw four Blackfeet scouts," said Feather Dog. "Two of them were
the same riders we saw before. This time they were close, and we could
see them. Then we saw that they were Blackfeet. They were going straight
ahead. I believe they are going to the Blackfeet village. I do not
believe they know about us."

"It is good," declared the Minneconjoux.

"Yes, it is good," Sun Bird told them. "But we must watch out. Perhaps
we will run into those scouts. The Blackfeet are sharp. If they see us
it will be hard to get near the camp."

"I will tell you something about that," Dancing Rabbit said, suddenly.
"The Blackfeet have moved their lodges. Yes, they have gone away from
the place where they were. They have gone over there in the shadow of
the big mountains."

The Minneconjoux were astounded at the announcement. They looked
anxiously toward the northwest, where a long range of dim, shadowy peaks
showed against the sky. They had expected to find the Blackfeet camp on
the open plain, a number of days' journey toward the north. It had never
occurred to their minds that the Blackfeet might have decided to change
the location of the village. The words of Dancing Rabbit gave them
several reasons for concern. First, they knew that they had already gone
considerably out of their way. Again, they realized that to reach the
new Blackfeet camp they must go far to the westward, where they would be
in peril from their old enemies the Crows, as well as from the
Blackfeet.

"It is bad," declared Sun Bird.

"It is bad," agreed his companions.

As there seemed to be a difference of opinion as to just which way they
should proceed, Sun Bird immediately called a council. Some of the
Minneconjoux believed it would be safer to continue directly toward the
north until they were about in line with the Blackfeet camp, and then
turn toward the west. Others thought that they should move directly
toward the new camp, and reach the mountains as soon as possible. There
was considerable discussion.

"My brothers, I believe the best thing to do is to turn toward the
mountains," said Sun Bird. "Then if we see our enemies we can hide. If
we go to the mountains we can climb high up, and look for the Blackfeet
camp. It will be hard for the Blackfeet to see us. In the day we will
hide in the timber. When it grows dark we will send scouts to find out
about the ponies. Yes, my friends, I believe it is the best way to get
near the camp."

"My brothers, Sun Bird has given us good words," declared Lean Wolf. "I
believe he has told us the best way to go to the Blackfeet camp. He is a
good war leader. We must listen to his words."

"My friends, what Lean Wolf says is true," said Feather Dog. "I believe
it would be foolish to keep going ahead. I have told you about those
four Blackfeet scouts. I believe they are going to the Blackfeet camp.
Pretty soon they will turn this way. If we keep going straight ahead we
will meet them. We must turn toward the mountains."

"White Otter, how do you feel about this thing?" inquired Sun Bird.

"My brother, I believe you have told the best way to go to the Blackfeet
camp," White Otter replied, quietly. "I believe what Feather Dog says is
true. If we keep going ahead perhaps we will run into those Blackfeet
scouts."

The opinion of the famous young Ogalala seemed to make a deep impression
upon the Minneconjoux. It was only a few moments before those warriors
who had suggested traveling toward the north changed their views, and
agreed that it would be safer to ride toward the west.

"Well, my brothers, I see that we all feel the same about this thing,"
Sun Bird said, when all had agreed. "It is good. Come, we will ride
toward those great mountains."

Having made their decision, they rode boldly toward the west, ready and
eager to meet their foes. It was late in the day, however, before they
saw any evidence of them. Then they discovered a smoke signal some
distance to the northward. Three columns of yellow smoke were ascending
into the sky. The Sioux watched them with considerable uneasiness. They
wondered if the Blackfeet scouts had discovered the war party.

"No, I do not believe it," Feather Dog declared. "That smoke is a long
ways off. Those scouts could not get so far ahead of us. It must be some
one different."

"Perhaps the Blackfeet are calling the scouts to the camp," suggested
Proud Hawk.

"No, the camp is not in that place," Dancing Rabbit told them.

Convinced that the smoke signals did not concern them, the Sioux
continued on their way. Feather Dog said that there was a good camp site
with plenty of grass and water a short distance ahead of them, and as
the day was drawing to a close they determined to stop there for the
night. They had not ridden far, however, before they saw three more
columns of smoke rising a considerable distance to the westward of the
first signals.

"It must be the Blackfeet," declared the Minneconjoux. "It is the danger
signal. They are telling their people about us."

"Perhaps they have found the Crows," suggested Feather Dog.

A few moments later a horseman swept into view, far to the westward. He
was riding at a furious pace, and seemed to be coming directly toward
them. They had little doubt that it was Running Dog, and they watched
him in great suspense.

"Running Dog is coming to tell us about something big," they cried.

As the Minneconjoux scout came nearer, he began to point excitedly
behind him. The Sioux looked anxiously toward the west, expecting to see
a company of their foes racing along on the trail of Running Dog.

"Perhaps the Crows are coming, we must be ready," said Sun Bird.

Roused by the possibility, the hot-tempered Minneconjoux immediately got
ready to fight. Then, as Running Dog finally came within shouting
distance, they began to cry out and question him.

"Are the Crows coming?" they inquired eagerly.

"No! no!" shouted Running Dog.

Then he dashed up to them. As he threw the panting pony upon its
haunches, his companions gathered about him to learn what had sent him
racing across the plain.

"Listen, my brothers, I will tell you about it," said Running Dog. "The
Crows and the Blackfeet are getting ready for a big fight over there
behind that ridge. I was watching them. Then I saw you coming that way.
Then I came over here to tell you to hold back. Do you see that smoke up
there? Well, the Blackfeet are calling the people to fight. You must
watch sharp. I saw many warriors over there behind that ridge."

The words of Running Dog were received in silence. The Minneconjoux
looked gravely into each other's faces. They realized the peril to which
they were exposed, and they waited for the war leaders to speak. All
eyes were turned upon Sun Bird.

"My friends, Running Dog has told you about those warriors over there
behind that ridge," said Sun Bird. "We are in great danger. Something
must be done. We must try to find a place to hide in until it grows
dark. Then perhaps we can get away from here. If we meet our enemies we
must fight them. We are Dacotahs. It is enough."

"My brother, I will tell you about a place to hide in," said Dancing
Rabbit. "I found it when I was running away from the Blackfeet. It is a
place where water used to run. Now it is dry. It is deep. It goes a long
way across the plain. We can ride into it, and no one will see us."

"Where is this place?" Sun Bird asked anxiously.

"Over there," said Dancing Rabbit, pointing toward the north.

"Come, my brothers, we will go to this place, and hide until it grows
dark," proposed Sun Bird. "I will ask three scouts to go over to that
ridge to watch those warriors. I will ask White Otter to be the leader."

"I will go," White Otter volunteered, eagerly.

Most of the war party desired to accompany the Ogalala on his perilous
reconnaissance. Having been appointed as leader, however, White Otter
was privileged to choose his companions.

"I will ask Lean Wolf and Little Raven to go with me," said White Otter.

"I will go with you," replied Lean Wolf.

"I will go," Little Raven said, eagerly, as his eyes flashed with boyish
enthusiasm.




CHAPTER VIII

A CLOSE CALL


A few moments afterward White Otter and his companions rode away on
their hazardous mission. Running Dog had told them that the rival war
parties were a considerable distance beyond the ridge, and the Sioux
hoped to come in sight of them without being discovered. White Otter
turned directly toward the south, as he believed that there was less
chance of encountering hostile scouts in that direction. He rode a
considerable distance before he finally turned toward the west, and
approached the ridge.

"The Crows have passed this place--the Blackfeet came the other
way--they will not pass the Crows--the Crows will not come back
here--this is a good place--we will stay here and watch," White Otter
told his companions.

"It is good," agreed Lean Wolf, the famous Minneconjoux scout.

They approached the ridge with great caution. The sun had already set,
but they knew the long summer twilight would give them ample time to
discover their foes. As they finally came within bow range of the grassy
slope, they stopped and spent many moments watching for signs of lurking
foes. Then they suddenly heard the sounds of battle.

"The Crows and the Blackfeet are fighting--it is good," White Otter
declared, grimly.

Then, while Little Raven remained with the ponies, White Otter and Lean
Wolf crawled slowly up the ridge. When they reached the top they parted
the long grass and looked anxiously across the plain. The Crows and the
Blackfeet were preparing to fight. They were a long distance from the
ridge, however, and the Sioux felt in little danger. They watched with
keen interest while their foes began the preliminaries of battle. The
experienced Sioux scouts read the situation at a glance. It was evident
that the Crows had been overtaken and brought to a stand by the
Blackfeet war party. The Crows had dismounted and taken shelter behind
their ponies, and the Blackfeet were riding about them in a great
circle, but keeping safely beyond bow range. There was much yelling and
singing of war songs, but no real attempt at actual fighting.

"The Blackfeet are cautious," White Otter said, scornfully. "They are
making a great noise, but I do not see them killing any Crows. If they
rushed in there and frightened those ponies the Crows would have a hard
time of it."

"It is true," agreed Lean Wolf.

The Crows, however, appeared to be considerably stronger in numbers, and
it was apparent that the Blackfeet were cautious about beginning the
attack. The Sioux were surprised at the small size of the Blackfeet war
party. They had expected to see a much larger force of those savage foes
engaged against the Crows.

"I do not see many Blackfeet--it is bad," said White Otter. "They have
left many warriors to guard the camp."

When Running Dog brought word of the impending battle, the Sioux had
hoped that the Blackfeet would send a sufficient force against the Crows
to weaken the defense of the Blackfeet camp considerably. White Otter
realized, however, that the hope was false. It was evident that the
crafty Blackfeet had left most of their fighting men at the village.

"Perhaps they are waiting for our people to come for those ponies," said
Lean Wolf.

"Yes, I believe it is true," agreed White Otter.

He had barely ceased speaking when the Blackfeet suddenly began their
attack. Whooping fiercely, they rushed upon their foes and made
desperate attempts to frighten and stampede the Crow ponies. The Crows,
however, had prepared for just such a maneuver, and the alarmed ponies
were unable to break away. In the meantime the Crows sent a deadly
volley of arrows against the Blackfeet, and the latter recoiled before
the fierceness of the defense. A number of warriors had already toppled
from their ponies, and it was evident that the loss somewhat discouraged
their comrades. For a moment they wavered, and then a reckless war
leader on a pinto pony rallied them and led them against their foes.

They rode close up to the Crows, and fought with great bravery. The
Crows, however, had the double advantage of numbers and shelter, and the
Blackfeet soon realized that they were fighting a losing fight. The
fearless war leader had already forfeited his life to his gallantry, and
a number of his followers were either killed or wounded. In return, the
Blackfeet had done little harm to the Crows, except for killing a few
ponies, and wounding one reckless young Crow who had rushed from behind
his horse to attack them. Thoroughly disheartened, they became
demoralized and raced away in bad disorder.

"See, see, the fierce Blackfeet are running like rabbits!" laughed White
Otter.

"The Crows are too strong for them," declared Lean Wolf.

Encouraged by their success, many of the Crows leaped upon their ponies
and set out after the fleeing Blackfeet. The maneuver threw the
Blackfeet into a rage. They immediately wheeled about and raced back to
meet their pursuers. Their boldness confused the Crows, and before they
had recovered from their surprise the Blackfeet were upon them. As less
than half of the Crow force had joined in the pursuit, the advantage had
suddenly turned to the Blackfeet. Smarting with the humiliation of their
recent repulse, the Blackfeet determined to take full vengeance upon the
misguided company of Crows who had blundered into their power.

"They have fooled the Crows," White Otter cried, excitedly. "They will
wipe out that war party before their friends can come to help them."

"The Blackfeet are sharp," laughed Lean Wolf.

The Sioux suddenly realized that the wild flight of the Blackfeet had
been a clever bit of stratagem to deceive their foes. It was apparent
that the trick had been entirely successful, as the Blackfeet seemed to
have the Crows entirely at their mercy.

"See, those poor Crows are calling their brothers to help them," White
Otter told Lean Wolf.

Finding themselves completely overwhelmed by the ferocity and strength
of their crafty foes, the Crows were thrown into a panic. They had lost
all sense of order and discipline, and each man was fighting for
himself. Their one idea appeared to be to escape from the relentless
Blackfeet, who seemed determined to annihilate them. Aware that they
were facing destruction, the Crows were making frantic appeals to their
comrades to come to their assistance. The latter abandoned the pack
ponies and the hard-earned supply of meat and rode wildly across the
plain to assist their tribesmen.

"Now we will see a big fight," White Otter cried, enthusiastically.

"Yes, yes," agreed Lean Wolf, as his eyes flashed with excitement.

The Crows who had come to the aid of their tribesmen fought with great
courage, but the Blackfeet were thoroughly aroused and they seemed
invincible. The Sioux were amazed at the bravery and skill displayed by
those hardy warriors from the north. Having duped their foes and gained
the advantage, they appeared determined to follow it through to a
complete victory.

Although the Crows still outnumbered them, the Blackfeet pressed the
attack with a reckless ferocity that completely demoralized their foes.
Time after time the Crows tried to rally from their confusion, but each
attempt was the signal for a still fiercer assault by the Blackfeet.

"Hi, the Blackfeet know how to fight!" White Otter whispered, tensely.

The fighting was at close range, and many riderless ponies gave evidence
of the result. The Sioux witnessed many deeds of heroism. They saw a
wounded Crow warrior on a white pony ride recklessly at three of his
enemies, and overcome all three of them before a company of Blackfeet
finally killed him. They saw a Blackfoot dash among a company of
astounded Crows and rescue his comrade who had been desperately wounded.
They saw many thrilling hand-to-hand encounters which were fought to the
death. They saw dismounted warriors running boldly into the thick of the
fight in the hope of killing an enemy and securing his horse. Most of
them were killed. A few achieved the exploit, and galloped from the
encounter in triumph.

Then as the light began to fade from the plain the Crows made a final,
heroic effort, and broke through the circle of foes. They raced directly
toward the spot where the Sioux were watching, and behind them thundered
the Blackfeet.

"Run to the ponies!" cried White Otter, as he realized the peril which
threatened them.

They scrambled wildly down the ridge and called to Little Raven to bring
the ponies. He had already guessed that something was wrong, and he lost
little time in joining them.

"The Crows and the Blackfeet are almost here!" White Otter told him, as
he sprang upon the piebald.

As the plain offered no hiding place in the vicinity of the ridge, White
Otter realized that their only chance of escape lay in open flight. He
also knew that to turn toward the north would arouse the suspicions of
the crafty Blackfeet. He raced away toward the east.

"Keep low on your ponies, and perhaps our enemies will not know who we
are," he advised his companions.

Crouching low upon the necks of their ponies, the Sioux rode furiously
to gain a safe lead upon their foes. Night was almost at hand, and the
dusky twilight shadows made it difficult for their enemies to identify
them. When the Crows finally dashed recklessly over the top of the
ridge the Dacotahs were many arrow flights away. At sight of the three
racing ponies, however, the Crows apparently became suspicious, and
fearful of being led into another trap. They immediately swerved from
their course, and rode toward the north.

"That is bad," cried White Otter, who had been risking his neck to
glance back at his foes. "If they go that way they may find our people."

"I believe our friends will be watching sharp," Lean Wolf assured him.

Then they heard the wild, ringing whoops of the Blackfeet, and White
Otter again turned his head to look back. The heavy shadows had almost
wiped out the ridge, and it was difficult to see the company of riders
who were racing recklessly down the steep grassy slope. He made them
out, however, and was relieved to see them turn sharply and follow the
Crows. The latter had entirely faded from sight in the dusk.

"The Blackfeet did not see us," White Otter told his companions. "See,
it is almost dark! We will ride slower."

They could barely see an arrow flight before them, and they believed
there was slight probability of being seen. In fact they had high hopes
that the Blackfeet had entirely failed to notice them. Feeling quite
safe, therefore, they reined in the ponies and rode at a slow canter.
They heard the Blackfeet yelling savagely farther toward the north and
had little doubt that they were still pursuing the demoralized Crows.

"They are making a great noise--it is good," declared Lean Wolf. "Our
people will hear them."

"Yes, it is----" began White Otter.

"Listen!" interrupted Little Raven.

They heard the sound of galloping ponies directly ahead of them, and
they barely had time to turn aside before the unknown riders passed them
in the darkness. Then the nervous little piebald whinnied, and the
strangers instantly stopped.

"Come!" cried White Otter, as he turned toward the north, and raced away
at top speed.

"I believe those riders are the Blackfeet scouts that Feather Dog told
us about," said Lean Wolf. "Little Raven, your ears are as sharp as the
ears of Tokala, the fox."

They rode some distance before they finally stopped to listen for sounds
from their foes. Night had fallen, and the great plain was cloaked in
darkness. For a long time the stillness was unbroken. It seemed as if
the Blackfeet had at last yelled themselves into silence. The Sioux
wondered if the Crows had escaped.

"I do not believe the Blackfeet came up with them," Lean Wolf said,
softly. "When it got dark I believe the Blackfeet turned back to round
up those ponies that the Crows left behind."

"Then we must watch sharp," declared White Otter. "Perhaps they will
ride over here and find us."

Then they heard the wail of a prairie wolf a short distance to the
westward. There was something about it that made them suspicious. As a
precaution against being betrayed to prowling foes, White Otter
dismounted and seized the nose of the little piebald. The other ponies
also showed signs of nervousness, and their riders quickly followed the
example of the cautious Ogalala. Then the three anxious Sioux scouts
stood beside their ponies and strained their ears to catch a warning of
danger. Three times the dreary call of the prairie wolf sounded from the
west, and each time the suspicions of the Sioux grew stronger. They felt
almost certain that it was a signal from their enemies.

"That does not sound like Mayash, the prowler," White Otter declared
suspiciously.

"It is different," agreed Lean Wolf.

At that moment they heard the cry repeated in the north. They knew at
once that it was an answer to the signal from the west. It was evident
that foes were on two sides of them, and the Sioux realized that they
were in a serious predicament.

"It is bad," whispered White Otter. "I believe Blackfeet scouts are out
there in the darkness. They are close. We must watch out."

"Do you believe they know us?" Little Raven inquired, anxiously.

"No," White Otter told him. "Lean Wolf, how do you feel about it?"

"I believe it is the Blackfeet," said Lean Wolf. "We must wait here
until we see what they are going to do. If we hear them coming here then
we will ride away before they find us."

"It is the best thing to do," White Otter told him.

They listened anxiously to learn if their foes were actually
approaching. They heard nothing to give them a clew. The signals had
ceased, and the calm, brooding night hush had fallen upon the plain. The
ponies, however, were still uneasy, and their actions made the Sioux
suspicious. They feared that other horses were close at hand, and the
possibility kept them alert.

"Listen, my brothers," White Otter whispered, anxiously. "Something is
moving over there."

The sound had come from the westward, and whatever had made it seemed to
be well within bowshot. The piebald was shaking its head, and struggling
to free its nose from the grasp of the Ogalala. The other ponies also
showed signs of recognition, and the Sioux felt sure that a horse was
moving slowly through the darkness. They listened with bated breath,
ready to jump upon their ponies and flee into the protection of the
night at the first hint that they had been discovered. They waited in
trying suspense while the rider slowly passed them, and the short, quick
footfalls of his pony died away in the distance.

"He has gone," whispered Little Raven.

"Sh!" cautioned Lean Wolf.

Another pony was approaching. Again the Sioux waited in breathless
suspense, while the unseen rider moved cautiously through the darkness
within bow range of them. This time, however, they were not so
fortunate. For some reason the rider stopped directly opposite them. Was
he suspicious? the Sioux wondered. The piebald tried to call, but White
Otter strangled the cry in its throat. Then the strange horse winded the
Sioux ponies, and whinnied its challenge. The next moment a voice
questioned cautiously from the night. The Sioux remained silent. Each
stood grasping the mane of his pony, ready to mount and race away on the
instant of discovery. Then the horse which had already passed answered
the challenge, and the suspicions of the second rider were allayed. A
moment later the Sioux heard him riding on his way. They remained
silent, however, listening anxiously to learn if a third rider was
following after those who had passed.

"There are no more," Lean Wolf whispered, finally.

"It is good," replied White Otter.

They waited until they felt sure that their enemies had gone beyond
hearing, and then they mounted and rode carefully toward the east. As
the mysterious scouts had gone toward the north, the Sioux determined to
make a wide detour to avoid an encounter. They walked the ponies until
they had gone a safe distance, and then they urged them into a brisk
canter, and began to circle back toward the north to reach the
Minneconjoux war party.




CHAPTER IX

ANXIOUS MOMENTS


After White Otter and his companions left them, the Minneconjoux war
party rode cautiously toward the north to find the hiding place of which
Dancing Rabbit had told. They realized the peril to which they were
exposing themselves, and Sun Bird took every precaution to guard against
blundering upon the Blackfeet. Running Dog and a companion scouted to
the westward, Feather Dog and Proud Hawk again reconnoitered toward the
east, and Sun Bird, Sitting Eagle and the lad, Dancing Rabbit, rode in
advance.

"How far away is this place?" Sun Bird asked, anxiously.

"It begins over there where you see those little trees," replied Dancing
Rabbit, as he pointed to a few stunted cottonwoods some distance ahead
of them.

"Yes, I know about that place," declared Sitting Eagle. "I have been
there. It is a good place to hide in."

Dancing Rabbit said that the shelter toward which they were moving was a
deep ravine which formerly had been the bed of a good-sized stream. It
extended directly across the plain from west to east, and went to the
very foothills of the great mountains. The young Minneconjoux declared
that, once in the bottom of that deep ravine, the war party would be
invisible to their foes, and it would be possible to remain hidden until
they reached the timbered ridges.

"It is good," declared Sun Bird. "When we get to that place we will hide
in the day, and travel toward the mountains when it gets dark."

Before they reached the ravine, however, they saw a horseman ride
cautiously over the ridge to the westward. When he reached the bottom of
the slope he rode rapidly to and fro, and appeared to be trying to
attract the attention of Sun Bird and his companions. It was the danger
signal, and the Minneconjoux watched him with grave attention. When he
saw that he had attracted their notice, he stopped and raised his right
hand above his head. Then he suddenly swept it downward and backward. It
was the signal to approach. Although he was a considerable distance
away, Sun Bird and Sitting Eagle agreed that it was Running Dog.

"He wants to tell us about something," said Sun Bird. "Go, Dancing
Rabbit, and bring us his words."

The lad immediately galloped away to meet the distant Minneconjoux
scout. Sun Bird and Sitting Eagle decided to wait where they were until
he returned. In a few moments they saw the war party riding toward them.
The Minneconjoux had discovered Running Dog, and were watching Dancing
Rabbit as he raced across the plain. When they reached Sun Bird,
however, they concealed their curiosity and waited for the youthful war
leader to tell them what had happened.

"My friends, that scout over there is Running Dog," said Sun Bird. "He
has made the danger signal. Then he called us. Dancing Rabbit has gone
to bring us his words. We will wait here until he comes back."

It was not long before they saw the eager lad racing toward them with
the message from Running Dog. He was urging his pony to top speed, and
the Sioux believed he brought word of great importance. Running Dog had
already disappeared into the dusk.

"I have brought you the words of Running Dog," said Dancing Rabbit, as
he stopped beside Sun Bird.

"Tell me what he says," replied Sun Bird.

"Running Dog says that the Crows and the Blackfeet are fighting,"
declared Dancing Rabbit. "He says it is a big fight. He says the Crows
are stronger than the Blackfeet. Running Dog says that is bad. He says
there must be many Blackfeet at the village. He believes that a big war
party may be coming this way. He says we must go to that gully and hide.
He says he will come there when it gets dark. Those are the words of
Running Dog."

"Come, lead us to that place," said Sun Bird.

The glow was fading from the western sky and the twilight shadows were
gathering upon the plain when the Sioux finally reached the dry stream
bed. It offered an ideal hiding place, and Sun Bird looked upon it with
delight.

"See, my brothers, this great gully leads far over there toward the
mountains," he said. "If we follow it, I do not believe our enemies will
be able to find us."

"It is good," declared the Minneconjoux.

They picketed the ponies in the bottom of the ravine, and then most of
the war party crawled up the steep bank to watch the plain. It was
almost dark, and they wondered why Feather Dog and Proud Hawk had failed
to join them. They looked anxiously toward the east in the hope of
seeing the scouts. Then they suddenly heard a chorus of piercing yells
and whoops far across the plain and they looked toward the sounds. The
noise seemed to come from the vicinity of the ridge, and some distance
to the southward.

"Perhaps our enemies have crossed the ridge; we must watch sharp," Sun
Bird cautioned them.

The light was almost gone, and it was difficult to see far across the
plain. The wild commotion continued, however, and, guided by the sounds,
the Sioux strained their eyes in an attempt to learn the cause of the
disturbance. Then some of them discovered what appeared to be a company
of horsemen racing along parallel with the ridge.

"It is the war party!" they cried. "It must be the Blackfeet. They are
riding this way!"

"See, see, some one is chasing them!" said Sitting Eagle.

They made out another company of riders who were apparently pursuing the
horsemen ahead of them. The discovery filled the Sioux with alarm. It
appeared as if both the Blackfeet and the Crows were racing toward the
ravine. In a few moments, however, darkness closed down and blotted them
from sight. Then the wild tumult suddenly ceased, and the Sioux were
left without a clew to the location of their foes.

"It is bad," Sun Bird declared, uneasily. "Those riders were coming this
way. Now we do not know what has become of them. Perhaps they are in
this gully. Perhaps they will come here. We must watch and listen."

The Minneconjoux heard him in silence. They were bewildered by the
sudden turn of fortune which shattered their fancied security and
threatened to expose them to their foes. The possibilities were
alarming. Thoroughly alive to their own peril, they were even more
concerned for the safety of their absent comrades. They wondered what
had happened to White Otter and his companions. Where were Feather Dog
and Proud Hawk? Why had Running Dog failed to warn them of the
approaching war parties? Had those brave scouts been trapped and
destroyed by their foes? The Sioux weakened at the thought.

Sun Bird was particularly disturbed at the possibility of harm having
come to his friend, White Otter, and his brother, Little Raven. The hot
fighting blood surged to his brain as he pictured his tribesmen in the
hands of his foes. He soon dismissed that possibility, however, for he
knew that neither White Otter nor Lean Wolf would ever permit
themselves to be taken alive. The thought suggested the still more
alarming possibility that they had been killed. Sun Bird, however,
refused even to consider it.

"No, my friends, I do not believe anything bad has happened to those
great scouts," he told his companions. "We will wait for them. They will
come."

He had barely finished speaking when one of the Sioux ponies whinnied
softly, and a moment afterward they heard a pony scramble up the side of
the ravine a short distance to the eastward, and gallop off across the
plain.

"Perhaps it is one of our friends," Sun Bird whispered, hopefully.

He crawled to the plain, and imitated the bark of the little gray fox.
The Sioux listened anxiously. Many moments passed. There was no
response. Then Sun Bird again sounded the familiar signal. Still there
was no reply. The Sioux became suspicious. They feared that a hostile
scout had blundered upon their hiding place. Sun Bird, however, felt
more hopeful. He knew the wariness of the Dacotah scouts, and he still
hoped that the mysterious rider was one of his friends. He repeated the
sharp, quick bark of the little gray fox, and waited eagerly for a
reply. This time he got it. It came from the direction where he had
heard the hoofbeats of the retreating pony.

"It is good," said Sun Bird. "That rider is a friend."

A few moments later they heard ponies approaching the ravine. Determined
to be prepared for an emergency, the Sioux lay along the top of the
ravine, with arrows fitted to their bows, ready to repulse an attack.
The precaution proved to be unnecessary, however, as the riders were
Feather Dog and Proud Hawk.

"My brothers, you have come--it is good," said Sun Bird.

The scouts who had returned from the eastward said that they had seen
nothing of their foes, although they felt quite sure that they had heard
several ponies pass them in the darkness. They knew nothing of the
thrilling chase which their companions had witnessed from the ravine,
and were much interested in the recital.

"Did you see anything of White Otter?" Sun Bird inquired, eagerly.

"No, we did not see any one," replied Feather Dog.

Sun Bird appeared serious. The continued absence of White Otter and his
companions worried him. He began to fear that they really had met with
some misfortune. The idea startled him.

At that moment some of the Minneconjoux declared that they heard some
one approaching the ravine. Sun Bird held his breath to listen, and his
heart filled with hope. Perhaps White Otter and Little Raven had come.
The possibility thrilled him. He waited in trying suspense for the
signal which would verify his hopes.

"Perhaps it is an enemy," suggested a warrior who was lying beside him.

Sun Bird remained silent. For the moment the Blackfeet and the Crows had
been crowded from his mind by the hope of seeing White Otter and Little
Raven. He had entirely forgotten the peril which threatened the Sioux
war party. The warning of his tribesman aroused him to his
responsibility. He was the war leader. It was his duty to think first of
the welfare and safety of the men who had entrusted themselves to his
leadership. He at once dismissed White Otter and Little Raven from his
thoughts, and again became the stern, impassive war leader.

"I do not hear anything," he told the man beside him. "What did you
hear?"

"It sounded like ponies," replied the warrior.

"Were they running?" inquired Sun Bird.

"No, it sounded as if they were standing in one place, and stamping
their feet," declared the Minneconjoux.

They listened a long time, but heard nothing. The warriors who had given
the warning, however, felt certain that they had not been mistaken.

"Perhaps it was Tatanka, the buffalo, or Tatokadan, the antelope," said
Sitting Eagle.

"No, no, it sounded like ponies," declared his friends.

Then as they continued to listen they heard the cry of a prairie wolf,
far to the westward. The weird serenade lasted some moments, and then
all was still. The call had sounded entirely natural, but the Sioux
believed it was a clever imitation by their foes. They wondered if it
had any connection with the sounds which had been heard near the ravine.
They realized that Blackfeet scouts might have followed the stream bed
in search of their foes, and that the wolf call was a signal for them to
return to the war party. The Sioux listened anxiously for the sound of
hoof beats going toward the west. When they failed to hear them they
were completely baffled. Had the sharp-eared warriors who claimed to
have heard the ponies been deceived? It seemed unlikely. Then what had
become of the mysterious riders? The entire Minneconjoux war party was
listening breathlessly, and it seemed impossible for the horsemen to
steal away without being heard. Then a new possibility presented itself.

"Perhaps they are Crows," the Sioux told one another.

The thought threw them into a flurry of excitement. They realized that
if Crow scouts had come that far to the eastward, the entire Crow force
might follow them along the ravine. As a precaution against a sudden
attack, two Sioux scouts moved cautiously along the stream bed on foot
to watch for the approach of enemies. They had barely gone beyond
bowshot, when the Sioux heard the bark of the little gray fox directly
in front of them. It filled them with joy, and they lost little time in
replying.

"Ho, my brothers, we have been waiting out here a long time," said
Running Dog, as he rode into the ravine with Big Crow, his fellow scout.

"Did you see White Otter?" Sun Bird immediately inquired.

"I do not know," replied Running Dog. "We saw three riders racing over
the ridge ahead of the Crows. They were far away. We could not tell
about them. Perhaps they were our brothers."

"What became of them?" Sun Bird asked, eagerly.

"They went that way," said Running Dog, as he pointed toward the east.
"The Crows did not follow them. They came this way. Then the Blackfeet
came after them."

"Did you hear Mayash, the wolf?" inquired Sitting Eagle.

"Yes, we heard his call, but he did not make it," Running Dog told him.
"It was the Blackfeet. I believe the Crows got away from them. Perhaps
they have turned this way. That is why we stayed out there in the
darkness. We did not know who was in this place."

"Did you hear us?" Sun Bird asked, anxiously.

"No, we did not hear you," said Running Dog. "Our ponies stopped and
tried to call, and we knew that some one was in this place."

Running Dog told his tribesmen that he and Big Crow had seen the end of
the fight, and the desperate race between the Crows and the Blackfeet.
When the Crows turned toward the ravine the Sioux scouts had been
greatly alarmed for the safety of the Minneconjoux war party. However,
as they realized that they could not carry a warning to their friends,
they had determined to follow their enemies, and learn the result of
the wild chase across the plain. With the coming of darkness they had
lost sight of both the Crows and the Blackfeet, but they were sure that
both war parties had entered the ravine a considerable distance to the
westward.

"Perhaps the Crows came this way--perhaps they crossed the gully and
went straight ahead," said Running Dog. "Anyway, I believe they fooled
the Blackfeet. We heard the Blackfeet scouts riding near us. I believe
they were trying to find the Crows."

"If the Crows came this way they must be near us," said Sun Bird.

"We did not hear anything----"

Running Dog was interrupted by the sound of a familiar voice from the
darkness.

"Ho, Dacotahs!"

"It is White Otter!" cried Sun Bird.

"Yes, my brother, I am here," replied White Otter, as he suddenly
appeared at the top of the ravine.

The Ogalala was alone and on foot, and Sun Bird feared that he had met
with disaster. He was about to ask for Little Raven, and Lean Wolf, when
White Otter turned toward the plain and called softly. A moment
afterward his companions came forward with the ponies. Their appearance
filled Sun Bird with joy. He found it difficult to conceal the emotion
which welled up in his heart at the safe arrival of his beloved
companions.

"My brothers, you have come--I feel good again," he said feelingly.




CHAPTER X

REBELLIOUS PONIES


The Minneconjoux were eager to learn how White Otter had been able to
get so near them without being heard. They were equally curious to know
how he had located them.

"I will tell you about it," said White Otter. "We were over there on
that ridge watching the fight. Then the Crows ran away. They came right
toward us. We rode away ahead of them. When it got dark we met some
riders. Then we turned this way. We heard some one riding past us. Then
we came on. We went over there near where the Blackfeet are, when we
heard Running Dog and Big Crow. We did not know them. They were coming
this way. We followed them. Then they stopped. We waited. Then we heard
the call of the little gray fox. That made us feel good. But we were not
sure about it. Then we heard those riders come into the gully. Then I
crawled up to find out about it. That is how we found you."

"White Otter, you are a great warrior," Sun Bird declared,
enthusiastically.

Then as the war party was complete he called a council of war to decide
what should be done. The Sioux were agreed that the wisest plan would be
to remain where they were until daylight.

"It is the best thing to do," said Sun Bird. "We know that the Crows and
the Blackfeet are somewhere along this gully. It would be foolish to
move toward them. When it gets light we will try to find out where they
are."

He posted scouts in and about the ravine to watch for the approach of
foes, while the war party lay down to sleep. There was no water, and
both the Sioux and their ponies suffered from thirst. The ponies were
particularly restless, and spent most of the night pawing the dry earth
in the bottom of the ravine. However, Dancing Rabbit assured his
companions that there was a good pool a half day's journey to the
westward, and Sitting Eagle confirmed his words.

"Perhaps the Blackfeet are at that place," suggested Sun Bird.

The night passed without incident, and at the first hint of dawn the
scouts hurried in from the plain. They said that they had neither seen
nor heard anything of their enemies. It seemed, therefore, that either
the Crows and the Blackfeet had continued their mad race through the
night, or else both had hidden themselves to wait for daylight.

"Perhaps the Crows got away and the Blackfeet have gone back to their
village," suggested one of the Minneconjoux.

His companions had serious doubts of it. As soon as it was light enough
to see across the plain, they crawled up the side of the ravine and
looked anxiously for signs of their foes. As they were nowhere in sight,
the Minneconjoux began to hope that the cheerful prophecy of their
comrade was correct. Still, they feared it would be dangerous to rely
upon it.

"We must be cautious," said Lean Wolf. "There are some good hiding
places over there. Perhaps the Blackfeet are waiting for the Crows to
show themselves."

There were a number of scattered stands of cottonwoods dotting the plain
to the westward, and the Sioux realized that one of them might shelter
their foes. They were particularly suspicious of the little grove which
Dancing Rabbit pointed out as the spot which sheltered the pool.

"We must watch that place," declared White Otter.

"Yes, we will stay here and watch," said Sun Bird. "If our enemies are
near us, pretty soon we will see their scouts."

As time passed, and they saw nothing to indicate that either the Crows
or the Blackfeet were anywhere in the vicinity, the Sioux began to
discuss the advisability of moving cautiously along the bottom of the
ravine. The ponies were growing frantic from thirst and were raising
considerable dust by their wild pawing in the stream bed. Some were
beginning to snort and whinny, and the Sioux feared that the
unmanageable little beasts might betray them to their foes. Then, too,
their own throats were parched and aching, and they were eager to reach
the little pool as soon as possible.

"We will go," Sun Bird said, finally.

They believed that it would be folly to expose scouts upon the open
plain, and they determined to keep to the shelter of the ravine until
they were opposite the grove which sheltered the pool. The ponies
appeared to understand that they were moving toward water, and the Sioux
found it almost impossible to hold them in control. For some moments the
fractious little beasts created the wildest sort of disorder, and the
Minneconjoux looked anxiously upon the heavy dust cloud that rose above
the ravine.

"It is bad," Sun Bird declared, uneasily, as he watched White Otter
struggling to subdue the hot-tempered piebald.

When the ponies had finally been brought under subjection, several
warriors who rode quieter horses dismounted and crawled to the top of
the ravine to search the plain. A heavy pall of dust hung over them, and
they wondered if it had been seen by their foes. The latter, however,
were nowhere in sight, and the Sioux knew that unless they were watching
from one of the groves they must have ridden from the locality.

"We saw no one," said the scouts when they overtook their companions.

"It must be that our enemies went away while it was dark," said a young
warrior named Painted Bird.

The Sioux, however, were suspicious. They determined to take nothing for
granted. As they approached the first of the little groves they sent
scouts along the ravine ahead of the war party to watch the plain and
guard against blundering into their foes. They were riding at a fast
pace, and they realized that they would arrive opposite the pool before
the day was half gone.

"It is bad," said White Otter. "We cannot go to that place until it
grows dark. If we get near it, it will be hard to hold the ponies."

"It is true," agreed Sun Bird. "I am thinking about it."

He had planned to move along the ravine until he was opposite the pool,
and then wait until he could send scouts to reconnoiter the grove under
cover of the night. He, too, realized, however, that it might be
impossible to control the ponies once they got that near to the water.
The riders were already having considerable difficulty in restraining
them, and Sun Bird feared that at any moment they might stampede and
dash wildly up the side of the ravine.

"We are raising a great dust," Lean Wolf said, soberly. "If our enemies
are watching they must see it."

"Yes, yes, it is bad," Sun Bird replied, impatiently. "We must stop."

He galloped to the head of the company and called upon the Minneconjoux
to halt. Many of them found difficulty in obeying the command. The
fiery, half-wild ponies had apparently scented the water and it seemed
to have driven them mad. In spite of their expert horsemanship the
Sioux were unable to control them. Although by sheer strength and skill
they finally brought them to a stop, they found it impossible to quiet
them. Crazed with their desire for water, the frantic beasts plunged and
reared and kicked and squealed and raised such a wild commotion that the
Sioux were thrown into a panic. They were certain that if enemies were
lurking at the pool they must surely have seen the dust and heard the
noise created by the unmanageable ponies.

"It is useless to wait here," said some of the more impulsive warriors.
"We may as well go ahead and see what comes of it."

"No, that would be foolish," declared Sun Bird. "If the Blackfeet are
hiding in that place they will see the dust. Perhaps they cannot hear
the noise. Anyway, if we stay in this gully they will not know who we
are. They must send scouts over here to find out about us. They will not
do that until it gets dark. Then it will be easy to fool them."

"Those are good words," White Otter agreed, heartily.

"Yes, that is the way I feel about it," declared Lean Wolf.

"It is the only thing to do," Sitting Eagle cried, angrily. "Are we
like the women who are afraid of the war ponies! Are we like old men who
have no strength in their arms? Does a Dacotah run to his enemy for
water when he is thirsty? Come, my brothers, we are Dacotahs. We are
men. Hold those horses. Throw them down. Kill them if you cannot
overcome them. It is better to go against our enemies on foot than to
let those foolish ponies carry us to our deaths. Sun Bird is a good war
leader. You have heard his words. They are good. We will listen. We will
stay here until it is safe to go ahead."

The words of the famous Minneconjoux scout created a deep impression
upon his comrades. He was a man whose daring achievements made him the
idol of his people, and his counsel was seldom disputed. His daring
challenge to their ability and manhood instantly roused the fighting
blood of the Sioux, and they immediately accepted the task of bringing
the fractious ponies under subjection. It was not easy, but the
Minneconjoux were on their mettle, and, as White Otter had already won
control over the piebald, they persevered until the ponies were finally
quieted.

Order having been restored, many of the Sioux crept up the side of the
ravine to watch the distant stand of cottonwoods which they hoped to
reach at dark. They were suffering keenly from thirst, which had been
greatly aggravated by their desperate struggle with the ponies. Some of
them chewed mouthfuls of grass in an attempt to suck moisture into their
burning throats. Others placed small pebbles beneath their tongues to
increase the flow of saliva. All of them, however, bore their discomfort
without complaint. It was a common occurrence for a warrior to endure
both hunger and thirst, and they had been trained from infancy to suffer
in silence.

"See, the day is passing," Sun Bird said, cheerfully, as the sun sank
slowly toward the west. "Pretty soon we will be under those trees,
drinking that water."

"It is good," the Minneconjoux murmured, thickly.

Although they watched closely until the grove finally faded from sight
in the evening shadows, they saw nothing of their foes. They were quite
convinced that the Crows had eluded the Blackfeet, and that the latter
had gone to their village to boast of their victory.

"We will go," Sun Bird said, as darkness at last fell upon the plain.

They moved eagerly along the ravine, and once more the parched ponies
tried to bolt from the control of their riders. The latter were still
smarting from the rebuke of Sitting Eagle, and they soon brought the
unruly little beasts under subjection. However, it was impossible to
quiet them. They snorted and squealed and whinnied, and the Sioux
realized that it was hopeless to try to reach the grove without being
heard.

"Well, if our enemies are over there they know that we are coming,"
Sitting Eagle declared, irritably.

"It is true," agreed Sun Bird. "But they do not know who we are. If the
Blackfeet are over there they will take us for Crows. If the Crows are
over there they will take us for Blackfeet. It is good. When we get near
that place we will stop. Then we will send scouts over there to find out
about it. If our enemies are there we will find out who they are. Then
we will run away before they find out about us."

"It is good," said Sitting Eagle.

When they finally came opposite the grove which contained the pool they
again fought the desperate ponies into submission and made heroic
efforts to keep them quiet. Then Sun Bird selected White Otter and
Sitting Eagle to go forward on foot to reconnoiter the cottonwoods.

"Those great scouts will find out about it," he boasted, as the two
famous Dacotahs slipped away as noiselessly as shadows.

It seemed a long time to the anxious Sioux before White Otter finally
returned and said that the grove was free from foes. The announcement
filled them with joy. Throwing caution to the winds, they rode out of
the ravine and raced recklessly toward the cottonwoods. Once at the pool
it was impossible to restrain the ponies, and the riders were forced to
wait until the frenzied animals had satisfied their thirst. Then the
Sioux plunged their feverish faces into the roily water and drank as
eagerly as the ponies.

"Ah," Sun Bird sighed, contentedly, as he finally rose to his feet.

Having drunk their fill, the ponies became quiet and turned to graze
upon the scant growth of grass about the pool. The Sioux, however,
remained alert. Their noisy arrival at the pool had made them uneasy.
They had vague, disturbing premonitions of danger, and they feared to
linger in the grove.

"If our enemies come and surround this place it will be hard to get
away," Sun Bird said, anxiously. "Come, we will go."

At that moment one of the ponies whinnied, and the Sioux were astounded
to hear it answered from the plain. Then they heard a horse galloping
toward the west. They turned to one another in alarm.

"Our enemies have caught us!" they cried.

"Wait," White Otter counseled, calmly. "I believe that rider is a scout.
Perhaps he is alone. We will listen. If he is with a war party then we
will hear signals. If he keeps quiet there is nothing to fear."

"It is good," agreed the Minneconjoux.

They listened in tense silence. Then, as the moments passed and they
heard nothing to suggest the approach of their foes, they felt
considerably relieved. Still they were somewhat fearful about leaving
the timber. They realized that either the Crows or the Blackfeet might
have surrounded the grove and sent the scout forward as a decoy to lure
them upon the open plain.

"Well, my brothers, that rider knows that some one is at this pool,"
declared Sun Bird. "If he is a scout he will tell his people about it. I
believe if we wait here something bad will come of it. If we go away our
enemies will not know that the Dacotahs were here. If we expect to get
to the great Blackfeet camp we must not let our enemies know about us."

The Sioux instantly saw the wisdom of his words and agreed that it
would be safer to abandon the grove and continue toward the mountains.
Dancing Rabbit told them that if they continued to ride through the
night, daylight would find them close upon the foothills.

"It is good--we will go," said Sun Bird.

They left the grove and moved slowly across the plain in the direction
of the ravine. The ponies were quiet and docile, and it seemed as if the
clever little beasts were attempting to make amends for the anxiety and
effort they had caused their riders a short time before. As the war
party drew near the ravine Sun Bird ordered a halt while he sent scouts
forward to reconnoiter. They soon returned and declared that the way was
clear.




CHAPTER XI

AN UNUSUAL ADVENTURE


Upon reaching the ravine the Sioux turned toward the west and rode until
daylight. Then they found themselves almost within the shadows of the
great massive peaks which towered against the sky. The low timbered
ridges of the foothills were still nearer at hand, and the air was
scented with fragrance from the dense stand of pines.

"It is good," declared Sun Bird. "Pretty soon we will come to those
great mountains. Then we can hide from our enemies until we find the
Blackfeet camp."

Having failed to find any further evidence of their foes, they began to
feel more secure. They gave little thought to the horseman who had
blundered upon them at the pool, for it appeared certain that both the
Crows and the Blackfeet had withdrawn from the vicinity. Encouraged by
the thought, the Sioux determined to continue toward the mountains.

When they reached the first ridge of foothills, Sitting Eagle, who was
familiar with the region, led the way along a game trail. It wound
upward from the plain, and brought them to a grassy meadow with a cold
bubbling spring in one corner of it. As it offered an attractive camp
site, the Sioux determined to stop.

After the ponies had been picketed and the camp established, several
young warriors went into the woods with their bows to look for game. It
was not long before they returned with a fat, young, white-tail deer.

As the camp site was a considerable height above the plain and well
hidden by the heavy stand of timber, the Sioux determined to risk making
a small fire. Then they broiled the deer meat and ate with keen
enjoyment. They had suddenly relaxed. For the moment the hardships and
perils of the war trail were forgotten. They talked and laughed and told
stories, and became as carefree and happy as boys. The merry feast
continued well into the night. When it finally ended, the sentinels took
their positions about the camp while their companions wrapped themselves
in their robes and lay down to sleep.

Shortly after daylight the Sioux descended to the plain and rode
northward along the base of the ridge. They kept within bowshot of the
timber so that they might conceal themselves if they found signs of
their foes. Dancing Rabbit declared that the Blackfeet camp was a number
of days' travel farther to the northward, and for the present at least
the Sioux had little fear of blundering into those foes. However, they
believed that the Crows might be somewhere in the vicinity and they
determined to keep a sharp watch.

"We will keep going ahead until we get near the Blackfeet camp," said
Sun Bird. "Then we will stop. Then some of us will climb those great
mountains and look for the Blackfeet lodges."

For two days they traveled cautiously along the edge of the foothills
without seeing anything to arouse their suspicions. Game, however, was
abundant. They saw countless numbers of buffaloes, great herds of elk,
and many deer and antelope.

"This is a good place to live in," declared White Otter.

"Yes, there is plenty of game here," replied Sun Bird.

Then they again saw Huya, the war bird. The eagle was soaring high up
near the snowclad peaks. The Sioux watched it with superstitious
premonitions. They believed it was an omen--a warning that foes were
near at hand.

"See, Huya has come back to tell us about our enemies," said Sun Bird.
"I believe we are near the Blackfeet. We must watch out."

Disturbed by the appearance of Huya, the war bird, and determined to run
no risk of betraying themselves to their foes, the Sioux decided to seek
shelter in the foothills while scouts climbed the ridges to look for the
Blackfeet camp. While the war party moved cautiously along the edge of
the plain, Sun Bird sent scouts into the timber to look for a suitable
camp site. At the end of the day they found a sheltered grassy park high
up near the summit of the ridge, and the Sioux determined to make it
their rendezvous until they were ready to advance upon the Blackfeet.

The following day, at dawn, Sun Bird and White Otter left the war party
and set out along the summit of the ridge to look for traces of the
Blackfeet camp. Other scouts rode cautiously along the edge of the plain
to watch for signs of the Crows or scouting parties of Blackfeet.

Although Sun Bird and White Otter had a splendid view of the plain they
failed to discover any evidence of the Blackfeet camp. When they finally
saw a large herd of buffaloes grazing contentedly a considerable
distance to the northward, they became convinced that the hostile camp
was far beyond their view.

"It is useless to look any more," declared White Otter. "The Blackfeet
camp is a long ways off."

"Yes, it must be so," said Sun Bird. "We will go back and tell our
friends about it."

"Wait," White Otter cried, eagerly. "Here is the trail of great
Matohota."

Sun Bird hastened to his side and saw the fresh tracks of a grizzly
bear. The trail led down into the timber. The footprints were of unusual
size, and the Sioux studied them with flashing eyes. The Dacotahs
considered killing great Matohota an exploit worthy of the bravest
warrior, and only second in importance to killing an enemy. A necklace
of bear claws was accepted as positive proof of the hunting ability and
courage of the wearer. Although both Sun Bird and White Otter had killed
several of those fierce beasts, they became enthusiastic at the idea of
securing the great claws of the bear which had recently passed.

"If we kill Matohota we will have something to show our friends," said
White Otter.

"He cannot be far away," Sun Bird declared, hopefully. "Come, we will
follow him."

They followed the trail down through the timber, and about half way
down the ridge it brought them within sight of another open grassy park.
Aware that those places were favorite feeding places for elk and deer,
the expert young hunters realized that the grizzly might have gone there
to feast upon the carcass of one of those animals.

"We must be careful," White Otter warned, softly.

They approached the spot with great caution, peering anxiously between
the trees to discover the grizzly. As the wind favored them, they hoped
to get within bow range without alarming their game. However, when they
finally came in full view of the park the bear was nowhere in sight.
They were keenly disappointed.

"Matohota has gone on," said Sun Bird.

"We will see," replied White Otter.

They stole to the edge of the timber and looked anxiously across the
grassy meadow. The trail of the bear was plainly visible through the
high grass. As they followed it with their eyes they suddenly discovered
something lying in the far corner of the park. One glance told them that
it was dead, but it was some time before they could make sure what it
was. Then they looked at each other in astonishment. They had suddenly
identified the object as a dead pony. The discovery made them cautious,
and they sank noiselessly into the bushes to watch.

"It is mysterious," whispered Sun Bird. "How did that pony come here?"

"We will try to find out about it, but first we must watch," replied
White Otter.

They watched a long time, searching the borders of the meadow with great
care. It was difficult to learn much about the dead pony from where they
were, but they saw that the carcass had been partly eaten, and they
believed it had been there for some time.

"It is good," said White Otter. "Matohota comes here to eat that pony.
If we wait here we will see him."

"Perhaps he is sleeping over there in those bushes," suggested Sun Bird.

They knew that after gorging itself with meat, a bear often would lie
down to sleep near the carcass, so that it would find a meal close at
hand when it again became hungry. It seemed probable, therefore, that
the great creature which they sought might be concealed somewhere within
bow range of them. They looked carefully along the edge of the woods,
hoping to discover a sign which would tell them where the bear had
entered the timber. The undergrowth appeared undisturbed, and, as the
trail faded out at the spot where the grass had been trampled down about
the carcass, there seemed little chance of learning what they wished to
know unless they made their way to the dead pony.

"We must go over there and find out about it," Sun Bird proposed,
finally.

"Come," said White Otter.

They moved through the timber as stealthily as wolves, and when they
drew near the carcass they again stopped to watch and listen. Then they
circled to find the trail of the bear. They came upon a wide game trail
leading down from the park, and as they stooped to study it they
discovered many tracks. Among them were the footprints of the great gray
timber wolves, and the clumsy round paw-marks of a mountain lion. The
latter track was fresh, and it was evident that the great cat had passed
over the trail since daylight. The tracks of the bear, however, were
missing.

"Matohota did not come this way," said Sun Bird.

"Perhaps he is close by," White Otter said, cautiously. "We will try to
find out where he is. Then we will go and look at that pony. It came
along this trail. See, here is a track."

He showed Sun Bird a faint and indistinct impression of a hoof at one
side of the trail. It was some days old, and offered them little
information.

"Come, we will find out what has become of Matohota, and then we will
come back here and find out about this thing," said White Otter.

They soon came upon the trail of the bear. As White Otter had guessed,
it circled around the edge of the park, and led back toward the top of
the ridge. It was plain, therefore, that the bear had its den somewhere
up there among the ledges, and came to the park to feed during the night
or at daylight.

"Now we know what to do," declared White Otter. "First we will go and
look at that pony. Then we will go down that trail and try to find some
more tracks. Then we will come back to this place and wait for
Matohota."

"It is good," said Sun Bird.

When they reached the dead pony they were surprised to see the shaft of
an arrow protruding from behind its shoulder. For a moment or so they
studied it in silence. Then White Otter knelt, and drew his knife.

"Perhaps we will find out what we want to know," he said.

He extracted the arrow and examined it with great care, and then he
passed it to Sun Bird. The latter studied it a long time. He noted that
the shaft was of willow and feathered along the sides for almost a
hand-width. The arrow was considerably longer than those used by the
Dacotahs, and the point was made of an unusual red flint. It was the
deeply notched model of the war arrows.

"Well, what do you make of it?" White Otter inquired, as Sun Bird
finished examining it.

"It is not a Dacotah arrow," replied Sun Bird. "It is not a Crow arrow.
It was not made by the Blackfeet. I do not know who made it."

"I cannot tell you about it," said White Otter, as Sun Bird returned the
mysterious arrow. "I do not know about the people who live in this
country. I know the Crow arrows. I have seen the Blackfeet arrows. I do
not know the others."

"I will show it to Sitting Eagle and Lean Wolf," said Sun Bird. "Perhaps
they will know about it."

As there seemed to be no other way of learning its identity, they
dismissed the arrow from their minds and turned their attention upon the
dead pony. It was a pinto, and appeared to have been dead a number of
days. They had little doubt that, having been wounded on the plain, it
had followed the game trail to the spot where it died.

"Perhaps the man who owned that pony rode up here to get away from his
enemies," suggested Sun Bird.

"Perhaps," said White Otter.

Then, as the day had almost ended, they realized that if they intended
to remain and watch for Matohota it was time to find a hiding place. As
there was not sufficient breeze to stir the leaves, White Otter held a
moistened finger above his head to learn the direction of the air
current. What there was seemed to come from the north side of the park.
As the bear was expected to approach from the west, and the bait was on
the east side of the park, the Sioux decided to hide themselves to the
southward of the dead pony. Then if the uncertain breeze should suddenly
shift to another quarter they would still be to the leeward of the bear.

"Matohota is strong," cautioned White Otter. "We must drive our arrows
deep into his body. We must not go too far away."

They concealed themselves in the undergrowth within easy bowshot of the
bait and determined to watch until the bear appeared. The light was
already fading from the park, and the heavy evening shadows were forming
at the edge of the woods. Then, as darkness settled down, the moon
flooded the little park with its silvery light.

"It is good," whispered Sun Bird. "Wakantunka has sent Hanyetuwi, the
night sun, to give us light."

"It is good," replied White Otter.

They had little hope that Matohota would appear before daylight, and
still they realized that he might come to feed under cover of the night.
It was not long, however, before they heard other prowlers approaching
the bait. The crackling of brush, and soft, stealthy footfalls caused
them to watch expectantly. A lithe, shadowy form moved swiftly into the
moonlight. It stopped a moment and raised a long pointed snout into the
air. Then it trotted gracefully to the bait. The Sioux recognized it as
Huhasapedan, the fox. They watched with great interest as the suspicious
creature circled warily about the carcass, stopping in alarm at the
slightest sound, and peering nervously into the shadows. It had barely
begun to eat, when a second woods prowler entered the park and moved
slowly toward the bait. The fox crouched behind the pony and watched
uneasily.

"Wolf," whispered White Otter.

The wolf had discovered the fox and was bristling and growling, as it
walked stiffly toward the pony. Awed by the threats of its formidable
rival, the fox slunk to the edge of the timber and sat upon its
haunches to watch until the wolf left the carcass. The wolf feasted
ravenously, tearing large pieces of flesh from the bait and growling
savagely as it ate. It was one of the great gaunt timber wolves, and the
Sioux longed to pierce it with their arrows. They resisted the
temptation, however, for they knew that Matohota might become suspicious
at the scent of fresh blood.

"It would be foolish," said White Otter.

The wolf refused to leave until it had gorged itself with meat, and then
it moved threateningly toward the fox. The latter immediately retreated
across the park and failed to show itself until the wolf had slunk into
the shadows.

The fox had barely returned to the bait when it was again interrupted by
another nocturnal prowler. A short, catlike snarl sounded from the
direction of the game trail, and as the fox paused to listen, a long,
crouching form appeared at the edge of the moonlight. Two glowing eyes
blazed defiance, and the fox bounded into the woods.

"It is fierce Imutanka," breathed Sun Bird.

They had instantly recognized the stealthy prowler as a mountain lion.
They watched with bated breath as the great cat moved cautiously toward
the carcass. In spite of its size and strength it seemed as wary and
fearful as Huhasapedan, the fox. It would slink forward a few paces and
then stop and look furtively about the park. Once it sniffed
suspiciously, and parted its lips in a silent snarl. Had it caught the
wolf scent? Was great Matohota approaching? The Sioux grew tense at the
thought. As the lion drew nearer the pony it crouched close to the
ground, growling and nervously lashing its tail. It appeared to be
preparing to spring upon the carcass. It was an unusually large
specimen, and the Sioux were eager to secure so noble a trophy.

"Come, we will kill Imutanka," suggested Sun Bird.

"Wait," cautioned White Otter.

A moment afterward a great bulky form appeared at the opposite side of
the park. The Sioux recognized it at once. It was great Matohota, the
grizzly. His sudden appearance caused their hearts to beat wildly
against their ribs, while their eyes flashed with the light of battle.
He was a foe worthy of the bravest warrior, and the young Dacotahs
longed for the chance to engage him in battle.

A slight breeze was stirring from the eastward, and Matohota had
evidently caught the scent of the mountain lion. He had raised his head
and was staring across the park. The Sioux looked toward the lion. It,
too, had discovered the bear, and was crouching behind the pony, and
grumbling threateningly.

"Imutanka will run away," whispered Sun Bird.

"Watch!" cautioned White Otter.

The bear had ambled clumsily into the open, and was following its trail
across the park. The Sioux turned their eyes upon the lion. They
expected to see it slinking away. Imutanka, however, showed no such
intention. His blazing eyes and ugly snarls made it plain that he had no
idea of running away. Still, the Sioux could not believe he would dare
to oppose the mighty Matohota.

"Imutanka looks brave, but he will run away," insisted Sun Bird.

"We will see," said White Otter.

As the bear came closer the Sioux saw that it was even larger than they
had guessed it to be. Matohota looked more than a match for sinewy
Imutanka, but the latter still held his ground. It was apparent that
having secured possession of the carcass he had no thought of
surrendering it without a fight. The Sioux thrilled at the possibility.

"If Imutanka stays there we will see something to talk about," Sun Bird
whispered, eagerly.

"Yes, yes, it will be a great fight," replied White Otter.

The bold defiance of the lion seemed to have made Matohota realize the
need of caution. He had stopped and was shaking his great head from side
to side and growling fiercely. Imutanka replied to his challenge with
short, throaty snarls. Then for some moments each gazed into the blazing
eyes of the other and appeared to be estimating the strength and courage
of its adversary. The Sioux were fascinated by the unusual spectacle.
For the moment their desire to kill was overcome by their curiosity to
learn the outcome of the fight.

It was some time, however, before the huge Matohota made up his mind to
attack his rival. Then, having determined to gain possession of the
bait, he rushed furiously upon the lion. The great sinewy cat had little
difficulty in avoiding him. Then, as Matohota whirled about with amazing
agility, the lion made its spring. Matohota reared upon his hind legs
and struck the lion to earth with his huge paw. Imutanka uttered a sharp
whine of pain and sprang aside. It was evident that Matohota had drawn
first blood. He dropped to all fours and turned quickly about as the
lion circled him. The Sioux saw that Imutanka was bleeding freely from a
deep gash in the neck. However, the wound only seemed to rouse the lion
to greater fury. Spitting, snarling, and growling, it glided stealthily
about its adversary, watching for an opening. Matohota, however, was
equally alert, and in spite of his great bulk he was sufficiently quick
to baffle his foe. Each time Imutanka crouched to spring, Matohota rose
upon his hind legs and held his great forepaws ready to deal another
deadly blow. Then the lion would immediately relax and attempt to glide
behind him, and Matohota would drop down and whirl about in time to
prevent the attack.

"Matohota is a great fighter," Sun Bird told White Otter.

"Imutanka is quick, he will fool Matohota," replied White Otter.

A moment later his prophecy was fulfilled. The lion had crouched to
spring, and Matohota reared to protect himself. Then Imutanka sprang far
to one side, and as Matohota dropped Imutanka was directly behind him.
Before Matohota could turn the lion was upon his back. Its great claws
tore down through the thick, shaggy coat, and ripped great gashes in his
flesh and its flashing fangs sank deep into the back of his neck. Quick
to understand his peril, Matohota threw himself and attempted to roll
over upon his back. Failing in his efforts to dislodge the lion,
Matohota rose upon his hind legs and fell over backward to crush the
lion beneath his great bulk. Imutanka was too cunning to be caught.
Releasing his hold he sprang away, and as Matohota crashed to the ground
the lion jumped for his throat. Matohota caught him in a crushing
embrace, and the fight became deadly. Rolling wildly over the ground the
ferocious beasts bit and tore each other until it seemed that neither
could survive the encounter.

The Sioux looked on with glistening eyes. The savage duel had roused
their own hot fighting blood and they were eager to enter the fray.

"Come, we will kill both of them," cried Sun Bird, as he fitted an arrow
to his bow.

"Wait, wait," urged White Otter. "We will see who is the greatest
warrior."

They watched, therefore, while the fight raged with unabated fury. At
last the superior strength of the great Matohota gave him the victory.
The lion broke free and sprang from the range of his deadly paws. It
crouched and faced him for a moment, and then as he reared to defend
himself, Imutanka weakened and turned to slink away into the night.

"Come!" cried Sun Bird, as he rose to his feet.

Two arrows pierced the heart of fierce Imutanka and he fell dead in his
tracks. Matohota whirled about at the sharp twang of the bowstrings, and
roared defiance at the two figures on the edge of the moonlight. Then as
he rushed forward to destroy them in his wrath, he, too, collapsed from
the shock of two burning arrows in his great hairy chest. The next
moment he rose to his feet and reared unsteadily to repeat the tactics
which had proved successful against fierce Imutanka. This time, however,
it was a fatal error, for the Sioux drove their arrows through his heart
and great Matohota crashed headlong into the grass and followed Imutanka
on the Long Trail.

"Hi, we have done a big thing," Sun Bird cried, excitedly, as he rushed
into the park to examine the trophies.

"We will have something to tell about," laughed White Otter.




CHAPTER XII

AN ENCOUNTER WITH THE FLATHEADS


The elated young Sioux lost little time in removing the great claws from
Matohota and the cruel, sharp talons from fierce Imutanka. They longed
to take the pelts as well, but they realized that it would be folly to
burden themselves with them. They spent some time, however, examining
the wounds which the savage creatures had inflicted upon each other. The
lion had bitten deeply into the back of Matohota's neck and ripped
terrible gashes in his back. Matohota had taken full revenge. His great
claws had torn gaping wounds in the chest and shoulders of Imutanka and
it was evident that the lion would have expired from loss of blood if
the Sioux had not ended its agony with their arrows. They decided,
therefore, that great Matohota should be credited with victory.

"Imutanka was very brave, but Matohota was too strong for him," declared
Sun Bird.

"Yes, Matohota won the fight," agreed White Otter.

As the night was far advanced they determined to wait until daylight
before setting out to rejoin their companions. They spent some time
dancing solemnly about their victims, and chanting their war songs. Then
they opened the carcasses of the bear and the lion and removed the
hearts. They cut them into two parts and ate them with superstitious
zeal. It was an ancient custom of the Dacotahs, who believed that by
consuming the heart of a particularly strong and courageous bear or lion
they would absorb the strength and courage of the animal itself.

At dawn the Sioux determined to follow the game trail to the plain, in
the hope of encountering some of the war party. They had thoughtfully
cut the arrows from the bodies of Matohota and Imutanka so that if
either the Blackfeet or the Crows chanced to visit the spot they would
be unable to guess who had ventured upon their hunting grounds.

"Perhaps we will find out something about that pony," suggested Sun
Bird, as they moved slowly down the game trail.

"See, here are the tracks of Imutanka," said White Otter.

The trail of the lion was plainly visible. The Sioux gave little
attention to it. Their interest in fierce Imutanka had ended with his
death. They were curious, however, to learn more about the unfortunate
pony. They watched closely to find its tracks. They were faint and far
apart, and although Sun Bird and White Otter were expert trailers they
could gain little information from the unsatisfactory trail.

Then the game trail suddenly led them to an open plateau which offered
an extended view of the plain. They saw a small company of horsemen
riding toward the ridge. They studied them closely. There were eight.

"Perhaps our friends are looking for us," said Sun Bird.

White Otter remained silent. His whole attention was concentrated upon
the approaching horsemen. They were a considerable distance below him
and some distance from the base of the ridge. It was difficult to
identify them, but the Ogalala was straining his eyes in the attempt. He
was particularly noting the ponies, as he had become thoroughly familiar
with the color and type of every animal in the Minneconjoux war party.
He failed to recognize any of the ponies which were approaching the
timber. One was a buckskin, and there were two pintos. There were
several such animals in the Sioux war party, but they differed in type
from the ponies on the plain. White Otter was suspicious of the
approaching horsemen. Sun Bird, too, was becoming uneasy about them.

"Who are they?" he asked, anxiously.

"They are not our people," White Otter assured him. "I do not know who
they are. Do you know them?"

"No," replied Sun Bird.

They watched anxiously while the riders drew nearer the base of the
ridge. As they finally came within bow range of the timber, they stopped
and began to watch the ridge. For a moment the Sioux wondered if the
horsemen had discovered them. It seemed impossible, as they had hidden
themselves in the undergrowth the moment they discovered the riders.

"No, they did not see us," White Otter declared, confidently. "I believe
they are scouts. Perhaps they are Blackfeet."

"No, they are not Blackfeet," said Sun Bird. "I know those people a long
ways off."

"Well, they do not look like Crows," White Otter told him.

"No, they are not Crows," replied Sun Bird.

"Who are they?" demanded White Otter.

"I cannot tell you that until they come closer," Sun Bird told him.

In the meantime one of the horsemen had left his companions and was
riding cautiously toward the ridge. His friends were watching him
closely and seemed ready to rush to his assistance at the first warning
of danger. As the scout drew steadily nearer, the Sioux studied him with
great care. Sun Bird was positive that he was not a Blackfoot, and both
of them were equally certain that he was not a Crow. The Crows allowed
their hair to grow to great length, and wore it in two massive braids
which often fell below their knees. The man who was approaching the
ridge, however, had a great abundance of rather short, unbraided hair,
which fell loosely about his shoulders. As Sun Bird noted it, and the
high, peculiar shape of the warrior's head he suddenly identified him.

"Now I know about him," he told White Otter. "He is a Flathead. It is
bad. They are enemies of my people. We must watch out."

"I have heard my grandfather tell about those people," said White Otter.

He recalled the stories which old Wolf Robe had told about how the
Flatheads flattened the heads of their children by tightly binding the
skulls of the babies between stiff slabs of bark, and keeping them in
the vise until the skulls were pressed into the desired shape. Those
strange people considered a high, flat skull a great mark of beauty. As
they were a northern tribe, hovering about the mountains, it was the
first time White Otter had encountered them. He studied the approaching
rider with curious interest.

"They are great hunters," Sun Bird told him. "I believe these riders are
coming to this ridge to hunt."

"Perhaps they will follow this trail," suggested White Otter. "Perhaps
they will go up there where we killed Matohota, to watch for game."

Sun Bird started at the suggestion. It appeared to have offered an
interesting possibility. He drew the mysterious arrow from his bowcase,
and smiled significantly at White Otter.

"Now I know about this thing," he said. "This arrow came from the
Flatheads."

White Otter nodded understandingly.

In the meantime the Flathead scout had reached the base of the ridge and
disappeared from their sight. They turned their attention to the company
of horsemen who were waiting on the plain. They seemed to be watching
for the signal to advance.

"Those people are very cautious," said White Otter.

"Perhaps they are afraid of the Blackfeet," Sun Bird told him.

Then they heard a shout from the base of the ridge, and the horsemen
cantered briskly toward the timber. The Sioux realized that it was time
to move from the plateau. They believed it would be easy to return to
the top of the ridge and escape from their enemies. Sun Bird, however,
showed a desire to linger.

"Those look like good ponies," he told White Otter, as his eyes twinkled
mischievously. "The Flatheads are our enemies. They have killed some of
my people. I feel like taking away some of those ponies."

"You are the leader, I will follow you," White Otter said, quietly.

"It is good," Sun Bird declared, enthusiastically.

Their first thought, however, was to conceal themselves sufficiently
near the game trail to see the Flatheads if they passed. It was a bold
resolve, and the eyes of the daring young Sioux flashed with excitement.
They had been taught from infancy that the noblest aim of a warrior was
to inflict punishment upon his enemies, and they determined to make the
most of their opportunity. They concealed themselves within easy bowshot
of the trail, and waited anxiously for the Flatheads to appear. It was
not long before the Sioux heard them approaching.

"They are coming," whispered Sun Bird.

They watched in breathless suspense, and in a few moments they saw the
first horseman appear at the edge of the plateau. His companions
followed closely behind him. The Sioux were greatly surprised when the
Flatheads stopped their ponies in the center of the open park and began
to dismount. Then the ponies were left with two warriors and the other
members of the company passed up the game trail on foot. The Sioux had a
splendid view of them at close range. They were tall, muscular men,
whose high, flattened skulls gave them a weird and sinister expression.
As they were not painted for war, the Sioux believed they were hunters.

"Perhaps they will find our tracks," Sun Bird whispered, uneasily, after
they had passed.

White Otter looked serious. The possibility had already flashed through
his mind, and he was troubled about it. He knew that even one indistinct
impression of a fresh moccasin track would arouse the suspicions of the
Flatheads, and send them hurrying to the plateau to investigate. Then it
would be impossible to capture the ponies, and difficult to get away.

"The ground is hard," Sun Bird said, hopefully. "We did not make many
tracks."

"The eyes of a hunter are sharp," White Otter cautioned him.

Realizing that there was nothing to be gained by worrying over the
possibility of the Flatheads discovering their tracks, the Sioux
dismissed the thought from their minds and turned their attention upon
the warriors with the ponies. The latter had incautiously turned loose
the ponies to graze in the center of the park and had stationed
themselves on opposite sides of the plateau to watch them. The Sioux
instantly saw their opportunity.

"Those warriors are very foolish," Sun Bird said, excitedly. "Now we can
creep up and get two of those ponies."

"We must be quick," White Otter told him. "Those other warriors may come
back."

"I will take that yellow pony, it looks fast," said Sun Bird.

"I will take the spotted pony with the white tail," said White Otter.

Having made their selection, the Sioux realized that they must attempt
their daring coup without a moment's delay. They moved through the
undergrowth with the alert, silent stealth of Huhasapedan, the fox.
When they were almost at the edge of the park they stopped to plan their
reckless dash upon the ponies. The animals which they hoped to secure
were grazing near the edge of the timber and the Flathead who guarded
them was picking berries a short distance away. The Sioux crawled a
bowlength nearer. Then as one of the ponies suddenly raised its head,
they stopped and waited with thumping hearts to learn if they had been
discovered. The unsuspecting animal resumed its feeding, however, and
the Sioux breathed more easily. Again they moved carefully toward the
border of the park. Their eyes were fixed upon the ponies, and their
ears were open to catch the first warning that the Flatheads had found
their tracks.

When they finally reached the edge of the timber, the ponies which they
had selected were almost within reach of them. They were grazing
quietly, and the long rawhide lariats were trailing between their feet.
The Flathead had turned his back upon them and was stooped over
searching for berries in the long grass. The warrior on the opposite
side of the park was lying in the shade of a tree. The Sioux realized
that their opportunity was at hand. Each fastened his eyes upon the
animal he planned to capture and prepared to rush into the park. At
that moment, however, they heard a signal from the upper end of the game
trail. The truth instantly flashed through their minds. The Flathead
hunters had discovered their trail.

"Come!" cried White Otter.

They jumped to their feet and rushed recklessly into the park. Then as
the startled ponies turned in panic, the Sioux sprang forward and seized
the lariats. The next moment they had mounted and were riding furiously
down the game trail. They chuckled with boyish glee as they heard the
alarmed Flathead guards yelling frantically for their companions.




CHAPTER XIII

A CLEVER STRATAGEM


At the time that Sun Bird and White Otter set out to climb the ridge to
search for the Blackfeet camp, Lean Wolf and Sitting Eagle rode
northward along the edge of the timber to look for signs of their
enemies. They were particularly anxious to locate the Crows, who, they
feared, were somewhere in the vicinity. They rode until the day was half
gone, and then, having seen nothing of their foes, determined to return
to their companions. As they were cantering slowly toward a deep ravine
which they had crossed earlier in the day, their ponies suddenly began
to raise their ears and whinny. The Sioux instantly stopped in alarm.

"Watch out!" cautioned Lean Wolf.

He had barely given the warning when a great company of horsemen rode
out of the ravine and raced toward the astounded Sioux. The latter
instantly recognized the riders as Crows. They were almost upon them and
the Sioux wheeled their ponies and rode madly across the plain.

"This way! This way!" cried Sitting Eagle, as he turned toward the
north.

The Crows were within bowshot and their arrows were falling all about
the crouching Sioux. The latter urged their ponies to a frantic burst of
speed to escape from the fierce attack. Stride by stride they distanced
their pursuers until they were beyond arrow range. Then the Crows
withheld their arrows and began to lash their ponies in an attempt to
again get within bow range.

"Keep low on your pony," cautioned Lean Wolf. "Perhaps they do not know
who we are."

"Yes, yes, we will try to fool them," replied Sitting Eagle.

Then as the two ponies raced along side by side he told Lean Wolf about
a narrow, shut-in canyon which extended back into the foothills. He said
it was only a short distance ahead of them.

"If we run into that place the Crows cannot get us," Sitting Eagle
declared, confidently.

"It is good, we will go there," agreed Lean Wolf.

The Crows were trying desperately to come within arrow range, but the
gallant Sioux ponies were holding their lead and their riders had little
fear of being overtaken. They believed that the Crow ponies had reached
the limit of their speed and that further urging would cause them to
collapse.

The Sioux finally reached the canyon a safe distance ahead of their
pursuers. After they had ridden through the narrow entrance, they
dismounted and sought safety behind two great boulders which guarded the
pass.

"Now we can hold off our enemies," Sitting Eagle said, with evident
relief.

"Yes, it will be hard for them to come through here," declared Lean
Wolf.

The Crows, however, showed no disposition to make the attempt. They
seemed to realize the strength of the Sioux position and appeared
reluctant to make an attack. They gathered in a compact group well
beyond arrow range, and held a council of war.

"They will wait until it gets dark," declared Sitting Eagle. "Then they
will try to get into this place."

"We will be ready," Lean Wolf said, doggedly. "But perhaps the Crows
will keep us here a long time. We have no water. It is bad."

"There is a little pool a short ways behind us, and there is plenty of
grass for the ponies," Sitting Eagle assured him.

"It is good," Lean Wolf declared, heartily. "We can stay here until the
Crows get tired and go away."

When the day finally ended and twilight fell upon the plain, the Sioux
became more alert. They feared that the crafty Crows would make an
attempt to creep into the canyon under cover of the darkness, and they
determined to be prepared. Crouching behind the bowlders, they peered
anxiously into the night, listening for the sound of stealthy footfalls
at the entrance to the canyon. Then, as time passed and the stillness was
unbroken, they began to wonder. Had the Crows suddenly departed? The
Sioux had grave doubts.

"No, they have not gone away," Lean Wolf told Sitting Eagle. "I believe
they took us for Blackfeet. They are very mad at those people. I believe
they will try hard to kill us."

"Listen!" cautioned Sitting Eagle.

They heard something moving cautiously near the entrance to the pass.
Fearing that the Crows were about to make an attack, the Sioux fitted
arrows to their bows and prepared to offer desperate resistance. Then
they again heard some one creeping stealthily toward them through the
night.

"It is a scout," whispered Lean Wolf.

Sitting Eagle rose to his knees, and shot his arrow toward the sounds.
There was a noisy scramble from the pass, and they knew that the
invaders had been driven off. Then for a long time they heard nothing
further from their foes. Shortly before daylight, however, a small
company of reckless young warriors rushed boldly into the narrow defile
and made a valiant attempt to overcome the Sioux. The latter fought
furiously, and the Crows were forced to withdraw. Their foolhardy
display of bravery had cost the lives of several of them.

The Sioux were greatly encouraged by their success in holding the pass.
They believed that the Crows would be slow to renew the attack. They had
withdrawn beyond arrow range, and as dawn lighted the plain the Sioux
saw them gathered in earnest discussion some distance from the canyon.

"Perhaps they will go away," Sitting Eagle said, hopefully.

"No, I do not believe it," replied Lean Wolf. "Listen, they are singing
their war songs. We must be ready."

A few moments afterward the entire Crow war party galloped toward the
canyon. As they came within arrow range, however, they dropped behind
their ponies and raced past yelling fiercely.

"Save your arrows!" shouted Lean Wolf.

"Yes, yes, I see what they are trying to do," Sitting Eagle told him.

They realized at once that their wily foes were attempting to make them
waste their arrows. When the Crows saw that the trick had failed, they
immediately withdrew beyond arrow range. This time, however, they
disappeared from sight over a rise of the plain. The Sioux looked at one
another in surprise. The unexpected maneuver made them suspicious.

"They are trying to fool us," said Sitting Eagle.

"Yes, they are trying to make us come out so that they can catch us,"
declared Lean Wolf.

Then their suspicions were confirmed as they saw several warriors
peeping over the crest of the rise. The Sioux laughed and jeered at
them, and the Crows instantly withdrew from sight. They remained hidden
for the rest of the day, but the Sioux had little doubt that sharp-eyed
scouts were constantly watching the pass.

"If they do not come when it gets dark, we will know that they have gone
away," said Sitting Eagle.

They watched in weary suspense as the long day finally drew to a close.
The Crows, however, failed to appear. It seemed as if they really had
abandoned the siege, and still the Sioux feared to believe it.
Experience had taught them that the Crows were crafty and treacherous
foes, and they feared that they were planning some clever ruse to gain
admission to the canyon.

"We must keep watching," Lean Wolf said, suspiciously.

The night was well advanced before they heard anything to arouse their
fears. Then they again caught the sound of some one moving toward the
canyon.

"Watch out, they have come!" whispered Sitting Eagle.

"I hear them," Lean Wolf replied.

The next moment a wild chorus of yells warned them that the entire Crow
force was crowding into the narrow pass. The Sioux knew that the
critical moment was at hand. The Crows had left their ponies out on the
plain and had crept toward the canyon on foot. It was evident that they
were determined to kill their foes at any cost, and the Sioux realized
that unless they could stop the first fierce rush there was no hope for
them.

"Come, we are Dacotahs, we will show these people how to fight!" Lean
Wolf cried, savagely.

They rose behind the bowlders and delivered a deadly volley of arrows
that threw the Crows into confusion. For a moment they hesitated, and
the Sioux took hope. Then the Crows rallied and rushed recklessly upon
their foes. The Sioux took shelter behind the bowlders and fought with
the fury of despair. They realized that it was only a matter of moments
before they would be overcome, and they determined to make the Crows pay
dearly for the victory.

At that instant, however, the great war cry of the Dacotahs echoed
through the night, and a moment afterward the thunderous hoof beats of
running ponies reverberated across the plain. The Sioux could scarcely
believe their ears. The Crows turned in panic.

"The Blackfeet! The Blackfeet!" they cried hysterically. "They have run
off our ponies!"

They believed that they had been led into a trap by the treacherous
Blackfeet, and the thought demoralized them. Their one thought was to
escape from the canyon before their foes barred the way. They scrambled
wildly through the narrow pass and fled into the darkness.

"Come!" cried Lean Wolf, as he sprang upon his pony.

The Sioux galloped from the pass, and raced across the plain to join the
Minneconjoux war party. They heard the Sioux war cry directly ahead of
them, and they raised their voices in reply. Several riderless ponies
crossed their path, but they made no attempt to capture them. Their one
thought was to join their comrades in an attack upon the bewildered
Crows. Then they heard some one galloping toward them and shouting their
names. A moment later White Otter raced the fiery piebald beside them.

"You are alive--it is good," he said. "Come, we will run away before the
Crows find out about it."

"Where are our brothers?" Lean Wolf inquired, anxiously.

"Little Raven and Running Dog are waiting over there," White Otter told
him.

"Yes, yes, but where are the others?" inquired Lean Wolf.

"They did not come," laughed White Otter. "We made all that noise to
frighten the Crow ponies and bring the Crows out on the plain. I did it
a long time ago. Now I have done it again. The Crows are very foolish."

"White Otter, you are a great chief!" Lean Wolf said, warmly. "You have
given us our lives. We will tell our people about it."




CHAPTER XIV

THE BLACKFEET CAMP


They soon found Little Raven and Running Dog, and then they set out to
join the war party. As they rode swiftly through the night Lean Wolf
asked White Otter to tell about his daring stratagem against the Crows.

"How did you come to find us?" Lean Wolf asked him.

"When we came back from the ridge, Sun Bird asked our friends about
you," said White Otter. "They told us that you went away and did not
come back. We felt bad about it. Sun Bird sent us to look for you.
Pretty soon we found the tracks of your ponies. We followed them to that
gully. Then we saw what had happened. We thought the Blackfeet had
caught you. It was easy to follow all those pony tracks. Then we came in
sight of the place where you were hiding. We lay down behind a ridge to
watch. We saw a war party of Crows. Then I told Running Dog and Little
Raven how I fooled those people. I said, 'I will fool them again.' Then
we frightened away the ponies and made the Crows run out. That is all I
have to say about it."

Soon afterward they encountered the Minneconjoux war party advancing
carefully along the edge of the timber. However, when Sun Bird learned
that the Crows were only a short distance ahead of him, he immediately
ordered a halt.

"If we keep going ahead we will run into those people," he told his
companions. "That would be foolish. We have set out to fight the
Blackfeet. We must keep ourselves strong until we meet them."

"Yes, it would be foolish to risk our lives until we have done what we
set out to do," the Minneconjoux told one another.

They made a wide detour, therefore, and circled far out on the plain to
avoid meeting their enemies. Daylight was close at hand when they
finally returned to the foothills. Having passed safely by the canyon
without hearing anything of the Crows, the Sioux believed that there was
little further danger of again encountering those hated foes.

"We are getting close to the Blackfeet camp, the Crows will not come
this way," said Sun Bird.

"They have gone to tell their people how the Blackfeet fooled them,"
Lean Wolf said, jokingly.

"White Otter can tell them about it," laughed the Minneconjoux.

As the last lingering night shadows lifted from the plain, the Sioux
entered the timber to avoid being seen by prowling companies of
Blackfeet. Although the danger of meeting the Crows appeared to have
passed, they knew that they would be in constant peril from the
Blackfeet. Dancing Rabbit said that they were within a day's journey of
the great camp, and the announcement roused them to their danger. They
moved carefully along the base of the ridge until they found a sheltered
hiding place.

"Now, my friends, I will tell you what I propose to do," said Sun Bird.
"You have heard the words of Dancing Rabbit. He says that we are getting
near the great Blackfeet camp. It is good. That is what we set out to
do. But we must be cautious. We must not let the Blackfeet see us until
we run off those ponies. We must hide in the timber until we are ready
to fight. But first we must find the Blackfeet camp. I believe we can
see it from the top of this ridge. Pretty soon I am going to climb up
there and look around. You must wait here until I come back. Then when
it grows dark we will go ahead. I have finished."

Soon afterward he set out with White Otter and Dancing Rabbit. They
climbed to the top of the ridge and looked anxiously toward the north.
It was some time before Dancing Rabbit spoke. Then he pointed eagerly
toward a low, sage-grown ridge.

"Do you see that long hill?" he asked excitedly.

"Yes, I see it," replied Sun Bird.

"Well, there is a river on the other side of it," Dancing Rabbit told
them. "Many trees grow along that river. The Blackfeet camp is between
that river and that long hill. I hid on top of that hill when I ran away
from the camp."

Sun Bird and White Otter heard him in silence. Now that the goal was
almost in sight they showed little emotion. Only the sudden flash of
their eyes betokened their interest. They were intently studying the
low, sage-grown sweep of the plain which Dancing Rabbit declared
concealed the Blackfeet camp.

"See, see, there is the smoke from the village!" cried Dancing Rabbit,
as he pointed to a thin column of smoke which was rising above the
ridge.

"I have been watching it a long time," Sun Bird told him.

"Yes, I saw it," said White Otter, as Sun Bird looked inquiringly at
him.

"See, there is a high place over there," said Sun Bird, as he pointed
toward a great ledge some distance to the northward. "If we climb up on
those rocks we can see the Blackfeet lodges."

"Yes, I believe you can see the camp from that place," Dancing Rabbit
declared, eagerly.

They made their way slowly along the ridge until they reached the base
of the great ledge. It rose many bow lengths above them and was so bare
and conspicuous that the Sioux were somewhat fearful of being seen if
they climbed it. They knew that when enemies were expected, every great
camp was protected by sentinels posted on elevations of the plain to
watch for the approach of their foes. As the Blackfeet had every reason
to expect an attack from both the Minneconjoux and the Crows, the Sioux
felt quite certain that they had taken the usual precautions to guard
their village. Still, the possibility of seeing the great Blackfeet camp
was a strong temptation, and the Sioux finally decided to climb the
ledge.

They had barely made the decision, however, when they saw something
which instantly changed their plans. A small company of horsemen had
suddenly appeared on the summit of the ridge which hid the camp. The
Sioux knew at once that they were Blackfeet, and they watched anxiously
to see which way they would go. They were considerably relieved when the
riders reached the foot of the slope and turned toward the east. They
rode off at a smart canter and soon disappeared into a dip of the plain.

"I believe they are hunters," said White Otter.

"Well, they have gone away," Sun Bird told him. "Come, we will climb up
there and look around."

"No, it would be foolish," White Otter declared. "I see some one down
there watching this place."

Sun Bird and Dancing Rabbit started in amazement. Both had unusually
sharp vision, and they had kept their eyes steadily on the ridge, but
neither of them had seen any one except the horsemen.

"Where is that person?" Sun Bird inquired, curiously.

"Look sharp at that twisted tree, near the top of the ridge," said White
Otter.

His companions looked in vain. They could find no evidence of any one
either in or about the tree which White Otter had designated. They
feared that he had been mistaken.

"I do not see any one," declared Sun Bird.

"Well, there is a warrior sitting up there among the branches," White
Otter told him. "If you look sharp along that crooked limb you will see
him. He is far away, but my eyes tell me that he is looking this way. We
must be cautious."

"Yes, yes, I see him!" Sun Bird said, excitedly.

"He must be a scout. Perhaps those riders left him there to watch for
enemies. Perhaps it is a war party."

"We will wait and see what he is going to do," said White Otter.

As they were high up, and well sheltered in the timber, the Sioux had
little fear of being discovered. They were curious to know what the
warrior in the tree was watching for, and they determined to wait until
they learned. Then they suddenly discovered a horseman near the spot
where the Blackfeet had disappeared. The Sioux felt sure that he was one
of the company. He was facing toward the ridge where the warrior was
watching from the tree. Apparently aware that the latter had seen him,
he dismounted and began to signal with his robe. First he held it
directly in front of him between his outstretched arms. The Sioux
recognized the signal as the sign for buffaloes. Then he waved the robe
up and down several times before his body. It was the signal for many.

"Those men are Blackfeet hunters," declared White Otter. "They have
found some buffaloes. That man is telling about it."

In the meantime the warrior had descended from the tree and hurried to
the top of the ridge. Then he stooped and raised his robe from the
ground. He faced toward the north, and repeated the signals which he had
just received. Then both warriors disappeared.

"That man has told the people in the village about the buffaloes," said
White Otter. "I do not believe it is a big hunt. Perhaps some buffaloes
came near the camp and some young men went out to kill them."

"Well, we must not show ourselves," Sun Bird said, with a tinge of
disappointment. "I would like to look at that camp, but I believe it
would be foolish to climb up there."

"Yes, my brother, it would be foolish," White Otter warned him. "The
Blackfeet are moving around. Their eyes are sharp. We must watch out."

"I will tell you how I feel about it," said Sun Bird.

"I am listening," replied White Otter.

"I am going to ask Dancing Rabbit to go back to our brothers," explained
Sun Bird. "I am going to ask him to tell them to come ahead when it
grows dark. Sitting Eagle knows this place. He must be the leader. When
it gets light they must hide in the timber and wait for us. Dancing
Rabbit, you must come back here and tell us where they are. Then we will
go to them and tell them what we saw. White Otter, I will ask you to
stay here with me. When it gets dark we will climb up on that high place
and hide. When the light comes we will see the Blackfeet camp."

"It is the best thing to do," White Otter told him.

Shortly after Dancing Rabbit left them, they saw a great company of
Blackfeet riding slowly over the ridge. There were both men and women,
and many of the ponies were dragging the pole _travois_ upon which
burdens were transported across the plains.

"Those hunters have killed some buffaloes," said White Otter. "These
people are going to bring in the meat."

They watched the interesting cavalcade move slowly across the plain and
disappear on the trail of the hunters. The Blackfeet were sending their
women to bring in the meat. It was apparent, therefore, that they had
little fear of either the Minneconjoux or the Crows retaliating for the
recent attacks which they had made upon them. The reckless boldness of
their arrogant foes caused the eyes of the Sioux to flash with anger.

"We will fool those boastful people," Sun Bird said, fiercely.

"They feel safe--it is good," White Otter replied, quietly.

They saw nothing more of the Blackfeet until the end of the day and then
the hunters returned. A short way behind them came the women and a few
men, leading the pack ponies laden with meat. After the Blackfeet had
passed over the ridge, the Sioux listened anxiously for sounds from the
camp. When they failed to hear anything they began to wonder if the camp
was farther away than they supposed.

"I do not believe it is far beyond that ridge," declared White Otter.
"The wind has carried away the noise."

"Yes, that may be true," agreed Sun Bird.

They waited impatiently for darkness, and when it finally came they
immediately began to climb the ledge. It was hard, perilous work, as the
night was unusually black, and the ledge was high and steep. There were
places where a false step would have meant severe injury, or even
death, and the Sioux realized the necessity for caution.

"Well, we have had a hard time," Sun Bird panted, as they finally
reached the top.

"Yes, it is a hard place to get to," agreed White Otter.

They went as far as possible along the top of the ledge, hoping at
daylight to be able to see over the ridge which hid the camp. Then they
concealed themselves behind two high pinnacles of rock which rose some
distance above the ledge and waited anxiously for the night to pass.

"See, the light is coming," Sun Bird said, eagerly, as the first faint
trace of dawn appeared in the east. "Pretty soon we will see the great
Blackfeet camp."

"It is good," replied White Otter.

They waited impatiently for darkness to leave the plain. Dawn seemed a
long time coming. However, the pale narrow streak across the eastern sky
gradually widened, the stars grew dim, and a bird note sounded from the
timber. Day was close at hand. The Sioux stirred restlessly. Their long
vigil was almost over. Would they see the Blackfeet camp? they wondered.
They longed to sweep aside the heavy black mantle which hid the plain.
Then, after some moments of trying suspense, they saw the night shadows
slowly retreating. The stars had disappeared. A soft gray twilight was
creeping out of the east. Like a great hand, it spread slowly over the
plain and wiped away the darkness. Dim, shadowy shapes appeared in its
wake. It passed over the ridge and drove the shadows into the north. The
Sioux followed it with eager eyes. Slowly, almost imperceptibly, it
extended across the plain and laid bare the secrets of the night.

"Look, look, there are the lodges!" Sun Bird cried, eagerly.

They seemed suddenly to have sprung from the plain--like pale, ghostly
phantoms on the trail of dawn. One after the other, they appeared from
the gloom in great sweeping circles that extended far out on the plain
until the entire camp was exposed before the fascinated eyes of the
Sioux. It was ideally situated beside the waters of a wide, willow-lined
stream. The Sioux marveled at its size. For a long time they studied it
in silence. Trained from infancy in the art of observation, they noted
every detail. They counted the lodges, estimated the number of persons
each would accommodate, determined the nearest and easiest approach to
the camp, noted the distance from the ridge, the distance from the
water, and many other details which skillful scouts were expected to
know.

Then they turned their attention to the ponies. There was a great herd
of them grazing some distance to the eastward of the lodges. The Sioux
watched them with covetous eyes. They knew that many of those animals
had come from the Minneconjoux camp. They intended to take them back,
and many Blackfeet ponies besides. Near the edge of the camp was a
smaller herd of ponies confined in a strong pole corral. The Sioux knew
that those were the more valuable animals, the fleet-footed war and
hunting ponies. White Otter studied them with great interest. He was
trying to identify the famous black war pony of Many Buffaloes, the
Blackfeet chief. However, he was unable to convince himself that any of
the ponies in the corral was that animal. He had little doubt that it
was securely guarded somewhere near the lodge of the chief.

"There are many lodges," Sun Bird said, finally.

"Yes, it is a great camp," replied White Otter.

The Blackfeet were beginning to stir. The Sioux saw them moving about
between the lodges. They looked like dwarfs at the distance. Then smoke
began to rise above the camp. Some people were running toward the river.
The Sioux believed they were boys. The splashes were distinctly visible
as they threw themselves into the water. The faint, far-away sound of
their voices came up from the plain. Then a shadow swept across the
ledge. The Sioux looked into the sky. Huya, the great war bird, was
soaring out over the Blackfeet camp.

"Hi, there is our brother, Huya!" said Sun Bird. "He has come to bring
our people to the Blackfeet camp."

"It is a good sign," declared White Otter.

They watched until the day was well advanced, and then they crept
carefully over the top of the ledge and descended to the summit of the
ridge. They found Dancing Rabbit waiting for them.

"Well, my brother, have you brought our friends here?" inquired Sun
Bird.

"They are hiding down there in the timber," replied Dancing Rabbit.

"Come, we will go to them," said Sun Bird.




CHAPTER XV

A PERILOUS RECONNAISSANCE


They found the war party camped in a secluded ravine which led far back
into the foothills. Having ridden throughout the night, most of the
Minneconjoux were sleeping when Sun Bird and White Otter arrived at the
rendezvous. The spot was strongly guarded by sentinels, however, who
took turns at keeping watch. Sun Bird and White Otter immediately asked
for water, and Dancing Rabbit led them to a splendid spring on the side
of the ravine. Then they supplied themselves with generous rations of
dried meat and ate heartily. In the meantime their arrival had awakened
most of the war party, and they gathered about the famous young scouts
and waited anxiously for them to speak.

"Well, my friends, I have something good to tell you," Sun Bird said, at
last. "We saw the Blackfeet camp. It is close by. There are many
lodges. There must be many people to live in them. We saw many ponies.
Some belong to our people. We have come to take them away. We will take
them. Then we saw the fast ponies. They are near the lodges. We will try
to take some of those. But, my friends, I must tell you that it will be
a hard thing to do. There are many warriors in that camp. They are
brave. Perhaps we will have to fight hard to get those ponies."

"My brothers, I have listened to your words," said Sitting Eagle. "You
say that the Blackfeet are brave. It is true. I have fought many battles
against them. They are braver than the Pawnees. They are braver than the
Kiowas. They are braver than the Crows. Now you know that they are very
brave. Well, my friends, the Dacotahs are braver than the Blackfeet.
Yes, the Dacotahs are the bravest of all. We will go to that great camp,
and take away those ponies. Sun Bird is a good leader. Our brother,
White Otter, is a great chief. I see many brave warriors sitting here.
We are very strong. Yes, my brothers, we will take away those ponies."

The boastful assurance of Sitting Eagle roused the Minneconjoux to a
great pitch of enthusiasm. For the moment their ardor overcame their
caution, and they began to talk loudly and utter wild threats against
their foes.

"Come! come!" Lean Wolf cried, impatiently. "We are making too much
noise. Are we like old women who cackle like foolish Magasapa, the
goose?"

The Minneconjoux instantly subsided into silence. They knew that it was
not the part of warriors to give way to their emotions, and they felt
guilty and ashamed. As Sun Bird showed no inclination to tell them
anything more about the Blackfeet camp, most of them threw themselves
upon the ground and resumed their slumbers. The three young scouts who
had just returned from the top of the ridge followed their example, and
it was not long before all except the vigilant sentinels about the edge
of the camp were sleeping soundly.

The day had ended and twilight had fallen upon the plain when Sun Bird
and White Otter finally awakened. They felt rested and refreshed, and
were eager to begin the great adventure which lay before them. As the
entire company was awake, Sun Bird prepared to carry out his plans for
advancing upon the Blackfeet camp. He called the sentinels who had
watched through the night, and asked if they had seen or heard anything
of their foes. They assured him that the night had passed without
alarm.

"It is good," said Sun Bird. "Now, my friends, I will tell you what I
propose to do. See! the light has almost gone. When it gets dark I am
going away to find out about that great camp. I am going to creep up
close. Then I will find out what we want to know. Then we will know how
to get those ponies. Now I am going to ask White Otter to go with me. He
is a great scout. He has been to the Pawnee camp. He has been to the
Crow camp. He has crawled up to the lodges of the Kiowas. Now I will ask
this great scout to go to the Blackfeet camp with me."

"I will go," White Otter told him.

There were many others who were anxious to risk their lives for a peep
into the great Blackfeet camp, but Sun Bird refused them. He knew that
numbers increased the chances of discovery, and he determined to run no
unnecessary risks. Besides, there were few, if any, warriors among the
Minneconjoux who could match the scouting abilities of the Ogalala. As
Sun Bird realized that the success of the undertaking might depend upon
the thoroughness of the reconnaissance which he planned to make, he
determined to rely solely upon White Otter and himself to carry it
through.

It was barely dark when they left the war party and set out for the
Blackfeet camp. Their companions watched them depart, in silence, for
they knew the danger to which they were about to expose themselves, and
many alarming possibilities flashed through their minds.

"They are very brave," said Sitting Eagle, as Sun Bird and White Otter
disappeared into the shadows.

Believing that it would be easier to accomplish their purpose if they
traveled on foot, they left their ponies with their companions. Once at
the edge of the plain, they hurried away in the direction of the low
sage-grown ridge. When they finally saw it looming up before them, they
realized that they must advance with more caution. If the Blackfeet
expected an attack it was probable that they had posted sentinels at
that spot, and the Sioux determined to take every precaution. The
discovery of the warrior in the tree led them to believe that the ridge
was a favorite watching place of their foes.

Once at the base of the slope, the Sioux stopped and spent some time
listening for the sound of voices. Then as they heard nothing to rouse
their fears, they moved cautiously up the side of the ridge. When they
reached the top they instantly located the camp by the glow from the
fires. For a moment or so they watched silently. Then they descended
through the sage, and moved out across the grim, black plain.

"Now we must watch out," warned Sun Bird.

Side by side, they sped through the night as swiftly and noiselessly as
wolves on the trail of their prey. Their eyes were fixed on the alluring
glow from the Blackfeet fires, they relied upon their ears to warn them
of danger. The plain, however, was steeped in silence. They heard
nothing but their own soft footfalls, and the gentle rustling of the
grass against their buckskin leggings.

"It is good," whispered Sun Bird. "The Blackfeet are in the camp eating
buffalo meat. There is no one to stop us."

"We must not be too sure about it," White Otter cautioned him.

Then they heard something which brought them to a sudden stop. The dogs
were barking furiously in the Blackfeet camp. The Sioux listened
uneasily. Several disturbing possibilities entered their minds. Had the
dogs caught their scent? It seemed impossible. White Otter raised a
moistened finger to test the breeze. It blew from the camp. They felt
relieved. Then another thought presented itself. Perhaps the Crows had
moved against the Blackfeet camp. The Sioux listened for sounds of an
attack. They heard only the savage baying of the dogs.

"I believe the dogs are fighting for meat," said Sun Bird.

"It is bad," White Otter replied, seriously. "If those dogs keep moving
around, it will be hard to get near the camp."

The thought troubled them. They knew that if one of those gaunt,
wolf-like creatures caught their scent it would instantly skulk out upon
the plain to investigate. Once it found them it would set up a racket
that would soon draw the rest of the pack upon them, and the Blackfeet
would be quick to realize the significance of the commotion.

"There is only one thing to do," said White Otter. "We will wait here
until the dogs quiet down. Then we will wait until they lie down to
sleep. Then we will creep up to the camp. If we go ahead now, those dogs
will find out about us."

"Yes, I see that it is the only thing to do," agreed Sun Bird.

It seemed a very long time to the impatient Sioux before the dogs
finally became silent. However, as they had heard nothing to indicate
alarm in the Blackfeet camp, they decided that the uproar had been
caused by the dogs fighting over the scraps of buffalo meat which the
Blackfeet had thrown them from their feast. In spite of the stillness,
however, the Sioux feared to approach the camp until they had allowed
the dogs time to gorge themselves and settle down to sleep. They waited,
therefore, watching the twinkle of the camp fires, and listening for
sounds from their foes.

"Come," Sun Bird said, suddenly. "Everything is still. I believe the
dogs have gone to sleep. We will creep up to the camp."

"I am ready," White Otter assured him.

Again they moved cautiously through the night until they were actually
within bowshot of the lodges. Then they suddenly heard the solemn
booming of the war drums, and the sound of singing. For a moment they
turned to one another in alarm. Were the Blackfeet preparing for war?
Then they guessed the truth.

"It is the hunters," whispered White Otter, "They are dancing the
Buffalo Dance."

"It is good," Sun Bird told him. "All the people will be around the
dancers. We can get close to the lodges."

"Watch out for the dogs," cautioned White Otter.

They advanced within half a bowshot of the camp, and then they dropped
to the plain to watch. The camp was brightly illuminated by the light
from the fires, and the Blackfeet were clearly visible as they passed
between the lodges. The booming of the war drums and the singing
continued, and the Sioux could hear even the short, sharp exclamations
of the dancers as they kept time with the music. Still they were unable
to see into the camp, and they determined to advance still closer.

Slowly, a bow length at a time, they crept toward the nearest lodges.
They moved with great caution, and stopped many times to make sure that
the way was clear. They were in constant fear of the dogs. Although they
had seen nothing of them, they realized that at any moment they might
encounter them prowling about the borders of the camp.

The Sioux had almost reached the lodges when they suddenly heard
something moving directly behind them. They turned in alarm. Had a dog
circled about them, and caught their scent? Their hearts beat wildly at
the thought. Each moment they expected to hear the first savage yelp
which would announce their approach to the Blackfeet. Then, as they
listened, they heard footsteps. Some one was walking directly toward
them. They were seized with panic. Discovery seemed certain. There was
not a moment to spare. Pressing themselves close against the ground,
they prepared to drive their arrows through their foe before he could
utter an outcry. At that moment he turned from his course and passed
without seeing them. His bent form, and slow, faltering gait convinced
the Sioux that he was an old man. As he emerged into the firelight at
the edge of the camp they saw that their guess was correct. A moment
afterward he disappeared behind a lodge.

"I believe he is a Medicine Man," whispered Sun Bird. "Perhaps he was
out there making Medicine."

"Perhaps," replied White Otter.

Having recovered from their alarm, they crawled to the edge of the camp,
and hid in the shadow of a lodge. Then they looked upon their enemies.
The Blackfeet were gathered in the center of the camp. They were
watching the wild antics of a company of dancers who were circling about
the fire. The Sioux studied the assemblage with great care. White Otter
was particularly curious, as it was the first time he had seen those
people.

The Blackfeet presented an interesting spectacle, as they celebrated
the success of their hunters. The latter were especially picturesque.
They had painted their faces and bodies and decorated themselves in a
most weird and grotesque manner. Many wore the entire skin of a buffalo
bull, including the head and horns. Others had fastened buffalo feet to
their ankles so that they rattled and clacked at each stride of the
dancer. Thus arrayed, they cavorted wildly about the fire, imitating the
antics of the buffaloes. They pranced, and reared, and kicked, and
roared. Some pawed the ground, and then lay down and wallowed as the
buffaloes would do to rid themselves of flies. Others imitated the
fierce encounter between two great rival bulls, pushing and jostling
each other, and butting their heads together until the spectators
shrieked with delight. It was a clever exhibition of mimicry, and more
than once the Sioux were forced to smile.

Then they turned their attention upon the spectators. Men, women and
children had assembled in a great circle about the dancers. The Sioux
made special note of the men. They were dark and tall, and powerful,
with deep, broad chests, and wide sloping shoulders. They compared
favorably in physique and bearing with the gallant Dacotah fighting men,
and the two young scouts realized that they had come upon worthy foes.
Closer to the dancers were the musicians, six old men, who thumped the
war drums and sang the Buffalo Song in high, cracked tones. The Sioux
gave little attention to them. Their eyes were focused on a small group
of men who stood together some distance to the right of the singers.
Their dress and manner proclaimed them men of importance, and the Sioux
knew that they were the chiefs and counselors of the tribe.

"That warrior who wears the bear robe is Many Buffaloes," Sun Bird
whispered, excitedly.

White Otter nodded understandingly, as he concentrated his attention
upon the man whom Sun Bird had designated. The great Blackfeet war chief
was a man slightly past the prime of life, whose massive frame, and
bold, fearless features well confirmed the stories of his marvelous
exploits on the war trail. He wore a great trailing war bonnet of eagle
plumes, and carried a long coupstick decorated with the trophies which
he had taken from his enemies. He carried himself with the dignity and
hauteur of a great leader, and the Ogalala looked upon him with respect.

"He looks like a warrior," White Otter told Sun Bird.

"He is a great chief," declared Sun Bird.

Many Buffaloes took no part in the ceremony. He stood apart with several
of his associates and showed little interest in the wild capers of the
dancers. His keen eyes, however, noted every action, and it was evident
that his apparent indifference was largely assumed. He appeared to
consider it beneath the dignity of a great war chief to show emotion
upon so trivial an occasion.

"Where is his black pony?" White Otter asked, eagerly.

"I cannot tell you," said Sun Bird.

"Come, we will try to find it," White Otter told him.

Sun Bird looked uneasily into the eyes of his friend. White Otter's bold
resolve filled him with alarm. A disturbing possibility swept through us
mind. Did the daring Ogalala plan to enter the Blackfeet camp in search
of the famous war pony? Sun Bird feared that it would be a fatal blunder
to make the attempt at that time. Even if White Otter should succeed in
leading away the pony without being seen, the loss would rouse the
entire Blackfeet nation. They would immediately send strong war parties
to search the plain, and the long, perilous journey of the Minneconjoux
would have been in vain. Sun Bird appeared reluctant to agree to the
proposal. White Otter instantly guessed the reason.

"I see that you do not feel good about it," White Otter said, quietly.
"I am a war leader. I am not going to do anything foolish. I am not
going to try to take away that pony. I am going to find out where it is.
Then I will wait until our brothers have run off the other ponies. Then
perhaps I will try to take away that black pony."

"It is good," Sun Bird said, with evident relief.

They began to circle cautiously about the camp. It was perilous work.
Bow in hand, they crept stealthily along in the shadows from the lodges,
stopping every bow length to watch and listen. Where were the dogs? They
would have given much to know. They knew that at any moment they might
stumble upon them. They had gone about an arrow flight when they
suddenly discovered one of the dogs lying beside a lodge. Was it asleep?
they wondered. It was lying with its back toward them, and was only five
or six bow lengths away. The Sioux watched it with bated breath. They
realized that the slightest sound might rouse it. They feared to move.
Still, it seemed equally perilous to loiter.

"Come," breathed White Otter.

For an instant Sun Bird hesitated. It was caution, not fear which held
him back. It seemed folly to risk discovery when they had already
learned so much about their foes. White Otter, however, was already
creeping noiselessly into the shadows, and Sun Bird determined to follow
him. Inch by inch they dragged themselves forward until they were
opposite the dog. Then for a moment they hesitated. It had every
appearance of being asleep, and the Sioux passed on.

Then they discovered what they were risking their lives to see. Beside a
great decorated lodge was a strongly made log corral, and above it
appeared the long slender head and graceful neck of the famous black war
pony. It was watching the glow in the center of the camp, and nervously
twitching its ears at the noise. White Otter gazed upon it with eager,
fascinated eyes. It was a noble trophy, and he longed to possess it. The
opportunity seemed before him. Impulse urged him to act. He paused to
consider. Loyalty held him back. He realized that his own ambition must
be sacrificed to insure the success of the Minneconjoux. They had
suffered a great loss at the hands of the Blackfeet. They had made a
long and perilous journey to recover the stolen ponies. Their success
depended upon keeping the Blackfeet in ignorance of their approach
until they were at the camp. White Otter made a quick, and final
decision.

"Come," he whispered. "I have found out what I wanted to know. We will
go."

"It is good," said Sun Bird.

They crept slowly from the edge of the camp. Then when they were a safe
distance from the lodges they rose to their feet and sped away into the
night.




CHAPTER XVI

OFF WITH THE PONIES


The following night the Minneconjoux set out to make their attack upon
the Blackfeet. Long before it was dark Sitting Eagle and Lean Wolf and
Running Dog left the ravine and rode away to watch from the ridge to the
southward of the camp. Then as the twilight faded from the plain the war
party followed swiftly on the trail of the scouts. Riding in pairs, the
Sioux passed on their way in grim silence. When they finally saw the low
ridge directly before them, they stopped and listened anxiously for word
from the scouts.

"Ho, my brothers, the way is clear, but the fires are still burning in
the Blackfeet camp," said Lean Wolf, as he suddenly rode out of the
night.

"We must wait," Sun Bird told him.

In a few moments they heard the sharp bark of the little gray fox, a
short distance to the eastward. Sun Bird waited until he heard it three
times, and then he replied. Soon afterward Running Dog appeared.

"I have been a long ways over there," he said, indicating the east. "I
saw nothing of our enemies. Their fires are burning. We must wait."

"Yes, my brother, we will wait," Sun Bird assured him.

It was some time before Sitting Eagle finally arrived. Then he too
suddenly rode out of the darkness.

"I have been close to the Blackfeet camp," said the famous scout. "I saw
the light of many fires. It is bad. We must wait."

"We will wait," said Sun Bird.

Then, as the stern Minneconjoux fighting men gathered about the youthful
war leader, Sun Bird announced his plans for running off the ponies.

"My brothers, we are in sight of the great Blackfeet camp," he said,
softly. "It is not far beyond this ridge. We have come a long ways. We
have come to do a big thing. We must go through with it. We will wait
here until the fires die down. Then we will know that the Blackfeet have
gone to the lodges. Then we will ride over there and run off the ponies.
Now I will tell you how to do it. There are many ponies out there on the
plain. There are other ponies near the lodges. When we cross over this
ridge I will show you where to find the ponies. When we get near the
camp we must separate. Some must go out on the plain to get those
ponies, and some must go to get the ponies that are near the camp. White
Otter is a great war chief. I will ask him to be the leader of those who
go to get the ponies that are near the camp. Sitting Eagle is a great
war leader. I will ask him to be the leader of those who go to run off
the ponies on the plain. Many of us must wait near the camp to fight
back the Blackfeet. I will be the leader. Now I have told you the way to
do this thing."

"It is good," agreed the Minneconjoux.

While they waited impatiently for the Blackfeet fires to die down, many
of the war party left their ponies with their friends and crawled to the
top of the ridge to watch the camp. Others dismounted and threw
themselves upon the plain to rest. There was little talking. The Sioux
realized that they were about to match themselves against a strong and
wily foe who greatly outnumbered them, and the thought made them
serious. They knew that the time for boasting had passed, and the time
for action was at hand. There was not one of the company, however, who
had the slightest fear. They believed that Dacotah courage would more
than offset the superior strength of the Blackfeet, and they felt
confident of success.

The night was more than half gone when the watchers returned from the
ridge and reported that the last flickering glow had faded from the
Blackfeet camp. The announcement roused the Sioux to action. Springing
upon their ponies, they waited eagerly for the word to advance.

"My brothers, the Blackfeet have gone to their lodges," said Sun Bird.
"Pretty soon they will be asleep. It is good. They will not know about
us until they hear us running off the ponies. Come, Dacotahs, we will
go."

The summons stirred their fighting blood. They longed to send the
Dacotah war cry ringing across the plain as a challenge to their foes.
They stifled the temptation, however, and crossed the ridge in silence.
All evidence of the Blackfeet camp had vanished into the night, and Sun
Bird chose the north star to guide him on his way.

The preliminary reconnaissance which Sun Bird and White Otter had made
the previous night proved of great value. At that time they had
carefully noted the contour of the plain between the ridge and the camp,
and had estimated distances between certain prominent landmarks which
they had retained in their memory. Now, as they found them, they were
able to guess how closely they were approaching the Blackfeet camp. When
he believed that they had gone half way, Sun Bird ordered a halt, and
proceeded to divide the war party. The younger, less experienced
warriors were assigned to the companies who were to run off the ponies,
while the renowned fighters and famous scouts were chosen as a rear
guard to fight back the Blackfeet. Then Sun Bird carefully explained the
location of the ponies.

"Now we are ready to go ahead with this thing," he said. "But before we
begin I will tell you something. When you are ready to ride off the
ponies that are on the plain you must make many quick barks of the
little gray fox. Then you must wait. When White Otter and his brothers
hear it they will know that you are ready. Then when they are ready they
must make that signal. When it stops you must go ahead to run off the
ponies. Then if the Blackfeet hear you we will be ready to hold them
back. Keep these words. Do not go ahead until you hear the signal. I
have finished."

A short distance farther on the Sioux separated to make their raid
against the Blackfeet. Sitting Eagle and his companions turned aside to
approach the spot where the loose ponies were pastured. White Otter and
his company continued toward the camp, and Sun Bird and the fighting men
followed close behind him.

When they were within several bowshots of the camp they stopped, and
White Otter and three companions went forward. He had asked Little Raven
to accompany him, and the young Minneconjoux rode at his side.

"If the ponies begin to call we must make the signal, and be ready to
rush ahead," said the Ogalala.

When they finally saw the black, indistinct outlines of the corral, they
stopped to listen. They knew that the lodges at the end of the camp were
less than half a bowshot away. The slightest sound, therefore, might
arouse the Blackfeet. White Otter turned to Little Raven.

"Get down from your pony," he whispered.

They dismounted and left their ponies with the two warriors who
accompanied them. Then they moved swiftly toward the corral. They were
within bow length of it when they heard the quick barks of the little
gray fox some distance toward the east. Their hearts bounded at the
sound. Sitting Eagle and his companions were ready to run off the
ponies. White Otter rushed to the corral. He turned in dismay. The
corral was empty.

At that instant a horse whinnied in the Blackfeet camp. The Sioux ponies
replied. A dog barked. Voices sounded close at hand. The Blackfeet were
alarmed. Realizing that further caution was useless, White Otter sounded
the signal.

"Run to the ponies!" he cried to Little Raven.

They heard their comrades riding forward to meet them. They also heard
the thunder of many hoofs, and the wild yells of the Blackfeet.
Springing upon his pony, White Otter raced recklessly toward the camp.
Little Raven followed him. They found the village in wild disorder. The
Blackfeet had been completely surprised.

Out on the plain Sitting Eagle and his companions were driving away the
captured ponies. The raid had been entirely successful, and the elated
Sioux were already many arrow flights beyond the camp. Behind them Sun
Bird and his force of fighting men were loitering within bowshot of the
village, watching for White Otter with the other bunch of ponies. When
he failed to appear, Sun Bird rode toward the corral to find him. He
encountered the two warriors who had accompanied the Ogalala on his
perilous mission.

"Where are the ponies? Where is White Otter? Where is Little Raven?" Sun
Bird asked, excitedly.

"That place was empty," they told him. "White Otter and Little Raven
rode away toward the Blackfeet camp."

Sun Bird stared wildly into the face of the speaker. He could scarcely
believe him. Then the truth suddenly flashed across his mind. He
understood why White Otter had risked himself.

"Yes, yes, I know about it," he said.

He called the two riders to follow him and galloped away to lead his
valiant company against the Blackfeet. The latter had rallied from their
confusion and were riding from the camp.

In the meantime White Otter and Little Raven had ridden boldly along the
edge of the camp until they reached the spot where the famous black war
pony was kept. Then White Otter dismounted, and left his pony with
Little Raven. Taking advantage of the darkness and the confusion in the
Blackfeet camp, the daring Ogalala moved swiftly between the lodges. It
was only a moment or so before he encountered his foes. A frightened old
woman took him for one of her people and ran to him for protection. He
grumbled fiercely at her and sprang away before she recognized him. The
next instant two excited warriors dashed past within bow length, and
called him to follow them. Then the way seemed clear, and he hurried
toward the corral. His heart beat wildly as he suddenly saw the log
inclosure before him. When he reached it, however, he saw that it, too,
was empty. The famous black pony had been taken away.

For some moments the disappointed young Sioux lingered beside the
corral. He was blaming himself for having refused the opportunity which
had presented itself the night before. At that time the great trophy had
been almost within his grasp. Now he believed it was forever beyond his
reach. He told himself that he had been foolish to surrender his chance.
Then he suddenly thrilled with the pride of sacrifice. He was a Dacotah,
and the Dacotahs had relied upon him to help them against their foes. He
had nobly performed his duty to the tribesmen who had given him their
confidence. His act had brought success to the Minneconjoux. The thought
roused him. His own loss was forgotten as he rejoiced in the victory of
his people.

"I have done a good thing," he said, joyfully.

Then as he saw fires beginning to gleam in various parts of the camp, he
realized that it was time to go. As he ran toward the edge of the camp a
dog suddenly appeared before him. It faced him with bared fangs and
flashing eyes, and its deep, ugly growls gave warning of an intention to
fight.

"Hi, you foolish Blackfeet dog," cried White Otter, as he drove his
arrow through it. "Now your people will know that I have been in their
village."

He bounded past the struggling dog, and ran from the camp. Little Raven
was waiting with the ponies.

"Come," cried White Otter, as he sprang upon the piebald. "The Blackfeet
have ridden away on the war ponies. Some one took away that black pony.
Now we must go to help our brothers. Listen! I hear them making a big
fight."

Sounds of battle came from directly ahead of them, and White Otter knew
that Sun Bird and his companions were fighting back the Blackfeet.
Calling Little Raven to follow him, the daring young war chief raised
his voice in the war cry, and raced away to engage in the fight.




CHAPTER XVII

HOTLY PURSUED


Once aware of what had happened, the enraged Blackfeet rushed from the
camp like a swarm of angry bees. Led by their great war chief, Many
Buffaloes, they rode recklessly out upon the plain to overtake the
daring foes who had run off their ponies. They had not gone an arrow
flight, however, before they collided with the Sioux.

"Come, my brothers, it is time to fight!" cried Sun Bird.

The resolute band of Sioux fighting men charged furiously upon their
foes. They were outnumbered three to one, but the fierceness of their
attack deceived the Blackfeet and threw them into confusion. Having
recognized the Dacotahs, the Blackfeet knew from experience what sort of
resistance to expect from those powerful and courageous foes.

"The Sioux! The Sioux!" they cried, fiercely.

Then, as Sitting Eagle and his companions raced the captured ponies
through the night, Sun Bird and his company of warriors fought
desperately to hold back the Blackfeet. The latter, however, soon became
aware of their superiority in numbers, and the discovery gave them
confidence. Recovering from their momentary disorder, they made a
desperate attempt to break through their enemies.

The Sioux, however, held their ground, and the fighting was at close
quarters. There were many thrilling encounters. Lean Wolf fought three
Blackfeet warriors and overcame all of them. Sun Bird had his pony
killed beneath him, and then killed his foe and took his horse. Feather
Dog became separated from his companions and was compelled to fight off
an entire company of Blackfeet until some of his friends discovered his
plight and rushed to his assistance.

In spite of their bravery, however, the Sioux were unable to overcome
the odds against them. It was not long before they realized that it
would be folly to sacrifice themselves in attempting to match strength
with their foes. The Blackfeet were too strong to be held back. The
Sioux saw that their only chance of success was in making a running
fight.

"We must follow after the ponies," said Sun Bird.

The moment they gave way the Blackfeet interpreted it as a sign of
defeat. Feeling sure of victory, they charged recklessly forward, and
attempted to throw the Sioux into a rout. Instantly alert to his peril,
Sun Bird brought his company to a stand, and fought with a grim ferocity
that soon convinced the Blackfeet of their mistake. They realized that
victory was far from being won, and they became somewhat more cautious.
After several costly and futile attempts to make the Sioux give ground,
they suddenly divided their forces, and a strong company swept around
the Sioux flank.

"They are passing! They are passing!" the Minneconjoux cried in alarm.

At that moment White Otter and Little Raven joined the war party. They
had fought their way through the very midst of their foes, and reached
their companions in safety. The presence of the famous young war chief
greatly encouraged the Minneconjoux.

"There is only one thing to do," White Otter said, hurriedly, as Sun
Bird turned to consult him. "We must keep ahead of those Blackfeet."

Acting upon his advice, the Sioux suddenly gave way and raced across
the plain in pursuit of Sitting Eagle and the band of ponies. Behind
them thundered the main force of Blackfeet, and at their right rode the
company that had succeeded in getting past them.

"When we come to the ponies we must make a big fight," White Otter
declared, grimly, as he rode beside Sun Bird.

"Yes, yes," agreed Sun Bird.

The Blackfeet kept close behind them, and the Sioux were in constant
peril from their arrows. Whenever the Blackfeet came too near, however,
the Sioux turned upon them and fought them off. Thus they made their way
across the plain until they overtook Sitting Eagle and his companions.
The latter had heard them approaching, and had rounded up the ponies and
prepared to fight.

"Keep going! Keep going!" shouted Sun Bird. "We will hold back the
Blackfeet."

"Yes, keep going!" cried White Otter. "Run the ponies until you come to
that big gully. Then wait for us."

Sitting Eagle and his company barely got the ponies under way before the
Blackfeet were upon them. Sun Bird and the war party fought savagely to
hold them off, but the company of Blackfeet who had ridden along the
Sioux flank circled under cover of the darkness and reached the herd.

"Hold the ponies! Hold the ponies!" shouted Sitting Eagle, as the wily
Blackfeet attempted to stampede them.

Yelling fiercely, they charged close up to the alarmed ponies, and threw
them into wild disorder. Frightened into a panic by the noisy tumult,
the bewildered animals tried to break from their captors and flee across
the plain. Sitting Eagle and his companions made valiant efforts to hold
them under control, but the Blackfeet were riding furiously about the
herd, and making desperate efforts to kill the men who guarded it.

In the meantime Sun Bird and the Minneconjoux war party were fighting a
thrilling battle with the main force of their foes. The latter had again
rushed to close quarters, and the Sioux were in desperate straits.
Greatly outnumbered, they fought with a reckless courage that astounded
their enemies. Try as they might, the Blackfeet were unable to break
through the heroic company that confronted them. Led by Many Buffaloes
himself, the bravest warriors in the Blackfeet nation hurled themselves
against the Sioux with a daring abandon that would have speedily routed
less valiant foes. The Sioux, however, repulsed each savage attack with
a dogged ferocity that gradually shattered the confidence of their
foes.

Sitting Eagle and his gallant band were less successful. They found it
impossible to keep the ponies under control, and at the same time defend
themselves against the Blackfeet. They were threatened with disaster and
began to lose heart.

"Come, Dacotahs, show these people how to fight!" cried Sitting Eagle.

At that moment White Otter led a company of Minneconjoux against the
Blackfeet who had attacked the herd. Roused by the courage of the young
Ogalala war chief, the Minneconjoux warriors charged furiously upon the
surprised Blackfeet and completely overwhelmed them with the fierceness
of their attack. For a moment only the Blackfeet opposed them, and then
as White Otter drove his arrow through the leader of the company the
others lost courage and retreated into the night.

"Come," shouted the Ogalala. "Drive away the ponies!"

Sitting Eagle and his comrades instantly got the ponies in motion. Then
the determined Blackfeet again charged forward to gain possession of the
herd. This time, however, they were met by White Otter and his gallant
band of fighters. They fought with a fiery zeal that soon threw fear
into the hearts of their foes. Riding boldly at the head of his
companions, White Otter dashed recklessly among the Blackfeet, and threw
them into confusion. Then as they wavered he raised the piercing Dacotah
war cry, and led his tribesmen in a furious assault that caused the
astounded Blackfeet to flee wildly before him. He followed them a long
distance across the plain, and exacted heavy toll from the laggards.
Then he suddenly heard Sun Bird and the rest of the war party riding
toward the south.

"Come," he cried. "Our brothers are running ahead of the Blackfeet. We
must find out about it."

Having subdued his foes, he turned and led his comrades to join the
Minneconjoux. When he finally overtook them he found Sun Bird in high
spirits. The skillful young war leader had completely defeated his foes.

"The Blackfeet are getting cautious," said Sun Bird. "See, they are
keeping far behind. I believe they are afraid of us."

The Blackfeet appeared to have lost much of their confidence. Having
lost heavily in the desperate fighting with the Sioux, they seemed
unwilling to risk coming again to close quarters with those indomitable
foes. Although they still continued to follow them, they were content to
remain safely beyond arrow range. The Sioux hoped that they would soon
abandon the pursuit.

"Pretty soon they will turn back," declared Sun Bird. "Then they will go
to the village, and tell their people what a great fight they made."

"Well, they will not bring back those ponies," laughed Little Raven.

Daylight was breaking when the Sioux again overtook their comrades with
the captured ponies. Sitting Eagle had stopped in the bottom of a deep
ravine through which trickled a tiny stream. The Sioux saw at once that
it offered them splendid protection against their foes.

"It is good," Sun Bird said, heartily. "Now we will see what the
Blackfeet will do."

The latter had already stopped, and were apparently discussing the
advisability of attempting to drive the Sioux from their shelter. For a
long time they seemed unwilling to make the effort. The Sioux had left
the ponies in the bottom of the ravine, and were lying along the top of
the bank watching their foes with great interest. They had no intention
of leaving the ravine until the Blackfeet had either made an attack or
withdrawn from the vicinity.

"Perhaps they will wait until it gets dark," suggested Little Raven.

"No, I do not believe it," Sun Bird told him. "I believe they will do
something pretty soon."

"Yes, my brother, that is how I feel about it," said White Otter.

The three young warriors were lying beside one another at the top of the
ravine. On each side of them were the other members of the war party,
except a few young warriors who had been left in charge of the ponies.
White Otter noted, however, that some of the Minneconjoux were missing.
Among them were Proud Hawk and Painted Bird, the two young warriors who
had served as scouts for the war party. The eyes of the Ogalala flashed
threateningly as he realized that they and their absent companions had
been killed by the Blackfeet.

"It is bad," Sun Bird said, solemnly. "Those brave warriors were my
friends. I saw Proud Hawk fall from his pony. I was close beside him. I
tried to carry him off, but the Blackfeet killed him. I saw Painted Bird
making a great fight. The Blackfeet were all around him. They must have
killed him. I tried to get near him, but some Blackfeet rushed upon me
and killed my horse. I had a hard time to get away."

"Well, we must not think about it," said White Otter. "A warrior must
always be ready to die. Those men were very brave. It is enough. We will
tell our people about them."

"Yes, we will call out their names when we ride through the camp,"
replied Sun Bird. "We will tell our people that we sent many Blackfeet
to walk behind our brothers on the Long Trail."

Then their thoughts were diverted by the sudden activity of the
Blackfeet. They were advancing slowly across the plain, singing their
war songs, and shouting boastful threats against the Sioux. The latter
watched them with little fear. They realized that the possession of the
ravine had turned the odds in their favor. Besides, they strongly
doubted that the Blackfeet would actually venture within bowshot.

"They will keep away," Sun Bird said, confidently.

It was not many moments before his words were verified. The Blackfeet
had suddenly stopped beyond arrow range. They were still chanting the
war songs, and shouting threateningly, but they showed no inclination to
approach nearer the ravine. The Sioux, however, watched them closely.
They knew that at any moment their wily foes might throw aside their
caution and sweep forward in a furious attack.

"See, that great chief, Many Buffaloes, is giving them strong words,"
Sun Bird said, eagerly, as he seized White Otter by the arm.

The Ogalala made no reply. His eyes were following every move of the
famous Blackfeet war chief. The latter had ridden out in front of his
tribesmen and was making a fiery address. Several times he wheeled his
pony and swept his arm toward the Sioux. They felt certain that he was
rousing his warriors for a final attempt to recapture the ponies. It was
evident that his words were accomplishing the desired effect. The
Blackfeet were becoming greatly excited. The Sioux grew serious. They
had great respect for the courage and ability of the renowned Blackfeet
leader, and they feared that he was preparing to carry through some bold
stroke which might still bring victory to the Blackfeet.

"Many Buffaloes is going to do something big," Sun Bird told White
Otter. "He is very brave. We must watch out."

White Otter took little notice of the warning. His entire attention was
concentrated upon the spirited black pony, and its famous rider.
Everything else had passed from his mind. Even the great company of
jeering Blackfeet had suddenly faded from his vision. He saw nothing but
the Blackfeet war chief, and his prancing black pony. He watched them
with flashing, fascinated eyes. Then Many Buffaloes dramatically passed
his bow, quiver and arrows to one of his tribesmen, and turned toward
the Sioux with his war club raised. White Otter uttered a short, fierce
exclamation of satisfaction. He had instantly interpreted the maneuver,
and his heart bounded with hope.

As the Blackfeet chief rode slowly toward the ravine, singing his war
song and flourishing his war club, White Otter passed his bow and
arrow-case to Sun Bird and scrambled wildly down the steep side of the
ravine.

"That man is very brave," he cried, excitedly. "Tell your people that
they must not try to kill him when he comes close. I am going to ride
out there to meet him."

"No, no, that would be foolish!" Sun Bird shouted in alarm. "He is
riding that great Medicine Horse. You cannot catch him. He will lead you
over there to the Blackfeet, and they will kill you."

"We will see," White Otter replied, lightly, as he ran to the piebald.

In the meantime the Blackfeet chief was fearlessly approaching the
ravine. He was already well within bow range, but the Sioux withheld
their arrows. There were two reasons. In the first place Sun Bird had
called out and warned them against killing Many Buffaloes, and in the
second place his bold defiance insured his safety. The Sioux understood
his reckless maneuver as a challenge to their manhood, an invitation for
one of their leaders to come out and meet him in personal combat. To
have killed him from shelter, under those circumstances, would have made
them weaklings and cowards in the eyes of their foes. The Sioux felt
compelled to respect the code of honor which prevailed even between the
most bitter enemies. They realized, therefore, that one of their number
must accept the defiant challenge of the Blackfeet chief, or else the
latter must be permitted to return to his tribesmen in safety.
Nevertheless, the Minneconjoux knew that if any one went forth to meet
him the wily war leader would rely upon the phenomenal speed of his pony
to carry him to safety, and decoy his enemy within bow shot of his
warriors. For that reason they made great efforts to dissuade White
Otter from his purpose.

"Many Buffaloes has done this thing many times, but we have no ponies
that can come up with him," the Minneconjoux told White Otter. "If you
follow him the Blackfeet will surely kill you."

"I am going," White Otter replied, firmly.

A moment afterward he rode out upon the plain. The Blackfeet greeted his
appearance with savage yells of derision. The Sioux raised the great
Dacotah war cry to give him courage. Many Buffaloes stopped and waited
for him to approach.

"White Otter is a great warrior; he is very brave; that pony is very
fast, but I believe he will be killed," Sun Bird said, fearfully.

The solemn faces of the Minneconjoux gave endorsement to his fears.
They, too, believed that the reckless Ogalala was going to his death.
Having witnessed the speed of the famous black war pony, they felt
certain that White Otter would never get within striking distance of the
Blackfeet chief. Their only hope was that the Ogalala would discover his
peril in time to turn back and save himself from the treacherous
Blackfeet.

"Then we must be ready to rush out and help him," said Sun Bird.

At that instant White Otter raised the war cry, and raced toward the
Blackfeet chief. The latter waited until the Ogalala was almost upon
him, and then he turned his pony and rode furiously toward his yelling
tribesmen. A moment afterward he twisted about and laughed shrilly, as
he shook his war club at the Sioux. Enraged by the taunt, White Otter
struck his pony with the heavy rawhide quirt. The piebald bounded
forward at a speed which caused the Minneconjoux and the Blackfeet to
stare in silent amazement. With each stroke of the lash the wonderful
little beast ran faster. The famous Blackfeet pony was a full length in
the lead, but the piebald was actually gaining. The Minneconjoux could
not believe it possible.

"Many Buffaloes is holding back," they told one another. "He is trying
to draw White Otter near his people."

"No, no, it is not so!" Sun Bird shouted, excitedly. "See, the Dacotah
pony is running faster!"

It was true. Sioux and Blackfeet both realized it. Many Buffaloes looked
over his shoulder and was equally astounded. The piebald had cut his
lead in half and was still gaining. Alarmed at the discovery, Many
Buffaloes lashed the black pony to its best speed. It ran as no other
horse in the great Blackfeet nation had ever run before, but the piebald
ran even faster. White Otter was within less than half a pony-length of
the Blackfeet chief. The latter, however, was almost within bow shot of
his tribesmen. The Minneconjoux realized that unless White Otter
overtook the black pony within the next few strides he would be at the
mercy of his foes. The thought drove them into a frenzy of excitement.

"See, see, he has caught Many Buffaloes!" Sun Bird shouted, wildly.

The piebald had closed the gap, and was drawing abreast of the Blackfeet
pony. Enraged by the glorious achievement of the Sioux pony, the
Blackfeet raced forward to save their chief from defeat. At that moment,
however, White Otter drew even with his foe. Yelling defiantly, Many
Buffaloes swung his war club at the head of the Ogalala. White Otter
crouched and barely escaped the deadly blow. Then before the Blackfeet
chief could regain his balance the agile young Sioux swung his own
weapon and knocked Many Buffaloes from his horse. The next moment he
secured control of the famous black war pony. Turning the ponies in
their tracks, he raced toward the ravine with the entire company of
Blackfeet close behind him.

Leaving a few warriors in the ravine to guard the ponies, the Sioux
galloped madly across the plain to rescue White Otter. Once he got the
ponies under way, however, there was slight chance of the Blackfeet
overtaking him. Stride by stride he drew away from his pursuers, who
were too busily engaged lashing their ponies to think of shooting their
arrows. When they finally did make use of their bows they found
themselves already within range of the Minneconjoux. The latter shot
their arrows with deadly effect, and the disheartened Blackfeet wavered
before the attack. Then, as White Otter dashed among them, the Sioux
flashed about and raced back to the ravine without losing a man.

"Well, my brothers, I have showed you that the Dacotah ponies can run,"
White Otter said, quietly as he dismounted in the midst of his
enthusiastic tribesmen.

"White Otter, I believe the pony that Curly Horse gave you is a Medicine
Pony," Sun Bird declared, seriously. "Perhaps that is why it was so
fierce when you began to ride it. I believe my father had something to
do with it. He is a great Medicine Person."

"It may be true," White Otter told him, as he stroked the neck of the
little piebald.

"Yes, yes, Rain Crow must have had something to do with it," declared
the superstitious Minneconjoux.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE STAMPEDE


The Blackfeet made no attempt to follow the Sioux to the ravine.
Instead, they turned about, and rode far from arrow range. They carried
off their chief and several warriors who had fallen in the skirmish, and
the Sioux were in doubt whether the famous war leader had been killed,
or only wounded, by the blow from White Otter. It was plain, however,
that the Blackfeet had finished the fight. They stopped for a few
moments to shout idle threats against the Sioux and then rode slowly
toward the north.

"Well, my brothers, the Blackfeet have gone," said Sun Bird. "It is
good. We have done what we came here to do. We have taken away these
ponies. We have made a big fight. We have sent the boastful Blackfeet
back to their lodges. My friends, those are big things to talk about.
Well, I will tell you that White Otter has done the biggest thing of
all. You all know about it. Look at that black pony. You all know how
it came here. It is something to tell about. Now, my brothers, I must
tell you something different. We must not feel too big about these
things. We are a long ways from our people. We have many ponies. We
cannot travel fast. The Crows and the Flatheads are still ahead of us.
Perhaps we shall meet them. We must keep thinking about it. Yes, my
brothers, we must be cautious."

"My friends, those are good words," declared Lean Wolf. "What Sun Bird
says is true. We have fought back the Blackfeet, but other enemies may
be waiting for us. We have many good ponies. We must take them to our
village. Perhaps it will be a hard thing to do. The Crows would like to
get those ponies. Yes, I believe the Flatheads would like to get them.
We would feel foolish if we lost them. We must be cautious."

The Minneconjoux found it difficult to restrain their enthusiasm. The
younger warriors, especially, were eager to celebrate their victory over
the Blackfeet. They rushed to the bottom of the ravine, and crowded
forward to count coup upon the Blackfeet pony by striking it with their
hands. The act was a substitute for striking an enemy, and gave them the
privilege of reciting the details of some daring exploit which they had
performed in the fight with their foes. Besides, the Minneconjoux still
looked upon the black war pony as something mysterious, a strange
Medicine Creature possessing superior powers of speed and endurance.
They hoped that in laying their hands upon it they might in some way
absorb some of its mystical powers.

In the meantime Sun Bird had sent scouts to follow the Blackfeet, to
make sure that they were actually going to their village. Other riders
had crossed the plain to the southward to learn if it would be safe to
travel in that direction with the ponies. The day was well advanced when
the scouts returned to the war party. The Minneconjoux gathered eagerly
about them to learn what they had seen.

"The Blackfeet are still going ahead," said Running Dog, who had
followed them. "I believe they are going to their village."

"Did you see anything of Many Buffaloes?" Sun Bird asked, anxiously.

"Yes, I saw him sitting on a pony," declared Running Dog. "He was
between two riders. I believe they were holding him up. I saw some other
warriors lying across the backs of ponies. I believe they were tied
there. Perhaps they were dead. The Blackfeet are traveling slow."

"Well, we know that Many Buffaloes is alive," said Sun Bird. "No one can
harm him. He must be very strong. Perhaps he is a Medicine Person."

"My brother, I will tell you something different," said Sitting Eagle.
"Perhaps the Blackfeet expected us to follow them. Perhaps they were
holding Many Buffaloes on that horse to fool us. Perhaps he was dead."

"Yes, that may be true," declared the Minneconjoux.

Still, as they could not be sure, they were unable to reach a definite
conclusion regarding the fate of the Blackfeet chief. While they were
discussing it the scouts from the southward returned. They declared that
the plain was free from foes.

"It is good," said Sun Bird. "Now we will go ahead."

The cautious young war leader planned his advance with the care and
skill of a veteran. He realized that one blunder might undo all that had
been accomplished, and turn the splendid victory into a staggering
defeat. The Minneconjoux were fatigued, and their ponies were jaded, and
Sun Bird knew that it might be difficult to overcome a strong force of
foes if they were fresh and eager for battle. He determined, therefore,
to use every safeguard against encountering his enemies.

When the Sioux were ready to leave the ravine, scouts moved across the
plain in advance and on both sides of them, and a small detail of
warriors were left behind to make certain that the Blackfeet did not
return. Then the war party was divided. White Otter and half of the
force rode ahead. Behind them followed Sitting Eagle and the warriors in
charge of the ponies. Sun Bird and the balance of the company brought up
the rear.

The day was far spent, and the Sioux hoped to reach water by the time
night came upon them. Sun Bird planned to stop when it grew dark, and
allow the ponies to rest until daylight. Then he decided to travel in
the early morning and after nightfall, and to stop in some suitable
shelter during the heated hours of the day.

"We must keep the ponies fresh," he told his companions.

Shortly before dark they came upon a large shallow pool on the open
plain. As there was a heavy stand of grass for the ponies, Sun Bird
determined to stop there for the night. The ponies were immediately
turned loose to feed, and guards were appointed to watch them until
daylight.

It was not long, however, before the Sioux heard something which caused
them considerable uneasiness. Low, rumbling peals of thunder sounded
from the west. The Sioux looked anxiously into the heavens. The stars
shone brightly overhead, but the distant sky appeared black and
threatening. As they watched, a quick, darting flash of light zigzagged
across the western sky. A dull, thudding crash of thunder boomed in the
distance.

"The Thunder Birds are talking--it is bad," Sun Bird said soberly, as he
seated himself beside White Otter.

"Yes, my brother, it is bad," agreed White Otter.

Then for some time they sat in gloomy silence, watching the sky. A great
mass of ominous black clouds rose steadily out of the west and blotted
out the stars. Sharp, jagged streaks of lightning cut through the night.
A fresh breeze stirred across the plain. The thunder sounded louder. It
was evident that the storm was approaching.

The possibility filled the Sioux with alarm. They looked anxiously
toward the herd of ponies. They knew that it would be difficult to hold
them under control when the storm broke upon them. Once thoroughly
alarmed they might stampede, and race wildly across the plain. Then it
would be necessary for the Sioux to ride recklessly through the night
in an attempt to keep possession of the herd. It was a perilous task, in
which many brave riders might lose their lives.

"My brothers, the Thunder Birds are coming--it is bad," cried Sitting
Eagle, as he came to find Sun Bird. "The ponies are sniffing the wind.
They are uneasy. Some of them are running around."

"We must hold them," said Sun Bird. "Every one must go out there and
keep riding around them."

"It is good," replied Sitting Eagle, as he galloped away.

The war ponies had been either picketed or hobbled and left to feed,
while the riders threw themselves upon the plain to rest from their
exertions. Now, as the storm approached, there was great confusion as
each warrior rushed to find his pony. Those who had picketed their
ponies had little difficulty, but the hobbled animals had wandered some
distance away, and their owners spent many anxious moments searching for
them. White Otter and Sun Bird had picketed their ponies and they found
them at once.

"White Otter, you have done some big things--it is enough," said Sun
Bird. "You must stay out of this. You have taken away the great black
war pony. You must not lose it. When the Thunder Birds fly over us you
must hold fast to that pony. Do not try to do anything else. I am your
brother. Listen to my words."

"I will do as you tell me to do," agreed White Otter.

"It is good," cried Sun Bird, as he galloped toward the ponies.

The riders had already stationed themselves about the herd and Sitting
Eagle was racing about shouting instructions. The Sioux were in a high
tension of excitement. The great storms which swept across the plains
always filled them with superstitious awe. They believed that they were
caused by the Thunder Birds, which they imagined to be two giant
birdlike monsters that lived high up in the most inaccessible peaks of
the loftiest mountains. The Sioux believed that these weird creatures
possessed all sorts of mysterious powers and that at certain intervals
they flew across the country to destroy those unfortunate people who had
incurred their displeasure.

"Some one has made the Thunder Birds mad--they are coming to drive away
the ponies," the Minneconjoux told one another, in alarmed whispers.

Their hearts filled with gloomy premonitions of impending disaster, as
the storm rushed upon them. The breeze had freshened to a gale, the
stars above them had vanished, the plain was smothered in darkness.
Vivid flashes of light flickered across the sky. Loud, crashing peals of
thunder rolled through the night. The ponies showed signs of terror.
They crowded nervously together, with heads raised, snorting and
whinnying. The Sioux rode anxiously around them, fearful that each
startling flash would cause them to run.

Then the storm suddenly broke upon them. A dazzling flare of light was
followed by a terrifying crash of thunder and the ponies leaped forward
in blind panic. The Sioux made desperate efforts to hold them in the
herd, but the panic had spread to the riding ponies, and they were
rearing and plunging in a manner that demanded the entire attention of
the riders. Some of the more fiery animals bolted from control and raced
wildly through the night. A moment afterward the herd broke through the
gap in the circle and thundered across the plain. The fears of the Sioux
were realized--the stampede had begun.

Having witnessed the first break of the startled ponies, Sun Bird rode
recklessly after the leaders in the hope of guiding them across the
plain. Beside him rode Little Raven. Allowing their ponies to run at
will, the Minneconjoux soon found themselves at the front of the herd.
Then they suddenly realized their peril. Their lives depended upon the
agility of their ponies. A fall meant instant destruction beneath the
hoofs of the panic-stricken beasts behind them. However, there was
little time to think of the danger. The foremost ponies had swerved
toward the west and Sun Bird and Little Raven tried to turn them back.

"We must not let them go that way!" Sun Bird shouted, anxiously. "The
Crows and the Flatheads are over there."

Lashing vigorously with their heavy riding quirts, they forced the
ponies from their course and kept them running toward the south. Thus
they rode through the height of the storm, risking their lives to redeem
their pledge to return the ponies which the Blackfeet had driven away.

Then, as the storm finally spent its fury, and passed across the plain,
the wild stampede suddenly came to an end. Having run themselves into
exhaustion, the ponies were glad to stop. A third of the herd, however,
were missing. Sun Bird was dismayed by the discovery.

"Come, my brothers, tell me how those ponies got away from you," he
said, sharply.

"We could not hold them all together," said Sitting Eagle. "I saw some
ponies breaking away and when I rode after them some more ponies got
away."

"Yes, that is how it happened," declared Lean Wolf. "I saw two ponies
turning away, and I chased them. When I was driving them back, I saw a
big bunch of ponies turning around. Then I rode after them and brought
some of them back. Then I stayed close by the herd. I saw it was the
best thing to do."

"Well, my friends, it is bad, but I see that you did the best you
could," Sun Bird told them. "We had a hard time getting those ponies. We
must not leave them for our enemies. There is only one thing to do.
Sitting Eagle, you must keep going ahead with these ponies. When you get
near our village you must stop and wait for us. Do not let our people
see you until we come. My brothers, most of you must go with Sitting
Eagle to help him fight our enemies. Some of us must stay here until it
gets light. Then we will go out and look for the ponies that got away. I
believe we will find them close by. Now I will call out the names of the
men who must go with me to find the ponies. Listen, my brothers, I am
going to call those names: Lean Wolf, Little Raven, Feather Dog,
Running Dog, Falling Eagle, Brave Bear, Two Elks. These men will go with
me. The rest of you must go with Sitting Eagle."

As he finished speaking they heard two ponies galloping toward them. A
few moments afterward White Otter appeared. The piebald and the
Blackfeet pony were lathered with sweat. Neither, however, showed the
slightest trace of exhaustion.

"I have been a long ways," said the Ogalala. "These foolish ponies ran
the wrong way. It was a long time before I could turn them around. Then
I came very fast."

"Now White Otter is here," said Sun Bird. "It is good. I am going to ask
him to be the leader of the men who go with Sitting Eagle."

Then the Sioux separated. Sitting Eagle and his escort of warriors rode
away toward the south with the ponies while Sun Bird and his company of
scouts remained behind to search for the missing horses.




CHAPTER XIX

TRAILING THE RUNAWAYS


Sun Bird and his companions were greatly encouraged when they looked
across the plain at daylight and saw several of the stray ponies feeding
a short distance to the northward. They hoped that others might be
concealed behind some of the low hummocks which broke the level of the
plain.

"See, there are some of the ponies!" said Sun Bird. "We will go and get
them. Then we will ride up on those little hills and look around. I
believe we will see some more ponies."

They cantered slowly toward the grazing ponies. There were five and they
were feeding close together. They raised their heads and watched
curiously as the horsemen approached, but they showed little fear. The
Sioux, however, determined to take no chance of frightening them into
another exhausting dash across the plain. As they rode within bow range
they separated and circled carefully about the ponies. Then they
gradually closed the net, and the ponies made little effort to escape.

"Now I will tell you what to do," said Sun Bird, when they had secured
the horses. "Some of you must keep these ponies. The rest of us will
ride up on those high places and look around. I will ask Falling Eagle
and Brave Bear and Two Elks to keep these ponies. Leave them where they
are until we come back. Then we will drive them away."

The three warriors who had been selected stationed themselves about the
ponies and their comrades turned toward a low grassy slope to the
westward. They had gone less than an arrow flight when their ponies
suddenly raised their heads and looked toward the north. A moment
afterward one of the ponies behind them whinnied. "There is something
over there behind that hill," said Sun Bird as he turned about.

At that instant a horseman appeared. They recognized him as Many
Feathers, one of the warriors who had been left in the ravine to watch
for the return of the Blackfeet. Having recognized his friends, Many
Feathers returned their signal, and then disappeared behind the ridge.

"Where has he gone?" Little Raven asked, anxiously.

"We must watch," Sun Bird told him.

Then Many Feathers and two comrades rode over the rise of the plain,
driving four of the stray ponies before them. They came directly toward
Sun Bird and his companions.

"It is good," said Lean Wolf. "Our brothers are bringing some more
ponies. Pretty soon we will find all that got away."

"Well, my brothers, I see that you found some ponies," said Sun Bird, as
Many Feathers and his comrades rode up.

"Yes, we found them back there on the plain," said Many Feathers.

The young warrior appeared to know about the stampede. He said that he
and his companions had read the story from the tracks which they had
followed from the pool.

"Did you see anything of the Blackfeet?" inquired Sun Bird.

"No," replied Many Feathers. "We waited a long time but they did not
come back."

"Did you see any more ponies?" Lean Wolf asked him.

"No, we did not see any more," said Many Feathers.

"My brothers, it is good you came here," Sun Bird told them. "Now I am
going to ask you to take these ponies over there where you see Falling
Eagle and Brave Bear and Two Elks. You must stay with them and help them
watch the ponies until we come back."

"We will go," said Many Feathers.

Then Sun Bird and his companions rode to the top of the low ridge to the
westward. They saw the rest of the ponies gathered in a small herd some
distance out on the open plain. The sight filled them with joy. As they
were about to go after them, however, they suddenly discovered two
riders watching from a ridge beyond the ponies.

"Hi, hi," Sun Bird cried, excitedly. "Someone has found the ponies. Now
they are watching us."

"It is bad," said Lean Wolf.

Feeling certain that they had already been seen, the Sioux made no
attempt to hide. They remained in open sight and tried to identify the
distant horsemen. The latter were too far away to be recognized. The
Sioux took hope at the thought. They knew that if they could not
identify their foes, the latter would find it impossible to recognize
them.

"They must be Crows or Flatheads," said Sun Bird. "Anyway, I believe
they are scouts."

"It is bad," said Running Dog. "They will bring their people here to get
those ponies."

The Sioux were greatly disturbed by the possibility. As their little
company numbered only eleven, they knew that they would be powerless
before a strong force of their enemies. Aware that the unexpected
emergency demanded quick action, they held a hurried council to decide
what should be done. They saw many difficulties. In the first place they
realized that if they rode directly toward the ponies they might drive
them toward their foes. Still, to circle around behind the herd it would
be necessary to approach close to their enemies. Then, too, the Sioux
knew that if they succeeded in running off the ponies they would
probably be followed by a strong force of their foes. As the ponies were
already fatigued from their strenuous exertions, another long race might
cause them to collapse.

"It will be hard to get them away if our enemies try to stop us,"
Running Dog said, gloomily.

As he spoke the horsemen suddenly disappeared from the ridge. The Sioux
looked at one another in alarm. They felt certain that one of the scouts
had gone to warn his people, while the other concealed himself to watch.
Sun Bird realized that it was time to act. Delay might prove fatal.

"Come, my brothers, we must do something," cried the bold young war
leader. "I am going to circle around behind those ponies. I will ask
Lean Wolf to go with me. The rest of you must hide behind this hill
until we drive the ponies to you. If our enemies come after us do not
wait to help us. Go to our brothers and help them drive away those
ponies. Send some one ahead of you to bring back the war party. Come,
Lean Wolf, we will go."

They were gone before their friends found time to reply. Moving boldly
down the ridge, the daring scouts turned sharply toward the north and
rode away at top speed. Their companions concealed themselves below the
crest of the slope and watched them with anxious eyes. They believed
that they were rushing into great peril and they had grave fears for
their safety.

"I do not feel good about this thing," Little Raven said, uneasily.
"Perhaps those people over there are trying to fool us. Perhaps they are
waiting until our brothers come close. Then they will come over the top
of that hill and kill them."

"Sun Bird is a good war leader. Lean Wolf is a great scout. They are
sharp. Their ponies are fast. I do not believe they will let those
people catch them," Feather Dog replied, reassuringly.

Sun Bird and Lean Wolf rode many arrow flights toward the north before
they finally swerved to the west. Some of the ponies were watching them,
but as yet showed no inclination to run. The Sioux felt much relieved.
They had feared that the nervous beasts might take fright at sight of
them and flee toward the distant ridge.

"If they keep still we will soon get behind them," Sun Bird said,
hopefully.

"Watch that hill," Lean Wolf cautioned him.

"Do you see any one up there?" Sun Bird asked him.

"No, I do not see any one, but we must be cautious," replied Lean Wolf.

When they had passed the ponies they began to circle to come up on the
other side of them. They were almost within arrow range of the ridge and
they kept a sharp watch for foes. Then, as they turned to approach the
ponies they heard a shout behind them. Glancing back they saw four Crow
warriors racing down the slope at breakneck speed.

"Come, get the ponies running!" shouted Sun Bird as he lashed his pony
into a furious sprint.

They rode madly toward the startled ponies, shouting and waving their
arms to get the animals in motion. Once started, the ponies needed
little urging. They had not entirely recovered from their wild panic of
the previous night and the fierce shouts behind them sent them racing
across the plain at their best speed.

"Keep after the ponies, I will fight the Crows," Sun Bird cried,
impulsively.

"No, no, you must keep going ahead!" Lean Wolf shouted, fiercely. "If
the Crows come close we will fight them back. Pretty soon we will reach
our brothers. Then these warriors will turn back."

He had barely ceased speaking before Little Raven and Feather Dog and
Many Feathers and Running Dog swept over the ridge some distance to the
northward of the ponies. Yelling savagely, they raced to the assistance
of their tribesmen and at sight of them the Crows stopped in confusion.
The odds had suddenly turned against them and they lost courage. They
turned and raced away before the Sioux got within bowshot of them. The
Sioux made no attempt to overtake them. Their one thought was to get
away with the ponies before a stronger force of their foes came upon
them.

"We have driven away our enemies, now we must run off the ponies," cried
Sun Bird.

"Yes, we must keep going," said Lean Wolf.

They drove the ponies over the ridges and ran them toward Falling Eagle
and the warriors who were waiting with the other horses. Then Little
Raven and Many Feathers hid below the top of the ridge to watch for the
Crows.

The Sioux knew that the Crow village was somewhere in the vicinity and
they had little doubt that a strong force of those foes would soon set
out in pursuit of them. However, they hoped to gain a sufficient lead to
make it impossible for the Crows to overtake them before nightfall. Then
they believed the Crows would abandon the chase.

When they reached Falling Eagle and his companions the Sioux turned
directly toward the south and drove the ponies across the plain at top
speed. They hoped to reach the deep ravine in which they had hidden from
the Crows and the Blackfeet.

"Perhaps the Crows took us for Blackfeet," suggested Running Dog.
"Perhaps they will go the other way to find us."

"No, I do not believe it," said Lean Wolf. "Those warriors came close. I
believe they know we are Dacotahs."

For some time they kept the ponies running at their best speed and then
as they saw nothing of their foes they gradually slackened the pace. For
the balance of the day they rode over the plain at an easy canter and
shortly before dark they came in sight of the abandoned stream bed.
Their spirits revived at sight of it. They believed that even if the
Crows should overtake them it would be possible to hold them off until
scouts found White Otter and the war party and brought them to the
ravine.

"I do not believe the Crows can catch us now," said Sun Bird, as they
drove the tired ponies into the ravine.

"We can make a big fight in this place," Lean Wolf told him.

As night fell Feather Dog followed the ravine toward the west to listen
for the approach of the Crows. Soon after he had gone Little Raven and
Many Feathers arrived. Their ponies showed the effects of fast riding.

"Tell us what you have seen," said Sun Bird.

"The Crows are coming," declared Little Raven. "It is a big war party.
Those scouts tried to follow you, but we drove them back. We did that
many times. Then the war party came and we ran away. The Crows are
coming straight ahead. We rode fast to keep ahead of them. Pretty soon
they will be here."

"Well, there will be many against us, but we must get ready to fight,"
Lean Wolf said, fearlessly.

"No, my brother, I believe that would be foolish," Sun Bird told him.
"The Crows are too strong for us. I am going to fool them. I will tell
you how to do it. I am going to ask Running Dog and Falling Eagle and
Brave Bear and Two Elks and Many Feathers and Broken Hand and Mad Bull
to ride away with the ponies. I will make Running Dog the leader. At
first you must turn toward the-place-where-day-begins. Then you must
circle back and go toward our village. Pretty soon you will find our
brothers. Then you must stop. When you go away the rest of us will stay
here to fool the Crows. When they come close we will ride out and make a
great noise. Then we will ride toward the mountains. We will keep
shouting as if we are driving ponies. The Crows will follow us. Then we
will circle around and fool them. I will ask Lean Wolf and Little Raven
and Feather Dog to help me do this thing. Come, my brothers, drive away
the ponies."

"Hi, that is a great thing to do," Lean Wolf said enthusiastically.
"Yes, I believe we will fool the Crows."

As there was little time to spare, Running Dog and his companions
immediately drove the ponies from the ravine and disappeared into the
night. Sun Bird listened anxiously until the sounds of the hoofbeats
had died away and then he turned to his comrades.

"Well, my brothers, pretty soon the Crows will come, we must be ready,"
he said.

A moment later Feather Dog appeared. He said that he had heard the sound
of galloping ponies and had come to investigate.

"It was our brothers taking away the ponies," explained Sun Bird.

Then he acquainted Feather Dog with the details of the wily trick to
fool the Crows. The famous Minneconjoux scout immediately endorsed the
plan.

"It is good," he said, as his eyes twinkled merrily.

"Listen," cried Little Raven.

The Sioux immediately became silent. The hoofbeats of many ponies echoed
across the plain. The Crows were galloping boldly toward the ravine. The
thought filled Sun Bird with anxiety. He realized that if the bold
stratagem failed, the warriors with the ponies were doomed. Once
overtaken on the open plain, he felt sure they would be speedily
surrounded and annihilated by the great Crow war party. He grew weak at
the possibility. Then his pony called and his thoughts were diverted.
The hoofbeats suddenly ceased. Having located their enemies the Crows
had become cautious. The Sioux pony called again and Sun Bird made no
attempt to stop it.

"It is good," he said. "The Crows will think the ponies are here. Come,
ride around and make a noise."

They rode rapidly to and fro to make it appear that there were a number
of ponies in the ravine. Then they suddenly swept up the side of the
gully and raced across the plain. As they rode they snapped their riding
quirts and yelled excitedly at imaginary ponies. Then they listened
anxiously for sounds from the Crows. When they failed to hear them they
gave way to despair. Sun Bird grew sick at heart. He feared that he had
sent his comrades to their death.

"Perhaps the Crows are keeping quiet until they get across that gully,"
suggested Lean Wolf. "Perhaps they believe that some of us are waiting
there to fight them back."

At that instant a shrill yell of triumph rang through the night, and a
moment afterward the Sioux heard the quick, sharp hoofbeats of galloping
ponies directly behind them. The Crows had been deceived. They were
following blindly on the false trail. The Sioux were wild with joy.
Unmindful of their own peril, they were satisfied to know that their
comrades and the ponies were safe.

"It is good! It is good!" Sun Bird cried, joyfully. "We have fooled the
Crows. Now our brothers will get away with the ponies."

They continued to make a great noise, lest the Crows should suddenly
discover their blunder. They rode furiously toward the west, and
rejoiced in the thought that each stride of the ponies was luring their
foes farther from those whom they wished to overtake. It was not long,
however, before the Sioux realized that the Crows were gaining upon
them. The discovery aroused them to their peril. They knew that if the
Crows came up with them there would be little chance of escape.

"Come, we must ride faster," Sun Bird cried, anxiously.

They lashed the ponies into a terrific burst of speed and slowly drew
away from their enemies. They knew, however, that it would be impossible
to maintain the pace. They also realized that each moment was taking
them farther from their course.

"Now we must try to circle around," Sun Bird told them. "Do not make any
more noise."

They suddenly subsided into silence and turned sharply toward the south.
Then their hearts bounded with joy as they heard the Crows blunder from
the trail and continue toward the west. Having once lost them in the
night, it seemed doubtful if the Crows would be able to find them before
daylight.

"We have got away," Sun Bird said, confidently. "The Crows cannot find
us. Pretty soon they will go back."

"Yes, I believe we are safe," replied Lean Wolf.

"Sun Bird, you have done a big thing," declared Feather Dog. "You are a
great war leader. I will tell our people about it."

The Sioux laughed gleefully as they heard the Crows signaling far away
toward the west. Then they turned toward the east to find their
tribesmen. They rode steadily through the night and at daylight came
upon the entire Minneconjoux war party at the waterhole which marked the
boundary of the Minneconjoux hunting grounds. They were within a short
day's travel of the great Sioux camp. The long war journey was almost at
an end. Success seemed assured. The Sioux were elated.

"My brothers, we have come together again," said Sun Bird. "I see you
have kept the ponies. Now we are close to our village. Pretty soon we
will be with our people. It is good."




CHAPTER XX

SAFE AT LAST


The Sioux waited until the ponies had recovered somewhat from their
fatigue and then they set out for the Minneconjoux camp. They rode gayly
across the plain, talking and laughing and singing their war songs.
Their task had been accomplished. Their fears had vanished. The wearying
suspense was at an end. They were eager to reach their people, for they
knew that a royal welcome awaited them. The day had almost ended,
however, when they finally came in sight of the Minneconjoux village.

"See, there are the lodges of our people," said Sun Bird. "Pretty soon
some one will see us. We must get ready to ride into the camp."

"You are the leader, you must go ahead," said Feather Dog.

"Yes, Sun Bird must go ahead," cried the others.

"Well, I will ask Dancing Rabbit to ride with me; it will make old
Spotted Face feel good to see him," Sun Bird told them. "Then White
Otter must follow close behind me. He has done the biggest thing of
all."

"It is good," cried the Minneconjoux.

They advanced slowly toward the camp. Sun Bird and Dancing Rabbit rode
in front. White Otter followed, leading the famous black war pony, and
Little Raven rode beside him. Then came Lean Wolf and Feather Dog and
Sitting Eagle and Running Dog and all the famous scouts. Behind them
followed the great herd of ponies, surrounded by the balance of the war
party.

The Minneconjoux soon discovered the approaching horsemen and rushed
from the camp in great excitement. As they recognized the riders and saw
the great herd of ponies they were thrown into an ecstasy of joy. They
gathered at the edge of the camp, singing and dancing and calling out
the names of the warriors who had gone to fight the Blackfeet.

"See, see, the great war party is coming!" they cried. "They are
bringing many ponies."

The war party raised their voices in the piercing Dacotah war cry. It
echoed triumphantly across the plain and threw the camp into a tumult.
Then the Minneconjoux suddenly recognized Dancing Rabbit. Men, women
and children began to call his name.

"Our brothers have brought back Dancing Rabbit!" they shouted. "See,
Dancing Rabbit has come back to us! Look, Spotted Face, your grandson is
alive! He is coming to your lodge."

The aged warrior shaded his eyes with his hand and looked eagerly across
the plain. He was trembling with anxiety. The Minneconjoux waited for
him to speak.

"Yes, my friends, it is Dancing Rabbit," he said, finally. "Wakantunka,
the Great Mystery, has sent him back to me. It is good."

A moment afterward the Minneconjoux discovered the black war pony. The
sight of it astonished them into silence. They looked upon it with wild,
inquiring eyes. Had they been mistaken? Could it really be the famous
war pony of the great chief Many Buffaloes?

"Yes, yes, it is the great black war pony!" Rain Crow cried, excitedly.
"White Otter, my son, has brought it to our camp."

When the war party came within bow range they stopped and waited while a
delegation of noted warriors rode out to escort them to the camp. At the
same time a company of youths raced eagerly across the plain to take
charge of the ponies.

Then the war party rode triumphantly into the village, singing their war
songs and calling the names of the warriors who had been killed by the
Blackfeet. As each missing warrior was mentioned his people began to
mourn and cry out dismally in their grief. However, as his companions
extolled his bravery the mourners stifled their sobs and thrilled with
pride at his noble sacrifice.

"A warrior must be ready to die," said Pretty Star, the mother of Proud
Hawk. "My son was very brave. They are calling his name. He did a great
thing for his people. It is enough."

As the victorious warriors paraded through the village the people
gathered eagerly about White Otter and the famous black war pony. Many
of the old men and boys ran forward and struck the Blackfeet pony with
their hands to count a coup against their foes. When he reached the
center of the camp White Otter stopped and tied the Blackfeet pony
before the lodge of Curly Horse, the Minneconjoux war chief.

"See, White Otter has given the black war pony to Curly Horse," said the
Minneconjoux. "It is a great thing to do."

Curly Horse and the great men of the tribe had assembled before the
medicine lodge to greet the war party. When the warriors lined up before
him the famous chief stepped forward to address them.

"I will call Sun Bird and White Otter to come and stand before me," said
Curly Horse. "My brothers, both of you are young men, but you have done
big things. Sun Bird, you are the leader of this war party. You have
done what you set out to do. You have brought back the ponies that the
Blackfeet took away. It was a hard thing to do. White Otter, you are a
great chief. You have done many big things. Now you have done the
biggest thing of all. I see that you have tied that great pony in front
of my lodge. It makes me feel good. But I will not take it. You must
take it to your people. Now I will speak to those brave warriors who
went with you. My brothers, you have done a big thing. You were very
brave. Now I will ask Rain Crow to give you some words."

"My friends, you have done a great thing for your people," said Rain
Crow, the Medicine Man. "Now we have many ponies. Some of them were
Blackfeet ponies. It is good. Sun Bird, you are my son. Little Raven,
you are my son. White Otter, I have called you my son. All three of you
were very brave. It makes me feel big. White Otter, you have done the
biggest thing of all. Our people will talk about it a long time. I have
finished."

When Rain Crow ceased speaking the Minneconjoux cried out for Sun Bird
to talk to them.

"Well, my people, you have asked me to give you some words," said Sun
Bird. "First I will tell you about White Otter. He was very brave. He
went into the Blackfeet camp. He fought back many Blackfeet. He rode
after the great chief Many Buffaloes and caught up with him. Then he
knocked him on the head and ran off with his pony. He has brought it
here. Now I will tell you about Little Raven. He was very brave. He went
with White Otter to the Blackfeet camp. He fought many Blackfeet. Now I
will tell you about all these great warriors that you see standing here.
They were very brave. Lean Wolf fought four Blackfeet warriors and
killed all of them. Sitting Eagle ran off the ponies. Feather Dog did
some great things. Running Dog found our enemies. All of these brave
warriors fought hard to bring the ponies here. Now I have told you about
it."

"White Otter! White Otter!" shouted the Minneconjoux. "Come, White
Otter, give us some words."

The Ogalala received a stirring ovation. It was some time before he was
able to speak.

"My brothers, I have not many words to give you," he said, modestly. "I
will tell you that Sun Bird is a great war leader. He told us what to
do. I will tell you that the Minneconjoux are very brave. I will tell my
people about them. I will tell you that the Dacotah ponies can run.
Curly Horse gave me that great pony that I rode to the Blackfeet camp.
It is very fast. That is how I caught Many Buffaloes. I believe Rain
Crow must have had something to do with it. He is a great Medicine
Person. I believe he helped me to do this thing. Now I will speak to
your great chief Curly Horse. Curly Horse, I have tied that black pony
in front of your lodge. It must stay there. You gave me a great pony to
ride to the Blackfeet camp. I will keep it. Now I will give you that
great Blackfeet pony. You must keep it. Rain Crow, you have called me
your son. Well, my father, I have brought you a fast spotted pony. I
took it from the Flatheads. Now I will not talk anymore."

"White Otter, I see that you have a good heart," said Curly Horse. "I
will listen to your words, I will keep that great war pony. I feel big
to own that pony."

When it grew dark the Minneconjoux lighted a great fire and assembled
about it to celebrate the success of the war party. They spent the
entire night dancing and singing and telling of the great exploits
performed by the men who had gone to the Blackfeet camp.

  THE END



    +-----------------------------------------------+
    |             Transcriber's Note:               |
    |                                               |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the  |
    | original document have been preserved.        |
    |                                               |
    | Typographical errors corrected in the text:   |
    |                                               |
    |      TOC Runways changed to Runaways
    | Page  27 murmered changed to murmured         |
    | Page  33 murmered changed to murmured         |
    | Page  59 susspense changed to suspense        |
    | Page  96 unkown changed to unknown            |
    | Page 164 Siting changed to Sitting            |
    | Page 211 desperated changed to desperate      |
    | Page 253 Wakantanka changed to Wakantunka     |
    +-----------------------------------------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The War Trail, by Elmer Russell Gregor

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WAR TRAIL ***

***** This file should be named 36888.txt or 36888.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/8/8/36888/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Barbara Kosker, Michael and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
