The Project Gutenberg EBook of Man's Redemption of Man, by William Osler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Man's Redemption of Man
       A Lay Sermon

Author: William Osler

Release Date: July 31, 2011 [EBook #36926]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAN'S REDEMPTION OF MAN ***




Produced by Al Haines










MAN'S

REDEMPTION

OF MAN


  _A Lay Sermon,
  McEwan Hall Edinburgh,
  Sunday July_ 2_nd_
  1910


BY

WILLIAM OSLER



LONDON

CONSTABLE & CO. LTD

1913




{4}

Note.--This address was delivered at a service held for the students of
the University of Edinburgh, in connection with the Edinburgh meeting
of the National Association for the Prevention of Tuberculosis.




{5}

And a man shall be as an hiding-place from the wind, and a covert from
the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place; as the shadow of a
great rock in a weary land.

And the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice
of crying.  There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old
man that has not filled his days.

(Isaiah.)


To man there has been published a triple gospel--of his soul, of his
goods, of his body.  Growing with his growth, preached and professed in
a hundred different ways in various ages of the world, these gospels
represent the unceasing purpose of his widening thoughts.

The gospel of his relation to the powers unseen has brought sometimes
hope, too often despair.  In a wide outlook on the immediate and remote
effects of the attempts to establish this relation, one event
discredits the great counsel of Confucius (who realized what a heavy
yoke religion might be) to keep aloof from spiritual beings.  Surviving
the accretions of twenty centuries, the life and immortality brought to
light by the gospel of Christ, remain the earnest desire of the best
portion of the race.

The gospel of his goods--of man's relation to his fellow men, is
written in blood on every page of history.  Quietly and slowly the
righteousness that exalteth a nation, the principles of eternal
justice, have won acquiescence, at any rate in theory, though as
nations and individuals we are still far from carrying them into
practice.

And the third gospel, the gospel of his body, which brings man into
relation with nature,--a true _evangelion_, the glad tidings of a
conquest beside which all others sink into insignificance--is the final
conquest of nature, out of which has come man's redemption of man, the
subject to which I am desirous of directing your attention.

In the struggle for existence in which all life is engaged, disease and
pain loom large as fundamental facts.  The whole creation groaneth and
travaileth, and so red in tooth and claw with ravin is Nature, that, it
is said, no animal in a wild state dies a natural death.  The history
of man is the story of a great martyrdom--plague, pestilence and
famine, battle and murder, crimes unspeakable, tortures inconceivable,
and the inhumanity of man to man has even outdone what appear to be
atrocities in nature.  In the _Grammar of Assent_ (chap. x) Cardinal
Newman has an interesting paragraph on this great mystery of the
physical world.  Speaking of the amount of suffering bodily and mental
which is our lot and heritage, he says: "Not only is the Creator far
off, but some being of malignant nature seems to have got hold of us,
and to be making us his sport.  Let us say that there are a thousand
millions of men on the earth at this time; who can weigh and measure
the aggregate of pain which this one generation has endured, and will
endure from birth to death?  Then add to this all the pain which has
fallen and will fall upon our race through generations past and to
come.  Is there not then some great gulf fixed between us and the good
God?"

Dwelling too exclusively on this aspect of life, who does not echo the
wish of Euripides: "Not to be born is the best, and next to die as soon
as possible."

Some of you may remember Edwin Markham's poem, "The Man with the Hoe,"
based on Millet's famous picture.

  Bowed by the weight of centuries he leans
  Upon his hoe and gazes on the ground,
  The emptiness of ages in his face,
  And on his back the burden of the world.
  Who made him dead to rapture and despair,
  A thing that grieves not and that never hopes,
  Stolid and stunned, a brother to the ox?


It is a world-old tale, this of the trembling heart, the failing eyes,
the desponding mind of the natural man.  "And thy life shall hang in
doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt have
none assurance of thy life: In the morning thou shalt say, Would God it
were even! and at even thou shalt say, Would God it were morning! for
the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shalt fear, and for the sight of
thine eyes which thou shalt see" (Deut. xxviii.).

The condition of Hopeful and Christian put by Giant Despair into "a
very dark dungeon, nasty and stinking to their spirits," and beaten
with stripes, and made to feel that the bitterness of death was as
nothing to the bitterness of life, illustrates in allegory the state of
man for countless centuries.  In darkness and in the shadow of death he
lay helpless, singing like the prisoners vain hymns of hope, and
praying vain prayers of patience, yet having all the while in his
bosom, like Christian, a key called Promise, capable of unlocking the
doors of his dungeon.  Groping between what Sir Thomas Browne so finely
calls "the night of our forebeing" and the unknown future--the dark
before and after, he at last came to himself, and with the help of this
key unlocked the mysteries of Nature, and found a way of physical
salvation.

Man's redemption of man is the great triumph of Greek thought.  The
tap-root of modern science sinks deep in Greek soil, the astounding
fertility of which is one of the out-standing facts of history.  As Sir
Henry Maine says: "To one small people ... it was given to create the
principle of progress.  That people was the Greek.  Except the blind
forces of Nature nothing moves in this world which is not Greek in its
origin."  Though not always recognized, the controlling principles of
our art, literature and philosophy, as well as those of science, are
Hellenic.  We still think in certain levels only with the help of
Plato, and there is not a lecture room of this university[1] in which
the trained ear may not catch echoes of the Lyceum.  In his
introductory chapter of his _Rise of the Greek Epic_, Professor Murray
dwells on the keen desire of the Greeks to make life a better thing
than it is, and to help in the service of man, a thought that pervades
Greek life like an aroma.  From Homer to Lucian there is one
refrain--the pride in the body as a whole; and in the strong conviction
that "our soul in its rose-mesh" is quite as much helped by flesh as
flesh is by soul, the Greek sang his song "For pleasant is this flesh."
The beautiful soul harmonizing with a beautiful body is as much the
glorious ideal of Plato as it is the end of the education of Aristotle.
What a splendid picture in Book III of the _Republic_, of the day when
"our youth will dwell in a land of health, amid fair sights and sounds
and receive the good in everything; and beauty, the effluence of fair
works, shall flow into the eye and ear like a health-giving breeze from
a purer region, and insensibly draw the soul from earliest years into
likeness and sympathy with the beauty of reason."  The glory of this
zeal for the enrichment of the present life was revealed to the Greeks
as to no other people, but in respect to care for the body of the
common man, we have only seen its fulfilment in our own day, but as a
direct result of methods of research initiated by them.

Philosophy, as Plato tells us, begins with wonder; and, staring
open-eyed at the starry heavens on the plains of Mesopotamia, man took
a first step in the careful observation of Nature, which carried him a
long way in his career.  But he was very slow to learn the second
step--how to interrogate Nature, to search out her secrets, as Harvey
puts it, by way of experiment.  The Chaldeans, who invented gnomons,
and predicted eclipses, made a good beginning.  The Greeks did not get
much beyond trained observation, though Pythagoras made one fundamental
experiment when he determined the dependence of the pitch of sound on
the length of the vibrating cord.  So far did unaided observation and
brilliant generalization carry Greek thinkers, that there is scarcely a
modern discovery which by anticipation cannot be found in their
writings.  Indeed one is staggered at their grasp of great principles.
Man can do a great deal by observation and thinking, but with them
alone he cannot unravel the mysteries of Nature.  Had it been possible
the Greeks would have done it; and could Plato and Aristotle have
grasped the value of experiment in the progress of human knowledge, the
course of European history might have been very different.

This organon was absent, and even in the art of medicine Hippocrates
with all his genius did not get beyond highly trained observation, and
a conception of disease as a process of Nature.  The great Pergamite,
Galen, did indeed realize that the bare fact was only preliminary to
the scientific study of disease by experiment, and to the collecting of
data, from which principles and laws could be derived.  On the dark
horizon of the ancient world shone the brightness of the Grecian dawn
so clearly that the emancipated mind had an open way.  Then something
happened--how, who can tell?  The light failed or flickered almost to
extinction: Greece died into a mediaevalism that for centuries
enthralled man in chains, the weary length of which still hampers his
progress.  The revival of learning awakened at first a suspicion and
then a conviction that salvation lay in a return to the old Greek
fathers who had set man's feet in the right path, and so it came about
that in the study of chemistry, and in the inventions of Copernicus,
Kepler and Galileo, modern science took its origin.  The growth of the
experimental method changed the outlook of mankind, and led directly to
the development of the physical and biological sciences by which the
modern world has been transformed.

A slow, painful progress, through three centuries, science crept on
from point to point, with many mistakes and many failures, a progress
often marked and flecked with the stains of human effort, but all the
same the most revolutionary and far-reaching advance ever made by man's
intellect.  We are too close to the events to appreciate fully the
changes which it has wrought in man's relation to the world; and the
marvellous thing is that the most important of these changes have been
effected within the memory of those living.  Three stand out as of the
first importance.

My generation was brought up in the belief that "Man was in his
original state a very noble and exalted creature, being placed as the
head and lord of this world, having all the creatures in subjection to
him.  The powers and operations of his mind were extensive, capacious
and perfect"--to quote the words of one of my old Sunday-school
lessons.  It is not too much to say that Charles Darwin has so turned
man right-about-face that, no longer looking back with regret upon a
Paradise Lost, he feels already within the gates of a Paradise Regained.

Secondly, Chemistry and Physics have at last given him control of the
four elements, and he has harnessed the forces of Nature.  As usual
Kipling touches the very heart of the matter in his poem on "The Four
Angels," who in succession offered to Adam fire, air, earth and water.
Happy in the garden, watching the apple tree in bud, in leaf, in
blossom and in fruit, he had no use for them; but when the apple tree
was cut down, and he had to work outside of Eden wall,--then--

      out of black disaster
  He arose to be the master
  Of Earth and Water, Air and Fire.

And this mastery, won in our day, has made the man with the hoe look up.

But the third and greatest glory is that the leaves of the tree of
science have availed for the healing of the nations.  Measure as we may
the progress of the world--intellectually in the growth and spread of
education, materially in the application to life of all mechanical
appliances, and morally in a higher standard of ethics between nation
and nation, and between individuals, there is no one measure which can
compare with the decrease of disease and suffering in man, woman and
child.  The Psalmist will have it that no man may redeem his brother,
but this redemption of his body has been bought at a price of the lives
of those who have sought out Nature's processes by study and
experiment.  Silent workers, often unknown and neglected by their
generation, these men have kept alive the fires on the altars of
science, and have so opened the doors of knowledge that we now know the
laws of health and disease.  Time will only permit me to refer to a few
of the more important of the measures of man's physical redemption.

Within the life-time of some of us a strange and wonderful thing
happened on the earth--something of which no prophet foretold, of which
no seer dreamt, nor is it among the beatitudes of Christ Himself; only
St. John seems to have had an inkling of it in that splendid chapter in
which he describes the new heaven and the new earth, when the former
things should pass away, when all tears should be wiped away, and there
should be no more crying nor sorrow.  On October 16, 1846, in the
amphitheatre of the Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, a new
Prometheus gave a gift as rich as that of fire, the greatest single
gift ever made to suffering humanity.  The prophecy was
fulfilled--_neither shall there be any more pain_; a mystery of the
ages had been solved by a daring experiment by man on man in the
introduction of anaesthesia.  As Weir Mitchell sings in his poem, "The
Death of Pain"--

  Whatever triumphs still shall hold the mind,
  Whatever gifts shall yet enrich mankind,
  Ah! here, no hour shall strike through all the years,
  No hour so sweet as when hope, doubt and fears,
  'Mid deepening silence watched one eager brain
  With Godlike will decree the Death of Pain.


At a stroke the curse of Eve was removed, that multiplied sorrow of
sorrows, representing in all ages the very apotheosis of pain.  The
knife has been robbed of its terrors, and the hospitals are no longer
the scenes of those appalling tragedies that made the stoutest quail.
To-day we take for granted the silence of the operating-room, but to
reach this Elysium we had to travel the slow road of laborious
research, which gave us first the chemical agents; and then brave
hearts had to risk reputation, and even life itself in experiments, the
issue of which was for long doubtful.

More widespread in its benediction, as embracing all races and all
classes of society, is the relief of suffering, and the prevention of
disease through the growth of modern sanitary science in which has been
fought out the greatest victory in history.  I can only refer to three
subjects which illustrate and lead up to the question which is in the
minds of all of us to-day.

You have in Scotland the merit of the practical introduction of a
method which has revolutionized the treatment of wounds, and changed
the whole aspect of modern surgery.  I am old enough to have been a
dresser in a large general hospital in the pre-Listerian days, when it
was the rule for wounds to suppurate, and when cases of severe pyaemia
and septicaemia were so common that surgeons dreaded to make even a
simple amputation.  In the wards of the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary and
of the Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Lord Lister's experimental work on the
healing of wounds led to results of the deepest moment to every
individual subject to an accident, or who has to submit to an
operation.  It is not simply that the prospect of recovery is
enormously enhanced, but Listerian surgery has diminished suffering to
an extraordinary degree.  In the old days every wound which suppurated
had to be dressed, and there was the daily distress and pain, felt
particularly by young children.  Now, even after operations of the
first magnitude, the wound may have but a single dressing, and the
after-pain is reduced to a minimum.  How well the older ones of us
realize that anaesthetics and asepsis between them have wrought a
complete revolution in hospital life.  I asked the Superintendent of
Nurses at the Royal Infirmary to let me know how many patients last
night in the wards had actual suffering, and she has sent word that
about one in eight had pain, not all of them acute pain.

But man's redemption of man is nowhere so well known as in the
abolition and prevention of the group of diseases which we speak of as
the fevers, or the acute infections.  This is the glory of the science
of medicine, and nowhere in the world have its lessons been so
thoroughly carried out as in this country.  It is too old a story to
retell in detail, but I may remind you that in this city within fifty
years there has been an annual saving of from four to five thousand
lives, by measures which have directly prevented and limited the spread
of infectious diseases.  The man is still alive, Sir Henry Little-John,
who made the first sanitary survey of the city.  When one reads the
account of the condition of the densely crowded districts on the south
side of the High Street, one is not surprised that the rate of
mortality was 40 and over per thousand.  That you now enjoy one of the
lowest death rates in Europe--15.3 per thousand for last year--is due
to the thoroughness with which measures of recognized efficiency have
been carried out.  When we learn that last year there were no deaths
from smallpox, not one from typhus, and only 21 from fevers of the
zymotic group, it is scarcely credible that all this has been brought
about within the memory of living men.  It is not too much to say that
the abolition of small-pox, typhus and typhoid fevers have changed the
character of the medical practice in our hospitals.  In this country
typhoid fever is in its last ditch, and though a more subtle and
difficult enemy to conquer than typhus, we may confidently hope that
before long it will be as rare.

Here I would like to say a word or two upon one of the most terrible of
all acute infections, the one of which we first learned the control
through the work of Jenner.  A great deal of literature has been
distributed, casting discredit upon the value of vaccination in the
prevention of small-pox.  I do not see how any one who has gone through
epidemics as I have, or who is familiar with the history of the
subject, and who has any capacity left for clear judgment, can doubt
its value.  Some months ago I was twitted by the Editor of the Journal
of the Anti-Vaccination League for maintaining a curious silence on the
subject.  I would like to issue a Mount Carmel-like challenge to any
ten unvaccinated priests of Baal.  I will take ten selected vaccinated
persons, and help in the next severe epidemic, with ten selected
unvaccinated persons (if available!).  I should choose three members of
Parliament, three anti-vaccination doctors, if they could be found, and
four anti-vaccination propagandists.  And I will make this
promise--neither to jeer nor to jibe when they catch the disease, but
to look after them as brothers; and for the three or four who are
certain to die I will try to arrange the funerals with all the pomp and
ceremony of an anti-vaccination demonstration.

A blundering art until thirty or forty years ago, preventative medicine
was made a science by the discovery of the causes of many of the
serious epidemic diseases.  To any one of you who wishes to know this
side of science, what it is, what it has done, what it may do, let me
commend Radot's _Life of Pasteur_, which reads like a fairy tale.  It
is more particularly in connection with the great plagues of the world
that man's redemption of man may be in the future effected; I say in
the future because we have only touched the fringe of the subject.  How
little do we appreciate what even a generation has done.  The man is
only just dead, Robert Koch, who gave to his fellow-men the control of
cholera.  Read the history of yellow fever in Havana and in Brazil if
you wish to get an idea of the powers of experimental medicine; there
is nothing to match it in the history of human achievement.  Before our
eyes to-day the most striking experiment ever made in sanitation is in
progress.  The digging of the Panama Canal was acknowledged to be a
question of the health of the workers.  For four centuries the Isthmus
had been a white man's grave, and during the French control of the
Canal the mortality once reached the appalling figure of 170 per
thousand.  Even under the most favourable circumstances it was
extraordinarily high.  Month by month I get the _Reports_ which form by
far the most interesting sanitary reading of the present day.  Of more
than 54,000 employes (about 13,000 of whom are white), the death rate
per thousand for the month of March was 8.91, a lower percentage, I
believe, than any city in the United States.  It has been brought about
in great part by researches into the life history of the parasite which
produces malaria, and by the effectual measures taken for its
destruction.  Here again is a chapter in human achievement for which it
would be hard to find a parallel.  But let us not forget that these are
but illustrations of wide-spread possibilities of organization on
modern lines.  These are sanitary blessings.  To make them available in
the Tropics is the heaviest burden of the white man; how heavy you may
know from the startling figures which have just been issued from
British India.  Exclusive of the native states for the year 1908, the
total deaths from fever and cholera exceeded 5,000,000, out of a
population of 226,000,000.  The bright spot in the picture is the
diminution of the mortality from plague--not fewer than a million fatal
cases as compared with 1907.

These are brief indications of the lines along which effective progress
is being made in man's redemption by man.  And all this has a direct
bearing upon the disease, the fight against which brings us together.
Tuberculosis is one of the great infections of the world, and it has
been one of the triumphs of our generation to determine its cause.
With the improvement of sanitation there has been a reduction in its
mortality, amounting since 1850 to above 40 per cent.  But it still
remains the most formidable single foe, killing a larger number of
people than any other disease--some 60,000 in Great Britain and Ireland
in 1908, and 589 of this city.  Practically between 10 and 11 per cent.
of all deaths are due to it.  A plain proposition is before the people.
We know the disease--how it is caused, how it is spread, how it should
be prevented, how in suitable cases it may be cured.  How to make this
knowledge effective is the prime reason of this conference.  It is a
campaign for the public; past history shows that it is a campaign of
hope.  The measures for its stamping out, though simple on paper,
present difficulties interwoven with the very fabric of society, but
they are not insuperable, and are gradually disappearing.  It is for
this reason we urge you to join with enthusiasm in the crusade;
remembering, however, that only the prolonged and united efforts,
carried through several generations, can place the disease in the same
category with typhus fever, typhoid and small-pox.

In the comedies and tragedies of life our immutable human nature reacts
very much as in the dawn of science, and yet, with a widening of
knowledge, the lights and shadows of the landscape have shifted, and
the picture is brighter.  Nothing can bring back the hour when sin and
disease were correlated as confidently as night and day; and how shall
we assess the enormous gain of a new criterion, a new estimate of the
value of man's life!  There are tones in human sentiment to-day which
the ancients never heard, which our fathers indeed heard but faintly,
and that without recognizing their significance.  The human heart by
which we live has been touched as with the wand of a Prospero.  What
availed the sceptred race! what the glory that was Greece, or the
grandeur that was Rome! of what avail even has been the message of the
gospel, while the people at large were haunted by fear and anxiety,
stricken by the pestilence of the darkness and the sickness of the
noon-day?  The new socialism of Science with its definite mission cares
not a rap for the theories of Karl Marx, of Ferdinand Lassalle, or of
Henry George; still less for the dreams of Plato or of Sir Thomas
More--or at least only so far as they help to realize the well-being of
the citizen.  Nor is there need to fear that in weighing the world in
our balance we may drain the sap of its life, so long as we materialize
in the service of man those eternal principles on which life
rests--moral fervour, liberty and justice.

The outlook for the world as represented by Mary and John, and Jennie
and Tom has never been so hopeful.  There is no place for despondency
or despair.  As for the dour dyspeptics in mind and morals who sit idly
croaking like ravens,--let them come into the arena, let them wrestle
for their flesh and blood against the principalities and powers
represented by bad air and worse houses, by drink and disease, by
needless pain, and by the loss annually to the state of thousands of
valuable lives--let them fight for the day when a man's life shall be
more precious than gold.  Now, alas! the cheapness of life is every
day's tragedy!

If in the memorable phrase of the Greek philosopher Prodicus, "That
which benefits human life is God," we may see in this new gospel a link
betwixt us and the crowning race of those who eye to eye shall look on
knowledge, and in whose hand Nature shall be an open book, an approach
to the glorious day of which Shelley sings so gloriously:

          Happiness
  And Science dawn though late upon the earth;
  Peace cheers the mind, health renovates the frame;
  Disease and pleasure cease to mingle here,
  Reason and passion cease to combat there,
  Whilst mind unfettered o'er the earth extends
  Its all-subduing energies, and wields
  The sceptre of a vast dominion there.



[1] See note on page 4.




RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,

BRUNSWICK STREET, STAMFORD STREET, S.E.,

AND BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.











End of Project Gutenberg's Man's Redemption of Man, by William Osler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAN'S REDEMPTION OF MAN ***

***** This file should be named 36926.txt or 36926.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/9/2/36926/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
