Project Gutenberg's Twenty Quick Soups, by Sarah Tyson Heston Rorer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Twenty Quick Soups

Author: Sarah Tyson Heston Rorer

Release Date: August 2, 2011 [EBook #36943]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY QUICK SOUPS ***




Produced by David E. Brown and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









  OTHER BOOKS

  BY MRS S T RORER


  MRS RORER'S COOK BOOK
    nearly 600 pages of the choicest recipes in every department of
    cookery; bound in washable oil-cloth covers, $1.75

  CANNING AND PRESERVING
    paper covers, 40 cents; cloth, 75 cents

  HOT WEATHER DISHES
    paper covers, 40 cents; cloth, 75 cents

  HOME CANDY MAKING
    paper covers, 40 cents; cloth, 75 cents

  TWENTY QUICK SOUPS
  FIFTEEN NEW WAYS FOR OYSTERS
  HOW TO USE A CHAFING DISH
  COLONIAL RECIPES
  SANDWICHES
  DAINTIES
    Each of the above six volumes is bound in a different colored linen
    cloth, beautifully stamped in colors; price 25 cents each


  ARNOLD AND COMPANY Publishers
  PHILADELPHIA




  TWENTY QUICK SOUPS




  TWENTY
  QUICK SOUPS

  BY MRS S T RORER


  PHILADELPHIA
  ARNOLD AND COMPANY


  Copyright 1894 by Mrs S T Rorer

  Printed by
  George H Buchanan and Company
  Philadelphia




CONTENTS


                           PAGE

Cream of Asparagus            9

Cream of Corn                10

Cream of Lettuce             11

Cream of Beets               12

Tomato Soup                  13

Clear Tomato with Sago       14

Brown Broth                  15

Cheese Balls                 16

Bisque of Clam               17

Club Clam Soup               18

Mock Oyster Soup             19

Cucumber Tapioca Soup        21

Quick Clear Soup             22

A la Royal                   24

Bisque of Salmon             25

Currant Soup                 26

Chocolate Soup               28

Cream of Chestnut Soup       29

Pistachio Soup               30

Ye Food for ye Gods          31

Oatmeal Soup                 32




CREAM OF ASPARAGUS

Wash one bundle of asparagus, cut off the tips and throw them into a
pint of boiling water, add a teaspoonful of salt, and simmer gently for
fifteen minutes. Strain them and save the water; to this water add the
remaining part of the bundle, cut into small pieces. Cook fifteen
minutes and press through a colander. Put one quart of milk into a
double boiler; rub together two tablespoonfuls of butter and two
tablespoonfuls of flour. Add a little of the hot milk to this and work
until perfectly smooth, then stir into the milk and cook five minutes.
Heat the asparagus mixture, turn the milk quickly into it, season, add
the asparagus tips, and serve. This cannot be boiled or it will curdle.


CREAM OF CORN

Score each row of grains on six ears of corn; then, with the back of
the knife press it out carefully and throw the cobs into a kettle; cover
with a quart of water, bring to boiling point and strain. Now, add the
scraped corn to the water. Rub together two tablespoonfuls of butter and
one of flour. Stir it into this corn mixture and bring to boiling point,
then add one pint of hot milk; season and serve.


CREAM OF LETTUCE

Wash and pull apart two good-sized heads of lettuce. Throw them into a
hot saucepan, shake over the fire until the lettuce leaves simply melt.
Sprinkle over a teaspoonful of salt, then press through a sieve. Put one
quart of milk in a double boiler. Rub together two tablespoonfuls of
butter and two of flour, add it to the milk and stir until it thickens.
Chop sufficient parsley to make two tablespoonfuls and pound it in a
mortar. Put this in a bowl; mix it with the lettuce that has been
pressed through the sieve. Stir in the milk, then add a half teaspoonful
of beef extract, dissolved in a little of the hot milk; season and
serve.


CREAM OF BEETS

Take four cold, boiled beets and grate them. Dissolve a teaspoonful of
beef extract in one pint of boiling water. Add it to the beets, and when
they reach the boiling point add one pint of hot milk; stir in a
tablespoonful of butter, palatable seasoning of salt, and when it
reaches the boiling point, add tablespoonful of arrow-root dissolved in
two tablespoonfuls of cold water. Bring to boiling point again, and
serve.


TOMATO SOUP

Cut six large tomatoes into small pieces. Put them into a saucepan with
one pint of water, or stock, add tablespoonful of butter, slice of
onion, bay leaf and a sprig of parsley. Cook slowly twenty minutes and
press through a sieve sufficiently fine to remove the seeds. Return this
soup to the fire, add tablespoonful of arrow root moistened in two
tablespoonfuls of cold water, another tablespoonful of butter and a
palatable seasoning of salt and pepper, and serve with squares of
toasted bread.


CLEAR TOMATO WITH SAGO

Put one pint of stewed tomatoe into a saucepan, add slice of onions, bay
leaf and sprig of parsley. Simmer ten minutes. Cover four tablespoonfuls
of pearl sago with a pint of cold water and soak for twenty minutes.
Now, stand this over the back part of the stove until the sago is
perfectly clear, and the water almost boiling hot. Add to the tomatoes
one pint of boiling water and two tablespoonfuls of butter, then press
through a sieve. Return to the fire, add a teaspoonful of salt, half
teaspoonful of pepper and then the sago. Serve at once. This soup may be
varied by adding, instead of the pint of water to the tomatoes, a pint
of stock.


BROWN BROTH

Boil and cut into dice one young carrot, one onion and one potato. Put
two ounces of butter in the frying-pan, throw in the vegetables and stir
carefully until they are a golden brown. Then skim them out and put them
in a saucepan. Cover with one quart of boiling water, add a bay leaf and
simmer gently twenty minutes. Press through a puree sieve, return these
to the kettle, add a teaspoonful of kitchen bouquet and palatable
seasoning of salt and pepper. Serve with cheese balls.


CHEESE BALLS

Put a tablespoonful of butter and a quarter of a cup of water over the
fire to boil. Stir in quickly a quarter of a cup of flour and stir for a
minute. Take from the fire and add one well-beaten egg and two
tablespoonfuls of grated cheese. Drop this mixture into a greased baking
pan, and bake in a quick oven fifteen minutes. The paste should not be
larger than a good sized bean as you drop it on the pan. A very good way
to make them is to put this mixture in a pastry bag and press it through
a plain tube, and cut it off into small balls.


BISQUE OF CLAM

Drain fifty small clams. Bring the liquor to boiling point and skim.
Chop the clams fine, add them to the liquor and cook gently for ten
minutes. Then press through a sieve. Put one quart of milk into a double
boiler; add to it a bay leaf. Rub together two tablespoonfuls of butter
and two of flour, and stir carefully into the milk. Cook slowly until it
thickens. Now, add a teaspoonful of onion juice or grated onion, and
turn in the clam mixture. Stir carefully for a moment, season with salt
and pepper, and serve.

Remember this must not be boiled after the clam has been added to the
milk. If you have white stock in the house the soup is greatly improved
by having instead one quart of milk, one pint of milk and a pint of
stock.


CLUB CLAM SOUP

Drain fifty small clams, then chop them fine. Mix the liquor and the
clams, and add one quart of cold water, about two tablespoonfuls of
chopped ham, one large onion sliced thin, quarter of a teaspoonful of
mace and a sprig of parsley. Bring this slowly to a boiling point. Rub
together two tablespoonfuls of butter and two of flour. Stir them into
the soup carefully, add just a dash of salt and a quarter teaspoonful
of pepper. Bring to boiling point, then take from the fire and turn in
one pint of hot milk, to which you have just added the well-beaten yolks
of four eggs. Stir quickly and serve with squares of toasted bread.


MOCK OYSTER SOUP

Select about one dozen roots of salsify. Scrape them and throw at once
into cold water to prevent discoloration. Cut the salsify crosswise into
thin slices. Put them into one quart of cold water and add about two
ounces of codfish. This is best in one solid piece. Simmer gently for
thirty minutes and remove the codfish. Have ready one pint of milk
heated in a double boiler. Add it to the salsify, then stir in carefully
one tablespoonful of butter and two of flour that have been rubbed to a
smooth paste. Season with salt and pepper. Then, just as you take it
from the fire, add another teaspoonful of butter, cut into pieces, and
it is ready to serve.


CUCUMBER TAPIOCA SOUP

Boil three good-sized cucumbers, cut them into slices and cover them
with one quart of white stock. Simmer gently for twenty minutes. Then
press through a sieve. Soak two tablespoonfuls of pearl tapioca in one
pint of milk in a cold place for one hour. Stand this in a double boiler
and heat slowly until the tapioca is perfectly clear. Heat the cucumber
mixture; add a teaspoonful of salt, teaspoonful of onion juice and
quarter teaspoonful of pepper. Turn into the hot milk. Have ready in the
tureen the yolks of two eggs, well-beaten. Pour the soup over
gradually.


QUICK CLEAR SOUP

Put one pound of finely-chopped meat into one pint of cold water, beat
it for about a minute with an egg beater, and let it stand for thirty
minutes, while you prepare the flavoring. Stir one tablespoonful of beef
extract into a quart of boiling water. Add a tablespoonful of grated
onion and one bay leaf. Now bring the meat to boiling point. Strain in a
colander. Beat the white and shell of one egg with two tablespoonfuls of
cold water. Put the soup you have strained from the meat over the fire,
and when boiling add to the egg mixture, bring to boiling point and
strain through two thicknesses of cheese cloth. Then add this to the
beef extract mixture, season with teaspoonful of salt and quarter
teaspoonful of pepper, and it is ready to serve.

This may be served with two tablespoonfuls of boiled rice or boiled
macaroni, or with fresh rings of cucumbers. To prepare these rings cut a
large cucumber into slices crosswise. With a round cutter stamp them out
just as much as you can to remove the skin, and then with a smaller
cutter stamp out the seeds. Throw these rings into boiling salted water
and boil for twenty minutes; strain and put in the soup. Or this soup
may be served a la Royal.


A LA ROYAL

Beat two eggs until well mixed; add two tablespoonfuls of stock, half
teaspoonful of salt and a quarter teaspoonful of pepper. Now add two
tablespoonfuls of milk or cream, and turn into a small buttered basin or
mold. Stand this mold in a pan of boiling water and cook gently, either
in the oven or on the top of the stove, until the custard is "set." When
cold cut into blocks or into fancy shapes. Put this in the tureen and
pour over the soup.


BISQUE OF SALMON

Wash well a half cup of rice. Put it into a quart of water and boil
rapidly for thirty minutes. Then press it through a puree sieve and add
to it the salmon from a one pound can, removing first all the bones,
skin and oil. Now press this again through a sieve; add a teaspoonful of
salt, bay leaf, tablespoonful of grated onion and half teaspoonful of
pepper. Stand it over the back part of the stove until it is steaming
hot. Heat one quart of milk in a double boiler. Rub together two
tablespoonfuls of butter and two of flour. Stir this carefully into the
milk and stir until perfectly smooth and thick. Then add a level
teaspoonful of salt; turn this mixture into the other, remove the bay
leaf, bring to scald-point, and serve. If you like this soup a little
deeper color, add a few drops of cochineal. Halibut may be used in
precisely the same way, of course, keeping the soup perfectly white.


CURRANT SOUP

This soup may be made from any sort of fresh, tart fruit. It should be
served for lunch perfectly cold, in either punch or bouillon cups. Put
one pint of currants and one pint of water over the fire and bring to
scalding point. Add half cup of sugar. Press through a puree sieve,
return to the fire and add one tablespoonful of arrow-root, moistened in
two tablespoonfuls of water. Bring to boiling point until the soup is
clear, then stand away to cool. If you use wine, add two tablespoonfuls
of white wine. Cherries, cranberries and strawberries may be used in the
same way, adding more or less sugar, according to the kind of fruit, but
these soups should not be sweet. Use just enough sugar to make them
palatable.


CHOCOLATE SOUP

Put three tablespoonfuls of cocoa into a double boiler, and add
gradually one pint of boiling water. Stir for at least five minutes over
the fire. Add four tablespoonfuls of sugar, take from the fire and add a
teaspoonful of vanilla. Turn this into one pint of cracked ice, and when
the soup is cold, turn into the serving cups, and put on the surface a
tablespoonful of whipped cream, and serve.


CREAM OF CHESTNUT SOUP

Shell and blanch one pound of large chestnuts. Cover them with a quart
of boiling water; add a slice of onion, piece of celery chopped, a bay
leaf, sprig of parsley and a dash of paprica. Cover and boil thirty
minutes. Press first through a colander; then add one pint of milk;
return the whole to the fire. Rub together two tablespoonfuls of butter
and two of flour; add to the soup; cook a minute; add a palatable
seasoning of salt, and then press the whole through a puree sieve. Make
hot and serve with croutons.


PISTACHIO SOUP

Wash one quart of nice spinach. Pick each leaf from the stem and throw
into a saucepan; stand over the fire for a moment, shaking so that the
spinach will not discolor. Sprinkle over a teaspoonful of salt. As soon
as the spinach begins to wilt, drain and chop very fine, then pound it
to a paste. Put one quart of milk into a double boiler; add one
teaspoonful of almond paste unsweetened, and two ounces of pistachio
nuts chopped to a powder. Cover and cook twenty minutes. Add spinach,
one tablespoonful of butter, one of arrow-root, moistened, and press
through a puree sieve. Add a teaspoonful of salt, dash of paprica, and
serve. Nice for green lunch.


YE FOOD FOR YE GODS

Peel half pound of good, fresh mushrooms; remove the lower part of
stems. Wash the mushrooms, and chop them very fine with a silver knife.
Put them in a saucepan, with one quart of good chicken stock. Cover and
simmer gently thirty minutes; add teaspoonful of salt and simmer ten
minutes longer. Put two tablespoonfuls of butter in another saucepan,
add three tablespoonfuls of fine flour, mix and cook a minute without
browning; add a half pint of thick cream to the mushrooms, then add the
whole to the butter and flour, stir constantly until it just comes to
boiling point; add dash of white pepper and serve in bouillon cups.
Serve with whole wheat bread toasted in oven.


OATMEAL SOUP

Add one cup of cold cooked oatmeal to one quart of water; add a slice of
onion, sprig of celery top, bay leaf, teaspoonful of salt, saltspoonful
of pepper. Cover and boil slowly ten minutes; add a half teaspoonful of
beef extract, or, if you have stock, use it in place of water. Now press
through a sieve; return to the fire; when boiling, add half pint of hot
milk, and serve.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:

  Inconsistencies in spelling and hyphenation have been retained from
    the original.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected as follows:
    Page 10: earns has been changed to ears





End of Project Gutenberg's Twenty Quick Soups, by Sarah Tyson Heston Rorer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY QUICK SOUPS ***

***** This file should be named 36943.txt or 36943.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/9/4/36943/

Produced by David E. Brown and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
