The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Girl From His Town, by Marie Van Vorst

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Girl From His Town

Author: Marie Van Vorst

Illustrator: F. Graham Cootes

Release Date: August 3, 2011 [EBook #36961]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIRL FROM HIS TOWN ***




Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Image]




                                  THE
                           GIRL FROM HIS TOWN

                                  _By_
                            MARIE VAN VORST

                         WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY
                            F. GRAHAM COOTES

                              INDIANAPOLIS
                       THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY
                               PUBLISHERS




                             COPYRIGHT 1910
                       The Bobbs-Merrill Company

                                PRESS OF
                            BRAUNWORTH & CO.
                        BOOKBINDERS AND PRINTERS
                            BROOKLYN, N. Y.




                                CONTENTS

              CHAPTER                                   PAGE
                    I Dan Blair                            1
                   II The Duchess Approves                21
                  III The Blairtown Soloist               28
                   IV In The Coral Room                   31
                    V At The Carlton                      47
                   VI Galorey Seeks Advice                55
                  VII At The Stage Entrance               70
                 VIII Dan's Simplicity                    76
                   IX Disappointment                      85
                    X The Boy From My Town                94
                   XI Ruggles Gives a Dinner             109
                  XII The Green Knight                   128
                 XIII The Face of Letty Lane             135
                  XIV From India's Coral Strands         155
                   XV Galorey Gives Advice               174
                  XVI The Musicale Program               187
                 XVII Letty Lane Sings                   199
                XVIII A Woman's Way                      207
                  XIX Dan Awakes                         214
                   XX A Hand Clasp                       225
                  XXI Ruggles Returns                    231
                 XXII What Will You Take?                234
                XXIII In the Sunset Glow                 242
                 XXIV Ruggles' Offer                     250
                  XXV Letty Lane Runs Away               268
                 XXVI White and Coral                    274
                XXVII At Maxim's                         290
               XXVIII Such Stuff as Dreams               299
                 XXIX The Picture of It All              304
                  XXX Sodawater Fountain Girl            309
                 XXXI In Reality                         315
                XXXII The Prince Accepts                 319
               XXXIII The Things Above Ground            322




THE GIRL FROM HIS TOWN




CHAPTER I--DAN BLAIR


The fact that much he said, because of his unconscionable slang, was
incomprehensible did not take from the charm of his conversation as far
as the Duchess of Breakwater was concerned. The brightness of his
expression, his quick, clear look upon them, his beautiful young smile,
his not too frequent laugh, his "new gayness," as the duchess called his
high spirits, his supernal youth, his _difference_, credited him with
what nine-tenths of the human race lack--charm.

His tone was not too crudely western; neither did he suggest the ultra
East with which they were familiar. American women went down well enough
with them, but American men were unpopular, and when the visitor
arrived, Lady Galorey did not even announce him to the party gathered
for "the first shoot."

The others were in the armory when the ninth gun, a young chap, six feet
of him, blond as the wheat, cleanly set up and very good to look at,
came in with Lily, Duchess of Breakwater. Lady Galorey, his hostess,
greeted them.

"Oh, here you are, are you? Lord Mersey, Sir John Fairthrope." She
mumbled the rest of the names of her companions as though she did not
want them understood, then waved toward the young chap, calling him Mr.
Dan Blair, and he, as she hesitated, added:

"From Blairtown, Montana."

"And give him a gun, will you, Gordon?" Lady Galorey spoke to her
husband.

"I discovered Mr. Blair, Edie," the duchess announced, "and he didn't
even know there was a shoot on for to-day. Fancy!"

"I guess," Dan Blair said pleasantly, "I'll just take a gun out of this
bunch," and he chose one at random from several indicated to him by the
gamekeeper. "I get my best luck when I go it blind. Right! Thanks.
That's so, Lady Galorey, I didn't know there was to be any shooting
until the duchess let it out."

To himself he thought with good-natured amusement, "Afraid I'll spoil
their game record, maybe!" and went out along with them, following the
insular noblemen like a ray of sun, smiling on the pretty woman who had
discovered him in the grounds where he had been poking about by himself.

"Where, in Heaven's name, did you 'corral'--word of his own--the dear boy,
Edith? How did he get to Osdene Park, or in fact anywhere, just as he
is, fresh as from Eden?"

"Thought I'd let him take you by surprise, dearest. Where'd you find
Dan?"

"Down by the garden house feeding the rabbits, on his knees like a
little boy, his hands full of lettuces. I'd just come a cropper myself
on the mare. She fell, I'm sorry to say, Edie, and hacked her knees
quite a lot. One of those disguised ditches, you know. I was coming
along leading her when I ran on your friend."

The young duchess was slender as a willow, very brunette, with a
beautiful, discontented face.

"I'm going to show Dan Blair off," Lady Galorey responded, "going to
give the debutantes a chance."

Placidly nodding, the duchess lit a cigarette and began to quote from
Dan Blair's conversation: "I fancy he won't let them 'worry him'; he's
too 'busy!'"

"You mean that you're going to keep him occupied?"

The duchess didn't notice this.

"_Is_ he such a catch?"

Neither of the women had walked out with the guns. The duchess had a bad
foot, and Lady Galorey never went anywhere she could help with her
husband. She now drew her chair up to the table in the morning-room, to
which they had both gone after the departure of the guns, and regarded
with satisfaction a quantity of stationery and the red leather desk
appointments.

"Sit down and smoke if you like, Lily; I'm going to fill out some
lists."

"No, thanks, I'm going up to my rooms and get Parkins to 'massey' this
beastly foot of mine. I must have fallen on it. But tell me first, is
Mr. Blair a catch?"

Lady Galorey had opened an address book and looked up from it to reply:

"Something like ten million pounds."

"Heavens! Disgusting!"

"The richest young man 'west of some river or other.' At any rate he
told me last night that it was 'clean money.' I dare say the river is
responsible for its cleanliness, but that fact seemed to give him
satisfaction."

The duchess was leaning on the table at Lady Galorey's side.

"Dan's father took Gordon all over the West that time he went to the
States for a big hunt in the Rockies. He got to know Mr. Blair awfully
well and liked him. The old gentleman bought a little property about
that time that turned out to be a gold mine."

With persistency the duchess said:

"How d'you know it is 'clean money,' Edith? Not that it makes a rap of
difference," she laughed prettily, "but how do you know that he is rich
to this horrible extent?"

Lady Galorey put down her address book impatiently: "Does he look like
an impostor?"

The other returned: "Even the archangel fell, my dear Edith!"

"Well," returned her friend, "this one is too young to have fallen far,"
and she shut up her list in desperation.

The duchess sat down on the edge of the lounge and raised her expressive
eyes to Lady Galorey, who once more looked at her sarcastically, and
went on:

"Gordon liked the old gentleman: he was extraordinarily generous--quite a
type. They called the town after him--Blairtown: that is where the son
'hails from.' He was a little lad when Gordon was out and Mr. Blair
promised that Dan should come over here and see us one day, and this,"
she tapped the table with her pen, "seems to be the day, for he came
down upon us in this breezy way without even sending a wire, 'just
turned up' last night. Gordon's mad about him. His father has been dead
a year, and he is just twenty-two."

"Good heavens!" murmured the duchess. Lady Galorey opened her address
book again.

"Gordon's got him terribly on his mind, my dear; he has forbidden any
gambling or any bridge as long as the boy is with us...."

Her companion rose and thrust her hands into the pocket of her tweed
coat. She laughed softly, then went over to the long window where
without, across the pane, the early winter mists were flying, chased by
a furtive sun.

"Gordon said that the boy's father treated him like a king, and that
while the boy is here he is going to look out for him."

Over her shoulder the other threw out coldly:

"You speak as though he were in a den of thieves. I didn't know Gordon's
honor was so fine. As for me, _I_ don't gamble, you know."

Lady Galorey had decided that Lily's insistent remaining gave her a
chance to fill her fountain pen. She was, therefore, carefully squirting
in the ink, and she flushed at her friend's last words.

Lady Galorey herself was the best bridge player in London, and cards
were her passion. She did not remind the lady in the window that there
were other games besides bridge, but kept both her tongue and her
temper.

After a little silence in which the women followed each her own
thoughts, the duchess murmured:

"I'll toddle up-stairs, Edie--let you write. Where did you say we were
going to meet the guns for food?"

"At the gate by the White Pastures. There'll be a cart and a motor
going, whichever you like, around two."

"Right," her grace nodded; "I'll be on time, dearest."

And Lady Galorey with a relieved sigh heard the door close behind the
duchess. Wiping her fountain pen delicately with a bit of chamois, she
murmured: "Well, Dan Blair _is_ out of Eden, poor dear, if he met her by
the gate."

A fortune of a round ten million pounds was a small part of what this
young man had come into by direct inheritance from the Copper King of
Blairtown, Montana. For once the money figure had not been exaggerated,
but Lady Galorey did not know about the rest of Dan's inheritance.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The young man whistling in his rooms in the bachelor quarters of Osdene
Park House, dressed for dinner without the aid of a valet. When Lord
Galorey had asked him "where his manservant was," Dan had grinned.
"Gosh, I wouldn't have one of those Johnnies hanging around me--never did
have! I can put on _my_ stockings all right! There was a chap on the
boat I came over in who let his man put on his stockings. Can you beat
that?" Blair had laughed again. "I think if anybody tickled my feet that
way I would be likely to kick him in the eye."

Dressing in his room he whistled under his breath a song from a newly
popular comic opera; and he intoned with his clear young voice a line of
the words:

"_Should-you-go-to-Mandalay._"

Out through his high window, if he had looked, he would have seen the
misty sweep of the park under the faint moonrise and fine shadows that
the leaves made in the veiled light, but he did not look out. He was
dressing for dinner without a valet and giving a great deal of care to
his toilet; for the first time he was to dine in the house of a nobleman
and in the presence of a duchess; not that it meant a great deal to
him--he thought it was "funny."

In Dan Blair's twenty-two years of utterly happy days his one grief had
been the death of his father. As soon as the old man had died Dan had
gone off into the Rockies with his guides and not "shown up" for months.
When he came back to Blairtown, as he expressed it, "he packed his grip
and beat it while his shoes were good," for the one place he could
remember his father had suggested for him to go.

Blairtown was very much impressed when the heir came in from the Rockies
with "a big kill," and the orphan's case did not seem especially
disturbed. But no one in the town knew how the boy's heart ached for the
old man. When Dan was six years old his father had literally picked him
up by the nape of his neck and thrown him into the water like a pup and
watched him swim. At eight he sent the boy off with a gun to rough-camp.
Then he took Dan down in the mines with the men. His education had been
won in Blairtown, at a school called public, but which in reality was
nothing more than a pioneer district school.

On Sundays Dan dressed up and went with his father to church twice a day
and in the week-days his father took him to the prayer-meetings, and at
sixteen Dan went to college in California. He had just completed his
course when old Blair died. Then he inherited fifty million dollars.

On the day of the shoot at Osdene, Dan dropped sixty birds. He tried
very hard not to be too pleased. "Gosh," he thought to himself, "those
birds fell as though they were trained all right, and the other sports
were mad, I could see it." He then fell to whistling softly the air he
had heard Lady Galorey play the night before from the new success at the
Gaiety, and finished it as his toilet completed itself. He took up a
gardenia from his dressing-table, and fastened it in his coat, stopping
on the stairs on the way down to look over into the hall, where the men
in their black clothes and the women in their shining dresses waited
before going into the dining-room. The lights fell on white arms and
necks, on jewels and on fine proud heads. Dan Blair had been in San
Francisco and in New York, on short journeys, however, which his father,
the year before, had directed him to take, but he had never seen a
"show" like this.

He came slowly down the broad stairway of the Osdene Park House, the
last guest. In the corner, where, behind her, a piece of fourteenth
century tapestry cut a green and pink square against the rich black oak
paneling, the Duchess of Breakwater sat waiting. She wore a dress of
golden tulle which was simply a sheath to her slender body, and from her
neck hung a long rope of diamonds caught at the end by a small black
fan; there was a wreath of diamonds like shining water drops linked
together in her hair. She was the grandest lady at Osdene, and renowned
in more than one sense of the word. As Dan saw her smile at him and
rise, he thought:

"She is none too sorry that I made _that_ record, but I hope to heaven
she won't say anything to me about it."

And the duchess did not speak of it. Telling him that he was to take her
in to dinner, she laid first her fan on his arm and then her hand. And
Dan, one of those fortunate creatures who are born men of the world when
they get into it, gave her his arm with much grace, and as he leaned
down toward her he thought to himself:

"Well, it's lucky for me I have my head on tight; a few more of those
goo-goo eyes of hers and it would be as well for me to light out for the
woods."

                   *       *       *       *       *

Dan liked best at Osdene Park his chin-chins with Gordon Galorey. The
young man was unflatteringly frank in his choice of companions. When the
duchess looked about for him to ride with her, walk with her, to find
the secluded corners, to talk, to play with him, she was likely to
discover Dan gone off with Lord Galorey, and to come upon them later,
sitting enveloped in smoke, a stand of drinks by their side.

To Galorey, who had no heir or child, the boy's presence proved to be
the happiest thing that had come to him for a long time. He talked a
great deal to Dan about the old man. Galorey was poor and the fact of a
fortune of ten million pounds possessed by this one boy was continually
before his mind like an obsession. It was like looking down into a gold
mine. Galorey tried often to broach the subject of money, but Dan kept
off. At length Galorey asked boldly:

"What are you going to do with it?" On this occasion they were walking
over from the lower park back to the house, a couple of terriers at
their heels.

"Do with what?" Blair asked innocently. He was looking at the trees. He
was comparing their grayish green trunks and their foliage with the
California redwoods. A little taken aback, Lord Galorey laughed.

"Why, with that colossal fortune of yours."

And Blair answered unhesitatingly: "Oh--spend it on some girl sooner or
later."

Galorey fairly staggered. Then he took it humorously.

"My dear chap, I never saw a sweeter, bigger man than your father. If he
had been my father, I dare say I might have pulled off a different yard
of hemp, but I must confess that I think he has left you too much
money."

"Well, there are a lot of fellows who are ready to look after it for
me," Blair answered coolly. Before his companion could redden, he
continued: "You see, dad took care of me for twenty-one years all right,
and whenever I am up a stump, why all I have to do is to remember the
things he did."

For the first time since his arrival at Osdene Dan's tone was serious.
Interested as he was in the older man, Dan's inclination was to evade
the discussion of serious subjects. With Blair's slang, his conversation
was almost incomprehensible.

"Dad didn't gas much," the boy said, "but I could draw a map of some of
the things he did say. He used to say he made his money out of the
earth."

The two were walking side by side across the rich velvet of the
immemorial English turf. The extreme softness of the autumn day, its
shifting lights, its mellow envelope, the beauty of the park--the age,
the stability, the harmony, served to touch the young fellow's spirits.
At any rate there was a ring in him, an equilibrium that surprised
Galorey.

"'Most things,' dad said to me, 'go back to the earth.'" He struck the
English turf with his stick. "Dad said a fellow had better buy those
things that stay above the ground." Dan smiled frankly at his companion.
"Curious thing to say, wasn't it?" he reflected. "I remembered it, and I
got to wondering after I saw him buried, '_what are_ the things that
stay above the ground?' The old man never gave me another talk like
that."

After a few seconds Galorey put in:

"But, my dear chap, you did give me a shock up there just now when you
said you were going to spend 'all your money on some girl.'"

The millionaire took a chestnut from his pocket. He held it high above
his head and the little dog that had been yelping at his heels fixed his
eyes on it. Blair poised it, then threw it as far as he could. It sped
through the air and the terrier ran like mad across the park.

"I like girls awfully, Gordon, and when I find the right one, why, then
I'm going to feel what a bully thing it is to be rich."

Lord Galorey groaned aloud.

"My dear chap!" he exclaimed.

The spell of the day, the fragrant beauty of the time and place and hour
were clearly upon Dan Blair. Lord Galorey was sympathetic to him. The
terrier came tearing back with the chestnut held between his thick jaws.
Dan bent down to take the nut from the dog and wrestled with him gently.

"Swell little grip he's got. Nice old pup! Let it go now!" And he threw
the nut far again, and as the terrier ran once more Blair thrust his
hands down in his pockets and began softly to whistle the tune of
_Mandalay_.

He said slowly, going back to his subject: "It must be great to feel
that a fellow can give her jewels like the Duchess of Breakwater's,
ropes of 'em"--he nodded toward the house--"and a fine old place like this
now, and motors and yachts and all kinds of stuff."

His eyes rested on the suave lines of the Elizabethan house, with its
softened gables and its banked terraces. Possibly his vivid imagination
pictured "some nice girl" there waiting, as they should come up, to meet
him.

"I have always thought it would be bully to find a poor girl--pretty as a
peach, of course--one who had never had much, and just cover her with
things. Hey, there!" he cried to the terrier, who had come running back,
"bring it to me."

They had come up to the terrace by this, and Dan's confidence, fresh as
a gush of water from a rock, had ceased. His face was placid. He didn't
realize what he had said.

From out of one of the long windows, dressed in a sable coat, her small
head tied up in a motor scarf, the Duchess of Breakwater appeared. She
greeted them severely, and Lord Galorey hear her say under her breath to
Dan:

"You promised to be back to drive with me before dinner, Dan. Did you
forget?"

And as Galorey left the boy to make his peace, the first smile of
amusement broke over his face. He felt that the duchess had between her
and her capture of Dan Blair's heart the elusive picture of some "nice
girl"--not much perhaps, but it might be very hard to tear away the
picture of the ideal that was ever before the blue eyes of this man who
had a fortune to spend on her!




CHAPTER II--THE DUCHESS APPROVES


His attentions to the Duchess of Breakwater had not been so conspicuous
or so absorbing as to prevent the eager mothers--who, true to her word,
Lady Galorey had invited down--from laying siege to Dan Blair. Lady
Galorey asked him:

"Don't you want to marry any one of these beauties, Dan?" And Blair,
with his beautiful smile and what Lily called his inspired candor,
answered:

"Not on your life, Lady Galorey!"

And she agreed, "I think myself you are too young."

"No," Dan refuted, "you are wrong there. I shall marry as fast as I
can."

His hostess was surprised.

"Why, I thought you wanted your fling first."

And Dan, from his chair, in which, with a book, he had been sitting when
Lady Galorey found him, answered cheerfully:

"Oh, I don't like being alone. I want to go about with some one. I
should like a fling all right, but I want to fling with somebody as I
go."

The lady of the house was not a philosopher nor an analyst. She had
certain affairs of her own and was engrossed in them and lived in them.
As far as Lady Galorey was concerned the rest of the world might go and
hang itself as long as it didn't do it at her gate-post. But Blair
couldn't leave any one indifferent to him very long, not unless one
could be indifferent to a blaze of sunlight; one must either draw the
blinds down or bask in its brightness.

She laughed. "You're perfectly delicious! You mean to say you want to be
married at once and let your _wife_ fling around with you?"

"Just that."

"How sweet of you, Dan! And you won't marry one of these girls here?"

"Don't fill the bill, Lady Galorey."

"Oh, you have a sweetheart at home, then?"

"All off!" he assured her blithely, and rose, tall and straight and
slender.

The Duchess of Breakwater had come in, indeed she never failed to when
there was any question of finding Blair.

Dan stood straightly before the two women of an old race, and the
American didn't suggest any line of noble ancestors whatsoever. His
features were rather agglomerate; his muscles were possibly not the
perfect elastic specimens that were those muscles whose strain and sinew
had been made from the same stock for generations. He was, nevertheless,
very good to look on. Any woman would have thought so, and he bent his
blond head as he looked at the Duchess of Breakwater with something like
benevolence, something of his father's kindness in his clear blue eyes.
Neither of the noble ladies vaguely understood him. His hostess thought
him "a good sort," not half bad, a splendid catch, and the other woman,
only a few years his senior, was in love with him. The duchess had
married at eighteen, tired of her bargain at twenty, and found herself a
widow at twenty-five. She held a telegram in her hand.

"We've got the box for _Mandalay_ to-night at the Gaiety, and let's
motor in."

Only Lady Galorey hesitated, disappointed.

"Too bad--I had specially arranged for Lady Grandcourt to drive over with
Eileen. I thought it would be a ripping chance for her to see Dan."

When at length the duchess had succeeded in getting Dan to herself
toward the end of the day in the red room, after tea, she said:

"So you won't marry a London beauty?"

And rather coldly Dan had answered:

"Why, you talk, all of you, as if I had only to ask any girl of them,
and she would jump down my throat."

"Don't try it," the duchess answered, "unless you want to have your
mouth full!"

Dan did not reply for a second, but he looked at her more seriously,
conscious of her grace and her good looks. She was certainly better to
look at than the simple girls with their big hands, small wits, long
faces, and, as the boy expressed it, "utter lack of get-up." The duchess
shone out to advantage.

"Why don't you talk to me?" she asked softly. "You know you would rather
talk to me than the others."

"Yes," he said frankly; "they make me nervous."

"And I don't?"

"No," he said. "I learn a lot every time we are together."

"Learn?" she repeated, not particularly flattered by this. "What sort of
things?"

"Oh, about the whole business," he returned vaguely. "You know what I
mean."

"Then," she said with a slight laugh, "you mean to say you talk with me
for _educational purposes_? What a beastly bore!"

Dan did not contradict her. She was by no means Eve to him, nor was he
the raw recruit his simplicity might give one to think. He had had his
temptations and his way out of them was an easy one; for he was very
slow to stir, and back of all was his ideal. The reality and power of
this ideal Dan knew best at moments like these. But the Duchess of
Breakwater was the most lovely woman--the most dangerous woman that had
come his way. He liked her--Dan was well on the way to love.

The two were alone in the big dark room. At their side the small table,
from which they had taken their tea together, stood with its empty cups
and its silver. Without, the day was cold and windy, and the sunset
threw along the panes a red reflection. The light fell on the Duchess of
Breakwater, something like a veil--a crimson veil slipped over her face
and breast. She leaned toward Dan, and between them there was no more
barrier than the western light. He felt his pulses beat and a tide
rising within him. She was a delicious emanation, fragrant and near, and
as he might have gathered a cluster of flowers, so in the next second he
would have taken her in his arms, but from the other room just then Lady
Galorey, at the piano, played a snatch from _Mandalay_, striking at once
into the tune. The sound came suddenly, told them quickly some one was
near, and the Duchess of Breakwater involuntarily moved back, and so
knocked the small tray, jostled it, and it fell clattering to the floor.




CHAPTER III--THE BLAIRTOWN SOLOIST


Blairtown had a population of some eight thousand. There was a
Presbyterian church to which Dan and his father went regularly, sitting
in the bare pew when the winter's storms beat and rattled on the panes,
or in the summer sunshine, when the flies thronged the window casings,
when the smell of the pews and the panama fans and the hymn-books came
strong to them through the heat.

One day there was a missionary sermon, and for the first time in its
history a girl sang a solo in the First Presbyterian Church. Dan Blair
heard it, looked up, and it made a mark in his life. A girl in a white
dress trimmed with blue gentians, white cotton gloves, and golden hair,
was the soloist. He knew her, that is, he had a nodding acquaintance
with her. It was the girl at the drug store who sold soda-water, and he
had asked her some hundreds of times for a "vanilla or a chocolate," but
it wasn't this vulgar memory that made the little boy listen. It was the
girl's voice. Standing back of the yellow-painted rail, above the
minister's pulpit, above the flies, the red pews and the panama fans,
she sang, and she sang into Dan Blair's soul. To speak more truly, she
_made him a soul_ in that moment. She awakened the boy; his collar felt
tight, his cheeks grew hot. He felt his new boots, too, hard and heavy.
She made him want to cry. These were the physical sensations--the
material part of the awakening. The rest went on deeply inside of Dan.
She broke his heart; then she healed it. She made him want to cry like a
girl; then she wiped his tears.

The little boy settled back and grew more comfortable and listened, and
what she sang was,

  "From Greenland's icy mountains,
  From India's coral stra--ands."

Before the hymn reached its end he was a calm boy again, and the hymn
took up its pictures and became like an illustrated book of travels, and
he wanted to see those pea-green peaks of Greenland, to float upon the
icebergs to them, and see the dawn break on the polar seas as the
explorers do.... He should find the North Pole some day! Then he wanted
to go to an African jungle, where the tiger, "tiger shining bright,"
should flash his stripes before his eyes! Dan would gather wreaths of
coral from the stra--ands and give them to the girl with the yellow hair!
When he and his father came out together from the church, Dan chose the
street that passed the soda-fountain drug store and peeped in. It was
dark and cool, and behind the counter the drug clerk mixed the summer
drinks: and the drug clerk mixed them from that time ever afterward--for
the girl with the yellow hair never showed up in Blairtown again. She
went away!




CHAPTER IV--IN THE CORAL ROOM


"Mandalay" had run at the Gaiety the season before and again opened the
autumn season. Light and charming, thoroughly musical, it had toured
successfully through Europe, but London was its home, and its great
popularity was chiefly owing to the girl who had starred in it--Letty
Lane. Her face was on every post-card, hand-bill, cosmetic box, and even
popular drinks were named for her.

The night of the Osdene box party was the reopening of _Mandalay_, and
the curtain went up after the overture to an outburst of applause. Dan
Blair had never "crossed the pond" before this memorable visit, when he
had gone straight out to Osdene Park. London theaters and London itself,
indeed, were unexplored by him. He had seen what there was to be seen of
the opera bouffe in his own country, but the brilliant, perfect
performance of a company at the London Gaiety he had yet to enjoy.

The opening scene of _Mandalay_ is oriental; the burst of music and the
tinkling of the silvery temple bells and the effect of an extremely blue
sea, made Dan "sit up," as he put it. The theatrical picture was so
perfect that he lifted his head, pushed his chair back to enjoy. He was
thus close to the duchess. With invigorating young enthusiasm the boy
drew in his breath and waited to be amused and to hear. The tunes he
already knew before the orchestra began to charm his ear.

On landing at Plymouth Dan had been keen to feel that he was really
stepping into the world, and at Osdene Park he had been daily, hourly
"seeing life." The youngest of the household, his youth nevertheless was
not taken into consideration by any of them. No one had treated him like
a junior. He had gone neck to neck with their pace as far as he liked,
furnished them fresh amusement, and been their diversion. In all his
rare unspoiled youth, Blair had been suddenly dropped down in an effete
set that had whirled about him, and one by one out of the inner circle
had called him to join them; and one by one with all of them Dan had
whirled.

Lord Galorey had talked to him frankly, as plainly as if Dan had been
his own father, and found much of the old man's common sense in his fine
blond head. Lady Galorey had come to him in a moment of great anxiety,
and no one but her young guest knew how badly she needed help. He had
further made it known to the lady that he was not in the marriage
market; that she could not have him for any of her girls. And as for the
Duchess of Breakwater, well--he had whirled with her until his head swam.
He had grown years older at the Park in the few weeks of his visit, but
now for the first time, as the music of _Mandalay_ struck upon his ears,
like a ripple of distant seas, he felt like the boy who had left
Blairtown to come abroad. He had spent the most part of the day in
London with a man who had come over to see him from America. Dan
attended to his business affairs, and the people who knew said that he
had a keen head. Mr. Joshua Ruggles, his father's best friend, whom Dan
this afternoon had left to go to his room at the Carlton, had put his
arm with affection through the boy's:

"Don't look as though it were any too healthy down to the place you're
visiting at, Dan. Plumbing all right?"

And the boy, flushing slightly, had said: "Don't you fret, Josh, I'll
look after my health all right."

"There's nothing like the mountain air," returned the Westerner. "These
old fogs stick in my nostrils; feel as though I could smell London clean
down to my feet!"

                   *       *       *       *       *

From the corner of the box Dan looked hard at the stage, at the fresh
brilliant costumes and the lovely chorus girls.

"Gosh," he thought to himself, "they are the prettiest ever! Dove-gray,
eyes of Irish blue, mouths like roses!"

Leaning forward a little toward the duchess he whispered: "There isn't
one who isn't a winner. I never struck such a box of dry goods!"

The duchess smiled on Dan with good humor. His naive pleasure was
delightful. It was like taking a child to a pantomime. She was wearing
his flowers and displaying a jewel that he had found and bought for her,
and which she had not hesitated to accept. She watched his eager face
and his pleasure unaffected and keen. She could not believe that this
young man was master of ten million pounds.

When Letty Lane appeared Blair heard a light rustle like rain through
the auditorium, a murmur, and the house rose. There was a well-bred
calling from the stalls, a call from the pit, and a generous
applause--"Letty Lane--Letty Lane!" and as though she were royalty, there
was a fluttering of handkerchiefs like flags. The young fellow with the
others stood in the back of the box, his hands in his pockets, looking
at the stage. There wasn't a girl in the chorus as pretty as this prima
donna! Letty Lane came on in _Mandalay_ in the first act in the dress of
a fashionable princess. She was modish and worldly. For the only time in
the play she was modern and conventional, and whatever breeding she
might have been able to claim, from whatever class she was born, as she
stood there in her beautiful gown she was grace itself, and charm. She
was distinctly a star, and showed her appreciation of her audience's
admiration.

At the end of the tenor solo the Princess Oltary runs into the pavilion
and there changes her dress and appears once more to dance before the
rajah and to prove herself the dancer he has known and loved in a cafe
in Paris. Letty Lane's dress in this dance was the classic ballet
dancer's, white as the leaves of a lily. She seemed to swim and float;
actually to be breathed and exhaled from out her filmy gown; and the
only ray of color in her costume was her own golden hair, surmounted by
a small coral-colored cap, embroidered in pearls. The actress bowed to
the right and left, ran to the right, ran to the left; glanced toward
the Duchess of Breakwater's box; acknowledged the burst of applause;
began to dance and finished her _pas seul_, and with folded hands sang
her song. Her beautiful voice came out clear as crystal water from a
crystal rock, and her words were cradled like doves, like boats on the
boundless seas....

  "From India's coral strand...."

But there was no hymn tune to this song of Letty Lane's in _Mandalay_!
To the boy in the box, however, the words, the tune, the droning of the
flies on the window-pane, the strong odor of the hymn-books and panama
fans, came back, and the clear sunlight of Montana seemed to steal into
the Gaiety as Letty Lane sang.

The Duchess of Breakwater clapped with frank enthusiasm, and said: "She
is a perfect wonder, isn't she? Oh, she is _too_ bewitching!"

And she turned for sympathy to her friend, who stood behind her, his
face illumined. He was amazed; his blue eyes ablaze, his head bent
forward, he was staring, staring at the Gaiety curtain, gone down on the
first act.

He laughed softly, and the duchess heard him say:

"_Good!_ Well, I should say she was! She's a girl from our town!"

When the duchess tried to share her enthusiasm with Dan he had
disappeared. He left the box and with no difficulty made his way as far
as the first wing.

"Can you get me an entrance?" he asked a man he had met once at Osdene
and who was evidently an habitue.

"I dare say. Rippin' show, isn't it?"

[Image]

Dan put his hand on ducal shoulders and followed the nobleman through
the labyrinth of flies.

"Which of 'em do you want to see, old man?"

Dan, without replying, went forward to a small cluster of lights in one
of the wings. He went forward intuitively, and his companion caught his
arm: "Oh, I say, for _God's_ sake, don't go on like this!"

But without response Dan continued his direction. A call page stood
before the door, and Dan, on a card over the entrance, read "Miss Lane."
The smell of calcium and paint and perfume and the auxiliaries hung
heavy on the air. The other man saw Dan knock, knock again and then go
in.

Unannounced Dan Blair opened the door of the dressing-room of the
actress. Miss Lane's dressing-rooms were worth displaying to her
intimate friends. They were done with great taste in coral tint. She
might have been said to be in a coral cave under the sea, as far as
young Blair was concerned. As he came in he felt his ears deaden, and
the smoke of cigarettes grew so thick that he looked as through a veil.
The dancer was standing in the center of the room, one hand on her hip,
and in the other hand a cigarette. Her short skirt stood out around her
like a bell, and over the bell fell a rain of pinkish coral strands. She
wore a thin silk slip, from which her neck and arms came shining out,
and her woman knelt at her feet strapping on a little coral shoe.

Blair shut the door behind him, and began to realize how rude, how
impertinent his entrance would be considered. But he came boldly forward
and would have introduced himself as "Dan Blair from Blairtown," but
Miss Lane, who stared at the entrance through the smoke, burst into a
laugh so bright, so delightful, that he was carried high up on the coral
strands to the very beach. She crossed her white arms over her breast
and leaned forward, as a saleswoman might lean forward over a counter,
and with her beautifully trained voice, all sweetly she asked him:

"Hello, little boy, what will _you_ take?"

Blair giggled, quick to catch her meaning, and answered: "Oh, chocolate,
I guess!"

And Letty Lane laughed, put out her white hand, the one without the
cigarette, and said: "Haven't got that brand on board--so sorry! Will a
cocktail do? All sorts in bottles. Higgins, fix Mr. Blair a Martini."

As the dresser rose from her stooping position, the rest of Letty Lane's
dressing-room unfolded out of the mist and smoke. On a sofa covered with
lace pillows Blair saw a man sitting, smoking as well. He was tall and
had a dark mustache. It was Prince Poniotowsky, whom Dan had already met
at the Galorey shoot.

"Prince Poniotowsky," Miss Lane presented him, "Mr. Blair, of Blairtown,
Montana. Say, Frederick, give me my cap, will you? It is over by your
side. I've got to hustle."

The man, without moving, picked up a small red cap with a single plume,
from the sofa at his side. In another second Letty Lane had placed it on
her head of yellow hair, real yellow hair and not a doubt of it, like
sunshine--not the color one gets from inside bottles. Her arms, her hands
flashed with rings, priceless flashes, and the little spears pricked Dan
like sharp needles.

"It's the nicest ever!" she was saying. "How on earth did you get in
here, though? Have you bought the Gaiety Theater? I'm the most exclusive
girl on the stage. Who let you in?"

Her accent was English, and even that put her from him. As he looked at
her he couldn't understand how he had ever recognized her. If he had
waited for another act he wouldn't have believed the likeness real. The
girl he remembered had both softened and hardened; the round features
were gone, but all the angles were gone as well. Her eyes were as gray
as the seas; she was painted and her lids were darkened. Seen close, she
was not so divine as on the stage, but there was still a more thrilling
charm about the fact that she was real.

"To think of any one from Montana being here to-night! Staying very
long, Mr. Blair?" Between each sentence she directed Higgins, who was
getting her into her bodice. "And how do you like _Mandalay_? Isn't it
great?"

She addressed herself to Dan, but she smiled on both the men with
extreme brilliance.

"You bet your life," he responded. "I should think it was great."

Poniotowsky rose indolently. He had not looked toward the new-comer, but
had, on the other hand, followed every detail of Miss Lane's dressing.

"Better take your scarf, Letty. Hand it to Miss Lane," he directed
Higgins. "It is so damned drafty in these beastly wings."

He drew his watch out, gathered up his long coat, flung it over his arm
and picked up his opera hat which lay folded on Letty Lane's
dressing-table.

The call page for the third time summoned "Miss La--ne, Miss La--ane," and
she took the scarf Higgins handed her and ran it through her hands,
still beaming on Dan.

"Come in to see me at the Savoy on any day at two-thirty except on
matinee days."

"Put on your scarf." Poniotowsky, taking it from her hands, laid it
across her white shoulders, and she passed out between the two men,
light as a bird, smiling, nodding, followed by the prince and the boy
from Montana. The crowds began to fill the lately empty wings--dancers,
chorus girls with their rustling gowns. Letty Lane said to Dan:

"Guess you'll like my solo in this act all right--it's the best thing in
_Mandalay_. Now go along, and clap me hard."

It gave him a new pleasure, for she had spoken to him in real American
fashion with the swift mimicry that showed her talent. Dan went slowly
back to his party. As he took his seat by the duchess she said to him:

"You went out to see Letty Lane. Do you know her?"

"Know her!" And as Dan answered, the sound of his own voice was queer to
him, and his face flushed hotly. "Lord, yes. She used to be in the drug
store in Blairtown. Sold soda-water to me when we were both kids.
Whoever would have thought that she had that in her!" He nodded toward
the stage, for Letty Lane had come on. "She sang in our church, too, but
not for long."

"Who was with her in her dressing-room?" the duchess asked. Blair didn't
answer. He was looking at Letty Lane. She had come to dance for the
rajah and in her arms she held four white doves; each dove had a coral
thread around its throat. It was a number that made her famous, _The
Dove Song_. Set free, the birds flew about her, circling her blond head,
surmounted by the small coral-colored cap. The doves settled on her
shoulders, pecked at her lips.

"Was it Poniotowsky?" the duchess repeated.

And Dan told her a meaningless lie. "I didn't meet any one there." And
with satisfaction the duchess said:

"Then she has thrown him over, too. He was the latest and the richest.
She is horribly extravagant. No man is rich enough for her, they say.
Poniotowsky isn't a gold mine."

The doves had flown away to the wings and been gathered up by the Indian
servants. The actress on the stage began her Indian cradle song. She
came, distinctly turning toward the box party. She had never sung like
this in London before. There was a freshness in her voice, a quality in
her gesture, a pathos and a sweetness that delighted her audience. They
fairly clamored for her, waved and called and recalled. Dan stood
motionless, his eyes fastened on her, his heart rocked by the song. He
didn't want any one to speak to him. He wished that none of them would
breathe, and nearly as absorbed as was he, no one did speak.




CHAPTER V--AT THE CARLTON


There are certain natures to whom each appearance of evil, each form of
delinquency is a fresh surprise. They are born simple, in the sweet
sense of the word, and they go down to old age never of the world,
although in a sense worldly. If Dan Blair's eyes were somewhat opened at
twenty-two, he had yet the bloom on his soul. He was no fool, but his
ideals stood up each on its pedestal and ready to appear one by one to
him as the scenes of his life shifted and the different curtains rose.
He had been trained in finance from his boyhood and he was a born
financier. Money was his natural element; he could go far in it. But
_woman_! He was one of those manly creatures--a knight--to whom each woman
is a sacred thing: a dove, a crystal-clear soul, made to cherish and to
protect, made to be spoiled. And in Dan were all the qualities that go
to make up the unselfish, tender, foolish, and often unhappy American
husband. These were some of the other things he had inherited from his
father. Blair, senior, had married his first love, and whereas his boy
had been trained to know money and its value, how to keep it and spend
it, to save it and to make it, he had been taught nothing at all about
woman. He had never been taught to distrust women, never been warned
against them; he had been taught nothing but his father's memory of his
mother, and the result was that he worshiped the sex and wondered at the
mystery.

With Gordon Galorey and the others he had ridden, shot better than they,
and had played, but with Lady Galorey and the Duchess of Breakwater he
was nothing but a child. As far as his hostess was concerned, on several
occasions she had put to him certain states of affairs, well,
touchingly. Dan had been moved by the stories of sore need among the
tenants, had been impressed by the necessity of reforms and rebuildings
and on each occasion had given his hostess a check. She had asked him to
say nothing about it to Gordon, and he had kept his silence. Dan liked
Lady Galorey extremely: she was jolly, witty and friendly. She treated
him as a member of the family and made no demands on him, save the ones
mentioned.

In the time that he had come to know the Duchess of Breakwater she, on
her part, had filled him full of other confidences. Into his young ears
she poured the story of her disappointment, her disjointed life, from
her worldly girlhood to her disillusion in marriage. She was beautiful
when she talked and more lovely when she wept. Dan thought himself in
love with the Duchess of Breakwater. His conversations with her had
brought him to this conclusion. They had motored from Osdene Park
together, and he had been extremely taken with the pleasure of it, and
with the fact of their real companionship. Two or three times the words
had been on his lips, which were fated not to be spoken then, however,
and Dan reached the Gaiety still unfettered, his duchess by his side.
And then the orchestra had begun to play _Mandalay_, the curtain had
gone up and Letty Lane had come out on the boards. But her apparition
did not strike off his chains immediately, nor did he renounce his plan
to tell the duchess the very next day that he loved her.

When with sparkling eyes Lady Galorey raved about _Mandalay_, Dan
listened with eagerness. Everybody seemed to know all about Letty Lane,
but he alone knew from what town she had come!

They went for supper at the Carlton after the theater.

"Letty," Lady Galorey said, "tells it herself how the impresario heard
her sing in some country church--picked her up then and there and brought
her over here, and they say she married him."

Dan Blair could have told them how she had sung in that little church
that day. Dan was eating his caviare sandwich. "Her name _then_ was
Sally Towney," he murmured. How little he had guessed that she was
singing herself right out of that church and into the London Gaiety
Theater! Anyway, she had made him "sit up!" It was a far cry from
Montana to the London Gaiety. And so she married the greasy Jew who had
discovered her!

Dan glanced over at the Duchess of Breakwater. She was looking well,
exquisitely high bred, and she impressed him. She leaned slightly over
to him, laughing. He had hardly dared to meet her eyes that day, fearing
that she might read his secret. She had told him that in her own right
she was a countess--the Countess of Stainer. Titles didn't cut any ice
with him. At any rate, she would be able to "buy back the old farm"--that
is the way Dan put it. She had told him of the beautiful old Stainer
Court, mortgaged and hung up with debts, as deep in ruins as the ivy was
thick on the walls.

As Dan looked over at the duchess he saw the other people staring and
looking about at a table near. It was spread a little to their left for
four people, a great bouquet of orchids in the center.

"There," Galorey said, "there's Letty Lane." And the singer came in,
followed by three men, the first of them the Prince Poniotowsky,
indolent, bored, haughty, his eye-glass dangling. Miss Lane was dressed
in black, a superb costume of faultless cut, and it enfolded her like a
shadow; as a shadow might enfold a specter, for the dancer was as pale
as the dead. She had neither painted nor rouged, she had evidently
employed no coquetry to disguise her fag; rather she seemed to be on the
verge of a serious illness, and presented a striking contrast to the
brilliant creature, who had shone before their eyes not an hour before.
Her dress was a challenge to the more gay and delicate affairs the other
women in the restaurant wore. The gown came severely up to her chin. Its
high collar closed around with a pearl necklace; from her ears fell
pearls, long, creamy and priceless. She wore a great feathered hat,
which, drooping, almost hid her small, pale face and her golden hair.
She drew off her gloves as she came in and her white, jeweled hands
flashed. She looked infinitely tired and extremely bored. As soon as she
took her seat at the table intended for her party, Poniotowsky poured
her out a glass of champagne, which she drank off as though it were
water.

"Gad," Lord Galorey said, "she _is_ a stunner! What a figure, and what a
head, and what daring to dress like that!"

"She knows how to make herself conspicuous," said the Duchess of
Breakwater.

"She looks extremely ill," said Lady Galorey. "The pace she goes will do
her up in a year or two."

Dan Blair had his back to her, and when they rose to leave he was the
last to pass out. Letty Lane saw him, and a light broke over her pallid
face. She nodded and smiled and shook her hand in a pretty little
salute. If her face was pale, her lips were red, and her smile was like
sunlight; and at her recognition a wave of friendly fellowship swept
over the young man--a sort of loyal kinship to her which he hadn't felt
for any other woman there, and which he could not have explained. In
warm approval of the actress' distinction, he said softly to himself:
"_That's_ all right--she makes the rest of them look like thirty cents."




CHAPTER VI--GALOREY SEEKS ADVICE


Blair did not go back at once to Osdene Park. He stopped over in London
for a few days to see Joshua Ruggles, and so remarked for the first time
the difference between the speech of the old and the new world. Mr.
Ruggles spoke broadly, with complete disregard of the frills and
adornments of the King's English. He spoke United States of the pure,
broad, western brand, and it rang out, it vibrated and swelled and
rolled, and as Ruggles didn't care who heard him, nothing of what he had
to say was lost.

Old Mr. Blair had left behind him a comrade, and as far as advice could
go the old man knew that his Dan would not be bankrupt.

"Advice," Dan Blair senior once said to his boy, "is the kind of thing
we want some fellow to give us when we ain't going to do the thing we
ought to do, or are a little ashamed of something we have done. It's an
awful good way to get cured of asking advice just to do what the fellow
tells you to at once."

During Ruggles' stay in London the young fellow looked to it that
Ruggles saw the sights, and the two did the principal features of the
big town, to the rich enjoyment of the Westerner. Dan took his friend
every night to the play, and on the fourth evening Ruggles said: "Let's
go to the circus or a vaudeville, Dan. I have learned _this_ show by
heart!" They had been every night to see _Mandalay_.

"Oh, you go on where you like, Josh," the boy answered. "I'm going to
see how she looks from the pit."

Ruggles was not a Blairtown man. He had come from farther west, and had
never heard anything of Sarah Towney or Letty Lane. He applauded the
actress vigorously at the Gaiety at first, and after the third night
slept through most of the performance. When he waked up he tried to
discover what attraction Letty Lane had for Dan. For the young man never
left Ruggles' side, never went behind the scenes, though he seemed
absorbed, as a man usually is absorbed for one reason only.

In response to a telegram from Osdene Park, Dan motored out there one
afternoon, and during his absence Ruggles was surprised at his hotel by
a call.

"My dear Mr. Ruggles," Lord Galorey said, for he it was the page boy
fetched up, "why don't you come out to see us? All friends of old Mr.
Blair's are welcome at Osdene."

Ruggles thanked Galorey and said he was not a visiting man, that he only
had a short time in London, and was going to Ireland to look up "his
family tree."

"There are one hundred acres of trees in Osdene," laughed Galorey; "you
can climb them all." And Ruggles replied:

"I guess I wouldn't find any O'Shaughnessy Ruggles at the top of any of
'em, my lord. The boy has gone out to see you all to-day."

Galorey nodded. "That is just why I toddled in to see you!"

Ruggles' caller had been shown to the sitting-room, where he and Dan
hobnobbed and smoked during the Westerner's visit. There was a pile of
papers on the table, in one corner a typewriter covered by a black
cloth. Galorey took a chair and, refusing a cigarette, lit his pipe.

"I didn't have the pleasure of meeting you in the West when I was out
there with Blair. I knew Dan's father rather well."

Ruggles responded: "I knew him rather well too, for thirty years. If,"
he went on, "Blair hadn't known you pretty well he wouldn't have sent
the boy out to you as he has done. He was keen on every trail. I might
say that he had been over every one of 'em like a hound before he set
the boy loose."

Galorey answered, "Quite so," gravely. "I know it. I knew it when Dan
turned up at Osdene--" Holding his pipe bowl in the palm of his slender
hand, he smoked meditatively. He hadn't thought about things, as he had
been doing lately, for many years. His sense of honor was the strongest
thing in Gordon Galorey, the only thing in him, perhaps, that had been
left unsmirched by the touch of the world. He was unquestionably a
gentleman.

"Blair, however," he said, "wasn't as keen on this scent as you'd
expect. His intuition was wrong."

Ruggles raised his eyebrows slightly.

"I mean to say," Lord Galorey went on, "that he knew me in the West when
I had cut loose for a few blessed months from just these things into
which he has sent his boy--from what, if I had a son, God knows I'd throw
him as far as I could."

"Blair wanted Dan to see the world."

"Of course, that is right enough. We all have to see it, I fancy, but
this boy isn't ready to look at it."

"He is twenty-two," Ruggles returned. "When I was his age I was
supporting four people."

Galorey went on: "Osdene Park at present isn't the window for Blair's
boy to see life through, and that is what I have come up to London to
talk to you about, Mr. Ruggles. I should like to have you take him
away."

"What's Dan been up to down there?"

"Nothing as yet, but he is in the pocket of a woman--he is in a nest of
women."

Ruggles' broad face had not altered its expression of quiet expectation.

"There's a lot of 'em down there?" he asked.

"There are two," Galorey said briefly, "and one of them is my wife."

Ruggles turned his cigarette between his great fingers. He was a slow
thinker. He had none of old Blair's keenness, but he had other
qualities. Galorey saw that he had not been quite understood, and he
waited and then said:

"Lady Galorey is like the rest of modern wives, and I am like a lot of
modern husbands. We each go our own way. My way is a worthless one, God
knows I don't stand up for it, but it is not my wife's way in any sense
of the word."

"Does she want Dan to go along on her road?" Ruggles asked. "And how
far?"

"We are financially strapped just now," said Galorey calmly, "and she
has got money from the boy." He didn't remove his pipe from his mouth;
still holding it between his teeth he put his hand in his pocket, took
out his wallet, drew forth four checks and laid them down before
Ruggles. "It is quite a sum," Galorey noted, "sufficient to do a lot to
Osdene Park in the way of needed repairs." Ruggles had never seen a
smile such as curved his companion's lips. "But Osdene Park will have to
be repaired by money from some other source."

Ruggles wondered how the husband had got hold of the checks, but he
didn't ask and he did not look at the papers.

"When Dan came to the Park," said Galorey, "I stopped bridge playing,
but this more than takes its place!"

Ruggles' big hand went slowly toward the checks; he touched them with
his fingers and said: "Is Dan in love with your wife?"

And Lord Galorey laughed and said: "Lord no, my dear man, not even that!
It is pure good nature on his part--mere prodigality. Edith appealed to
him, that's all."

Relief crossed Ruggles' face. He understood in a flash the worldly
woman's appeal to the rich young man and believed the story the husband
told him.

"Have you spoken to the boy?"

"My dear chap, I have spoken to him about nothing. I preferred to come
to you."

"You said," Ruggles continued, "there were two ladies down to your
place."

Galorey had refilled his pipe and held it as before in the palm of his
hand.

"I can look after the affairs of my wife, and this shan't happen again,
I promise you--not at Osdene, but I'm afraid I can not do much in the
other case. The Duchess of Breakwater has been at Osdene for nearly
three weeks, and Dan is in love with her."

Ruggles put the four checks one on top of the other.

"Is the lady a widow?"

"Unfortunately, yes."

"So that's the nest Dan has got into at Osdene," the Westerner said. And
Galorey answered: "That is the nest."

"And he has gone out there to-day--got a wire this morning."

"The duchess has been in an awful funk," said Galorey, "because Dan's
been stopping in London so long. She sent him a message, and as soon as
Dan wired back that he was coming to the Park, I decided to come here
and see you."

Ruggles ruminated: "Has the duchess complications financially?"

"Ra-ther!" the other answered.

And Ruggles turned his broad, honest face full on Galorey: "Do you think
she could be bought off?"

Galorey took his pipe out of his mouth.

"It depends on how far Dan has gone on with her. To be frank with you,
Mr. Ruggles, it is a case of emotion on the part of the woman. She is
really in love with Dan. Gad!" exclaimed the nobleman. "I have been on
the point of turning the whole brood out of doors these last days. It
was like imprisoning a mountain breeze in a charnel house--a woman with
her scars and her experience and that boy--I don't know where you've kept
him, or how you kept him as he is, but he is as clear as water. I have
talked to him and I know."

Nothing in Ruggles' expression had changed until now. His eyes glowed.

"Dan's all right," he said softly. "Don't you worry! He's all right. I
guess his father knew what he was doing, and I'll bet the whole thing
was just what he sent him over here for! Old Dan Blair wasn't worth a
copper when the boy was born, and yet he had ideas about everything and
he seemed to know more in that old gray head of his than a whole library
of books. Dan's all right."

"My dear man," said the nobleman, "that is just where you Americans are
wrong. You comfort yourself with your eternal 'Dan's all right,' and you
won't see the truth. You won't breathe the word 'scandal' and yet you
are thick enough in them, God knows. You won't admit them, but they are
there. Now be honest and look at the truth, will you? You are a man of
common sense. Dan Blair is _not_ all right. He is in an infernally
dangerous position. The Duchess of Breakwater will marry him. It is what
she has wanted to do for years, but she has not found a man rich enough,
and she will marry this boy offhand."

"Well," said the Westerner slowly, "if he loves her and if he marries
her--"

"Marries her!" exclaimed the nobleman. "There you are again! Do you
think marriage makes it any better? Why, if she went off to the
Continent with him for six weeks and then set him free, that would be
preferable to marrying her. My dear man," he said, leaning over the
table where Ruggles sat, "if I had a boy I would rather have him marry
Letty Lane of the Gaiety. Now you know what I mean."

Ruggles' face, which had hardened, relaxed.

"I have seen that lady," he exclaimed with satisfaction; "I have seen
_her_ several times."

Galorey sank back into his chair and neither man spoke for a few
seconds. Turning it all over in his slow mind, Ruggles remembered Dan's
absorption in the last few days. "So there are three women in the nest,"
he concluded thoughtfully, and Gordon Galorey repeated:

"No, not three. What do you mean?"

"Your wife"--Ruggles held up one finger and Galorey interrupted him to
murmur:

"I'll take care of Edith."

"The Duchess of Breakwater you think won't talk of money?"

"No, don't count on it. She is aiming at ten million pounds."

Ruggles was holding up the second finger.

"Well, I guess Dan has gone out to take care of _her_ to-day."

Dan and Ruggles had seen _Mandalay_ from a box, from the pit and from
the stalls. On the table lay a book of the opera. While talking with
Galorey, Ruggles had unconsciously arranged the checks on top of the
libretto of _Mandalay_.

"_I'll_ take care of Miss Lane," Ruggles said at length.

His lordship echoed, "Miss Lane?" and looked up in surprise. "What Miss
Lane, for God's sake?"

"Miss Letty Lane at the Gaiety," Ruggles answered.

"Why, she isn't in the question, my dear man."

"You put her there just now yourself."

"Bosh!" Galorey exclaimed impatiently, "I spoke of her as being the
limit, the last thing on the line."

"No," corrected the other, "you put the Duchess of Breakwater as the
limit."

Galorey smiled frankly. "You are right, my dear chap," he accepted, "and
I stand by it."

A page boy knocked at the door and came in holding out on a salver a
card for Mr. Ruggles, and at the interruption Galorey rose and invited
Ruggles to go out with him that night to Osdene. "Lady Galorey will be
delighted."

But Ruggles shook his head. "The boy is coming back here to-night," and
Galorey laughed.

"Don't you believe it! You don't know how deep in he is. You don't know
the Duchess of Breakwater. Once he is with her--"

At the same time that the page boy handed Mr. Ruggles the card of the
caller, he gave him as well a small envelope, which contained box
tickets for the Gaiety. Ruggles examined it.

"I have got some writing to do," he told Galorey, "and I'm going to see
a show to-night, and I think I'll just stay here and watch my hole."

As soon as Galorey had left the Carlton, Mr. Ruggles despatched his
letters and his visitor, made a very careful toilet, and after waiting
until past eight o'clock for Dan to return to dinner, dined alone on
roast beef and a tart, and with perfect digestion, if somewhat
thoughtful mind, left the hotel and walked down the dim street to the
brilliant Strand, and on foot to the Gaiety.




CHAPTER VII--AT THE STAGE ENTRANCE


Ruggles, from his stall, for the fourth time saw the curtain go up on
_Mandalay_ and heard the temple bells ring. One of the stage boxes was
not occupied until after the first act and then the son of his friend
came in alone and sat far back out of sight of any eyes but the keenest,
and those eyes were Ruggles'. Letty Lane, delicious, fantastic,
languishing, sang to Dan; that was evident to Ruggles. He was a large
man and filled his stall comfortably. He sat through the performance
peacefully, his hands in his pockets, his big face thoughtful, his shirt
front ruffled. To look at him, one must have wondered why he had come to
_Mandalay_. He scarcely lost any of the threads of his own reflections,
though when Miss Lane, in response to a call from the house, sang her
cradle song three times, he seemed moved. The tones of her pure voice,
the cradling in her arms of an imaginary child, her apparent dovelike
purity, her grace and sweetness, and her cooing, gentle tone, to judge
by the softening of the Westerner's face, touched very much the big
fellow who listened like a child. At the end he drew his handkerchief
slowly across his eyes, but the tears, or rather moisture, that rose
there was not all due to Miss Lane's song, for Ruggles was extremely
warm.

He could see that in his box the boy sat transfixed and absorbed. Dan
went out in the second entr'acte and was absent when the curtain went
down. Ruggles, as well, left before the performance was over, to make
his way outside the theater to the stage exit, where there was already
gathered a little group, looked after by a couple of policemen. Close to
the curb a gleaming motor waited, the footman at its door. Ruggles
buttoned his coat up to his chin and took his place close to the door,
over which the electric light showed the words "Stage Entrance." A poor
woman elbowed him, her shabby hat adorned by a scraggly plume, a gray
shawl wrapped round her shoulders. A girl or two, who might have been
flower sellers in Piccadilly in the daytime, a couple of toughs, a
handful of other vagrants smelling of gin, a decent man in working
clothes, a child in his arms, formed the human hedge Letty Lane was to
pass between--a singular group of people to spend an hour hanging about
the streets at the exit of a theater well toward midnight. So the naive
Ruggles thought, and better understood the appearance of the young
fellows in evening clothes who hovered on the extreme edge of the little
crowd. Dan, however, was not of these.

"Look sharp, Cissy," the workingman spoke to his child, holding her well
up. "When she comes hout she'll pass close to yer, and you sing hout,
'God bless yer.'"

"Yes, Dad, I will," shrilled the child.

The woman in the gray shawl drew it close about her. "Aw she's a true
lidy, all right, ain't she? I expect you've had some kindness off her as
well?"

The man nodded over the child's shoulder. "Used to be a scene shifter,
and Miss Lane found out about my little girl last year--not this lass,
not Cissy, Cissy's sister--and she sent 'er to a place where it costs the
eyes out of yer head. She's gettin' well fast, and we, none of us, has
seen her or spoken to Miss Lane. She doesn't know our names."

And the woman answered: "She does a lot like that. She's got a heart
bigger'n her little body."

And a big boy in the front row said back to the others: "Well, she makes
a mint of money."

And the woman who had spoken before said: "She gives it nearly all to
the poor."

Ruggles was evidently on the poor side of the waiting crowd; the handful
of riffraff around him with its stench of dirt and gin. A better looking
set collected opposite and there was the gleam of white shirt fronts.

"Now, there she comes," the father saw her first. "Sing out, Cissy."

The door opened and a figure quickly floated from it, like a white rose
blown out into the foggy darkness. It floated down the few steps to the
street between the double row of spectators. A white cloak entirely
covered the actress. Her head was hidden by a white scarf, and she
almost ran the short gantlet to her motor, between the cries of "God
bless you!"--"Three cheers for Letty Lane"--"God bless you, lady!" She
didn't speak or heed, however, or turn her head, but held her scarf
against her face, and the man who slowly lounged behind her to the car,
and put her in and got in after her, was not the man Joshua Ruggles had
waited there to see. He hung about until the footman had sprung up and
the car moved softly away, the stage entrance door shut, then he
followed along with the crowd, with the few faithful ones who had waited
an hour in the cold mist to cry out their applause, not to a singer in
_Mandalay_ but to a woman's heart.




CHAPTER VIII--DAN'S SIMPLICITY


The Duchess of Breakwater was not sure how close Dan Blair's thoughts
were to marriage, but the boy from Montana was the easiest prey that had
come across the beautiful and unscrupulous woman's range. He had told
her that he stayed on up in London to see a man from home, and when
after four days he still lingered in town, she found his absence
unbearable, and sent him a wire so worded that if he had a spark of
interest in her he must immediately return to the Park. She had never
been more lovely than when Dan found her waiting for him.

She had ordered tea in her sitting-room. She told him that he looked
frightfully seedy, asked him what he had been doing and why he had
stopped so long away, and Blair told her that old Ruggles, his father's
friend, had run over to see him with a lot of papers for Dan to read and
sign and closed with a smile, telling her that he guessed she "didn't
know much about business."

"I only know the horrid things of business--debts, and loans, and bills,
and fussing."

"Those things are not business," Dan answered wisely; "they are just
common or garden carelessness."

She asked him why he had not brought Ruggles out to Osdene, and he told
her he couldn't have done a stroke of work with the old boy down here at
the Park.

Stirring his tea, he appreciated the duchess. The agreeable picture she
made impressed him mightily.

"Do you know," he asked suddenly, "what you make me think of?"

And she responded softly: "No, dear."

"A box of candy. This room with its stuffed walls, and you in it are
good enough--"

"To eat?" she laughed aloud. "Oh, you perfectly killing creature, what
an idea!"

And as he met her eyes with his clear ones, with a simplicity she could
never hope to reach, he put his tea-cup down; and as he did so the
duchess observed his strong hands, their vigor, well-kept and muscular,
but not the dandified hands of the man who goes often to the manicure.

"If it hadn't been for one thing," the boy went on, "I would have
thought of nothing else but you, every minute I've been away."

"Mr. Ruggles?" suggested the duchess.

"No, the Gaiety girl, Letty Lane. You know I told you in the box that
she was from my town."

The young man, who had flown back to Osdene Park in answer to a
telegram, began to take his companion into his confidence.

"I knew that girl," Dan said, "when she wasn't more than fourteen. She
sold me soda-water over the drug store counter. I always thought she was
bully, bright as a button and pretty as a peach. Once, I remember, I
took six chocolate sodas in one day just to go in and see her. I had an
awful time. I most died of that jag, and yet," he said meditatively, "I
don't think I ever spoke three words to her, just said 'sarsaparilla' or
'chocolate' or whatever it might happen to be. Ever since that day, ever
since that jag," he said with feeling, "I couldn't _see_ a stick of
chocolate and keep my head up! Well," went on the boy, "Sarah Towney
sang in our church for a missionary meeting, and I was there. I can
remember the song she sang." He spoke with unconscious ardor. He didn't
refer to the hymn, however, but went on with his narrative. "She
disappeared from Blairtown. I never had a peep at her again until the
other night. Gosh!" he said fervently, "when I saw her there on the
stage, why, I felt as though cold water was running up and down my
spine."

The duchess, as a rule, was amused by his slang. It seemed vulgar to her
now.

"Heavens," she drawled, "you are really too dreadful!"

He didn't seem to hear her.

"She's turned out a perfect wonder, hasn't she? A world-beater! Why,
everybody tells me there isn't another like her in her specialty. Of
course I have heard of Letty Lane, but I haven't been out to things
since I went in mourning, and I've never run up against her."

"Really," drawled the duchess again, "now that you have 'run up against
her' what are you going to do with her? Marry her?"

His honest stare was the greatest relief she had ever experienced. He
repeated bluntly: "Marry her? Why the dickens should I?"

"You seem absorbed in her."

He agreed with her. "I am. I think she's great, don't you?"

"Hardly."

But the cold voice of the duchess did not chill him. "Simply great," he
continued, "and I'm sorry for her down to the ground. That is what is
the matter. Didn't you notice her when she came into the Carlton that
night?"

"What of it, silly? I thought she looked as thin as a shad in that black
dress, and the way Poniotowsky goes about with her proves what an ass he
is."

"Well, I hate him," Blair simply stated; "I would wring his neck for
twenty cents. But she's very ill; that is what is the matter with her."

"They all look like that off the stage," the duchess assured
indifferently. "They are nothing but footlight beauties: they look
ghastly off the boards. I dare say that Letty Lane _is_ ill, though; the
pace she goes would kill anybody. Have some more tea?"

He held out his cup and agreed with her.

"She works too hard--this playing almost every night, singing and dancing
twice at the matinees, I should think she would be dead."

"Oh, I don't mean her professional engagements," murmured the duchess.

A revolt such as had stung him when they criticized her at the Carlton
rose in him now.

"It is hard to believe," he said, "when you hear her sing that dove song
and that cradle song."

But his companion's laugh stopped his championship short.

"You dear boy, don't be a silly, Dan. She doesn't need your pity or your
good opinion. She is perfectly satisfied. She has got a fortune in
Poniotowsky, and she really is 'a perfect terror,' you know."

Affected slightly by her cold dismissal of his subject, he paused for a
moment. But his own point of view was too strong to be shaken by this
woman's light words.

"I suppose if she wasn't from my town--" At his words the vision of Letty
Lane with the coral strands on her dress, came before his eyes, and he
said honestly: "But I do take an interest in her just the same, and
she's going to pieces, that's clear. Something ought to be done."

The Duchess of Breakwater was very much annoyed.

"Are you going to talk about her all the time?" she asked with sharp
sweetness. "You are not very flattering, Dan."

And he returned peacefully, "Why, I thought you might be able to help
her in some way or another."

"_Me!_" She laughed aloud. "Me help Letty Lane? Really--"

"Why, you might get her to sing out here," he suggested. "That would
sort of get hold of her; women know how to do those things."

His preposterous simplicity overwhelmed her. She stirred her tea, and
said, controlling herself, "Why, what on earth would you have me to say
to Letty Lane?"

"Oh, just be nice to her," he suggested. "Tell her to take care of
herself and to brace up. Get some nice woman to--"

The duchess helped him. "To reform her?"

"Do her good," the boy said gently.

"You're too silly for words. If you were not such a hopeless child I
would be furious with you. Why, my dear boy, she would laugh in your
face and in mine."

As the duchess left the tea-table she repeated: "Is this what you came
up from London to talk to me about?"

And at the touch of her dress as she passed him--at the look she gave him
from her eyes, Dan flushed and said honestly: "Why, I told you that she
was the only thing that kept me from thinking about you all the time."




CHAPTER IX--DISAPPOINTMENT


Dan Blair had not been back of the scenes at the Gaiety since his first
call on the singer. Indeed, though he had told the duchess he pitied
Miss Lane, he had not been able to approach her very closely, even in
his own thoughts. When she first appeared on his horizon his mind was
full of the Duchess of Breakwater, and the singer had only hovered round
his more profound feelings for another woman. But Letty Lane was an
atmosphere in Dan's mind which he was not yet able to understand. There
was so little left that was connected with his old home, certainly
nothing in the British Isles, excepting Ruggles, and to the young man
everything from America had its value. Decidedly the nice girl of whom
he had spoken to Gordon Galorey, the print-frocked, sun-bonneted type,
the ideal girl that Dan would like to marry and to spoil, had not
crossed his path. The Duchess of Breakwater did not suggest her, nor did
any of the London beauties. Dan's first ideal was beginning to fade.

He left Osdene Park on protest and returned the same night to London,
and all the way back to town tried to register in his mind, unused to
analysis, his experience with the Duchess of Breakwater on this last
visit.

He had experienced his first disappointment in the sex, and this
disappointment had been of an unusual kind. It was not that he had been
turned down or given the mitten, but he had seen one woman turn another
down. A woman had been mean, so he put it, and the fact that the Duchess
of Breakwater had refused to lend a moral hand to the singer at the
Gaiety hurt Dan's feelings. Then, as soon as his enthusiasm had calmed,
he saw what a stupid ass he had been. A duchess couldn't mix up with a
comic opera singer, of course. Still, he mused, "she might have been a
little nicer about it."

The education his father had given him about women, the slender
information he had about them, was put to the test now; the girl he had
dreamed of, "the nice girl," well, she would have had a tenderer way
with her in a case such as this! Back of Dan's hurt feelings, there was
a great deal on the Duchess of Breakwater's side. She had not done for
herself yet. She hadn't fetched him nearly up to the altar for nothing,
and back of his disapproval, there was a long list of admirations and
looks, memories of many tete-a-tetes and of more fervent kisses which
scored a good deal in the favor of Dan's first woman. The Duchess of
Breakwater had gone boldly on with Dan's unfinished education, and he
really thought he loved her, and that he was in honor bound to see the
thing through.

                   *       *       *       *       *

That evening, once more in the box he had taken all to himself, he
listened to _Mandalay_, carried away with the charm of the music and
carried away by the singer. He was in the box nearest the stage and
seemed close to her, and he imagined that under her paint he could see
her pallor and how thin she was. Nothing, however, in her acting or in
her voice revealed the least fatigue. Blair had obtained a card of
entrance to the theater, which permitted him to circulate freely behind
the scenes, and although as yet the run of his visits had not been
clear, this night he had a purpose. Dan stood not far from the corridor
that led to Letty Lane's room, and saw her after her act hurriedly cross
the stage, a big white shawl wrapping her slender form closely. She was
as thin as a candle. Her woman Higgins followed closely after her, and
as they passed Dan, Letty Lane called to him gaily:

"Hello, you! What are you hanging around here for?"

And Dan returned: "Don't stand here in the draft. It is beastly cold."

"Yes, Miss," her woman urged, "don't stand here."

But the actress waited nevertheless and said to Dan: "Who's the girl?"

"What girl?"

"Why, the girl you come here every night to see and are too shy to speak
to. Everybody is crazy to know."

Letty Lane looked like a little girl herself in the crocheted garment
her small hands held across her breast. Dan put his arm on her shoulder
without realizing the familiarity of his gesture:

"Get out of this draft--get out of it quick, I say," and pushed her
toward her room.

"Gracious, but you are strong." She felt the muscular touch, and his
hand flat against her shoulder was warm through the wool.

"I wish _you_ were strong. You work too darned hard."

Her head was covered with the coral cap and feather. Dan saw her billowy
skirt, her silken hose, her little coral shoes. She fluttered at the
door which Higgins opened.

"Why haven't you been to see me?" she asked him. "You are not very
polite."

"I am coming in now."

"Not a bit of it. I'm too busy, and it is a short entr'acte. Go and see
the girl you came here to see."

Dan thought that the reason she forbade him to come in was because
Prince Poniotowsky waited for her in her dressing-room. It was his first
jealous moment, and the feeling fell on him with a swoop, and its fangs
fastened in him with a stinging pain. He stammered:

"I didn't come to see any girl here but you. I came to see you."

"Come to-morrow at two, at the Savoy."

But before Dan realized his own precipitation, he had seized the
door-handle as Letty Lane went within and was about to close her room
against him, and said quickly:

"I'm coming right in now."

"Why, I never heard of such a thing," she answered sharply, angrily;
"you must be crazy! Take away your hand!" And hers, as well as his,
seized the handle of the door. Her small ice-cold hand brought him to
his senses.

"I beg your pardon," he murmured confusedly. "Do go in and get warm if
you can."

But instead of obeying, now that the rude young man withdrew his
importuning, Miss Lane's hands fell from the knob, and close to his eyes
she swayed before him, and Dan caught her in his arms--went into her
room, carrying her. He had been wrong about Prince Poniotowsky; save for
Higgins, the room was empty. The woman, though she exclaimed, showed no
great surprise and seemed prepared for such a fainting spell. Dan laid
the actress on the sofa and then the dresser said to him:

"Please go, sir; I can quite manage. She has these turns often. I'll
give her brandy. She will be quite right."

But Dan hesitated, looking at the bit of humanity that he had laid with
great gentleness on the divan covered with pillows. Letty Lane lay
there, small as a little child, inanimate as death. It was hard to think
the quiet little form could contain such life, fire and motion, or that
this senseless little creature held London with her voice and grace.
Higgins knelt down by Letty Lane's side, quiet, capable, going about the
business of resuscitating her lady much as she laced the singer's bodice
and shoes. "If you would be so good as to open the door, sir, and send
me a call page. They'll have to linger out this entr'acte or put on some
feature."

"But," exclaimed Blair, "she can't go back to-night?"

"Lord, yes," Higgins returned. "Here, Miss Lane; drink this."

At the door where he paused, Dan saw the girl lifted up, saw her lean on
Higgins' shoulder, and assured then that she was not lifeless in good
truth, he went out to do as Higgins had asked him. In a quarter of an
hour the curtain rose and within half an hour Dan, from his box, saw the
actress dance to the rajah her charming polka to the strains of the
Hungarian Band.




CHAPTER X--THE BOY FROM MY TOWN


He went the next day to see Letty Lane at the Savoy and learned that she
was too ill to receive him. Mrs. Higgins in the sitting-room told him
so.

Dan liked the big cordial face of the Scotch-woman who acted as
companion, dresser and maid for the star. Mrs. Higgins had an affable
face, one that welcomes, and she made it plain that she was not an enemy
to this young caller.

The visitor, in his blue serge clothes, was less startling than most of
the men that came to see her mistress.

"She works too hard, doesn't she?"

"She does everything too hard, sir."

"She ought to rest."

"I doubt if she does, even in her grave," returned Higgins. "She is too
full of motion. She is like the little girl in the fairy book that
danced in her grave."

Dan didn't like this comparison.

"Can't you make her hold up a little?"

Higgins smiled and shook her head.

Letty Lane's sitting-room was as full of roses as a flower garden. There
were quantities of theatrical photographs in silver and leather frames
on the tables and the piano. Signed portraits from crowned heads;
pictures of well-known worldly men and women whom the dancer had
charmed. But a full-length picture of Letty Lane herself in one of the
dresses of _Mandalay_ lay on the table near Dan, and he picked it up.
She smiled at him enchantingly from the cardboard, across which was
written in her big, dashing hand: "For the Boy from _my_ Town. Letty
Lane."

Dan glanced up at Mrs. Higgins.

"Why, that looks as though this were for me."

The dressing woman nodded. "Miss Lane thought she would be able to see
you to-day."

The picture in his hand, Dan gazed at it rapturously.

"I'm from Blairtown, Montana, where she came from."

"So she told me, sir."

He laid the picture back on the table, and Higgins understood that he
wanted Miss Lane to give it to him herself. She led him affably to the
door and affably smiled upon him. She had a frill in her hand, a thimble
on her finger, and a lot of needles in her bodice. She looked motherly
and useful. Blair liked to think of her with Letty Lane. He put his hand
in his pocket, but she saw his gesture and reproved him quietly: "No,
no, sir, please, I never do. I am just as much obliged," and her face
remained so affable that Blair was not embarrassed by her refusal. His
parting words were:

"Now, you make her take care of herself."

And to please him, as she opened the door, she pleasantly assured him
that she would do her very best.

Dan went out of the Savoy feeling that he had left something of himself
behind him in the motley room of an actress with its perfumed atmosphere
of roses and violets. The photograph which he had laid down on the table
seemed to look out at him again, and he repeated delightedly, "That one
was for me, all right! I'm the 'boy from her town' and no mistake." And
he thought of her as she had lain, lifelessly and pale on the
dressing-room sofa, under the touch of hired hands, and how, no doubt,
she had been lying in her room when he called to-day, with shades drawn,
resting before the long hard evening, when London would be amused by
her, delighted by her, charmed by her voice, by her body and her grace.
He had wandered up as far as Piccadilly, went into a florist's and stood
before the flowers. Her sitting-room had been full of roses, but Dan
chose something else that had caught his eye from the window,--a huge
country basket of primroses, smelling of the earth and the spring. He
sent them with his card and wrote on it, "To the Girl from My Town," and
sent the gift with a pleasure as young and as fresh as was his own
heart.

He got no note of acknowledgment from his flowers. Miss Lane was
evidently better and played every night; no mention was made of her
indisposition in the papers. But Dan couldn't go to the Gaiety or bear
to see her make the effort which he knew must tire her beyond words to
conceive.

After a few days he called at the Savoy to get news of her. He got as
far as the lift when going up in it he saw Prince Poniotowsky. The sight
affected Miss Lane's townsman so forcibly that instead of going up to
the dancer's apartment Dan took himself off, and anger, displeasure and
something like disgust were the only sentiments he carried away from the
Savoy. He sent her no flowers, and gave himself up unreservedly to
Joshua Ruggles and to a couple of men who came in to see him by
appointment. And when toward four o'clock he found himself alone with
Ruggles, Dan threw himself down in a big chair and looked intensely
bored.

[Image]

"Well, I guess we don't need to see any more of these fellows for a
week, Dan," Ruggles yawned with relief. "I'm blamed if it isn't as hard
to take care of money as to get it. I was a poor man once, and so was
your father. Those were the days we had fun."

Ruggles took out a big cigar, struck a match sharply, and when he had
lit his Henry Clay he fixed his gaze on the flying London fog, whose
black curtain drew itself across their window.

"There's a lot of excitement," Ruggles said, "in not knowing what you're
going to get; may turn out to be anything when you're young and on the
trail. That's the way your father and me felt. And when we started out
on the spot that's Blairtown on the map to-day, your father had forty
dollars a week to engineer a busted mine and to pull the company into
shape."

Dan knew the story of his father's rise by heart, but he listened.

"He took on with the mine a lot of discontented half-hearted
rapscallions--a whole bunch, who had failed all along the line. He didn't
chuck 'em out. 'There's no life in old wood, Josh,' he said to me, 'but
sometimes there's fire in it, and I'm going to light up,' and he did. He
won over the whole lot of them in eighteen months, and within two years
he had that darned mine paying dividends. Meanwhile something came his
way and he took it."

From his chair Dan asked: "You mean the Bentley claim?"

"Measles," his friend said comically, with a grin. "Your father was sick
to death with them. When he was sitting up for the first time, peeling
in his room, there was a fellow, an Englishman, a total stranger, come
in to see him. 'Better clear out of here,' your father says to him. 'I'm
shedding the damnedest disease for a grown man that ever was caught.'
'I'm not afraid of it,' the Englishman said, 'I'm shedding worse.' When
your father asked him what that was, he said the idea that he could make
any money in the West. He told your father that he was going back to
England and give up his western schemes, and that he had a claim to
sell, and he told Blair where it lay. 'Who has seen it?' your father
asked. 'Any of my men?' And the Englishman told your father that nobody
had wanted to buy it and that was why he had come to him. He said he
thought his only chance to sell was to hold up some blind man on his
dying bed and that he had heard that Blair was too sick to stir out of
his room and to prospect. Your father liked the fellow's cheek and when
he found out that he had the maps with him, your father bought the whole
blooming sweep at the man's price, which was a mere song.

"Your father never went near his purchase for a year or more, and when
he had turned the mine he was managing over to the original company,
with me as manager in his place, at a salary of twenty thousand dollars
a year, he said to me one day, 'Ruggles, you'll be sorry to know that
the fun is all over, I've struck oil.' But the oil was copper. The whole
blooming business that he'd bought of that Englishman was rich with ore.
Well, that's the story of Blairtown," Ruggles said. "You were born there
and your mother died there."

Dan said: "Galorey told me what dad did later for the man that sold him
the mine, and it was just like everything else he did, for dad was all
right, just as good as they come."

Ruggles agreed. He left his reminiscences abruptly. "Your dad and me had
the fun in our time; now you are going to get the other kind; you're
going to make the dust fly that he dug up."

And the rich young man said musingly: "I'll bet it isn't half as good at
my end."

And Ruggles agreed: "Not by a jugful." And followed: "What's on
to-night? _Mandalay?_"

Dan's fury at Prince Poniotowsky came back. "I guess you thought I was a
little loose in the lid, didn't you, Josh, going so often to the same
play?"

"You wouldn't have been the first rich man that had the same disease,"
Ruggles answered.

"There is nothing the matter with _Mandalay_, but I'm not gone on any
actress living, Josh; you are in the wrong pew."

Dan altered his indolent pose and sat forward. "But I _am_ thinking of
getting married," he said.

"I hope it's to the right girl, Dan."

And with young assurance Blair answered: "It will be if I marry her. I
know what I want all right."

"I hope she knows what she wants, Dan."

"How do you mean?"

"You or your money. You have the darnedest handicap, my boy."

Blair flushed. "I'll get to hate the whole thing," he said ferociously.
"It meets me everywhere--bonds--stocks--figures--dividends
--coupons--deeds--it's too much!" he said suddenly, with resentment. "It is
too much for me. Why, sometimes I feel a hundred years old, and like a
hunk of gold."

Ruggles, in answer to this, said: "Why, that reminds me of what a man
remarked about your father once. It was the same English chap your
father bought the claim of. Speaking of Blair, he said to me: 'You know
there's all kinds of metal bars, and when you cut into them some is
bullion and some's coated with aluminum, and there's others that when
you cut down, cut a clean yellow all along the line.' If, as you say,
you feel like a hunk of metal, it ain't bad if it is that kind."

"It's got to stop coming in between me and the woman I marry, all right,
though." Dan did not pursue his subject further, for his feelings about
the duchess were too unreal to give him the sincere heartiness with
which he would have liked to answer Ruggles.

He went over to the window, and, with his hands in his pockets, stood
looking out at the fog. Ruggles, at the table, opened the cover of the
book of _Mandalay_ and took out the four checks made out to Lady Galorey
and which he had forgotten. He hurriedly thrust them into his pocket.

"Come away, Dannie," he said cheerfully, "let's do something wild. I
feel up to most anything with this miserable fog down on me. If it had
any nerve it would take some form or shape, so a man could choke it
back."

Ruggles blew his nose violently.

"There's nothing to do," said Dan in a bored tone.

"Why don't you see who your telegram is from?" Ruggles asked him. It
proved to be a suggestion from Gordon Galorey that Dan should meet him
at five o'clock at the club.

"What will you do, Rug?"

"Sleep," said the Westerner serenely; "I'm nearly as happy in London as
I am in Philadelphia. It's four o'clock now and I can't sleep more than
four hours anyway. Let's have a real wild time, Dannie."

Dan looked at him doubtfully, but Ruggles' eyes were keen.

"What kind of a time do you mean?"

"Let's ask the Gaiety girl for dinner--for supper after the theater."

"Letty Lane? She wouldn't go."

"Why not?"

"She is awfully delicate; it is all she can do to keep her contracts."

He knows that, Ruggles thought. "Let's ask her and see." He went over to
the table and drew out the paper. "Come on and write and ask her to go
out with us to supper."

"See here, Rug, what's this for?"

"What's strange in it? She is from our state, and if you don't hustle
and ask her I am going to ask her all alone."

Dan was puzzled as he sat down to the table, reflecting that it was
perfectly possible that old Ruggles had fallen a prey to the charms of
an actress. She wouldn't come, of course. He wrote a formal invitation
without thinking very much of what he said or how, folded and addressed
his note.

"What did you say?" Ruggles asked eagerly.

"Why, that two boys from home wanted to give her a supper."

"Well," said Ruggles, "if the answer comes while you are at the club
I'll open it and give the orders. Think she'll come?"

"I do not," responded Dan rather brutally. "She's got others to take her
out to supper, you bet your life."

"Well, there's none of them as rich as you are, I reckon, Dan."

And the boy turned on him violently.

"See here, Josh, if you speak to me again of my money, when there's a
woman in the question--"

He did not finish his threat, but snatched up his coat and hat and
gloves and went out of the door, slamming it after him.

Mr. Ruggles' profound and happy snore was cut short by the page boy, who
fetched in a note, with the Savoy stamping on the back. Ruggles opened
it not without emotion.

"Dear boy," it ran, "I haven't yet thanked you for the primroses; they
were perfectly sweet. There is not one of them in any of my rooms, and
I'll tell you why to-night. I am crazy to accept for supper"--here she
had evidently struck out her intended refusal, and closed with, "I'm
coming, but don't come after me at the Gaiety, please. I'll meet you at
the Carlton after the theater. Who's the other boy? L. L."

The "other boy" read the note with much difficulty, for it was badly
written. "He'll have to stop sending her flowers and going every night
to the theater unless he wants a row with the duchess," he said dryly.
And with a certain interest in his role, Ruggles rang for the head
waiter, and with the man's help ordered his first midnight supper for an
actress.




CHAPTER XI--RUGGLES GIVES A DINNER


The bright tide of worldly London flows after and around midnight into
the various restaurants and supper rooms, and as well through the
corridors and halls of the Carlton. At one of the small tables bearing a
great expensive bunch of orchids and soft ferns, Josh Ruggles, in a new
evening dress, sat waiting for his party. Dan had dined with Lord
Galorey, and the two men had gone out together afterward, and Ruggles
had not seen the boy to give him Letty Lane's note.

"Got it with you?" Blair asked when he came in, and Ruggles responded
that he didn't carry love letters around in his dress clothes.

They could tell by the interest in the room when the actress was coming,
and both men rose as Letty Lane floated in at flood tide with a crowd of
last arrivals.

She had not dressed this evening with the intention that her dark
simplicity of attire should be conspicuous. The cloak which Dan took
from her shed the perfume of orris and revealed the woman in a blaze of
sparkling _paillettes_. She seemed made out of sparkle, and her blond
head, from which a bright ornament shook, was the most brilliant thing
about her, though her dress from hem to throat glistened with discs of
gold like moonshine on a starry sea. The actress' look of surprise when
she saw Ruggles indicated that she had not expected a boy of his age.

"The other boy?" she asked. "Well, this is the nicest supper party ever!
And you are awfully good to invite me."

Ruggles patted his shirt front and adjusted his cravat.

"My idea," he told her, "all the blame on me, Miss Lane. Charge it up to
me! Dan here had cold feet from the first. He said you wouldn't come."

She laughed deliciously.

"He did? Hasn't got much faith, has he?"

Miss Lane drew her long gloves off, touched the orchids with her little
hands, on which the ever present rings flashed, and went on talking to
Ruggles, to whom she seemed to want to address her conversation.

"I'm simply crazy over these flowers."

The older man showed his pleasure. "My choice again! Walked up myself
and chose the bunch, blame me again; ditto dinner; mine from start to
finish--hope you'll like it. I would have added some Montana peas and
some chocolate soda-water, only I thought you might not understand the
joke."

Miss Lane beamed on him. Although he was unconscious of it, she was not
fully at ease: he was not the kind of man she had expected to see.
Accustomed to young fellows like the boy and their mad devotion,
accustomed to men with whom she could be herself, the big, bluff,
middle-aged gentleman with his painfully correct tie, his rumpled
iron-gray hair, and his deference to her, though an unusual diversion,
was a little embarrassing.

"Oh, I know your dinner is ripping, Mr. Ruggles. I'm on a diet of milk
and eggs myself, and I expect your order didn't take in those." But at
his fallen countenance she hurried to say: "Oh, I wouldn't have told you
that if I hadn't been intending to break through."

And with childlike anticipation she clapped her hands and said: "We're
going to have 'lots of fun.' Just think, they don't know what that means
here in London. They say 'heaps of sport, you know.'" She imitated the
accent maliciously. "It's just we Americans who know what 'lots of fun'
is, isn't it?"

Near her Dan Blair's young eyes were drinking in the spectacle of
delicate beauty beautifully gowned, of soft skin, glorious hair, and he
gazed like a child at a pantomime. Under his breath he exclaimed now,
with effusion, "You bet your life we are going to have lots of fun!" And
turning to him, Miss Lane said:

"Six chocolate sodas running?"

"Oh, don't," he begged, "not that kind of jag."

She shook with laughter.

"Are you from Blairtown, Mr. Ruggles? I don't think I ever saw you
there."

And the Westerner returned: "Well, from what Dan tells me, you're not
much of a fixture yourself, Miss Lane. You were just about born and then
kidnapped."

Her gay expression faded. And she repeated his word, "Kidnapped? That's
a good word for it, Mr. Ruggles."

She picked up between her fingers a strand of the green fern, and looked
at its delicate tracery as it lay on the palm of her hand.

"I sang one day after a missionary sermon in the Presbyterian Church."
She interrupted herself with a short laugh. "But I guess you're not
thinking of writing my biography, are you?"

And it was Dan's voice that urged her. "Say, do go on. I was there that
day with my father, and you sang simply out of sight."

"Yes," she accepted, "out of sight of Blairtown and everybody I ever
knew. I went away the next day." She lifted her glass of champagne to
her lips. "Here's one thing I oughtn't to do," she said, "but I'm going
to just the same. I'm going to do everything I want this evening.
Remember, I let you drink six glasses of chocolate soda once." She
drained her glass and her friends drank with her. "I like this soup
awfully. What is it?"--just touching it with her spoon.

"Why," Ruggles hastened to tell her, "it ain't a _party_ soup, it's
Scotch broth. But somehow it sounded good on the bill of fare. I fixed
the rest of the dinner up for you and Dan, but I let myself go on the
soup, it's my favorite."

She did not eat it, however, although she said it was splendid and that
she was crazy about it.

"Did you come East then?" Dan returned to what she had been saying.

"Yes, that week; went to Paris and all over the place."

She instantly fell into a sort of melancholy. It was easy to be seen
that she did not want to talk about her past and yet that it fascinated
her.

"Just think of it!" he exclaimed. "I never heard a word about you until
I heard you sing the other night."

The actress laughed and told him that he had made up for lost time, and
that he was a regular "sitter" now at the Gaiety.

Ruggles said, "He took me every night to see you dance until I balked,
Miss Lane."

"Still, it's a perfectly great show, Mr. Ruggles, don't you think so? I
like it better than any part I ever had. I am interested about it for
the sake of the man who wrote it, too. It's his first opera; he's an
invalid and has a wife and five kids to look after."

And Ruggles replied, "Oh, gracious! I feel better than ever, having gone
ten times, although I wasn't _very_ sore about it before! Ain't you
going to eat anything?"

She only picked at her food, drinking what they poured in her glass, and
every time she spoke to Dan a look of charming kindness crossed her
face, an expression of good fellowship which Ruggles noted with
interest.

"I wish you could have seen this same author to-day at the rehearsal of
the play," Letty Lane went on. "He's too ill to walk and they had to
carry him in a chair. We all went round to his apartments after the
theater. He lives in three rooms with his whole family and he's had so
many debts and so much trouble and such a poor contract that he hasn't
made much out of _Mandalay_, but I guess he will out of this new piece.
He hugged and kissed me until I thought he would break my neck."

London had gone mad over Letty Lane, whose traits and contour were the
admiration of the world at large and well-known even to the news-boys,
and whose likeness was nearly as familiar as that of the Madonnas of
old. Her face was oval and perfectly formed, with the reddest of
mouths--the most delicious and softest of mouths--the line of her brows
clear and straight, and her gray eyes large and as innocent and
appealing as a child's; under their long lashes they opened up like
flowers. It was said that no man could withstand their appeal; that she
had but to look to make a man her slave; and as more than once she
turned to Dan, smiling and gracious, Ruggles watched her, mutely
thinking of what he had heard this day, for after her letter came
accepting their invitation he had taken pains to find out the things he
wanted to know. It had not been difficult. As her face and form were
public, on every post-card and in every photographer's shop, so the
actress' reputation was the property of the public.

As Ruggles repeated these things to himself, he watched her beside the
son of his old friend. They were talking--rather she was--and behind the
orchids and the ferns her voice was sweet and enthralling. Ruggles tried
to appreciate his bill of fare while the two appreciated each other. It
was strange to Dan to have her so near and so approachable. His sights
of her off the stage had been so slight and fleeting. On the boards she
had seemed to be an unreal creation made for the public alone. Her
dress, cut fearlessly low, displayed her lovely young bosom--soft,
bloomy, white as a shell--and her head and ears were as delicate as the
petals of a white rose. Low in the nape of her neck, her golden hair lay
lightly, and from its soft masses fragrance came to him.

Ruggles could hear her say: "Roach came to the house and told my people
that I had a fortune in my voice. I was living with my uncle and my
step-aunt and working in the store. And that same day your father sent
down a check for five hundred dollars. He said it was 'for the little
girl with the sweet voice,' and it gives me a lot of pleasure to think
that I began my lessons on _that money_."

The son of old Dan Blair said earnestly: "I'm darned glad you did--I'm
darned glad you did!"

Letty Lane nodded. "So am I. But," with some sharpness, "I don't see why
you speak that way. I've earned my way. I made a fortune for Roach all
right."

"You mean the man you married?"

"Married--goodness gracious, what made you think that?" She threw back
her pretty head and laughed--a laugh with the least possible merriment in
it. "Oh, Heavens, marry old Job Roach! So they say _that_, do they? I
never heard that. I hear a lot, but I never heard that fairy tale." She
put her hands to her checks, which had grown crimson. "That's not true!"

Dan swore at himself for his tactless stupidity.

Ruggles had heard both sides. She was adored by the poor, and, as far as
rumor knew, she spent thousands on the London paupers, and the
Westerner, who had never been given to reveling in scandals and to whom
there was something wicked in speaking ill of a woman, no matter whom
she might be, listened with embarrassment to tales he had been told in
answer to his other questions; and turned with relief to the stories of
Letty Lane's charity, and to the stories of her popularity and her
success. They were more agreeable, but they couldn't make him forget the
rest, and now as he looked at her face across the bouquet of orchids and
ferns, it was with a sinking of heart, a great pity for her, and still a
decided enmity. He disapproved of her down to the ground. He didn't let
himself think how he felt, but it was for the boy. Ruggles was not a man
of the world in any sense; he was simple and Puritan in his judgments,
and his gentle nature and his big heart kept him from pharisaical and
strenuous measures. He had been led in what he was doing to-night by a
diplomacy and a common sense that few men east of the Mississippi would
have thought out under the circumstances.

"Tell Mr. Ruggles," he heard Dan say to her, "tell him--tell him!"

And she answered:

"I was telling Mr. Blair that, as he is so frightfully rich, I want him
to give me some money."

Ruggles gasped, but answered quietly:

"Well, he's a great giver, Miss Lane."

"I guess he is if he's like his father!" she returned. "I am trying to
get a lot, though, out of him, and when you asked me to dine to-night I
said to myself, 'I'll accept, for it will be a good time to ask Mr.
Blair to help me out in what I want to do.'"

At Ruggles' face she smiled sweetly and said graciously:

"Oh, don't think I wouldn't have come anyway. But I'm awfully tired
these days, and going out to supper is just one thing too much to do! I
want Mr. Blair," she said, turning to Ruggles as if she knew a word from
him would make the thing go through, "to help me build a rest home down
on the English coast, for girls who get discouraged in their art. When I
think of the _luck_ I have had and how these things have been from the
beginning, and how money has just poured in, why," she said ardently,
"it just makes my heart ache to think of the girls who try and fail, who
go on for a little while and have to give up. You can't tell,"--she
nodded to Ruggles, as though she were herself a matron of forty,--"you
can not tell what their temptations are or what comes up to make them go
to pieces."

Ruggles listened with interest.

"I haven't thought it all out yet, but so many come to me tired out and
discouraged, and I think a nice home taken care of by a good creature
like my Higgins, let us say, would be a perfect blessing to them. They
could go there and rest and study and just think, and perhaps," she said
slowly, as though while she spoke she saw a vision of a tired self, for
whom there had been no rest home and no place of retreat, "perhaps a lot
of them would pull through in a different way. Now to-day"--she broke her
meditative tone short--"I got a letter from a hospital where a poor thing
that used to sing with me in New York was dying with consumption--all
gone to pieces and discouraged, and there is where your primroses went
to--" she nodded to Dan. "Higgins took them. You don't mind?" And Blair,
with a warmth in his voice, touched by her pity more than by her
charity, said:

"Why, they grew for you, Miss Lane; I don't care what you do with them."

Letty Lane sank her head on her hands, her elbows leaned on the table.
She seemed suddenly to have lost interest even in her topic. She looked
around the room indifferently. The orchestra was softly playing _The
Dove Song_ from _Mandalay_, and very softly under her breath the star
hummed it, her eyes vaguely fixed on some unknown scene. To Dan and to
Ruggles she had grown strange. The music, her brilliancy, her sudden
indifference, put her out of their commonplace reach. Ruggles to himself
thought with relief:

"She doesn't care one rap for the boy anyway, thank God. She's got other
fish to land."

And Dan Blair thought: "It's my infernal money again." But he was
generous at heart and glad to be of service to her, and was perfectly
willing to be "touched" for her poor. Then two or three men came up and
joined them. She greeted them indolently, bestowing a word or a look on
this one or on that; all fire and light seemed to have gone out of her,
and Dan said:

"You are tired. I guess I had better take you home."

She did not appear to hear him. Indeed she was not looking at him, and
Dan saw Prince Poniotowsky making his way toward their table across the
room.

Letty Lane rose. Dan put her cloak about her shoulders, and glancing
toward Ruggles and toward the boy as indifferently as she had considered
the new-comers, who formed a small group around the brilliant figure of
the actress, she nodded good night to both Ruggles and Blair and went up
to the Hungarian as though he were her husband, who had come to take her
home. However, at the door she sufficiently shook off her mood to smile
slightly at Dan:

"I have had 'lots of fun,' and the Scotch broth was great! Thank you
both so much."

Until they were up in their sitting-room her hosts did not exchange a
word. Then Ruggles took a book up from the table and sat down with his
cigar. "I am going to read a little, Dan. Slept all day; feel as
wide-awake as an owl."

Dan showed no desire to be communicative, however, to Ruggles'
disappointment, but he exclaimed abruptly:

"I'll be darned, Ruggles, if I can guess what you asked her for!"

"Well, it did turn out to be a pretty expensive party for you, Dannie,
didn't it?" Ruggles returned humorously. "I'll let you off from any more
supper parties."

And Dan fumed as he turned his back. "_Expensive!_ There you are again,
Ruggles, with your infernal intrusion of money into everything I do."

When the older man found himself alone, he read a little and then put
his book down to muse. And his meditations were on the tide of life and
the beds it runs over; the living whirlpool as Ruggles himself had seen
it coursing through London under fog and mist. It seemed now to surge up
in the dark to his very windows, and the flow mysteriously passed under
his windows in these silent hours when no one can see the muddy, muddy
bottom over which the waters go. Out of the sound, as it flowed on, the
cries rose, he thought, kindly to his ears: "God bless her--God bless
Letty Lane!" And with this sound he closed his meditations, thinking of
a more peaceful stream, the brighter, sweeter waters of the boy's
nature, translucent and clear. The vision was happier, and with it
Ruggles rose and yawned, and shut his book.




CHAPTER XII--THE GREEN KNIGHT


The Duchess of Breakwater had made Dan promise at Osdene the day he went
back to London that he would take her over to her own place, Stainer
Court, and with her see the beauty, ruins and traditions of the place.

When Dan got up well on in the morning, Ruggles had gone to the bank.
Dan's thoughts turned from everything to Letty Lane. With irritation he
put her out of his mind. There had come up between himself and the girl
he had known slightly in his own town years ago a wall of partition.
Every time he saw her Poniotowsky was there, condescending, arrogant,
rude and proud. The prince the night before had given the tips of his
fingers to Dan, nodded to Ruggles as if the Westerner had been his
tailor, and had appropriated Letty Lane, and she had gone away under his
shadow. The simplicity of Dan's life, his decent bringing up, his
immaculate youth, for such it was, his aloofness from the world, made
him naive, but he was not dull. He waited--not like a skeptic who would
fit every one into his pigeonholes--on the contrary, he waited to find
every one as perfect as he knew they must be, and every time he tried to
think of Letty Lane, Poniotowsky troubled him horribly and seemed to
rise before him, and sardonically look at him through his eye-glass,
making the boy's belief in good things ridiculous.

He wrote a note to Ruggles, saying that he would be back late and not to
wait for him, and set out in his own car for Blankshire, where the
duchess was to meet him at Stainer Court at noon. On his way out he
decided that he had been a fool to discuss Letty Lane with the Duchess
of Breakwater, and that it had been none of his business to put her duty
before her, and that he had judged her quickly and unfairly. He fell in
love with the lovely English country over which his motor took him, and
it made him more affectionate toward the English woman. He sat back in
his car, looking over the fine shooting land, the misty golden forests,
as through the misty country his motor took its way. The breath of
England was on his cheeks, he breathed in its odors fresh and sweet, the
windless air was cool and fragrant. His cheeks grew red, his eyes shone
like stars, and he was content with his youth and his lot. When they
stopped at Castelene, the property belonging to Stainer Court, he felt
something of proprietorship stir in him, and at Stainer Arms ordered a
drink, bought petroleum, and then pushed up the avenue under the
leafless giant trees, whose roots were older than his father's name or
than any state of the Union. And he felt admiration and something like
emotion as he saw the first towers of Stainer Court finally appear.

The duchess waited for him in the room known as the "Green Knight's
Room," because of a figure in tapestry on the walls. The legend in wool
had been woven in Spain, somewhere about the time when Isabella was
kind, and when in turn a continent loomed up for the world in general
out of the mist. The subject of the Green Knight's tapestry was simple
and convincing. On a sheer-cut village of low ferns, where daisies stood
up like trees, a slender lady poised, her dark sandaled feet on the
pin-like turf. Her figure was all swathed round with a spotless dress of
woolly white, softened by age into a golden misty tone, and a pair of
friendly and confidential rabbits sat close to her golden slippers. The
lady's face was candid and mild; her eyes were soft, and around her head
was wound a fillet of woven threads, mellow in tone, a red, no doubt,
originally, but softened to a coral pink by time. This lady in all her
grace and virginal sweetness was only half of the woven story. To her
right stood a youth in forest green, his sword drawn, and his intention
evidently to kill a creature which, near to the gentle rabbits, out of
the daisied grass lifted its cruel snakelike head. For nearly five
hundred years the serpent's venom had been poised, and if the serpent
should start the Green Knight would strike, too, at the same magic
moment.

Close to the tapestry a fire had been laid in the broad fireplace, and
the duchess had ordered the luncheon table for Dan and herself spread
with the cold things England knows how to combine into a delectable
feast. The room was full of mediaeval furnishings, but the Green Knight
was the best of all. The Duchess of Breakwater took him for granted. She
had known him all her life, and she had only been struck by his
expensive beauty when the offer came to her from the National Museum to
buy him, and she wondered how long she could afford to stick to her
price.

When Dan came in he found her in a short tweed skirt, a mannish blouse,
looking boyish and wholly charming, and she mixed him a cocktail under
the Green Knight's very nose and offered it with the wisdom of the
serpent itself, and the duchess didn't in the least suggest the
white-robed, milk-white lady.

The friends drank their cocktails in good spirits, and Dan presented the
lady with the flowers he had brought her, and he felt a strong sentiment
stir at the sight of her in this old room, alone and waiting for him.
The servants left them, the duchess put her hands on the boy's broad
shoulders. Nearly as tall as he, she was a good example of the
best-looking English woman, straight and strong, and her eyes were
level, and Dan met them with his own.

"I am so glad you came," she murmured. "I've been ragging myself every
minute since you went away from Osdene."

"You have? What for?"

"Because I was such a perfect prig. I'll do anything you like for Miss
Lane. I mean to say, I'll arrange for a musicale and ask her to sing."

The color rushed into Dan's face. How bully of her! What a brick this
showed her to be! He said: "You are as sweet as a peach!"

The duchess' hands were still on his shoulders. She could feel his rapid
breath.

"I don't make you think of a box of candy now?" she murmured, and the
boy covered her hand with his own.

"I don't know what you make me think of--it is bully, whatever it is!"

If the Spanish tapestry could only have reversed its idea, and if the
immaculate lady, or even one of the rabbits, could have drawn a sword to
protect the Green Knight, it would have been passing well. But the woven
work, when it first had been embroidered, was done for ever; it was
irrevocable in its mistaken idea, that it is only the _woman_ who needs
protection!




CHAPTER XIII--THE FACE OF LETTY LANE


As Dan went through the halls of the Carlton on his way to his rooms
that same evening, the porter gave him two notes, which Dan went down
into the smoking-room to read. He tore open the note bearing the Hotel
Savoy on the envelope, and read:

  "Dear Boy: Will you come around to-night and see me about five
  o'clock? Don't let anything keep you." (Letty Lane had the habit of
  scratching out phrases to insert others, and there was something
  scratched out.) "I want to talk to you about something very
  important. Come sure. L. L."

Dan looked at the clock; it was after nine, and she would be at the
Gaiety going on with her performance.

The other note, which he opened more slowly, was from Ruggles, and it
began in just the same way as the dancer's had begun:

  "Dear Boy: I have been suddenly called back to the United States. As
  I didn't know how to get at you, I couldn't. I had a cable that
  takes me right back. I get the _Lusitania_ at Liverpool and you can
  send me a Marconi. Better make the first boat you can and come over.

                                                     "Joshua Ruggles."

Ruggles left no word of advice, and unconscious of this master stroke on
the part of the old man, whose heart yearned for him as for his own son,
Dan folded the note up and thought no more about Ruggles.

When an hour later he came out of the Carlton he was prepared for the
life of the evening. He stopped at the telephone desk and sent a
telegram to Ruggles on the _Lusitania_:

  "Can't come yet a while; am engaged to be married to the Duchess of
  Breakwater."

He wrote this out in full and the man at the Marconi "sat up" and smiled
as he wrote. With Letty Lane's badly written note in his pocket, and
wondering very much at her summons of him, Dan drove to the Gaiety, and
at the end of the third act went back of the scenes. There were several
people in her dressing-room. Higgins was lacing her into a white bodice
and Miss Lane, before her glass, was putting the rouge on her lips.

"Hello, you," she nodded to Dan.

"I am awfully sorry not to have shown up at five. Just got your note.
Just got in at the hotel; been out of town all day."

Dan saw that none of the people in the room was familiar to him, and
that they were out of place in the pretty brocaded nest. One of them was
a Jew, a small man with a glass eye, whose fixed stare rested on Miss
Lane. He had kept on his overcoat, and his derby hat hung on the back of
his head.

"Give Mr. Cohen the box, Higgins," Miss Lane directed, and bending
forward, brought her small face close to the glass, and her hands
trembled as she handled the rouge stick.

Mr. Cohen in one hand held a string of pearls that fell through his fat
fingers, as if eager to escape from them. Higgins obediently placed a
small box in his hand.

"Take it and get out of here," she ordered Cohen. "Miss Lane has only
got five minutes."

Cohen turned the stub of his cigar in his mouth unpleasantly without
taking the trouble to remove it. "I'll take the box," he said rapidly,
"and when I get good and ready I'll get out of here, but not before."

"Now see here," Blair began, but Miss Lane, who had finished her task,
motioned him to be quiet.

"Please go out, Mr. Blair," she said. "Please go out. Mr. Cohen is here
on business and I really can't see anybody just now."

Behind the Jew Higgins looked up at Dan and he understood--but he didn't
heed her warning; nothing would have induced him to leave Letty Lane
like this.

"I'm not going, though, Miss Lane," he said frankly. "I've got an
appointment with you and I'm going to stay."

As he did so the other people in the room took form for him: a blind
beggar with a stick in his hand, and by his side a small child wrapped
in a shawl. With relief Dan saw that Poniotowsky was absent from the
party.

Cohen opened the box, took its contents out and held up the jewels.
"This," he said, indicating a string of pearls, "is all right, Miss
Lane, and the ear-drops. The rest is no good. I'll take or leave them,
as you like."

She was plainly annoyed and excited, and, as Higgins tried to lace her,
moved from her dressing-table to the sofa in a state of agitation.

"Take them or leave them, as _you_ like," she said, "but give me the
money and go."

The Jew took from his wallet a roll of banknotes and counted them.

"Six," he began, but she waved him back.

"Don't tell me how much it is. I don't want to know."

"Let the other lady count it," the Jew said. "I don't do business that
way."

Dan, who had laid down his overcoat and hat on a chair, came quietly
forward, his hands in his pockets, and standing in front of the Jew, he
said again:

"Now you look here--"

Letty Lane threw the money down on the dressing-table. "Please," she
cried to Dan, "let me have the pleasure of sending this man out of my
room. You can go, Cohen, and go in a hurry, too."

The Jew stuffed the pearls in his pocket and went by Dan hurriedly, as
though he feared the young man intended to help him. But Dan stopped
him:

"Before this deal goes through I want you to tell me why you are--"

Miss Lane broke in: "My gracious Heavens! Can't I even sell my jewels
without being bossed? What business is it of yours, Mr. Blair? Let this
man go, and go all of you--all of you. Higgins, send them out."

The blind man and the child stirred, too, at this outburst. The little
girl wore a miserable hat, a wreck of a hat, in which shook a feather
like a broken mast. The rest of her garments seemed made of the
elements--of dirt and mud--mere flags of distress, and the odor of the
poor filled the room: over the perfume and scent and smell of stage
properties, this miserable smell held its own.

"Come, Daddy," whispered the child timidly, "come along."

"Oh, no, not you, not you," Letty Lane said.

Job Cohen crawled out with ten thousand pounds' worth of pearls in his
pockets, and as soon as the door had closed the actress took up the roll
of notes.

"Come here," she said to the child. "Now you can take your father to the
home I told you of. It is nice and comfortable--they will treat his eyes
there."

"Miss Lane--Miss Lane!" called the page boy.

"Never mind that," said the actress, "it is a long wait this act. I
don't go on yet."

Higgins went to the door and opened it and stood a moment, then
disappeared into the side scenes.

Letty Lane ruffled the pile of banknotes and without looking drew out
two or three bills, putting them into the child's hands. "Don't you lose
them; stuff them down; this will keep you and your father for a couple
of years. Take care of it. You are quite rich now. Don't get robbed."

The child tremblingly folded the notes and hid them among her rags. The
tears of happiness were straggling over her face. She said finally,
finding no place to stow away her riches, "I expect I'd best put them in
daddy's pocket."

And Dan came to her aid; taking the notes from her, he folded and put
them inside the clothes of the old beggar.

"Miss Lane," said Higgins, who had come in, "it is time you went on."

"I'll see your friends out of the theater," Blair offered. And as he did
so, for the first time she looked at him, and he saw the fever in her
brilliant eyes.

"Thanks awfully," she accepted. "It is perfectly crazy to give them so
much money at once. Will you look after it like a good boy and see
something or other about them?"

He thought of her, however, and caught up a great soft shawl from the
chair, wrapped it around her tenderly, and she flitted out, Higgins
after her, leaving the rest of the money scattered on her
dressing-table.

"Come along," said Blair kindly to the two who stood awaiting his orders
with the docility of the poor, the obedience of those who have no right
to plan or suggest until told to move on. "Come, I'll see you home." And
he didn't leave them until he had taken them in a cab to their
destination--until he had persuaded the girl to let him have the money,
look after it for her, come to see her the next day and tell her what to
do.

Then he went back to the theater and stood up in the rear, for the house
was crowded, to hear Letty sing. It was souvenir night; there were
post-cards and little coral caps with feathers as _bonbonnieres_. They
called her out before the curtain a dozen times, and each time Dan
wanted to cry "Mercy" for her. He felt as though this little act had
established a friendship between them; and his hands clenched as he
thought of Poniotowsky, and he tried to recall that he was an engaged
man. He had an idea that Letty Lane was looking for him through the
performance. She finished in a storm of applause, and flowers were
strewn upon her, and Dan found himself, in spite of his resolution,
going back into the wings.

This time two or three cards were sent in. One by one he saw the
visitors refused, and Dan, without any formality, himself knocked at
Letty Lane's small door, which Higgins opened, looked back over her
shoulder to give his name to her mistress, and said to Dan confidently,
"Wait, sir; just wait a bit." Her lips were affable. And in a few
moments, to Dan's astonished delight, the actress herself appeared, a
big scarf over her head and her body enveloped in her snowy cloak, and
he understood with a leap of his heart that she had singled him out to
take her home.

She went before him through the wings to the stage entrance, which he
opened for her, and she passed out before him into the fog and the mist.
For the first time Blair followed her through the crowd, which was a big
one on this night. On the one side waited the poor, who wished her many
blessings, and on the other side her admirers, whose thoughts were quite
different. Something of this flashed through Dan's mind,--and in that
moment he touched the serious part of life for the first time.

In Letty Lane's motor, the small electric light lit over their heads and
the flower vase empty, he sat beside the fragrant human creature whom
London adored, and knew his place would have been envied by many a man.

"I took your friends to their place all right," he told her, "and I'm
going to see them myself to-morrow. I advised the girl not to get
married for her money. Say, this is awfully nice of you to let me take
you home!"

She seemed small in her corner. "You were great to-night," Dan went on,
"simply great! Wasn't the crowd crazy about you, though! How does it
feel to stand there and hear them clap like a thunderstorm and call your
name?"

She replied with effort. "It _was_ a nice audience, wasn't it? Oh, I
don't know how it feels. It is rather stimulating. How's the other boy?"
she asked abruptly, and when Dan had said that Ruggles had left him
alone in London, she turned and laughed a little.

Dan asked her why she had sent for him to-day. "I'm mighty sorry I was
out of town," he said warmly. "Just to think you should have wanted me
to do something for you and I didn't turn up. You know I would be glad
to do anything. What was it? Won't you tell me what it was?"

"The Jew did it for me."

And Dan exclaimed: "It made me simply sick to see that animal in your
room. I would have kicked him out if I hadn't thought that it would make
an unpleasant scene for you. We have passed the Savoy." He looked out of
the window, and Letty Lane replied:

"I told the driver to go to the Carlton first."

She was taking _him_ home then!

"Well, you've got to come in and have some supper with me in that case,"
he cried eagerly, and she told him that she had taken him home because
she knew that Mr. Ruggles would approve.

"Not much you won't," he said, and put his hand on the speaking tube,
but she stopped him.

"Don't give any orders in my motor, Mr. Blair. You sit still where you
are."

"Do you think that I am such a simple youth that I--"

Letty Lane with a gesture of supreme ennui said to him impatiently:

"Oh, I just think I am pretty nearly tired to death; don't bother me. I
want my own way."

Her voice and her gesture, her beauty and her indifference, her sort of
vague lack of interest in him and in everything, put the boy, full of
life as he was, out of ease, but he ventured, after a second:

"Won't you please tell me what you wanted me to do this afternoon?"

"Why, I was hard up, that's all. I have used all my salary for two
months and I couldn't pay my bill at the Savoy."

"Lord!" he said fervently, "why didn't you--"

"I did. Like a fool I sent for you the first thing, but I was awfully
glad when five o'clock came you didn't turn up. Please don't bother or
speak of it again."

And burning with curiosity as to what part Poniotowsky played in her
life, Dan sat quiet, not venturing to put to her any more questions. She
seemed so tired and so overcome by her own thoughts. When they had
turned down toward the hotel, however, he decided that he must in honor
tell her his news.

"Got some news to tell you," he exclaimed abruptly. "Want you to
congratulate me. I'm engaged to be married to the Duchess of Breakwater.
She happens to be a great admirer of your voice."

The actress turned sharply to him and in the dark he could see her
little, white face. The covering over her head fell back and she
exclaimed:

"Heavens!" and impulsively put her hands out over his. "Do you really
mean what you say?"

"Yes." He nodded surprisedly. "What do you look like that for?"

Letty Lane arranged her scarf and then drew back from him and laughed.

"Oh, dear, dear, dear," she exclaimed, "and I ... and I have been...."

She looked up at him swiftly as though she fancied she might detect some
new quality in him which she had not observed before, but she saw only
his clear, kind eyes, his charming smile and his beautiful, young
ignorance, and said softly to him:

"No use to cry, little boy, if it's true! But that woman isn't half good
enough for you--not half, and I guess you think it funny enough to hear
_me_ say so! What does the other boy from Montana say?"

"Don't know," Dan answered indifferently. "Marconied him; didn't tell
him about it before he left. You see he doesn't understand
England--doesn't like it."

A little dazed by the way each of the two women took the mention of the
other, he asked timidly:

"You don't like the Duchess of Breakwater, then?"

And she laughed again.

"Goodness gracious, I don't know her; actresses don't sit around with
duchesses." Then abruptly, her beautiful eyes, under their curled dark
lashes, full on him, she asked:

"Do _you_ like her?"

"You bet!" he said ardently. "Of course I do. I am crazy about her." Yet
he realized, as he replied, that he didn't have any inclination to begin
to talk about his fiancee.

They had reached the Carlton and the door of Letty Lane's motor was held
open.

"Better get out," he urged, "and have something to eat."

And she, leaning a little way toward him, laughed.

"Crazy! Your engagement would be broken off to-morrow." And she further
said: "If I really thought it would, why I'd come like a shot."

As she leaned forward, her cloak slipping from her neck, revealing her
throat above the dark collar of the simple dress she wore, he looked in
her dove-gray eyes, and murmured:

"Oh, say, do come along and risk it. I'm game, all right."

She hesitated, then bade him good night languidly, slipping back into
her old attitude of indifference.

"I am going home to rest. Good night. I don't think the duchess would
let you go, no matter what you did!"

Dan, standing there at her motor door, this beautiful, well-known woman
bantering him, leaning toward him, was conscious of her alone, all snowy
and small and divine in her enveloping scarf, lost in the corner of her
big car.

"I hate to have you go back alone to the Savoy. I really do. Please let
me--"

But she shook her head. "Tell the man the Savoy," and as Dan, carrying
out her instructions, closed the door, he said: "I don't like that empty
vase in there. Would you be very good and put some flowers in it if they
came?"

She wouldn't promise, and he went on:

"Will you put only my flowers in that vase always hereafter?"

Then, "Why, of course not, goose," she said shortly. "Will you please
let me close the door and go home?"

Dan walked into the Carlton when her bright motor had slipped away, his
evening coat long and black flying its wings behind him, his hat on the
back of his blond head, light of foot and step, a gay young figure among
the late lingering crowd.

He went to his apartments and missed Ruggles in the lonely quiet of the
sitting-room, but as the night before Ruggles had done, Dan in his
bedroom window stood looking out at the mist and fog through which
before his eyes the things he had lately seen passed and repassed,
specter-like, winglike, across the gloom. Finally, in spite of the fact
that he was an engaged man with the responsibilities of marriage before
him, he could think of but one thing to take with him when he finally
turned to sleep. The face of the woman he was engaged to marry eluded
him, but the face under the white hood of Letty Lane was in his dreams,
and in his troubled visions he saw her shining, dovelike eyes.




CHAPTER XIV--FROM INDIA'S CORAL STRANDS


Mrs. Higgins, in Miss Lane's apartment at the Savoy, was adjusting the
photographs and arranging the flowers when she was surprised by a
caller, who came up without the formality of sending his name.

"Do you think," Blair asked her, "that Miss Lane would see me half a
minute? I called yesterday, and the day before, as soon as I saw that
there was a substitute singing in _Mandalay_. Tell her I'm as full of
news as a charity report, please, and I rather guess that will fetch
her."

Something fetched her, for in a few minutes she came languidly in, and
by the way she smiled at her visitor it might be thought Dan Blair's
name alone had brought her in. The actress had been ill for a fortnight
with what the press notices said was influenza. She wore a teagown, long
and white as foam, her hair rolled in a soft knot, and her face was pale
as death. Frail and small as she was, she was more ethereal than when in
perfect health.

"Don't stand a minute." And by the hand she gave him Dan led her over to
the lounge where the pillows were piled and a fur-lined silk cover
thrown across the sofa.

"Don't give me that heavy rug, there's that little white shawl." She
pointed to it, and Dan, as he gave it to her, recognized the shawl in
which she wrapped herself when she crossed the icy wings.

"It's in those infernal side scenes you get colds."

He sat down by her. She began to cough violently and he asked, troubled,
"Who's taking care of you, anyway?"

"Higgins and a couple of doctors."

"That's all?"

"Yes. Why, who should be?"

Dan didn't follow up his jealous suspicion, but asked in a tone almost
paternal and softly confidential:

"How are your finances getting on?"

Her lips curved in a friendly smile. But she made a dismissing gesture
with her frail little hand.

"Oh, I'm all right; Higgins told me you had some news about my poor
people."

The fact that she did not take up the financial subject made him
unpleasantly sure that her wants had been supplied.

"Got a whole bunch of news," Dan replied cheerfully. "I went to see the
old man and the girl in their diggings. Gosh, you couldn't believe such
things were true."

She drew her fine brows together. "I guess there are a good many things
that would surprise you. But you don't need to tell me about hard times.
That's the way I am. I'll do anything, give anything, so long as I don't
have to hear hard stories." She turned to him confidentially. "Perhaps
it's acting in false scenes on the stage; perhaps it's because I'm lazy
and selfish, but I can't bear to hear about tales of woe."

What she said somewhat disturbed his idea of her big-hearted charity.

"I don't believe you're lazy or selfish," he said sincerely, "but I've
got an idea that not many people really know you."

This amused her. Looking at him quizzically, she laughed. "I expect you
think you do."

Dan answered: "Well, I guess the people that see you when you are a kid,
who come from your own part of the country, have a sort of friendship."
And the girl on the sofa from the depths of her shawl put out a thin
little hand to him and said in a voice as lovely in tone as when she
sang in _Mandalay_:

"Well, I guess that's right! I guess that's about true."

After the tenth of a second, in which she thought best to take her
little cold hand away from those big warm ones, she asked:

"Now please do tell me about the poor people."

In this way giving him to understand how really true his better idea of
her had been.

"Why, the old duffer is as happy as a house afire," said the boy. "Not
to boast, I've done the whole thing up as well as I knew how. I've got
him into that health resort you spoke of, and the girl seems to have got
a regular education vice! She wants to study something, so she's going
to school."

"Go on talking," the actress invited languidly. "I love to hear you talk
Montana! Don't change your twang for this beastly English drawl,
whatever you do."

"You have, though, Miss Lane. I don't hear a thing of Blairtown in the
way you speak."

And the girl said passionately: "I wish to God I spoke it right through!
I wish I had never changed my speech or anything in me that was like
home."

And the boy leaning forward as eagerly exclaimed: "Oh, do you mean that?
Think how crazy London is about you! Why, if you ever go back to
Montana, they will carry you from the cars in a triumphal chair through
the town."

She waited until she could control the emotion in her voice.

"Go on telling me about the little girl."

"She was so trusting as to give the money up to me and I guess it will
draw interest for her all right."

"Thank you," smiled the actress, "you are terribly sweet. The child got
Higgins to let her into my dressing-room one day after a matinee. I
haven't time to see anybody except then."

Here Higgins made her appearance in the room, with an egg-nog for her
lady, which, after much coaxing, Dan succeeded in getting the actress to
drink. Higgins also had taken away the flowers, and Letty Lane said to
Dan:

"I send them to the hospital; they make me sick." And Dan timidly asked:

"Mine, too?"

This brought a flush across the ivory pallor of her cheek. "No, no,
Higgins keeps them In the next room." And with an abrupt change of
subject she asked: "Is the Duchess of Breakwater very charitable?" And
Blair quickly replied:

"Anyhow she wants you to sing for her at a musicale in Park Lane when
you're fit."

Miss Lane gave a soft little giggle. "Is _that_ what you call being
charitable?"

Dan blushed crimson and exclaimed: "Well, hardly!"

"Did you come here to ask me that?"

"I came to tell you about 'our mutual poor.' You'll let me call them
that, won't you, because I happened to be in your dressing-room when
they struck their vein?"

Miss Lane had drawn herself up in the corner of the sofa, and sat with
her hands clasped around her knees, all swathed around and draped by the
knitted shawl, her golden head like a radiant flower, appearing from a
bank of snow. Her fragility, her sweetness, her smallness, appealed
strongly to the big young fellow, whose heart was warm toward the world,
whose ideals were high, and who had the chivalrous longing inherent in
all good men to succor, to protect, and above all to adore. No feeling
in Dan Blair had been as strong as this, to take her in his arms, to
lift her up and carry her away from London and the people who applauded
her, from the people that criticized her, and from Poniotowsky.

He was engaged to the Duchess of Breakwater. And as far as his being
able to do anything for Letty Lane, he could only offer her this
politeness from the woman he was going to marry.

"I never sing out of the theater." Her profile was to him and she looked
steadily across the room. "It's a perfect fight to get the manager to
consent."

Blair interrupted and said: "Oh, I'll see him; I'll make it all right."

"Please don't," she said briskly, "it's purely a business affair. How
much will she pay?"

Dan was rather shocked. "Anything you like."

And her bad humor faded at his tone, and she smiled at him. "Well, I'll
tell Roach that. I guess it'll make my singing a sure thing."

She changed her position and drew a long sigh as though she were very
tired, leaned her blond head with its soft disorder back on the pillow,
put both her folded hands under her cheek and turned her face toward
Dan. The most delicate coral-like color began to mount her cheeks, and
her gray eyes regained their light.

"Will two thousand dollars be too much to ask?" she said gently.

If she had said two million to the young fellow who had not yet begun to
spend his fortune, which as far as he was concerned was nothing but a
name, it would not have been too much to him; not too much to have given
to this small white creature with her lovely flushed face, and her
glorious hair.

"Whatever is your price, Miss Lane, goes."

"I'll sing three songs: one from _Mandalay_, an English ballad and
something or other, I don't know what now, and I expect you don't
realize how cheaply you are getting them." She laughed, and began to hum
a familiar air.

"I wish you would sing just one song for me."

"For another thousand?" she asked, lifting her eyebrows. "What song is
it?"

And as Dan hesitated, as if unwilling to give form to words that were so
full of spell to him, she said deliciously: "Why, can you see a London
drawing-room listening to me sing a Presbyterian hymn tune?" Without
lifting her head from the pillow she began in a charming undertone, her
gray eyes fixed on his:

  "From Greenland's icy mountains,
    From India's coral strands,
  Where Afric's sunny fountains
    Roll down their golden sands."

Blair, near her, turned pale. There rose in him the same feeling that
she had stirred years ago in the little church, and at the same time
others. He had lost his father since then, and he thought of him now,
but that big, sad emotion was not the one that swayed him.

"Please stop," he pleaded; "don't go on. Say, there's something in that
hymn that hurts."

Letty Lane, unconscious of how subtly she was playing, laughed, and
suddenly remembered that Dan had sat before her that day by the side of
old Mr. Blair. She asked abruptly:

"Why does the Duchess of Breakwater want me to sing?"

"Because she's crazy about your voice."

"Is she awfully rich?"

"Um ... I don't know."

Letty Lane flashed a look at him. "Oh," she said coolly, "I guess she
won't pay the price then."

Dan said: "Yes, she will; yes, she will, all right."

"Now," Letty Lane went on, "if it were a charity affair, I could sing
for nothing, and I don't doubt the duchess, if she is as benevolent as
you say she is, could get me up some kind of a charity show."

Dan, who had started to rise, now leaned toward her and said: "Don't you
worry about it a bit. If you'll come and sing we will make it right
about the price and the charity; everything shall go your way."

She was seized upon by a violent fit of coughing, and Dan leaned toward
her and put his arm around her as a brother might have done, holding her
tenderly until the paroxysm was past.

"Gosh!" he exclaimed fervently, "it's heartbreaking to hear you cough
like that and to think of your working as you do. Can't you stop and
take a good rest? Can't you go somewhere?"

"To Greenland's icy mountains?" she responded, smiling. "I hate the
cold."

"No, no; to some golden sands or other," he murmured under his breath.
"And let me take you there."

But she pushed him back, laughing now. "No golden sands for me. I'm
afraid I've got to sing in _Mandalay_ to-night."

He looked at her in dismay.

She interrupted his protest: "I've promised on my word of honor, and the
box-office has sold the seats with that understanding."

By her sofa, leaning over her, in a choked voice he murmured:

"You _shan't_ sing! You shan't go out to-night!"

"Don't be a goose, boy," she said. "You've no right to order me like
that. Stand back, please." As he did so she whisked herself off the sofa
with a sudden ardor and much grace. "Now," she told him severely, "since
you've begun to take that tone with me, I'm going to tell you that you
mustn't come here day after day as you have been doing. I guess you know
it, don't you?"

He stood his ground, but his bright face clouded. They had been so near
each other and were now so removed.

"I don't care a damn what people say," he replied.

She interrupted him. She could be wonderfully dignified, small as she
was, wrapped as she was in the woolen shawl. "Well," she drawled with a
sudden indolence and indifference in her voice, "I expect you'll be
surprised to hear that _I_ do care. Sounds awfully funny, doesn't it?
But as you have been coming to the theater now night after night till
everybody's talking about it--"

"You don't want my friendship," he stammered.

And Letty Lane controlled her desire to laugh at his boyish subterfuge.
"No, I don't think I do."

Her tone struck him deeply: hurt him terribly. He threw his head up
defiantly.

"All right, I'm turned down then," he said simply. "I didn't think you'd
act like this to a boy you'd known all your life!"

"Don't be silly, you know as well as I do that it won't do."

He did know it and that he had already done enough to make it reasonable
for the duchess, if she wanted to, to break their engagement. Slowly
preparing to take his leave, he said wistfully: "Can't I help you in any
way? Let me do something with you for your poor. It's a comfort to have
them between us, and you can count on me."

She said she knew it. "But don't come any more to the wings; get a habit
of _not_ coming."

On the threshold of her door he asked her to let him know when she would
sing in Park Lane, and in touching her hand he repeated that she must
count on him. With more tenderness in his blue eyes than he was himself
aware, he murmured devotedly:

"Take care of yourself, won't you, please?"

As Blair passed from the sitting-room into the hall and toward the lift,
Mrs. Higgins came out hurriedly from one of the rooms and joined him.

"How did you find her, Mr. Blair?"

"Awfully seedy, Mrs. Higgins; she needs a lot of care."

"She won't take it though," returned the woman. "Just seems to let
herself go, not to mind a bit, especially these last weeks. I'm glad you
came in; I've been hoping you would, sir."

"I'm not any good though, she won't listen to a word I say."

It seemed to surprise the dressing woman.

"I'm sorry to hear it, sir; I thought she would. She talks about you
often."

He colored like a school-boy. "Gosh, it's a shame to have her kill
herself for nothing." Reluctant to talk longer with Mrs. Higgins, he
added in spite of himself: "She seems so lonely."

"It's two weeks now since that human devil went away," Mrs. Higgins said
unexpectedly, looking quietly into the blue eyes of the visitor.

"She hasn't opened one of his letters or his telegrams. She has sold
every pin and brooch he ever gave her, scattered the money far and wide.
You saw how she went on with Cohen, and her pearls."

Dan heard her as through a dream. Her words gave form and existence to a
dreadful thing he had been trying to deny.

"Is she hard up now, Mrs. Higgins?" he asked softly. And glancing at him
to see just how far she might go, the woman said:

"An actress who spends and lives as Miss Lane does is always hard up."

"Could you use money without her knowing about it?"

"Lord," exclaimed the woman, "it wouldn't be hard, sir! She only knows
that there is such a thing as money when the bills come and she hasn't
got a penny. Or when the poor come! She's got a heart of gold, sir, for
everybody that is in need."

He took out of his wallet a wad of notes and put them in Higgins' hands.
"Just pay up some bills on the sly, and don't you tell her on your life.
I don't want her to be worried." Explaining with sensitive
understanding: "It's all right, Mrs. Higgins; I'm from her town, you
know." And the woman who admired him and understood him, and whose life
had made her keen to read things as they were, said earnestly:

"I quite understand how it is, sir. It is just as though it came
straight from 'ome. She overdraws her salary months ahead."

"Have you been with Miss Lane long?"

"Ever since she toured in Europe, and nobody could serve her without
being very fond of her indeed."

Dan put out his big warm hand eagerly. "You're a corker, Mrs. Higgins."

"I could walk around the world for her, sir."

"Go ahead and do it then," he smiled, "and I'll pay for all the boot
leather you wear out!"

As he went down-stairs, already too late to keep an engagement made with
his fiancee, he stopped in the writing-room to scribble off a note of
excuse to the duchess. At the opposite table Dan saw Prince Poniotowsky,
writing, as well. The Hungarian did not see Blair, and when he had
finished his note he called a page boy and Dan could hear him send his
letter up to Miss Lane's suite. The young Westerner thought with
confident exaltation, "Well, he'll get left all right, and I'm darned if
I don't sit here and see him turned down!"

Dan sat on until the page returned and gave Poniotowsky a verbal
message.

"Will you please come up-stairs, sir?"

And Blair saw the Hungarian rise, adjust his eye-glass, and walk toward
the lift.




CHAPTER XV--GALOREY GIVES ADVICE


Lord Galorey had long been used to seeing things go the way they would
and should not, and his greatest effort had been attained on the day he
gave his languid body the trouble to go in and see Ruggles.

"My God," he muttered as he watched Dan and the duchess on the terrace
together--they were nevertheless undeniably a handsome pair--"to think
that this is the way I am returning old Blair's hospitality!" And he was
ashamed to recall his western experiences, when in a shack in the
mountains he had watched the big stars come out in the heavens and sat
late with old Dan Blair, delighted with the simple philosophies and the
man's high ideals.

"What the devil does it all mean?" he wondered. "She has simply seduced
him, that's all."

He got Dan finally to himself and without any preparation began, pushing
Dan back into a big leather chair, and standing up like a judge over
him:

"Now, you really must listen to me, my dear chap. I shan't rest in my
grave unless I get a word with you. Your father sent you here to me and
I'm damned if I know what for. I've been wondering every day about it
for two months. He didn't know what this set was like or how rotten it
is."

"What set?" The boy looked appallingly young as Gordon stared down at
him. There wasn't a line or wrinkle on his smooth brow or on his lips
and forehead finely cut and well molded--but there were the very seals of
what his father would have been glad to see. The boy had the same clear
look and unspoiled frankness that had charmed Galorey at the first. He
had been a lazy coward to delay so long.

"Why, the rottenness of this set right here in my house." And as the
host began to see that he should have to approach a woman's name in
speaking, he stopped short, his mouth wide open, and Dan thought he had
been drinking.

"You are talking of marrying Lily," Gordon got out.

"I am _going_ to marry her."

"You mustn't."

Blair got up out of his chair. It didn't need this attack of Galorey's
to bring to his mind hints that had been dropped that Galorey was in
love with the Duchess of Breakwater. It illuminated what Galorey was
saying fast and incoherently.

"I mean to say, my dear chap, that you mustn't marry the Duchess of
Breakwater. Look at most of these European marriages. They all go to
smash. She is older than you are and she has lived her life. You are
much too young."

"Hold up, Galorey; you mustn't go on, you know. You know I am engaged;
that's all there is about it. Now, let's go and have a game of pool."

Galorey had not worked himself up to this pitch to break off now at a
fatal point.

"I'm responsible for this, and by gad, Dan, I'm going to put you on your
guard."

"You are responsible for nothing, Galorey, and I warn you to drop it."

"You would listen to your father if he were here, wouldn't you?"

"I don't know," said the boy slowly. Then followed up with an honest,
"Yes, I would."

Gordon caught eagerly, "Well, he sent you to me. Your friend Ruggles has
gone off and washed his hands of you, but I can't."

Lord Galorey walked across the room briskly and came back to Dan. "First
of all, you are not in love with Lily--not a bit of it. You couldn't
be--and what's more she is not in love with you."

Blair laughed coolly. "You certainly have got things down to a fine
point, Gordon. I'll be hanged if I understand your game."

Galorey went bravely on: "Therefore, if neither of you are in love, you
understand that there is nothing between you but your money."

The Englishman got his point out brutally, relieved that the impersonal
thing money opened a way for him. He didn't want to be the bounder and
the cad that the mention of the woman would have made him.

The boy drew in an angry breath. "Gosh," he said, "that cursed money
will make me crazy yet! You are not very flattering to me, Gordon, I
swear, and Lily wouldn't thank you for the motives you impute to her."

"Oh, rot!" returned Gordon more tranquilly. "She hasn't got a human
sentiment in her. She's a rock with a woman's face."

Dan turned his back on his host and walked off into the billiard-room.
Galorey promptly followed him, took down a cue and chalked it, and said:

"Well, come now; let's put it to the test." Blair began stacking the
balls.

"How do you mean?"

"Well, when you have had time to get your first news over from Ruggles,
tell her you have gone to smash and that you are a pauper."

"I don't play tricks like that," said the Westerner quietly.

"No," responded Galorey bitterly, "you let others play tricks on you."

The young man threw his cue smartly down, his youth looked
contemptuously at the worldly man, and he turned pale, but he said in a
low voice:

"Now, you've got to let up on this, Gordon; I thought at first you had
been drinking. I won't listen. Let's get on another subject, or I'll
clear out."

Galorey, however, cool and pitiful of the tangle in the boy's affairs,
wouldn't let himself be angry. "You are my old chum's boy, Dan," he went
on, "and I'm not going to stand by and see you spoil your life in
silence. You are of age. You can go to the devil if you like, but you
can't go there under my roof, without a word from me."

"Then I'll get out from under your roof, to-night."

"Right! I don't blame you there, but, before you go, tell Lily you have
lost your money, and see what she is made of. My dear chap"--he changed
his tone to one of affection--"don't be an ape; listen to me, for your
father's sake; remember your whole life's happiness is in this game.
Isn't it worth looking after?"

"Not at the risk of hurting a woman's feelings," said the boy.

"How can it hurt her, my dear man, to tell her you are poor?"

"It's a lie. I'm not up to lying to her; I don't care to. And you mean
to think that if I told her I was busted she would throw me over?"

"Like a shot, my green young friend--like a shot."

"You haven't a very good opinion of women," Blair threw out with as near
a sneer as his fine young face could express.

"No, not very," agreed the pool player, who had continued his shots with
more or less sangfroid. When Galorey had run off his string of balls he
said, looking up from the table: "But I've got a very good opinion of
that 'nice girl' you told me of when you first came, and I wish to
Heaven she had kept you in the States."

This caught the boy's attention as nothing else had. "There never was
any such girl," he said slowly; "there never has been anywhere; I rather
guess they don't grow. You have made me a cad in listening to you,
Gordon, but as to playing any of those comedy tricks you suggest, they
are not in my line. If she is marrying me for my money, why, she'll get
it."

"You're a coward," said Galorey, "like the rest of American husbands--all
ideal and no common sense. You want to make a mess of your life. You
haven't the grit to get out of a bad job."

He spurred himself on and his weak face grew strong as he felt he was
compelling the boy's attention. "If you only had half the character your
father had, you wouldn't make a mistake like this; you wouldn't run
blind into such a deal as this."

Blair was impressed by his host. Galorey was so deadly in earnest and so
honest, and, as Dan's face grew set and hardened, his companion prayed
for wisdom. "If I can only win through this without touching Lily hard,"
he thought, and as he waited, Blair said:

"You haven't hesitated to call me names, Gordon. You're not my build or
my age, and I can't thrash you."

And his host said cheerfully: "Oh, yes, you can; come on and try," and,
metaphorically speaking, Dan struck his first blow:

"They say--people have said to me--that you once cared for Lily yourself."

The Englishman's heavy eyelids did not flicker. "It's quite true."

Taken back by this frank response, Blair stammered: "Well, I guess that
explains everything. It's not surprising that you should feel as you do.
If you are jealous, I can forgive it a little bit, but it is low down to
call a woman a fortune hunter."

Now Gordon Galorey's face changed and grew slightly white. "Don't make
me angry, my dear chap," he said in a low tone; "I have said what I
wanted to say. Now, go to the devil if you like and as soon as you
like."

And the boy said hotly, stammering in his excitement:

"Not yet--not yet--not before I tell you what I think."

Gordon, with wonderful control of his own anger, met the boy's eyes, and
said with great patience:

"No, don't, Dan; don't go on. There are many things in this affair that
we can't touch upon. Let it drop. The right woman would make a ripping
man of you, but you oughtn't to marry for ten years."

Dan took the hand which Galorey put out to him, and the Englishman said
warmly: "My dear chap, I hope it will all come out right, from my
heart."

Dan, who had regained his balance, said to his friend:

"I've been very angry at what you said, but you're the chap my father
sent me to. There must be something back of this, and I'm going to find
out what it is, and I'm going to take my own way to find out. I wouldn't
give a rap for anything that came to me through a trick or a lie, and I
wouldn't know how to go to her with a cock-and-bull story. I shall act
as I feel and go ahead being just as I am, and perhaps she won't want me
after all, even if I have got the rocks!"

And Galorey said heartily: "I wish there was a chance of it."

When, later, Gordon thought of Dan it was with a glow. "What a chip of
the old block he is," he said; "what a good bit of character, even at
twenty-two years." He was divided between feeling that he had made a
mess of things between Dan and himself, and feeling sure that some of
his advice had gone home. After a moment's silence, Dan Blair's son
said: "I'm going up to London to-morrow."

"For long?"

"Don't know."

Then returning with boyish simplicity to their subject, which Galorey
thought had been dropped, Dan said:

"There may be something true in what you say, Gordon. Perhaps she does
want my money. I'm not a titled man and I'll never be known for anything
except my income. At any rate I was rich when I asked her to marry me,
and I'm going to fix up that old place of hers, and I'm glad I've got
the coin to do it."

When, later, for they had been interrupted in their conversation by the
entrance of the lady herself, Gordon, as Ruggles had done, mentally
thought of the flowing tide of life, and how it flowed over what he
himself had called "rotten ground." Perhaps old Blair was right, he
mused, after all. What does it matter if the source is pure at the head
water? It's awfully hard to force it at the start, at least.




CHAPTER XVI--THE MUSICALE PROGRAM


The duchess ran Dan, made plans, set the pace, and they were very much
in evidence during the season. The young American, good-natured and
generous, the duchess beautiful and knowing, were the observed of
London, and those of her friends who would have tolerated Dan on account
of his money, ended by sincerely liking him. The wedding-day had not
been fixed as yet, and Dan was not so violently carried away that he
could not wait to be married. Meanwhile Gordon Galorey thanked God for
the delay and hoped for a miracle to break the spell over his friend's
son before it should be too late. In early May the question came up
regarding the musicale. The duchess made her list and arranged the
Sunday afternoon and her performers to suit her taste, and the week
before lounged in her boudoir when Dan and Galorey appeared for a late
morning call.

"There, Dan," she said, holding out a bit of paper, "look at the list
and the program, will you?"

"Sounds and reads all right," commented Dan, handing it on to Galorey.

Besides being an artistic event, she intended that the concert should
serve to present Dan to her special set. She now lit a cigarette and
gave one to each of her friends, lighting the Englishman's herself.

"The best names in London," Lord Galorey said. "You see, Dan, we shall
trot you out in a royal way. I hope you fully appreciate how swagger
this is to be."

Glancing at the list Blair remarked:

"But I don't see Miss Lane's name?"

"Why should you?" the duchess answered sharply.

"Why, we planned all along that she was to sing," he returned.

She gave a long puff to her cigarette.

"We did _rather_ speak of it. But we shall do very well as we are. The
program is full up and it's perfectly ripping as it stands."

"Yes, there's only just one thing the matter with it," the boy smiled
good-naturedly, "and it's easy enough to run her in. I guess Miss Lane
could be run in most anywhere on any program and not clear the house."

Lord Galorey, who knew nothing about the subject under discussion, said
tactfully: "Why, of course, Letty Lane is perfectly charming, but you
couldn't get her, my dear chap."

"I think we will let the thing stand as it is," said the duchess, going
back to her desk and stirring her paper about. "It's really too late
now, you know, Dan."

Unruffled, but with a determination which Lord Galorey and the lady were
far from guessing, Blair resumed tranquilly:

"Oh, I guess she'll come in all right, late as it is. We'll send word to
her and fix it up."

The duchess turned to him, annoyed: "Oh, don't be a beastly bore,
dear--you are not really serious."

Dan still smiled at her sweetly. "You bet your life I am, though, Lily."

She rang a bell at the side of her desk, and when the footman came in
gave him the sheet of paper. "See that this is taken at once to the
stationer's."

"Better wait, Lily"--her fiance extended his hand--"until the program is
filled out the way it is going to stand." And Blair fixed his handsome
eyes on his future wife. "Why, we got this shindig up," he noted
irreverently, "just so Miss Lane could sing at it."

"Nonsense," she cried, angry and powerless, "you ridiculous creature!
Fancy me getting up a musicale for Letty Lane! Do tell Dan to stop
bothering and fussing, Gordon. He's too ridiculous!"

And Lord Galorey said: "What is the row anyway?"

"Why, I want Miss Lane to sing here on Sunday," Dan explained....

"And I don't want her," finished the Duchess of Breakwater, who was
evidently unwilling to force a scene before Lord Galorey. She handed the
list to her servant, but Dan intercepted it.

"Don't send out that list, Lily, as it is."

He gave it back to her, and his tone was so cool, his expression so
decided and quiet, that she was disarmed, and dismissed the servant,
telling him to return when she should ring again. Coloring with anger,
she tapped the envelope against her brilliantly polished nails.

If she had been married to Blair she would have burst into a violent
rage; if he had been poorer than he was she would have put him in his
place. Lord Galorey understood the contraction of her brows and lips as
Dan reminded: "You promised me that you would have her, you know, Lily."

"Give in, Lily," Galorey advised, rising from the chair where he was
lounging. "Give in gracefully."

And she turned on Galorey the anger which she dared not show the other
man. But Dan interrupted her, explaining simply:

"I knew the girl when she was a kid: she is from my old home, and I want
Lily to ask her here to sing for us, and then to see if we can't do
something to get her out of the state she is in."

Galorey repeated vaguely, "State?"

"Why, she's all run down, tired out; she's got no real friends in
London."

The other man flicked the ash from his cigarette and looked at Blair's
boy through his monocle.

"And you thought that Lily might befriend her, old chap?"

"Yes," nodded Dan, "just give her a lift, you know."

Galorey nodded back, smiling gently. "I see, I see--a moral, spiritual
lift? I see--I see." He glanced at the woman with his strange smile.

She put her cigarette down and seated herself, clasping her hands around
her knees and looked at her fiance.

"It's none of my business what Letty Lane's reputation is. I don't care,
but you must understand one thing, Dan, I'm not a reformer, or a
charitable institution, and if she comes here it is purely
professional."

He took the subject as settled, and asked for a copy of the program and
put it in his pocket. "I'll get the names of her songs from her and take
the thing myself to Harrison's. And I'd better hustle, I guess; there's
no time to lose between now and Sunday." And he went out triumphant.

Galorey remained, smoking, and the duchess continued her notes in
silence, cooling down at her desk. Her companion knew her too well to
speak to her until she had herself in hand, and when finally she took up
her pen and turned about, she appeared conscious for the first of his
presence.

"Here still!" she exclaimed.

"I thought I might do for a safety valve, Lily. You could let some of
your anger out on me."

The duchess left her desk and came over to him.

"I expect you despise me thoroughly, don't you, Gordon?"

They had not been alone together since her engagement to Blair, for she
had taken pains to avoid every opportunity for a tete-a-tete.

"Despise you?" he repeated gently. "It's awfully hard, isn't it, for a
chap like me to despise anybody? We're none of us used to the best
quality of behavior, you know, my dear girl."

"Don't talk rot, Gordon," she murmured.

"You didn't ask my advice," he continued, "but I don't hesitate to tell
you that I have done everything I could to save the boy."

She accepted this philosophically. "Oh, I knew you would; I quite
expected it, but--" and in the look she threw at him there was more
liking than resentment--"I knew you, too; you _couldn't_ go very far, my
dear fellow."

"I think Dan Blair is excellent stuff," Gordon said.

"He is the greenest, youngest, most ridiculous infant," she exclaimed
with irritation, and he laughed.

"His money is old enough to walk, however, isn't it, Lily?" She made an
angry gesture.

"I expected you'd say something loathsome."

Her companion met her eyes directly. She left her chair and came and sat
down beside him on the small sofa. As he did not move, or look at her,
but regarded his cigarette with interest, she leaned close to him and
whispered: "Gordon, try to be nice and decent. Try to forget yourself.
Don't you see what a wonderful chance it is for me, and that, as far as
you and I are concerned, it can't go on?"

The face of the man by her side grew somber. The charm this woman had
for him had never lessened since the day when he told her he loved her,
long before his marriage, and they were both too poor.

"We have always been too poor, and Edith is jealous of me every day and
hour of her life. Can't you be generous?"

He rose and stood over her, looking down at her beautiful form and her
somewhat softened face, but his eyes were hard and his face very pale.

"You had better go, Gordon," she said slowly; "you had better go...."

Then, as he obeyed her and went like a flash as far as the door, she
followed him and whispered softly: "If you're really only jealous, I can
forgive you."

He managed to get out: "His father was my friend; he sent the boy to me
and I've been a bad guardian." He made a gesture of despair. "Put
yourself in my place. Let Dan Blair go, Lily; let him go."

Her eyelids flickered a little, and she said sharply: "You're out of
your senses, Gordon--and what if I love him?"

With a low exclamation he caught her hand at the wrist so hard that she
cried out, and he said between his teeth: "You _don't_ love him! Take
those words back!"

"Of course I do. Let me free!"

"No," he said passionately, holding her fast. "Not until you take that
back."

His face, his tone, his force, dominated her; the remembrance of their
past, a possible future, made her waver under his eyes, and the woman
smiled at him as Blair had never seen her smile.

"Very well, then, goose," she capitulated almost tenderly; "I don't love
that boy, of course. I'm marrying him for his money. Now, will you let
me go?"

But he held her still more firmly and kissed her several times before he
finally set her free, and went out of the house miserable--bound to her
by the strongest chains--bound in his conscience and by honor to his
trust to Dan's father, and yet handicapped by another sense of honor
which decrees that man must keep silence to the end.




CHAPTER XVII--LETTY LANE SINGS


The house of the Duchess of Breakwater in Park Lane was white, with
green blinds and green balconies; beautiful, distinguished and old,
mellow with traditions, and the tide of fashion poured its stream into
the music-room to listen to the Sunday concert. Without, the day was
bland and beautiful, mild spring in the deep sweet air, and already the
bloom lay over the park and along the turf. Piccadilly was ablaze with
flowers, and in the windows and in the flower-women's baskets they were
so sweet as to make the heart ache and to make the senses thrill. Keen
to the spring beauty, the last guest to go into the drawing-room of the
Duchess of Breakwater was the young American man in whom the magic of
the season had stirred the blood. He seemed the youngest and the
brightest guest to cross the sill of the great house whose debts he was
going to pay, and whose future he was going to secure with American
money.

Close after him a motor car rolled up to the curb, and under the awning
Letty Lane passed quickly, as though thistledown, blown into the
distinguished house. The actress was taken possession of by several
people and shown up-stairs.

Dan spoke to his hostess, who wore, over her azure dress, a necklace
given her by Dan. She said he was "too late for words," and why hadn't
he come before. After greeting him she set him free, and he went eagerly
to find his place next an elderly woman whom he liked immensely, Lady
Caiwarn. She had given him twenty pounds for some of his poor. Lady
Caiwarn had a calm, kind face, and Dan sat down beside her, well out of
the crush, and they talked amiably throughout the violin solo.

"Think of it," she said, "Letty Lane of the Gaiety is going to sing. I'd
sit through a great deal for that. Let that man with the fiddle do his
worst."

Blair laughed appreciatively. He thought Lady Caiwarn would be a good
friend for Miss Lane, better than the duchess herself. "I wish Lily
could hear you talk about her violinist," he said, delighted; "she
thinks he's the whole show." And tentatively, his ingenuous eyes fixed
on his friend, he asked: "I wonder how you would like to meet Miss Lane.
She's perfectly ripping, and she's from my State."

"_Meet her!_" Lady Caiwarn exclaimed, but before she could finish,
through the room ran the little anticipatory rustle that comes before
the great, and which, when they have gone, breaks into applause. The
great actress had appeared to give her number. Dan and Lady Caiwarn,
behind the palms in a little corner of their own, watched her.

A clever understanding of the world into which she was to come this day,
had made the girl dress like a charm. She stood quietly by the piano,
her hands folded. Among the high ladies of the English world in their
splendid frocks, their jewels and feathers, she was a simple figure, her
dress snow white, high to her throat, unadorned by any gay color,
according to the fashion of the time. It was such a dress as Romney
might have painted, and under her arms and from across her breast there
fell a soft coral-colored silken scarf. The costume was daring in its
simplicity. She might have been Emma, Lady Hamilton, because perfectly
beautiful, perfectly talented, she could risk severe simplicity, having
in herself the fire and the art and the seduction. Her hair was a golden
crown and her eyes like stars. She was excited, and the scarlet had run
along her cheeks like wine spilled over ivory.

She looked around the room, failed to see Blair, but saw the Duchess of
Breakwater in her velvet and her jewels. Letty Lane began to sing. Dan
and she had chosen _Mandalay_ and she began with it. Her dress only was
simple. All the complexity of her talent, whatever she knew of seduction
and charm, she put in the rendering of her song. Even the conventional
audience, most of which knew her well, were enchanted over again, and
they went wild about her. She had never been so charming. The men
clapped her until she began in self-defense another favorite of the
moment, and ended in a perfect huzzah of applause.

She refused to sing again until, in the distance, she saw Dan standing
by the column near his seat. Then indicating to the pianist what she
wanted, she sang _The Earl of Moray_, such a rendering of the old ballad
as had not been heard in London, and coming, as it did, from the lips of
a popular singer whose character and whose verve were not supposed to be
sympathetic to a piece of music of this kind, the effect was startling.
Letty Lane's face grew pale with the touching old tragedy, the scarlet
faded from her cheeks, her eyes grew dark and moist, she might indeed
herself have been the lady looking from the castle wall while they
carried the body of her dead lover under those beautiful eyes.

Dan felt his heart grow cold. If she had awakened him when he was a
little boy, she thrilled him now; he could have wept. Lady Caiwarn did
wipe tears away. When the last note of the accompaniment had ended,
Dan's friend at his side said: "How utterly ravishing! What a beautiful,
lovely creature; how charming and how frail!"

He scarcely answered. He was making his way to Letty Lane, and he wrung
her hand, murmuring, "Oh, you're great; you're great!" And the pleasure
on his face repaid her over and over again. "Come, I want you to meet
the Duchess of Breakwater, and some other friends of mine."

As he let her little cold hand fall and turned about, the room as by
magic had cleared. The prime minister had arrived late and was in the
other room. The refreshments were also being served. There was no one to
meet Letty Lane, except for several young men who came up eagerly and
asked to be presented, Gordon Galorey among them.

"Where's Lily?" Dan asked him; "I want her to meet Miss Lane."

"In the conservatory with the prime minister," and Galorey looked
meaningly at Dan, as much as to say, "Now don't be an utter fool."

But Letty Lane herself saved the situation. She shook hands with the
utmost cordiality and sweetness with the men who had been presented to
her, and asked Dan to take her to her motor. He waited for her at the
door and she came down wrapped around as usual in her filmy scarf.

"Are you better?" he asked eagerly. "You look awfully stunning, and I
don't think I can ever thank you enough."

She assured him that she was "all right," and that she had a "lovely new
role to learn and that it was coming on next month." He helped her in
and she seemed to fill the motor like a basket of fresh white flowers.
Again he repeated, as he held the door open:

"I can't thank you enough: you were a great success."

She smiled wickedly, and couldn't resist:

"Especially with the women."

Dan's face flushed; he was already deeply hurt for her, and her words
showed him that the insult had gone home.

"Where are you going now?"

"Right to the Savoy."

Without another word, hatless as he was, he got into the motor and
closed the door.

"I'm going to take you home," he informed her quietly, "and there's no
use in looking at me like that either! When I'm set on a thing I get
it!"

They rolled away in the bland sunset, passed the park, down Piccadilly,
where the flowers in the streets were so sweet that they made the heart
ache, and the air through the window was so sweet that it made the
senses swim!




CHAPTER XVIII--A WOMAN'S WAY


When the duchess thought of looking for Blair later in the afternoon he
was not to be found. Galorey told her finally he had gone off in the
motor with Letty Lane, bareheaded. The duchess was bidding good-by to
the last guest; she motioned Galorey to wait and he did so, and they
found themselves alone in the room where the flowers, still fresh,
offered their silent company; the druggets strewn with leaves of smilax,
the open piano with its scattered music, the dark rosewood that had
served for a rest for Letty Lane's white hand. Galorey and the duchess
turned their backs on the music-room, and went into a small conservatory
looking out over the park.

"He's nothing but a cowboy," the lady exclaimed. "He must be quite mad,
going off bareheaded through London with an actress."

"He's spoiled," Lord Galorey said peacefully.

She carried a bunch of orchids Dan had given her, and regarded them
absently. "I've made him angry, and he's taking this way of exhibiting
his spleen."

Galorey said cheerfully: "Oh, Dan's got lots of spirit."

Looking up from the contemplation of her flowers to her friend, the
duchess murmured with a charming smile: "I don't hit it off very well
with Americans, Gordon."

His color rising, Galorey returned: "I think you'll have to let Dan go,
Lily!"

For a second she thought so herself; and they both started when the
voice of the young man himself was heard in the next room.

"Good-by, I'll let you make your peace, Lily," and Gordon passed Dan in
the drawing-room in leaving, and thought the boy's face was a study.

The duchess held out her hand to Dan as he came across the room.

"Come here," she called agreeably. "Every one has gone, thank heaven!
I've been waiting for you for an age. Let's talk it all over."

"Just what I've come back to do."

There had been royalty at the musicale, and the hostess spoke of her
guests and their approval, mentioning one by one the names of the great.
It might have impressed the ear of a man more snob than was the Montana
copper king's son. "I did so want you to meet the Bishop of London," she
said. "But nobody could find you. You look most awfully well, Dan," and
with the orchids she held, she touched his hand.

He was so direct, so incapable of anything but the honest truth, that
Dan didn't know deceit when he saw it, and his lady spoke so naturally
that he thought for a moment her rudeness had been unintentional.
Perhaps she hadn't really meant--Everybody in her set was rude, great and
rude, but she could be deliciously gracious, and was so now.

"Don't you think it went off well?"

Dan said that it had been ripping and no mistake.

"I like Lady Caiwarn; she's bully, and I liked the king. He spoke to me
as if he had known me for a year."

She began to be a little more at her ease.

"I didn't care much for the fiddling, but Letty Lane made up for all the
rest," said Dan. "Wasn't she great?"

"Ra-ther!" The duchess' tone was so warm that he asked frankly: "Well,
why didn't you speak to her, Lily?" And the directness caught her
unprepared. The insult to the actress by which she had planned to teach
him a lesson failed to give her the bravado she found she needed to meet
Dan's question. Her part of the transaction, deliberate, unkind, seemed
worse and more serious through his headlong act, when he had driven off,
braving her, in the motor of an actress. She didn't dare to be jealous.

"Wasn't it too dreadful?" she murmured. "Do you think she noticed it too
awfully? I was just about to go up and speak to her when the prime
minister--"

Dan interrupted the duchess. He blushed for her.

"Never mind, Lily." His tone had in it something of benevolence. "If you
really didn't mean to be mean--"

She was enchanted by her easy victory. "It was abominable."

"Yes," he accepted, "it was just that! I was mortified. You wouldn't
treat a beggar so. But she's got too much sense to care."

Eager to do the duchess justice, even though he was little by little
being emancipated, he was all the more determined to be fair to her.

"It was too sweet of her not to mind. I dare say her check helped to
soothe her feelings," the woman said.

"You don't know her," he replied quietly. "She wouldn't touch a cent."

The duchess exclaimed in horror: "Then she _did_ mind."

And he returned slowly: "She's eaten and drunk with kings, and if the
king hadn't gone so early you can bet he would have set the fashion
differently. Let's drop the question. She sent you back your check, and
I guess you're quits."

With a sharp note in her voice she said: "I hope it won't be in the
papers that you drove bareheaded back to the hotel with her. Don't
forget that we are dining with the Galoreys, and it's past seven."

After Dan had left her, the duchess glanced over the dismantled room
which the servants were already restoring to order. She was not at case
and not at peace, but there was something else besides her tiff with Dan
that absorbed her, and that was Galorey. She couldn't quite shake him
off. He was beginning to be imperious in his demands on her; and, in
spite of her cupidity and her debts, in spite of the precarious position
in which she found herself with Dan, she could not break with Galorey
yet. She went up-stairs humming under her breath the ballad Letty Lane
had sung in the music-room:

  "And long will his lady look from the castle wall."




CHAPTER XIX--DAN AWAKES


The next night Dan, magnetically drawn down the Strand to the Gaiety,
arrived just before the close of the last act, slipped in, and sat far
back watching Letty Lane close her part. After hearing her sing as she
had the afternoon before in the worldly group, it was curious to see her
before the public in her flashing dress and to realize how much she was
a thing of the people. To-night she was a completely personal element to
Dan. He could never think of her again as he had hitherto. The sharp
drive through the town that afternoon in her motor had made a change in
his feelings. He had been hurt for her, with anger at the Duchess of
Breakwater's rudeness, and from the first he had always known that there
was in him a hot championship for the actress. To-night, whenever the
man who sang with her, put his arms around her, danced with her, held
her, it was an offense to Dan Blair; it had angered him before, but
to-night it did more. One by one everything faded out of his foreground
but the brilliant little figure with her golden hair, her lovely face,
her beautiful graceful body, and in her last gesture on the stage before
the curtain went down, she seemed to Blair to call him and distinctly to
make an appeal to him:

  "You might rest your weary feet
  If you came to Mandalay."

Well, there was nothing weary about the young, live, vigorous American,
as, standing there in his dark edge of the theater, his hands in his
pockets, his bright face fixed toward the stage, he watched the slow
falling of the curtain on the musical drama. Dan realized how full of
vigor he was; he felt strong and capable, indeed a feeling of power
often came to him delightfully, but it had never been needful for him to
exert his forces, he had never had need to show his mettle. Now he felt
at those words:

  "You might rest your weary feet"

how, with all his heart, he longed that the dancer should rest those
lovely tired little feet of hers, far away from any call of the public,
far away on some lovely shore which the hymn tune called the coral
strand. As he gazed at her mobile, sensitive face, whose eyes had seen
the world, and whose lips--Dan's thoughts changed here with a great pang,
and the close of all his meditations was: "Gosh, she ought to rest!"

The boy walked briskly back of the scenes toward the little door, behind
which, as he tapped, he hoped with all his heart to hear her voice bid
him come in. But there were other voices in the room. He rattled the
door-knob and Letty Lane herself called to him without opening the door:

"Will you go, please, Mr. Blair? I can't see any one to-night."

He had nothing to do but to go--to grind his heel as he turned--to swear
deeply against Poniotowsky. His late ecstasy was turned to gall. The
theater seemed horrible to him: the chattering of the chorus girls,
their giggles, their laughter as he passed the little groups, all seemed
weird and infernal, and everything became an object of irritation.

As he went blindly out of the theater he struck his arm against a piece
of stage fittings and the blow was sharp and stinging, but he was glad
of the hurt.

Without, in the street, Dan took his place with the other men and
waited, a bitter taste in his mouth and anger in his breast, waited
until Letty Lane fluttered down, followed by Poniotowsky, and the two
drove away.

The young man could have gone after, running behind the motor, but there
was a taxicab at hand; he jumped in it, ordering the man to follow the
car to the Savoy. There the boy had the pleasure of seeing Miss Lane
enter the hotel, Poniotowsky with her--had the anguish of seeing them
both go up in the lift to her apartments.

When Dan came to himself he heard the chimes of St. Martin's ring out
eleven. He then remembered for the first time that he had promised to
dine alone at home with the Duchess of Breakwater.

"Gosh, Lily will be wild!"

In spite of the lateness of the hour he hurried to Park Lane. The
familiar face of the manservant who let him in blurred before the young
man's eyes. Her grace was out at the theater? Blair would wait then, and
he went into the small drawing-room, quiet, empty, reposeful, with a
fire across the andirons, for the evening was damp and cool. Still dazed
by his jealous, passionate emotions, he glanced about the room, chose a
long leather sofa, and stretching out his length, fell asleep. There in
the shadow he slept profoundly, waking suddenly to find that he was not
alone. Across the room the Duchess of Breakwater stood by the table; she
was in evening dress, her cloak and gloves on the chair at her side. She
laughed softly and the man to whom she laughed, on whom she smiled, was
Lord Galorey.

Blair raised himself up on the sofa without making any noise, and he saw
Galorey take the woman in his arms. The sight didn't make the fiancee
angry. He realized instantly that he _wanted to believe that it was
true_, and as there was nothing theatrical in the young Westerner, he
sprang up, slang so much a part of his nature that the first words that
came to his lips was a phrase in vogue.

"Look who's here!" he cried, and came blithely forward, his head clear,
his lips smiling.

The duchess gave a little scream and Dan lounged up to the two people
and held his hand frankly out to the lady.

"That's all right, Lily! Go right on, Gordon, please. Only I had to let
you know when I waked up! Only fair. I guess I must have been asleep
quite a while."

The Duchess of Breakwater shrugged. "I don't know what you dreamed," she
said acidly, "if you were asleep."

"Well, it was a very pretty dream," the boy returned, "and showed what a
stupid ass I've been to think I couldn't have dreamed it when I was
awake."

"I think you are crazy," the duchess exclaimed.

But Blair repeated: "That's all right. I mean to say as far as I am
concerned--"

And Galorey, in order to stand by his lady, murmured:

"My dear chap, you _have_ been dreaming."

But Blair met the Englishman's gray eyes with his blue ones. "I did have
a bottle of champagne, Gordon, that's a fact, but it couldn't make me
see what I did see."

"Dan," the Duchess of Breakwater broke in, "let Gordon take you home,
like a dear. You're really ragging on in a ridiculous way."

Blair looked at her steadily, and as he did so he repeated:

"That's all right, Lily. Gordon cares a lot, and the truth of the matter
is that I _do not_."

She grew very pale.

"I would have stuck to my word, of course," he went on, "but we'd have
been infernally unhappy and ended up in the divorce courts. Now, this
little scene here of yours lets me out, and I don't lay it up against
either of you."

"Gordon!" she appealed to her lover, "why, in Heaven's name, don't you
speak!"

The Englishman realized that while he was glad at heart, he regretted
that he had been the means of her losing the chance of her life.

"What do you want me to say, Lily?" he exclaimed with a desperate
gesture. "I can't tell him I don't love you. I have loved you, God help
me, for ten years."

She could have killed him for it.

"I can tell you, Dan, if you want me to," Galorey went on, "that I don't
believe she cares a penny for any one on the face of the earth, for you
or me."

Old Dan Blair's son showed his business training. His one idea was to
"get out," and as he didn't care who the Duchess of Breakwater loved or
didn't love, he wanted to break away as fast as he could. He sat down at
the table under the light of the lamp and drew out his wallet with its
compact, thick little check book, the millionaire's pass to most of the
things that he wants.

"You've taught me a lot," he said to the Duchess of Breakwater, "and my
father sent me over here for that. I have been awfully fond of you, too.
I thought I was fonder than I am, I guess. At any rate I want to stand
by one of my promises. That old place of yours--Stainer Court--now that's
got to be fixed up."

He made a few computations on paper, lifted the pad to her with the
figures on it, round, generous and full.

"At home," he said, "in Blairtown, we have what we call 'engagement'
parties, when each fellow brings a present to the girl, but this is what
we might call a 'broken engagement party.' Now, I can't," the boy went
on, "give this money to you very well; it won't look right. We will have
to fix that up some way or other. You will have to say you got an
unexpected inheritance from some uncle in Australia." He smiled at
Galorey: "We will fix it up together."

His candor, his simplicity, were so charming, he stood before the two so
young, so clear, so clean, that a sudden tenderness for him, and a sense
of what she had lost, what she never had had, made her exclaim:

"Dan, I really don't care a pin for the money--I don't"--but the hand she
held out was seized by the other man and held fast. Galorey said:

"Very well, let it go at that. You don't care for the money, but you
will take it just the same. Now, don't, for God's sake, tell him that
you care for him."

He made her meet his eyes this time: stronger than she, Galorey forced
her to be sincere. She set Dan free and he turned and left them standing
there facing each other. He softly crossed the room, and looking back,
he saw them, tall, distinguished, both of them under the
lamplight--enemies, and yet the closest friends bound by the strongest
tie in the world.

As Dan went out through the curtains of the room and they fell behind
him, the Duchess of Breakwater sank down in the chair by the side of the
table; she buried her face. Gordon Galorey bent over her and again took
her in his arms, and she suffered it.




CHAPTER XX--A HAND CLASP


It was one o'clock. Blair called a hansom and told the driver to take
him to the Carlton, and leaning back in the vehicle he breathed a long
sigh. He looked like his father, but he didn't know it. He felt old. He
was a man and a tired one and a free one, and the sense of this liberty
began to refresh him like a breeze over parched sand. He thought over
what he had left for a second, stopped longest in pitying Galorey, then
went into the Carlton restaurant to order some supper, for he began to
feel the need of food. He had not time to drink his wine and partake of
the cold pheasant before he saw that opposite him the two people who had
taken their table were Letty Lane and Poniotowsky. The woman's slender
back was turned to Blair, and his heart gave a leap of pain at the sight
of the man with her, and the cruel suffering began again.

Dan gave up the idea of eating: drank a whole bottle of champagne, then
pushed it away from him violently. "Hold up," he told himself, "you're
getting dangerous; this drinking won't do." So he sat drumming on the
table looking into the air. When those two got up to go, however, he
would go with them; that was sure. He could never see them go out
together again; no--no--no! As his brain grew a bit clearer he saw that
they were having a heated discussion between them, and as the room
emptied finally, save for themselves, Dan, though he could not hear what
Poniotowsky said, understood that he was urging something which the girl
did not wish to grant. When they left he rose as well, and at the door
of the restaurant the actress and her companion paused, and Dan saw her
face, deadly pale. There were tears in her eyes.

"For God's sake!" he heard her murmur, and she impatiently drew her
cloak around her shoulders. Poniotowsky put out his hand to help her,
but she drew back from him, exclaiming violently: "Oh, no--no!" Before he
was aware what he was doing, Dan was holding his hand out to Miss Lane.

How she turned to him! God of dreams! How she took in one cold hand his
hand; just the grasp a man needs to lead him to offer the service of his
life. Her hand was icy--it thrilled him to his marrow.

"Oh--you--" she breathed. "Hello!"

No words could have been more commonplace, less in the category of
dramatic or poetic welcome, but they were music to the boy, and when the
actress looked at him with a ghost of a smile on her trembling lips, Dan
was sure there was some kind of blessing in the greeting.

"I am going to see you home," he said with determination, and she caught
at it:

"Yes, yes, do! Will you?"

The third member of the party had not spoken. A servant fetched him a
light to which he bent, touching his cigar. Then he lifted his head--a
handsome one--with its cold and indifferent eyes, to Letty Lane.

"Good night, Miss Lane." A deep color crept under his dark skin.

"Come," said the actress eagerly, "come along; my motor is out there and
I am crazy tired. That is all there is about it. Come along."

Snatched from a marriage contract, still bitter from his jealous anger,
this--to be alone with her--by the side of this white, fragrant, wonderful
creature--to have been turned to by her, to be alone with her, the
Duchess of Breakwater out of his horizon, Poniotowsky gone--Oh, it was
sweet to him! They had rolled out from the Carlton down toward the
Square and he put his arm around her waist, his voice shook:

"You are dead tired! And when I saw that brute with you to-night I could
have shot him."

"Take your arm away, please."

"Why?"

"Take it away. I don't like it. Let my hand go. What's the matter with
you? I thought I could trust you."

He said humbly: "You can--certainly you can."

"I am tired--tired--tired!"

Under his breath he said: "Put your head on my shoulder, Letty,
darling."

And she turned on him nearly as violently as she had on Poniotowsky, and
burst into tears, crouching almost in the corner of the motor, away from
him, both her hands upon her breast.

"Oh, can't you see how you bother me? Can't you see I want to rest and
be all alone? You are like them all--like them all. Can't I rest
anywhere?"

The very words she used were those he had thought of when he saw her
dance at the theater, and his heart broke within him.

"You can," he stammered, "rest right here. God knows I want you to rest
more than anything. I won't touch you or breathe again or do anything
you don't want me to."

She covered her face with her hands and sat so without speaking to him.
The light in her motor shone over her like a kindly star, as, wrapped in
her filmy things she lay, a white rose blown into a sheltered nook.
After a little she wiped her eyes and said more naturally:

"You look perfectly dreadfully, boy! What have you been doing with
yourself?"

They had reached the Savoy. It seemed to Dan they were always just
driving up to where some one opened a door, out of which she was to fly
away from him. He got out before her and helped her from the car.

"Well, I've got a piece of news to tell you. I have broken my engagement
with the duchess."

This brought her back far enough into life to make her exclaim: "Oh, I
_am_ glad! That's perfectly fine! I don't know when I've heard anything
that pleased me so much. Come and see me to-morrow and tell me all about
it."




CHAPTER XXI--RUGGLES RETURNS


Dan did not fall asleep until morning, and then he dreamed of Blairtown
and the church and a summer evening and something like the drone of the
flies on the window-pane soothed him, and came into his waking thoughts,
for at noon he was violently shaken by the shoulder and a man's voice
called him as he opened his eyes and looked into Ruggles' face.

"Gee Whittaker!" Ruggles exclaimed. "You _are_ one of the seven
sleepers! I've been here something like seventeen minutes, whistling and
making all kinds of barnyard noises."

As Dan welcomed him, rubbing the sleep from his eyes, Ruggles told him
that he had come over "the pond" just for the wedding.

"There isn't going to be any wedding, Josh! Got out of all that last
night."

Ruggles had the breakfast card in his hand, which the waiter had brought
in, and Dan, taking it from his friend, ordered a big breakfast.

"I'm as hungry as the dickens, Rug, and I guess you are, too."

"What was the matter with the duchess?" Ruggles asked. "Were you too
young for her, or not rich enough?"

Significantly the boy answered: "One too many, Josh," and Ruggles winced
at the response.

"Here are the fellows with my trunks and things," he announced as the
porters came in with his luggage. "Just drop them there, boys; they're
going to fix some kind of a room later."

Blair's long silk-lined coat lay on a chair where he had flung it, his
hat beside it, and Ruggles went over to the corner and lifted up a
fragrant glove. It was one of Letty Lane's gloves which Dan had found in
the motor and taken possession of. The young man had gone to his
dressing-room and begun running his bath, and Ruggles, laying the glove
on the table, said to himself:

"I knew he would get rid of the duchess, all right."

But when Dan came back into the room later in his dressing-gown for
breakfast, Ruggles said:

"You'll have to send her back her glove, Dannie."

At the sight of it beside the breakfast tray, Dan blushed scarlet. He
picked up the fragrant object.

"That's all right; I'll take care of it."

"Is _Mandalay_ running the same as ever?" Ruggles asked over his bacon
and eggs.

"Same as ever."

Ruggles saw he had not returned in vain, and that he was destined to
take up his part of the business just as he had laid it out for himself
to Lord Galorey. "It's up to me now: I'll have to take care of the
actress, and I'm darned if I haven't got a job. If Dan colors up like
that at the sight of her glove, I wonder what he does when he holds her
hand!"




CHAPTER XXII--WHAT WILL YOU TAKE?


When Dan, on the minute of two, went to the Savoy, Higgins, as was her
custom, did not meet him. Miss Lane met him herself. She was reading a
letter by the table, and when Dan was announced she put it back in its
envelope. Blair had seen her only in soft clinging evening dresses, in
white visionary clothes, or in her dazzling part costume, where the play
dress of the dancer displayed her beauty and her charms. To-day she wore
a tailor-made gown, and in her dark cloth dress, in her small hat, she
seemed a new woman--some one he hadn't known and did not know, and he
experienced the thrill a man always feels when the woman he loves
appears in an unaccustomed dress and suggests a new mystery.

"Oh, I say! You're not going out, are you?"

In the lapel of her close little coat was a flower he had given her. He
wanted to lean forward and kiss it as it rested there. She assured him:

"I have just come in; had an early lunch and took a long walk--think of
it! I haven't taken a walk alone since I can remember!"

Her walk had given her only the ghost of a flush, which rose over her
delicate skin, fading away like a furling flag. Her frailness, her
slenderness, the air of good-breeding her dress gave her, added to Dan's
deepening emotions. She seemed infinitely dear, and a thing to be
protected and fostered.

"Can't you sit down for a minute? I've come to make you a real call."

"Of course," she laughed. "But, first, I must answer this letter."

His jealousy rose and he caught hold of her hand that held the envelope.
"Look here, you are not to write it if it is to that damned scoundrel. I
took you away from him last night and you are never to see him again."

For the first time the two really looked at each other. Her lips parted
as though she would reprove him, and the boy murmured:

"That's all right. I mean what I say--never to see him again! Will you
promise me? Promise me--I can't bear it! I won't have it!"

A film of emotion crossed his clear young eyes and her slender hands
were held fast in his clasp. His face was beautiful in its tenderness
and in a righteous anger as he bent it on her. Instead of reproving him
as she had done before, instead of snatching away her hands, she swayed,
and at the sight of her weakness his eyes cleared, and the film lifted
like a curtain. She was not fainting, but, as her face turned toward
his, he saw it transformed, and Dan caught her in her dark dress, the
flowers in her bodice, to his heart. He held her as if he had snatched
her from a wreck and in a safe embrace lifted her high to the shore of a
coral strand. He kissed her, first timidly, wonderingly, with the
sacrament of first love on his lips. Then he kissed her as his heart
bade him, and when he set her free she was crying, but the tears on his
face were not all her tears.

"Little boy, how crazy, how perfectly crazy! Oh, Dan--Dan!"

She clung to him, looking up at him just as his boy-dreams had told him
a girl _would_ look some day. Her face was suffused and softened, her
lips--her coral-red, fine, lovely lips were trembling, and her eyes were
as gray, as profound as those seas his imagination had longed to
explore. Made poet for the first time in his life, as his arms were
around her, he whispered: "You are all my dreams come true. If any man
comes near you I'll kill him just as sure as fate. I'll kill him!"

"Hush, hush! I told you you were crazy. We're both perfectly mad. I have
tried my best not to come to this with you. What would your father say?
Let me go, let me go; I'll call Higgins."

The boy laughed aloud, the laugh of happy youth. He held her so close
that she might as well have tried to loose herself from an iron image of
the Spanish Inquisition as from his young arms. This slender, delicious,
willowy thing he held was Letty Lane, the adored star London went mad
over: the triumph of it! It flashed through him as his pulses beat and
his heart was high with the conquest, but it was to the woman only that
he whispered:

"I've said a lot of stuff and I am likely to say a lot more, but I want
you to say something to me. _Don't you love me?_"

The word on his lips to him was as strange, as wonderful, as though it
had been made for him.

"I guess I must love you, Dan. I guess I must have for a long time."

"God, I'm so glad! How long?"

"Why, ever since you used to come to the soda-fountain and ask for
chocolate. You don't know how sweet you were when you were a little
boy."

She put her slender hand against his hot cheek. "And you are nothing but
a little boy now! I think I must be crazy!"

As he protested, as she listened intently to what his emotion taught him
to say to her, she whispered close to his ear:

"What will _you_ take, little boy?"

And he answered: "I'll take you--you!"

At a slight sound in the next room Letty Lane started as though the
interruption really brought her to her senses, put her hand to her
disheveled hair, and before she could prevent it, Dan had called Mrs
Higgins to "come in," and the woman, in response, came into the
sitting-room. The boy went up to her and took her hands eagerly, and
said:

"It's all right, all right, Mrs. Higgins. Just think of it! She belongs
to me!"

"Oh, don't be a perfect lunatic, Dan," the actress exclaimed, half
laughing, half crying, "and don't listen to him, Higgins. He's just
crazy."

But the old woman's eyes went bright at the boy's face and tone. "I
never was so glad of anything in my life."

"As of what?" asked her mistress sharply, and the tone was so cold and
so suddenly altered that Dan felt a chill of despair.

"Why, at what Mr. Blair says, Miss."

"Then," said her mistress, "you ought to be ashamed of yourself. He's
only twenty-two, he doesn't know anything about life. You must be crazy.
He's as mad as a March hare and he ought to be in school."

Then, to their consternation, she burst into a passion of weeping; threw
herself on Higgins' breast and begged her to send Dan away--to send
everybody away--and to let her die in peace.

In utter despair the boy obeyed the dresser's motion to go, and his
transport was changed into anxiety and dread. He hung about down-stairs
in the Savoy for the rest of the afternoon, finally sending up to
Higgins for news in sheer desperation, and the page fetched Blair a note
in Letty Lane's own hand. His eyes blurred so as he opened the sheet, he
could hardly read the scrawl which said:

  "It was perfectly sweet of you to wait down there. I'm all
  right--just tired out! Better get on a boat and go to Greenland's Icy
  Mountains and cool off. But if you don't, come in to-morrow and have
  lunch with me.

                                                               Letty."




CHAPTER XXIII--IN THE SUNSET GLOW


He lived through a week of bliss and of torture. One minute she promised
to marry him, give up the stage, go around the world on a yacht, whose
luxuries, Dan planned, should rival any boat ever built, or they would
motor across Asia and see, one by one, the various coral strands and the
golden sands of the East. He could not find terms to express how he
would spend upon her this fortune of his, which, for the first time,
began to have value in his eyes. Money had been lavished on her, still
she seemed dazzled. Then she would push it all away from her in
disgust--tell him she was sick of everything--that she didn't want any new
jewels or any new clothes, and that she never wanted to see the stage
again or any place again; that there was nowhere she wanted to go,
nothing she wanted to see--that he must get some fresh girl to whom he
could show life, not one whom he must try to make forget it. Then,
again, she would say that she loved the stage and her art--wouldn't give
it up for any one in the world--that it was fatal to marry an
actress--that it was mad for him to think of marrying her, anyway--that
she didn't want to marry any one and be tied down--that she wanted to be
her own mistress and free.

He found her a creature of a thousand whims and caprices, quick to cry,
quick to laugh, divine in everything she did. He never knew what she
would want him to do next, or how her mood would change, and after one
of their happiest hours, when she had been like a girl with him, she
would burst into tears, beg him to leave the room, telling him that she
was tired--tired--tired, and wanted to go to sleep and never to wake up
again. Between them was the figure of Poniotowsky, though neither spoke
of him. She appeared to have forgotten him. Dan would rather have cut
out his tongue than to speak his name, and yet he was there in the mind
of each. During the fortnight Dan spent thousands of pounds on her,
bought her jewels which she alternately raved over or but half looked
at. He had made his arrangements with Galorey peacefully, coolly and
between the two men it had been understood that the world should think
the engagement broken by the duchess, and Dan's attention to Letty Lane,
already the subject of much comment, already conspicuous, was enough to
justify any woman in taking offense.

One day, the pearl of warm May days, when England even in springtime
touches summer, Blair was so happy as to persuade his sweetheart to go
with him for a little row on the river. The young fellow waited for her
in the boat he had secured, and she, motoring out with Higgins, had
appeared, running down to the edge of the water like a girl, gay as a
child let out from school, in a simple frock, in a marvelously fetching
hat, white gloves, white parasol, white shoes, and as Dan helped her
into the boat, pushed it out, pushed away with her on the crest of the
sun-flecked waters, spring was in his heart, and he found the moment
almost too great to bear.

The actress had been a girl with him all day, giving herself to his
moods, doing what he liked without demur, talking of their mutual past,
telling him one amusing story after another, proving herself an ideal
companion, fresh, varied, reposeful; and no one to have seen Letty Lane
with the boy on that afternoon would have dreamed that she ever had
known another love. They had moored their boat down near Maidenhead, and
he had helped her up the bank to the little inn, where tea had been made
for them, and served to him by her own beautiful white hands. He had
called for strawberries, and, like a shepherd in a pastoral, had fed
them to her, and as they lingered the sunset came creeping steadily in
through the windows where they sat.

As they neither called for their account nor to have the tea things
taken away, after a while the woman stealthily opened the door and,
unknown, looked at one of the prettiest pictures ever within her walls.
Letty Lane sat on the window-seat, her golden head, her white form
against the glow, and the boy by her side had his arms around her, and
her head was on his breast. They were both young. They might have been
white birds blown in there, nesting in the humble inn, and the woman of
the house, who had not heard the waters of the Thames flow softly for
nothing, judged them gently and sighed with pleasure as she shut the
door.

Here at Maidenhead Dan had left his boat and the motor took them back.
Nothing spoiled his bliss that day, and he said her name a thousand
times that night in his dreams. Jealousies--and, when he would let
himself think, they were not one, they were many--faded away. The duties
that a life with her would involve did not disturb him. For many a long
year, come what might, be what would, he would recall the glowing of
that sunset reflected under the inn windows, the singing of the thrushes
and the flash of the white dress and the fine little white shoes which
he had held in the palm of his ardent hand, which he had kissed, as he
told her with all his heart that she should rest her tired feet for
ever.

There grew in him that day a reverence for her, determined as he was to
bring into her life by his wealth and devotion everything of good. His
loving plans for her forming in his brain somewhat chaotic and very much
fevered, brought him nearer than he had ever been before to the picture
of his mother. His father it wasn't easy for Dan to think of in
connection with the actress. He didn't dare to dwell on the subject, but
he had never known his mother, and that pale ideal he could create as he
would. In thinking of her he saw only tenderness for Letty Lane--only
love; and in his room the night after the row on the river, the night
after the long idyl in the sunset-room of the inn, something like a
prayer came to his young lips, and, when its short form was finished, a
smile brought it to an end as he remembered the line in Letty Lane's own
opera:

  "She will teach you how to pray in an Eastern form of prayer."

The ring he had given the Duchess of Breakwater had been her own choice,
a ruby. He had asked her, through Galorey, to keep it and to wear it
later, when she could think of him kindly, in an ornament of some kind
or another. The duchess had not refused. The ring he bought for Letty
Lane, although there was no engagement announced between them, was the
largest, purest diamond he could _with decency_ ask her to put on her
hand! It sparkled like a great drop of clear water from some fountain on
a magic continent. In another shop strands of pink coral set through
with diamonds caught his fancy and he bought her yards of them, ropes of
them, smiling to think how his boyhood's dreams were come true.

He never saw Ruggles except at meals, hardly spoke to the poor man at
all, and the boy's absorbed face, his state of mind, made the older man
feel like death. He repeated to himself that he was too late--too late,
and usually wound up his reflections by ejaculating:

"Gosh almighty, I'm glad I haven't got a son!"




CHAPTER XXIV--RUGGLES' OFFER


He felt as he waited for her in that flower-filled room, for she had
recovered from her distaste for flowers, as he glanced at the
photographs of women like herself in costumes more or less frank, more
or less vulgar, he felt as though he wanted to knock down the walls and
let in a big view of the West--of Montana--of the hills. With such a
setting he thought he could better talk with the lady whom he had come
to see.

Ruggles held an unlighted cigar between his fingers and goose-flesh rose
all over him. His glasses bothered him. He couldn't get them bright
enough, though he polished them half a dozen times on his silk
handkerchief. His clothes felt too large. He seemed to have shrunken. He
moistened his lips, cleared his throat, tried to remember what kind of
fellow he had been at Dan's age. At Dan's age he was selling a suspender
patent on the road, supporting his mother and his sisters--hard work and
few temptations; he was too tired and too poor.

Miss Lane kept him waiting ten minutes, and they were hours to her
guest. He was afraid every minute that Dan would come in. The thoughts
he had gathered together, the plan of action, disarranged itself in his
mind every time he thought of the actress. He couldn't forget his vision
of her on the stage or at the Carlton, where she had sat opposite them
and bewitched them both. When she came into the sitting-room at length,
he started so violently that he knocked over a vase of flowers, the
water trickling all over the table down on to the floor.

She had dazzled him before the footlights, charmed him at dinner, and it
was singular to think that he knew how this dignified, quiet creature
looked in ballet clothes and in a dinner dress, whose frankness had made
him catch his breath. It was a third woman who stood before Ruggles now.
He had to take her into consideration. She had expected him, saw him by
appointment. She was a woman of mind and intelligence. She had not
climbed to her starry position without having acquired a knowledge of
men, and it was the secret of her success. She showed it in the dress in
which she received her visitor. She wore a short walking skirt of heavy
serge, a simple shirtwaist belted around, a sailor hat on her beautiful
little head. She was unjeweled and unpainted, very pale and very sweet.
If it had not been for the marks of fatigue under her eyes, she would
not have looked more than eighteen. On her left hand a single diamond,
clear as water, caught the refracted light.

"How-de-do? Glad you are back again."

She gave him a big chair and sat down before him smiling. Leaning her
elbows on her knees, she sank her face upon her hands and looked at him,
not coquettishly in the least, but as a child might have looked. From
her small feet to her golden head she was utterly charming.

[Image]

Ruggles made himself think of Dan. Miss Lane spoke slowly, nodding
toward him, in her languid voice: "It's no use, Mr. Ruggles, no use."

Holding her face between her hands, her eyes gray as winter's seas and
as profound, she looked at him intently; then, in a flash, she changed
her position and instantly transformed her character. He saw that she
was a woman, not an eighteen-year-old girl, but a woman, clever, poised,
witty, understanding, and that she might have been twenty years older
than the boy.

"I'm sorry you spoke so quick," he said.

"I knew," she interrupted, "just what you wanted to say from the start.
I couldn't help it, could I? I knew you would want to come and see me
about it. It isn't any use. I know just what you are going to say."

"No, ma'am," he returned, "I don't believe you do--bright as you are."

Ruggles gazed thoughtfully at the cold end of his unlighted cigar. It
was a comfort to him to hold it and to look at it, although not for
anything in the world would he have asked to light it.

"Dan's father and me were chums. We went through pretty much together,
and I know how he felt on most points. He was a man of few words, but I
know he counted on me to stand By the boy."

Ruggles was so chivalrous that his role at present cost him keen
discomfort.

"A lady like you," he said gently, "knows a great deal more about how
things are done than either Dan or me. We ain't tenderfeet in the West,
not by a long shot, but we see so few of a certain kind of picture shows
that when they do come round they're likely to make us lose our minds!
You know, yourself, a circus in a town fifty miles from a railroad
drives the people crazy. Now, Dan's a little like the boy with his eyes
on the hole in the tent. He would commit murder to get inside and see
that show." He nodded and smiled to her as though he expected her to
follow his crude simile. "Now, I have seen _you_ a lot of times." And
she couldn't help reminding him, "Not of your own accord, Mr. Ruggles."

"Well, I don't know," he slowly admitted; "I always felt I had my
money's worth, and the night you ate with us at the Carlton I understood
pretty well how the boy with his eyes at the tent hole would feel." But
he tapped his broad chest with the hand that held the cigar between the
first and second fingers. "I know just what kind of a heart you've got,
for I waited at the stage door and I know you don't get all your
applause inside the Gaiety Theater."

"Goodness," she murmured, "they make an awful fuss about nothing."

"Now," he continued, leaning forward a trifle toward her languid, half
interested figure, "I just want you to think of him as a little boy.
He's only twenty-two. He knows nothing of the world. The money you give
to the poor doesn't come so hard perhaps as this will. It's a big
sacrifice, but I want you to let the boy go."

She smiled slightly, found her handkerchief, which was tucked up the
cuff of her blouse, pressed the little bit of linen to her lips as
though to steady them, then she asked abruptly:

"What has he said to you?"

"Lord!" Ruggles groaned. "_Said_ to me! My dear young lady, he is much
too rude to speak. Dan sort of breathes and snorts around like a
lunatic. He was dangling around that duchess when I was here before, but
she didn't scare me any."

And Letty Lane, now smiling at him, relieved by his break from a more
intense tone, asked:

"Now, you are scared?"

"Well," Ruggles drawled, "I was pretty sure that woman didn't _care_
anything for the boy. Are you her kind?"

It was the best stroke he had made. She almost sprang up from her chair.

"Heavens," she exclaimed, "I guess I'm not!" Her face flushed.

"I had rather see a son of mine dead than married to a woman like that,"
he said.

"Why, Mr. Ruggles," she exclaimed passionately, addressing him with
interest for the first time, "what do you know about me? What? What? You
have seen me dance and heard me sing."

And he interrupted her.

"Ten times, and you are a bully dancer and a bully singer, but you do
other things than dance and sing. There is not a man living that would
want to have his mother dress that way."

She controlled a smile. "Never mind that. People's opinions are very
different about that sort of thing. You have seen me at dinner with your
boy, as you call him, and you can't say that I did anything but ask him
to help the poor. I haven't led Dan on. I have tried to show him just
what you are making me go through now."

If she acted well and danced well, it was hard for her to talk. She was
evidently under strong emotion and it needed her control not to burst
into tears and lose her chance.

"Of course, I know the things you have heard. Of course, I know what is
said about me"--and she stopped.

Ruggles didn't press her any further; he didn't ask her if the things
were true. Looking at her as he did, watching her as he did, there was
in him a feeling so new, so troubling that he found himself more anxious
to protect her than to bring her to justice.

"There are worse, far worse women than I am, Mr. Ruggles. I will never
do Dan any harm."

Here her visitor leaned forward and put one of his big hands lightly
over one of hers, patted it a moment, and said:

"I want you to do a great deal better than that."

She had picked up a photograph off the table, a pretty picture of
herself in _Mandalay_, and turned it nervously between her fingers as
she said with irritation:

"I haven't been in the theatrical world not to guess at this 'Worried
Father' act, Mr. Ruggles. I told you I knew just what you were going to
say."

"Wrong!" he repeated. "The business is old enough perhaps, lots of good
jobs are old, but _this_ is a little different."

He took the turning picture and laid it on the table, and quietly
possessed himself of the small cold hands. Blair's solitaire shone up to
him. Ruggles looked into Letty Lane's eyes. "He is only twenty-two; it
ain't fair, it ain't fair. He could count the times he has been on a
lark, I guess. He hasn't even been to an eastern college. He is no fool,
but he's darned simple."

She smiled faintly. The man's face, near her own, was very simple
indeed.

"You have seen so much," he urged, "so many fellows. You have been such
a queen, I dare say you could get any man you wanted." He repeated.
"Most any one."

"I have never seen any one like Dan."

"Just so: He ain't your kind. That is what I am trying to tell you."

She withdrew her hand from his violently.

"There you are wrong. He _is_ my kind. He is what I like, and he is what
I want to be like."

A wave of red dyed her face, and, in a tone more passionate than she had
ever used to her lover, she said to Ruggles:

"I love him--I love him!" Her words sent something like a sword through
the older man's heart. He said gently: "Don't say it. He don't know what
love means yet."

He wanted to tell her that the girl Dan married should be the kind of
woman his mother was, but Ruggles couldn't bring himself to say the
words. Now, as he sat near her, he was growing so complex that his brain
was turning round. He heard her murmur:

"I told you I knew your act, Mr. Ruggles. It isn't any use."

This brought him back to his position and once more he leaned toward her
and, in a different tone from the one he had intended to use, murmured:

"You don't know. You haven't any idea. I do ask you to let Dan go,
that's a fact. I have got something else to propose in its place. It
ain't quite the same, but it is clear--marry me!"

She gave a little exclamation. A slight smile rippled over her face like
the sunset across a pale pool at dawn.

"Laugh," he said humbly; "don't keep in. I know I am old-fashioned as
the deuce, and me and Dan is quite a contrast, but I mean just what I
say, my dear."

She controlled her amusement, if it was that. It almost made her cry
with mirth, and she couldn't help it. Between laughing breaths she said
to him:

"Oh, is it all for Dan's sake, Mr. Ruggles? Is it?" And then, biting her
lips and looking at him out of her wonderful eyes, she said: "I know it
is--I know it is--I beg your pardon."

"I asked a girl once when I was poor--too poor. Now this is the second
time in my life. I mean just what I say. I'll make you a kind husband. I
am fifty-five, hale as a nut. I dare say you have had many better
offers."

"Oh, dear," she breathed; "oh, dear, please--please stop!"

"But I don't expect you to marry me for anything but my money."

Ruggles put his cigar down on the edge of the table. He looked at his
chair meditatively, he took out his silk handkerchief, polished up his
glasses, readjusted them, put them on and then looked at her.

"Now," he said, "I am going to trust you with something, and I know you
will keep my secret for me. This shows you a little bit of what I think
about you. Dan Blair hasn't got a red cent. He has nothing but what I
give him. There's a false title to all that land on the Bentley claim.
The whole thing came up when I was home and the original company, of
which I own three-quarters of the stock, holds the clear titles to the
Blairtown mines. It all belongs now to me, if I choose to present my
documents. Dan knows nothing about this--not a word."

The actress had never come up to such a dramatic point in any of her
plays. With her hands folded in her lap she looked at him steadily, and
he could not understand the expression that crossed her face. He heard
her exclamation: "Oh, gracious!"

"I've brought the papers back with me," said the Westerner, "and it is
between you and me how we act. If Dan marries you I will be bound to do
what old Blair would have done--cut him off--let him feel his feet on the
ground, and the result of his own folly."

He had taken his glasses off while he made this assertion. Now he put
them on again.

"If you give him up I'll divide with the boy and be rich enough still to
hand over to my wife all she wants to spend."

She turned her face away from him and leaned her head once more upon her
hands. He heard her softly murmuring under her breath, with an absent
look on her face, accompanied by a still more incomprehensible smile.

"That's how it stands," he concluded.

She seemed to have forgotten him entirely, and he caught his breath when
she turned about abruptly and said:

"My goodness, how Dan will hate being poor! He will have to sell all his
stickpins and his motor cars and all the things he has given me. It will
be quite a little to start on, but he will hate it, he is so very
smart."

"Why, you don't mean to say--" Ruggles gasped.

And with a charming smile as she rose to put their conversation at an
end, she said:

"Why, you don't mean to say that you thought I _wouldn't stand by him_?"
She seemed, as she put her hands upon her hips with something of a
defiant look at the older man, as though she just then stood by her
pauperized lover.

"I thought you cared some for the boy," Ruggles said.

"Well, I am showing it."

"You want to ruin him to show it, do you?"

As though he thought the subject dismissed he walked heavily toward the
door.

"You know how it stands. I have nothing more to say." He knew that he
had signally failed, and as a sudden resentment rose in him he
exclaimed, almost brutally:

"I am darned glad the old man is dead; I am glad his mother's dead, and
I am glad I have got no son."

The next moment she was at his side, and he felt that she clung to his
arm. Her sensitive, beautiful face, all drawn with emotion, was raised
to his.

"Oh, you'll kill me--you'll kill me! Just look how very ill I am; you are
making me crazy. I just worship him."

"Give him up, then," said Ruggles steadily.

She faltered: "I can't--I can't--it won't be for long"--with a terrible
pathos in her voice. "You don't know how different I can be: you don't
know what a new life we were going to lead."

Stammering, and with intense meaning, Ruggles, looking down at her,
said: "My dear child--my dear child!"

In his few words something perhaps made her see in a flash her past and
what the question really was. She dropped Ruggles' arm. She stood for a
moment with her arms folded across her breast, her head bent down, and
the man at the door waited, feeling that Dan's whole life was in the
balance of the moment. When she spoke again her voice was hard and
entirely devoid of the lovely appealing quality which brought her so
much admiration from the public.

"If I give him up," she said slowly, "what will you do?"

"Why," he answered, "I'll divide with Dan and let things stand just as
they are."

She thought again a moment and then as if she did not want him to
witness--to detect the struggle she was going through, she turned away
and walked over toward the window and dismissed him from there. "Please
go, will you? I want very much to be alone and to think."




CHAPTER XXV--LETTY LANE RUNS AWAY


He had not got up-stairs to his rooms at the Carlton before a note was
handed him from the actress, bidding him to return at once to the Savoy,
and Ruggles, his heart hammering like a trip-hammer, rushed up to his
rooms, made an evening toilet, for it was then half-past seven, threw
his cravats and collars all around the place, cursed like a miner as he
got into his clothes, and red almost to apoplexy, nervous and full of
emotion, he returned to the rooms he had left not three hours before.

The three hours had been busy ones at the actress' apartment. Letty
Lane's sitting-room was full of trunks, dressing-bags and traveling
paraphernalia. She came forward out of what seemed a world of confusion,
dressed as though for a journey, even her veil and her gloves denoting
her departure. She spoke hurriedly and almost without politeness.

"I have sent for you to come and see me here. Not a soul in London knows
I am going away. There will be a dreadful row at the theater, but that's
none of your affairs. Now, I want you to tell me before I go just what
you are going to do for Dan."

"Who are you going with?" Ruggles asked shortly, and she flashed at him:

"Well, really, I don't think that is any of your business. When you
drive a woman as you have driven me, she will go far."

He interrupted her vehemently, not daring to take her hand. "I couldn't
do more. I have asked you to marry me. I couldn't do more. I stand by
what I have said. Will you?" he stammered.

She knew men. She looked at him keenly. Her veil was lifted above her
eyes and its shadow framed her small pale face on which there were marks
of utter disenchantment, of great ennui. She said languidly: "What I
want to know is, what you are going to do for Dan?"

"I told you I would share with him."

"Then he will be nearly as rich?"

"He'll have more than is good for him."

That satisfied her. Then she pursued: "I want you to stand by him. He
will need you."

Ruggles lifted the hand he held and kissed it reverently. "I'll do
anything you say--anything you say."

Down-stairs in the Savoy, as Dan had done countless times, Ruggles
waited until he saw her motor car carry her and her small luggage and
Higgins away.

In their sitting-room in the Carlton a half-hour later the door was
thrown open and Dan Blair came in like a madman. Without preamble he
seized Ruggles by the arm.

"Look here," he cried, "what have you been doing? Tell me now, and tell
me the truth, or, by God, I don't know what I'll do. You went to the
Savoy. You went there twice. Anyhow, where is she?"

Dan, slender as he was beside Ruggles' great frame, shook the elder man
as though he had been a terrier. "Speak to me. Where has she gone?"

He stared in the Westerner's face, his eyes bloodshot. "Why in thunder
don't you say something?"

And Ruggles prayed for some power to unloose his thickening tongue.

"You say she's gone?" he questioned.

"I say," said the boy, "that you've been meddling in my affairs with the
woman I love. I don't know what you have said to her, but it's only your
age that keeps me from striking you. Don't you know," he cried, "that
you are spoiling my life? Don't you know that?" A torrent of feeling
coming to his lips, his eyes suffused, the tears rolled down his face.
He walked away into his own room, remained there a few moments, and when
he came out again he carried in his hand his valise, which he put down
with a bang on the table. More calmly, but still in great anger, he said
to his father's friend:

"Now, can you tell me what you've done or not?"

"Dan," said Ruggles with difficulty, "if you will sit down a moment we
can--"

The boy laughed in his face. "Sit down!" he cried. "Why, I think you
must have lost your reason. I have chartered a motor car out there and
the damned thing has burst a tire and they are fixing it up for me. It
will be ready in about two minutes and then I am going to follow
wherever she has gone. She crossed to Paris, but I can get there before
she can even with this damned accident. But, before I go, I want you to
tell me what you said."

"Why," said Ruggles quietly, "I told her you were poor, and she turned
you down."

His words were faint.

"God!" said the boy under his breath. "That's the way you think about
truth. Lie to a woman to save my precious soul! But I expect," he said;
"you think she is so immoral and so bad that she will hurt me. Well," he
said, with great emphasis, "she has never done anything in her life that
comes up to what you've done. Never! And nothing has ever hurt me so."

His lips trembled. "I have lost my respect for you, for my father's
friend, and as far as she is concerned, I don't care what she marries me
for. She has got to marry me, and if she doesn't"--he had no idea, in his
passion, what he was saying or how--"why, I think I'll kill you first and
then blow my own brains out!" And with these mad words he grabbed up his
valise and bolted from the room, and Ruggles could hear his running feet
tearing down the corridor.




CHAPTER XXVI--WHITE AND CORAL


Spring in Paris, which comes in a fashion so divine that even the most
calloused and indifferent are impressed by its beauty, awakened no
answering response in the heart of the young man who, from his hotel
window, looked out on the desecrated gardens of the Tuileries--on the
distant spires of the churches whose names he did not know--on the square
block of old palaces. He had missed the boat across the Channel taken by
Letty Lane, and the delay had made him lose what little trace of her he
had. In the early hours of the morning he had flung himself in at the
St. James, taken the indifferent room they could give him in the crowded
season, and excited as he was he slept and did not waken until noon.
Blair thought it would be a matter of a few hours only to find the
whereabouts of the celebrated actress, but it was not such an easy job.
He had not guessed that she might be traveling incognito, and at none of
the hotels could he hear news of her, nor did he pass her in the
crowded, noisy, rustling, crying streets, though he searched motors for
her with eager eyes, and haunted restaurants and cafes, and went
everywhere that he thought she might be likely to be.

At the end of the third day, unsuccessful and in despair, having hardly
slept and scarcely eaten, the unhappy young lover found himself taking a
slight luncheon in the little restaurant known as the Perouse down on
the Quais. His head on his hand, for the present moment the joy of life
gone from him, he looked out through the windows at the Seine, at the
bridge and the lines of flowering trees. He was the only occupant of the
upper room where, of late, he had ordered his luncheon.

The tide of life rolled slowly in this quieter part of the city, and as
Blair sat there under the window there passed a piper playing a shrill,
sweet tune. It was so different from any of the loud metropolitan
clamors, with which his ears were full, that he got up, walked to the
window and leaned out. It was a pastoral that met his eyes. A man
piping, followed by little pattering goats; the primitive, unlooked-for
picture caught his tired attention, and, just then, opposite the Quais,
two women passed--flower sellers, their baskets bright with crocuses and
girofles. The bright picture touched him and something of the springlike
beauty that the day wore and that dwelt in the May light, soothed him as
nothing had for many hours.

He paid his bill, took courage, picked up his hat and gloves and stick
and walked out briskly, crossing the bridge to the Rue de Rivoli,
determined that night should not fall until he found the woman he
sought. Nor did it, though the afternoon wore on and Dan, pursuing his
old trails, wandered from worldly meeting place to worldly meeting
place. Finally, toward six o'clock, he saw the lengthening shadows steal
into the woods of the Bois de Boulogne, and in one of the smaller
alleys, where the green-trunked trees of the forests were full of purple
shadows and yellow sun discs, flickering down, he picked up a small iron
chair and sat himself down, with a long sigh, to rest.

While he sat there watching the end of the _allee_ as it gave out into
the broader road, a beautiful red motor rolled up to the conjunction of
the two ways and Letty Lane, in a summer frock, got out alone. She had a
flowing white veil around her head and a flowing white scarf around her
shoulders. As the day on the Thames, she was all in white--like a dove.
But this time her costume was made vivid and picturesque by the coral
parasol she carried, a pair of coral-colored kid shoes, around her neck
and falling on their long chain, she wore his coral beads. He saw that
he observed her before she did him. All this Dan saw before he dashed
into the road, came up to her with something like a cry on his lips,
bareheaded, for his hat and his stick and his gloves were by his chair
in the woods.

Letty Lane's hands went to her heart and her face took on a deadly
pallor. She did not seem glad to see him. Out of his passionate
description of the hours that he had been through, of how he had looked
for her, of what he thought and wanted and felt, the actress made what
she could, listening to him as they both stood there under the shadows
of the green trees. Scanning her face for some sign that she loved him,
for it was all he cared for, Dan saw no such indication there. He
finished with:

"You know what Ruggles told you was a lie. Of course, I've got money
enough to give you everything you want. He's a lunatic and ought to be
shut up."

"It may have been a lie, all right," she said with forced indifference;
"I've had time to think it over. You are too young. You don't know what
you want." She stopped his protestations: "Well, then, _I_ am too old
and I don't want to be tied down."

When he pressed her to tell him whether or not she had ceased to care
for him, she shook her head slowly, marking on the ground fine tracery
with the end of her coral parasol. He had been obliged to take her back
to the red motor, but before they were in earshot of her servants, he
said:

"Now, you know just what you have done to me, you and Ruggles between
you. For my father's sake and the things I believed in I've kept pretty
straight as things go." He nodded at her with boyish egotism, throwing
all the blame on her. "I want you to understand that from now, right
now, I'm going to the dogs just as fast as I can get there, and it won't
be a very gratifying result to anybody that ever cared."

She saw the determination on his fine young face, worn by his sleepless
nights, already matured and changed, and she believed him.

"Paris," he nodded toward the gate of the woods which opened upon Paris,
"is the place to begin in--right here. A man," he went on, and his lips
trembled, "can only feel like this once in his life. You know all the
talk there is about young love and first love. Well, that's what I've
got for you, and I'm going to turn it now--right now--into just what older
people warn men from, and do their best to prevent. I have seen enough
of Paris," he went on, "these days I have been looking for you, to know
where to go and what to do, and I am setting off for it now."

She touched his arm.

"No," she murmured. "No, boy, you are not going to do any such thing!"

This much from her was enough for him. He caught her hand and cried:
"Then you marry me. What do we care for anybody else in the world?"

"Go back and get your hat and stick and gloves," she commanded, keeping
down the tears.

"No, no, you come with me, Letty; I'm not going to let you run to your
motor and escape me again."

"Go; I'll wait here," she promised. "I give you my word."

As he snatched up the inanimate objects from the leaf-strewn ground
where he had thrown them in despair, he thought how things can change in
a quarter of an hour. For he had hope now, as he hurried back, as he
walked with her to her car, as he saw the little coral shoes stir in the
leaves when she passed under the trees. The little coral shoes trod on
his heart, but now it was light under her feet!

Jubilant to have overcome the fate which had tried to keep her hidden
from him in Paris, he could hardly believe his eyes that she was before
them again, and, as the motor rolled into the Avenue des Acacias, he
asked her the question uppermost in his mind:

"Are you alone in Paris, Letty?"

"Don't you count?"

"No--no--honestly, _you know what I mean_."

"You haven't any right to ask me that."

"I have--I have. You gave me a right. You're engaged to me, aren't you?
Gosh, you haven't _forgotten_, have you?"

"Don't make me conspicuous in the Bois, Dan," she said; "I only let you
come with me because you were so terribly desperate, so ridiculous."

"Are you alone?" he persisted. "I have got to know."

"Higgins is with me."

"Oh, God," he cried wildly, "how can you joke with me? Don't you
understand you're breaking my heart?"

But she did not dare to be kind to him, knowing it would unnerve her for
the part she had promised to play.

He sat gripping his hands tightly together, his lips white. "When I
leave you now," he said brokenly, "I am going to find that devil of a
Hungarian and do him up. Then I am going to tackle Ruggles."

"Why, what's poor Mr. Ruggles got to do with it?"

Dan cried scornfully: "For God's sake, don't keep this up! You know the
rot he told you? I made him confess. He has had this mania all along
about money being a handicap; he was bent on trying this game with some
girl to see how it worked." He continued more passionately. "I don't
care a rap what you marry me for, Letty, or what you have done or been.
I think you're perfect and I'll make you the happiest woman in the
world."

She said: "Hush, hush! Listen, dear; listen, little boy. I am awfully
sorry, but it won't do. I never thought it would. You'll get over it all
right, though you don't, you can't believe me now. I can't be poor, you
know; I really couldn't be poor."

He interrupted roughly: "Who says you'll be? What are you talking about?
Why, I'll cover you with jewels, sweetheart, if I have to rip the earth
open to get them out."

She understood that Dan believed Ruggles' story to have been a
cock-and-bull one.

"You talk as though you could buy me, Dan. Wait, listen." She put him
back from her. "Now, if you won't be quiet, I'm going to stop my car."

He repeated: "Tell me, are you alone in Paris? Tell me. For three days I
have wandered and searched for you everywhere; I have hardly eaten a
thing, I don't believe I have slept a wink." And he told her of his
weary search.

She listened to him, part of the time her white-gloved hand giving
itself up to the boy; part of the time both hands folded together and
away from him, her arms crossed on her breast, her small shoes of coral
kid tapping the floor of the car. Thus they rolled leisurely along the
road by the Bois. Through the green-trunked trees the sunlight fell
divinely. On the lake the swans swam, pluming their feathers; there were
children there in their ribbons and furbelows. The whole world went by
gay and careless, while for Dan the problem of his existence, his
possibility for happiness or pain was comprised within the little room
of the motor car.

"Are you alone in Paris, Letty?"

And she said: "Oh, what a bore you are! You're the most obstinate
creature. Well, I am alone, but that has nothing to do with you."

A glorious light broke over his face; his relief was tremendous.

"Oh, thank God!" he breathed.

"Poniotowsky"--and she said his name with difficulty--"is coming to-night
from Carlsbad."

The boy threw back his bright head and laughed wildly.

"Curse him! The very name makes me want to commit a crime. He will go
over my body to you. You hear me, Letty. I mean what I say."

People had already remarked them as they passed. The actress was too
well-known to pass unobserved, but she was indifferent to their
curiosity or to the existence of any one but this excited boy.

Blair, who had not opened a paper since he came to Paris, did not know
that Letty Lane's flight from London had created a scandal in the
theatrical world, that her manager was suing her, and that to be seen
with her driving in the Bois was a conspicuous thing indeed. She thought
of it, however.

"I am going to tell the man to drive you to the gate on the other side
of the park where it's quieter, we won't be stared at, and then I want
you to leave me and let me go to the Meurice alone. You must, Dan, you
must let me go to the hotel alone."

He laughed again in the same strained fashion and forced her hand to
remain in his.

"Look here. You don't suppose I am going to let you go like this, now
that I have seen you again. You don't suppose I am going to give you up
to that infamous scoundrel? You have got to marry me."

Bringing all her strength of character to bear, she exclaimed: "I expect
you think you are the only person who has asked me to marry him, Dan. I
am going to _marry_ Prince Poniotowsky. He is perfectly crazy about me."

Until that moment she had not made him think that she was indifferent to
him, and the idea that such a thing was possible, was too much for his
overstrained heart to bear. Dan cried her name in a voice whose appeal
was like a hurt creature's, and as the hurt creature in its suffering
sometimes springs upon its torturer, he flung his arms around her as she
sat in the motor, held her and kissed her, then set her free, and as the
motor flew along, tore open the door to spring out or to throw himself
out, but clinging to him she prevented his mad act. She stopped the car
along the edge of the quiet, wooded _allee_. Blair saw that he had
terrified her. She covered her beating heart with her hands and gasped
at him that he was "crazy, crazy," and perhaps a little late his dignity
and self-possession returned.

"I am mad," he acknowledged more calmly, "and I am sorry that I
frightened you. But you drive me mad."

Without further word he got out and left her agitated, leaning toward
him, and Blair, less pale and thoroughly the man, lifted his hat to her
and, with unusual grace, bowed good night and good-by. Then, rushing as
he had come, he walked off down through the _allee_, his gray figure in
his gray clothes disappearing through the vista of meeting trees.

For a moment she stared after him, her eyes fastened on the tall slender
beautiful young man. Blair's fire and ardor, his fresh youthfulness, his
protection and his chivalry, his ardent devotion, touched her
profoundly. Tears fell, and one splashed on her white glove. Was he
really going to ruin his life? The old ballad, _The Earl of Moray_, ran
through her head:

  "And long may his lady look from the castle wall."

Dan had neither title nor, according to Ruggles, had he any money, and
she could marry the prince; but Dan, as he walked so fast away, misery
snapping at his heels as he went, stamping through the woods, seemed
glorious to Letty Lane and the only one she wanted in the world. What if
anything should happen to him really? What if he should really start out
to do the town according to the fashion of his Anglo-Saxon brothers, but
more desperately still? She took a card from the case in the corner of
the car, scribbled a few words, told the man to drive around the curve
and meet the outlet of the path by which Dan had gone. When she saw him
within reaching distance she sent the chauffeur across the woods to give
Mr. Blair her scribbled word and consoled herself with the belief that
Dan wouldn't "go to the dogs or throw himself in the river until he had
seen her again."




CHAPTER XXVII--AT MAXIM'S


At the Meurice, Miss Lane gave strict orders to admit only Mr. Blair to
her apartments. She described him. No sooner had she drunk her cup of
tea, which Higgins gave her, than she began to expect Dan.

He didn't come.

Her dinner, without much appetite, she ate alone in her salon; saw a
doctor and made him prescribe something for the cough that racked her
chest; looked out to the warm, bright gardens of the Tuileries fading
into the pallid loveliness of sunset, indifferent to everything in the
world--except Dan Blair. She believed she would soon be indifferent to
him, too; then everything would be done with. Now she wondered had he
really gone--had he done what he threatened? Why didn't he come? At
twelve o'clock that night, as she lay among the cushions of her sofa,
dozing, the door of her parlor was pushed in. She sprang up with a cry
of delight; but when Poniotowsky came up to her she exclaimed:

"Oh, you!" And the languor and boredom with which she said his name made
the prince laugh shortly.

"Yes, I. Who did you think it was?" Cynically and rather cruelly he
looked down at Letty Lane and admired the picture she made: small,
exquisite, her blond head against the dark velvet of the lounge, her
gray eyes intensified by the fatigue under them.

"Just got in from Carlsbad; came directly here. How-de-do? You look, you
know--" he scrutinized her through his single eye-glass--"most frightfully
seedy."

"Oh, I'm all right." She left the sofa, for she wanted to prevent his
nearer approach. "Have you had any supper? I'll call Higgins."

"No, no, sit down, please, will you? I want to know why you sent to
Carlsbad for me? Have you come to your senses?"

He was as mad about the beautiful creature as a man of his temperament
could be. Exhausted by excess and bored with life, she charmed and
amused him, and in order to have her with him always, to be master of
her caprices, he was willing to make any sacrifice.

"Have you sent off that imbecile boy?" And at her look he stopped and
shrugged. "You need a rest, my child," he murmured practically, "you're
neurasthenic and very ill. I've wired to have the yacht at
Cherbourg--It'll reach there by noon to-morrow."

She was standing listlessly by the table. A mass of letters sent by
special messenger from London after her, telegrams and cards lay there
in a pile. Looking down at the lot, she murmured: "All right, I don't
care."

He concealed his triumph, but before the look had faded from his face
she saw it and exclaimed sharply:

"Don't be crazy about it, you know. You'll have to pay high for me; you
know what I mean."

He answered gallantly: "My dear child, I've told you that you would be
the most charming princess in Hungary."

Once more she accepted indifferently: "All right, all right, I don't
care tuppence--not tuppence"--and she snapped her fingers; "but I like to
see you pay, Frederigo. Take me to Maxim's."

He demurred, saying she was far too ill, but she turned from him to call
Higgins, determined to go if she had to go alone, and said to him
violently: "Don't think I'll make your life easy for you, Frederigo.
I'll make it wretched; as wretched--" and she held out her fragile arms,
and the sleeves fell back, leaving them bare--"as wretched as I am
myself."

But she was lovely, and he said harshly: "Get yourself dressed. I'll go
change and meet you at the lift."

                   *       *       *       *       *

She made him take a table in the corner, where she sat in the shadow on
the sofa, overlooking the brilliant room. Maxim's was no new scene to
either of them, no novelty. Poniotowsky scarcely glanced at the crowd,
preferring to feast his eyes on his companion, whose indifference to him
made his abstraction easy. She was his property. He would give her his
title; she had demanded it from the first. The Hungarian was a little
overdressed, with his jeweled buttons, his large _boutonniere_, his
faultless clothes, his single eye-glass through which he stared at Letty
Lane, whose delicate beauty was in fine play: her cheeks faintly pink,
her starry eyes humid with a dew whose luster is of the most precious
quality. Her unshed tears had nothing to do with Poniotowsky--they were
for the boy. Her heart sickened, thinking where he might be; and more
than that, it cried out for him. She wanted him.

Oh, she would have been far better for Dan than anything he could find
in this mad city, than anything to which in his despair he would go for
consolation. She had kept her word, however, to that old man, Mr.
Ruggles; she had got out of the business with a fatal result, as far as
the boy was concerned. She thought Dan would drift here probably as most
Americans on their wild nights do for a part of the time, and she had
come to see.

She wore a dress of coral pink, tightly fitting, high to her little
chin, and seemed herself like a coral strand from neck to toe, clad in
the color she affected, and which had become celebrated as the Letty
Lane pink. Her feathered hat hid her face, and she was completely
shielded as she bent down drawing pictures with her bare finger on the
cloth. After a little while she said to Poniotowsky without glancing at
him:

"If you stare any longer like that, Frederigo, you'll break your
eye-glass. You know how I hate it."

Used as he was to her sharpness, he nevertheless flushed and sat back
and looked across the room, where, to their right, protected from them
as they were from him by the great door, a young man sat alone. Whether
or not he had come to Maxim's intending to join a congenial party,
should he find one, or to choose for a companion some one of the women
who, at the entrance of the tall blond boy, stirred and invited him with
their raised lorgnons and their smiles, will not be known. Dan Blair was
alone, pale as the pictures Letty Lane had drawn on the cloth, and he,
too, feasted his eyes on the Gaiety girl.

"By Jove!" said the Hungarian under his breath, and she eagerly asked:
"What? Whom? Whom do you see?"

Turning his back sharply he evaded her question and she did not pursue
the idea, and as a physical weakness overwhelmed her, when Poniotowsky
after a second said, "Come, _cherie_, for heaven's sake, let's go"--she
mechanically rose and passed out.

Several young men supping together came over eagerly to speak to her and
claim acquaintance with the Gaiety girl, and walked along out to the
motor. There Letty Lane discovered she had dropped her handkerchief, and
sent the prince back for it.

As though he had been waiting for the reappearance of Poniotowsky, Dan
Blair stood close to the little table which Letty Lane had left, her
handkerchief in his hand. As Poniotowsky came up Dan thrust the small
trifle of sheer linen into his waistcoat pocket.

"I will trouble you for Miss Lane's handkerchief," said Poniotowsky, his
eyes cold.

"You may," said Dan as quietly, his blue eyes like sparks from a star,
"trouble me for hell!" And lifting from the table Poniotowsky's own
half-emptied glass of champagne, the boy flung the contents full in the
Hungarian's face.

The wine dashed against Poniotowsky's lips and in his eyes. Blair
laughed out loud, his hands in his pockets. The insult was low and
noiseless; the little glass shattered as it fell so softly that with the
music its gentle crash was unheard.

Poniotowsky wiped his face tranquilly and bowed.

"You shall hear from me after I have taken Miss Lane home."

"Tell her," said the boy, "where you left the handkerchief, that's all."




CHAPTER XXVIII--SUCH STUFF AS DREAMS


Dan was in his room at the hotel. He woke and then slept again. Nothing
seemed strange to him--nothing seemed real. It was three o'clock in the
morning, the rumble of Paris was dull; it did not disturb him, for he
seemed without the body and to have grown giantlike, and to fill the
room. He had a sense of suffocation and the need to break through the
windows and to escape into ether.

The entrance of Poniotowsky's two friends was a part with the unreal
naturalness. One was a Roumanian, the other a Frenchman--both spoke
fluent English. Dan, his eyes fixed on the foreign faces, only half saw
them; they blurred, their voices were small and far away. Finally he
said:

"All right, all right, I can shoot well enough; this kind of thing isn't
our custom, you know--I'd as soon kill him one way as another, as a
matter of fact. No, I don't know a darned soul here." There was a confab
incomprehensible to Dan. "It's all one to me, gentlemen," he said. "I'd
rather not drag in my friends, anyhow. Fix it up to suit yourselves."

He wanted them to go--to be alone--to stretch his arms, to rid himself of
the burden of sense, and be free. And after they had left, he remained
in his window till dawn. It came soon, midsummer dawn, a singularly
tender morning in his heart. His mind worked with great rapidity. He had
made his will in the States. He wished he could have left everything to
Letty Lane, but if, as Ruggles said, he was a pauper? Perhaps it wasn't
a lie after all. Dan had written and telegraphed Ruggles asking for the
solemn truth, and also telling him where he was and asking the older man
to come over. If Ruggles proved he was poor, why, some of his burden was
gone. His money had been a burden, he knew it now. He might have no use
for money the next day. What good could it do him in a fix like this? He
was to meet Poniotowsky at five o'clock in a place whose name he
couldn't recall. He had seen it advertised, though; people went there
for lunch.

They were to shoot at twenty-five paces--he might be a Rockefeller or a
beggar for all the good his money could do him in a pinch like this.

His father wouldn't approve, the old man wouldn't approve, but he had
sent him here to learn the ways of the old world. A flickering smile
crossed his beautiful, set face. His lessons hadn't done him much good;
he would like to have seen good old Gordon Galorey again; he loved
him--he had no use for Ruggles, no use--it had been all his fault. His
mind reached out to his father, and the old man's words came dinning
back: "Buy the things that stay above ground, my boy." What were those
things? He had thought they were passion--he had thought they were love,
and he had put all on one woman. She couldn't stand by him, now that he
was poor.

The spasm in his heart was so sharp that he made a low sound in his
throat and leaned against the casing of the window. He must see her,
touch her once more.

The fellows Poniotowsky's seconds had chosen to be Dan's representatives
came in to "fix him up." They were in frock-coats and carried their silk
hats and their gloves. He could have laughed at them. Then they made him
think of undertakers, and his blood grew cold. He handled the revolvers
with care and interest.

"I'm not going to let him murder me, you know," he told his seconds.

They helped him dress, at least one of them did, while the other took
Dan's place by the window and looked to the boy like a figure of death.

The hour was getting on; he heard his own motor drive up, and they went
down, through the deserted hotel. The men who had consented to act for
Dan regarded their principal curiously. He wasn't pale, there was a
brightness on his face.

"_Partons_," said one of them, and told Blair's chauffeur where to go
and how to run. "_Partons._"




CHAPTER XXIX--THE PICTURE OF IT ALL


As far as his knowing anything of the customs of it all, it was like
leading a lamb to slaughter.

Villebon, lovely, vernal, at a later hour the spot for gay breakfasts
and gentle rendezvous, had been designated for the meeting between Dan
and Poniotowsky. There in his motor he gave up his effort to set his
thoughts clear. Nothing settled down. Even the ground they flew over,
the trees with their chestnut plumes, blurred, were indistinct,
nebulous, as if seen through a diving-bell under the sea. Fear--he didn't
know the word. He wasn't afraid--it wasn't that; yet he had a certainty
that it was all up with him. He was young--very young--and he hadn't done
much with the job. His father would have been ashamed of him. Then all
his thoughts went to Her. The two men in the motor floated off and she
sat there as she had sat yesterday in her marvelously pretty clothes--her
little coral shoes.

He had held those bright, little feet in his hand on the Thames day:
they had just filled his great hands. Mechanically he spread out his
firm, broad palms on the soft shoes. Letty Lane--Letty Lane--a shiver
passed through his body; the sense of her, the touch of her, the kisses
he had taken, the way she had blown up against him like a cloud--a cloud
that, as he held her, became the substance of Paradise. This brought him
back to physical life, brutally. He was too young to die.

Those little, red shoes would dance on his grave. Was she asleep now?
How would she know? What would she know?

Then Letty Lane, too, spirited away, and the boy's thoughts turned to
the man he was to meet. "The affairs are purely formal," he had heard
some one say, "an exchange of balls, without serious results."

One of his companions offered Blair a cigar. He refused, the idea
sickened him. Here the gentlemen exchanged glances, and one murmured,
"Is he afraid?"

The other shrugged.

"Not astonishing--he's a child."

At this Dan glanced up and smiled--what Lily, Duchess of Breakwater, had
called his divine young smile. The two secretly were ashamed--he was
charming.

As they got out of the motor Dan said:

"I want to ask a question of Prince Poniotowsky--if it is allowed. I'll
write it on my card."

After a conference between Prince Poniotowsky's seconds and Dan's, the
slip was handed the prince.

  "If you get out all right, will you marry Miss Lane? I shall be glad
  to know."

The Hungarian, who read it under the tree, half smiled. The naivete of
it, the touching youth of it, the crude lack of form--was perfect enough
to touch his sense of humor. On the back of Dan's card Poniotowsky
scrawled:

"Yes."

It was a haughty inclination, a salute of honor before the fight.

The meeting place was within sight of the little rustic pavilion of Les
Trois Agneaux, celebrated for its _pre sale_ and _beignets_: the
advertisements had confronted Dan everywhere during his wanderings those
miserable days. Under a group of chestnut trees in bright feathery
flower Prince Poniotowsky and his seconds waited, their frock-coats
buttoned up and their gloves and silk hats in their hands. As Blair and
his companions came up the others stood uncovered, grim and formal,
according to the code.

On the highroad a short distance away ranged the motors which had
fetched the gentlemen from Paris, and the car in which the physician had
come--an ugly and sinister gathering in the peace and beauty of the
serene summer morning.

Finches and thrashes sang in the bushes, over the grass the dew still
hung in crystals, and a peasant walking at his horses' heads on the slow
tramp back from the Paris market, was held up and kept stolidly waiting
at a few hundred yards away.

Twenty-five paces. They were measured off by the four seconds, and at
their signal Dan Blair and the prince took their positions, the
revolvers raised perpendicularly in their right hands.

Still more indistinctly the boy saw the sharp-cut picture of it all ...
the diving-bell was sinking deeper--deeper--into the sea.

"If I aim," he said to himself, "I shall kill sure--sure."

Blair heard the command: "Fire!" and supposed that after that he fired.




CHAPTER XXX--SODAWATER FOUNTAIN GIRL


His next sensation was that a warm stream flowed about his heart.

"My life's blood," he could dimly think, "my heart's blood." Redder than
coral, more precious, more costly than any gift his millions could have
bought her. "I've spent it for the girl I love." The stream pervaded
him, caressed him, folded his limbs about, became an enchanted sea on
which he floated, and its color changed from crimson to coral pale, and
then to white, and became a cold, cold polar sea--and he lay on it like a
frozen man, whose exploration had been in vain, and above him
Greenland's icy mountains rose like emerald, on every side.

That is it--"Greenland's icy mountains." How she sang it--down--down. Her
voice fell on him like magic balm. He was a little boy in church,
sitting small and shy in the pew. The tune was deep and low and heavenly
sweet. What a pretty mouth the soda-fountain girl had--like coral; and
her eyes like gray seas. The flies buzzed, they droned so loudly that he
couldn't hear her. Ah, that was terrible--_he couldn't hear her_.

No--no, it wouldn't do. He must hear the hymn out before he died.
Buzz--buzz--drone--drone. Way down he almost heard the soft note. It was
ecstasy. Sky--high up--too faint. Ah, Sodawater Fountain
Girl--sing--sing--with all your heart so that it may reach his ears and
charm him to those strands toward which he floats.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The expression of anguish on the young fellow's face was so
heartbreaking that the doctor, his ear at Dan's lips, tried to learn
what thing his poor, fading mind longed for.

From the bed's foot, where he stood, Dan's chauffeur came to his
gentleman's side, and nodded:

"Right, sir, right, sir--I'll fetch Miss Lane--I'll 'ave 'er 'ere,
sir--keep up, Mr. Blair."

                   *       *       *       *       *

He was going barefoot, a boy still following the plow through the
mountain fields. Miles and miles stretched away before him of dark,
loamy land. He saw the plow tear up the waving furrows, tossing the
earth in sprinkling lines. He heard the shrill note of the phoebe bird,
and looking heavenward saw it darting into the pale sky.

"What a dandy shot!" he thought. "What a bully shot!"

Prince Poniotowsky had made a good shot....

Ah, there was the smell of the hayfields--no--violets that sweetly laid
their petals on his lips and face. He was back again in church, lying
prone before an altar. If she would only sing, he would rise again--that
he knew--and her coral shoes would not dance over his grave.

He opened his eyes wide and looked into Letty Lane's. She bent over him,
crying.

"Sing," he whispered.

She didn't understand.

"Sodawater Fountain Girl--if you only knew how ... the flies buzzed, and
how the droning was a living pain...."

She said to Ruggles: "He wants something so heartbreakingly--what can we
do?" She saw his hands stir rhythmically on the counterpane--he didn't
look to her more than ten years old.... What a cruel thing--he was a boy
just of age--a boy--

Ruggles remembered the nights he had spent before the footlights of the
Gaiety, and that the pale woman trembling there weeping was a great
singer.

"I guess he wants to hear you sing."

She kneeled down by him; she trembled so she couldn't stand.

The others, the doctor and Ruggles, the waiters and porters gathered in
the hall, heard. No one of them understood the Gaiety girl's English
words.

  "From Greenland's icy mountains,
  From India's coral strands ..."

They were merciful and let him listen in peace. Through the blur in his
brain, over the beat of his young ardent heart, above the short breaths
the notes reached his failing senses, and lifted him--lifted him. There
wasn't a very long distance between his boyhood and his twenty-two years
to go, and he was not so weak but that he could travel so far.

He sat there by his father again--and heard. The flies buzzed, and he
didn't mind them. The smell of the fields came in through the windows
and the Sodawater Fountain Girl sang--and sang; and as she sang her face
grew holy to his eyes--radiant with a beauty he had not dreamed a woman's
face could wear. Above the choir rail she stood and sang peerlessly, and
the church began to fade and fade, and still she stood there in a shaft
of light, and her face was like an angel's, and she held her arms out to
him as the waters rose to his lips. She bent and lifted him--lifted him
high upon the strands....




CHAPTER XXXI--IN REALITY


Dan awoke from his dream, and sat suddenly up in bed in his shirt
sleeves, and stared at the people in his room,--a hotel boy and two
strangers, not unlike the men in his dream. He brushed his hand across
his eyes.

"Sit down, will you? Do you speak English?"

They were foreigners, but they did speak English, no doubt far more
perfectly than did Dan Blair.

"Look here," the boy said, "I don't know what's the matter with me--I
must have had a ripping jag on last night--let me put my head in a basin
of water, will you?"

He dived into the dressing-room, and came out in another second, his
blond head wet, wiping his face and hair furiously with a towel. He
hadn't beamed as he did now on these two strange men--for weeks.

"Well," he asked slowly, "I expect you've come to ask me to fight with
Prince Poniotowsky--yes? It's against our principles, you know, in the
States--we don't do that way. Personally, I'd throw anything at him I
could lay my hands on, but I don't care to have him let daylight through
me, and I don't care to kill your friend. See? I'm an American--yes, I
know, I know," he nodded sagely, "but we don't have your kind of fights
out our way. It means business when we go out to shoot."

He threw the towel down on the table, soaking wet as it was, put his
hands in the pockets of his evening clothes, which he still wore, for he
had not undressed, threw his young, blond head back and frankly told his
visitors:

"I'm not up on swords. I've seen them in pictures and read about them,
but I'll be darned if I've ever had one in my hand."

His expression changed at the quiet response of Poniotowsky's seconds.

"_Gee._ Whew!" he exclaimed, "he does, does he? Twenty
paces--revolvers--why, he's a bird--a bird!"

A slight flush rose along Dan's cheeks. "I never liked him, and you
don't want to hear what I think of him. But I'll be darned if he isn't a
bird."

His eyes caught sight of a blue envelope on the table. He tore the
telegram open. It was Ruggles' answer to his question:

  "Quite true. Tell you about it. Arrive your hotel around noon."

The despatch informed him that he was really a pauper and also that he
had a second for his duel with Poniotowsky. His guests stood formally
before the young barbarian.

"Look here," he continued amiably, "I can't meet your Dago friend like
this, it's not fair. He hasn't seen me shoot; it isn't for me to say it,
but I can't miss. Hold," he interrupted, "he has, too. He was at the
Galoreys' at that first shoot. Ah--well, I refuse, tell him so, will you?
Tell him I'm an American and a cowboy and that for me a duel at twenty
paces with a pistol would mean murder. I like his pluck--it's all
right--tell him anything you like. He ought to have chosen swords. He
would have had me there."

They retired as formally as they had entered, and took his answer to
their client, and after a bath and careful toilet Dan went out, leaving
a line for Ruggles, to say that he would be at the hotel to meet him at
noon.




CHAPTER XXXII--THE PRINCE ACCEPTS


The Hungarian, in the Continental, was drinking his coffee in his room
when his friends found him. He listened to what they had to say coolly.
His eye-glass gave him an air of full dress even at this early hour.
Poniotowsky had not fallen into a deep sleep and had a dream as Dan
Blair had--indeed he had only reached his rooms the night before when a
letter had been brought him from Miss Lane. He was used to her caprices,
which were countless, and he never left her with any certainty that he
should see her again, or with any idea of what her next move would be.
The letter read:

  "It's no use. I just can't. I've always told you so, and I mean it.
  I'm tired out--I want to go away and never see any one again. I want
  to die. I shall be dead next year, and I don't care. Please leave me
  alone and don't come to see me, and for heaven's sake don't bore me
  with notes."

When Poniotowsky received this note he had shrugged, and decided that if
he lived after his duel with the young savage he would go to see the
actress, taking a jewel or a gift--he would get her a Pomeranian dog, and
all would be well. He listened coolly to what his friends had to say.

"_C'est un enfant_," one of them remarked sneeringly.

"In my mind, he is a coward," said the other.

"On the contrary," answered Poniotowsky coolly, "he shoots to
perfection. You will be surprised to hear that I admire his refusal. I
accept his decision, as his skill is unquestioned with arms. I choose to
look upon this reply as an apology. I would like to have you inform Mr.
Blair of this fact. He's young enough to be my son, and he is a
barbarian. The incident is closed."

He put Letty Lane's note in his pocket, and leisurely prepared to go out
on the Rue de Castiglione to buy her a Pomeranian dog.




CHAPTER XXXIII--THE THINGS ABOVE GROUND


Higgins let him in, and across the room Blair saw the figure of the
actress against the light of the long window. Her back was to him as he
came up, and though she knew who it was, she was far from dreaming how
different a man it was that came in to see her this morning from the one
she had known.

"Won't you turn around and bid me good-by?" he asked her. "I'm going
away."

She gave him a languid hand without looking at him.

"Has Higgins gone?"

"Yes. Won't you turn round and say how-de-do, and good-by? Gosh," he
cried as she turned, "how pale you are, darling." And he took her in his
arms.

The vision he had had of her in her coral-colored dress at Maxim's gave
place to the more radiant one which had shone on him in his curious
dream.

"Are you very ill?" he murmured. "Speak to me--tell me--are you going to
die?"

"Don't be a goose, boy."

"I've had a wire from Ruggles," Dan said; "he tells me it's true. I have
nothing but my own feet to stand on, and I'm as poor as Job's turkey."
Looking at her impressively, he added, "I only mind because it will be
hard on you."

"Hard on me?"

"Yes, you'll have to start poor. Mother did with father, out there in
Montana. It will be rough at first, but others have done it and been
happy, and we've got each other." The eyes fixed on her were as blue as
the summer skies. "Money's a darned poor thing to buy happiness with,
Letty. It didn't buy me a thing fit to keep, that's the truth. I've
never been so gay since I was born as I am to-day. Why, I feel," he
said, and would have stretched out his arms, only he held her with them,
"like a king. Later I'll have money again, all right--don't fret--and then
I'll know its worth. I'll bet you weren't all unhappy there in Blairtown
before you turned the heads of all those Johnnies." He put one hand
against her cheek and lifted her drooping head. "Lean on me,
sweetheart," he said with great tenderness. "It will be all right."

A coral color stole along her cheek: it rose like a sweet tide under his
hand. She looked at him, fascinated.

"It's not a real tragedy," he went on. "I've got my letter of credit,
and old Ruggles will let me hang on to that, and you'll find the motor
cars and jewels will look like thirty cents when we stand in the door of
our little shack and look out at the Value Mine." He lifted her hand to
his lips, held it there, and the spark ignited in her; his youth and
confidence, his force and passion, woke a woman in Letty Lane that had
never lived before that hour.

He murmured: "I'll be there with you, darling--night and day--night and
day!" He brought his bright face close to hers.

She found breath to say, "What has happened to you, Dan--what?"

"I don't know," he gravely replied. "I guess I came up pretty close
against it last night; things got into their right places, and then and
there I knew you were the girl for me, and I the man for you, rich or
poor."

He kissed her and she passively received his caresses, so passively, so
without making him any sign, that his magnificent assurance began to be
shaken--his arms fell from her.

"It's quite true," he murmured, "I am poor."

She led him to the lounge and made him sit down by her. He waited for
her to speak, but she remained silent, her eyes fixed on her frail
hands, ringless--tears forced themselves under her eyelids, but she kept
them back.

"I guess," she said in a veiled tone, "you've no idea all I've been
through, Dan, since I stood there in the church choir."

American though he was, and down on foreign customs--he wouldn't fight a
duel--he got down on his knees and put his arms around her from there.

"I know what you are, all right, Letty. You are an angel."

She gave way and burst into tears and hid her face on his shoulder, and
sobbed.

"I believe you do--I believe you do. You've saved my soul and my life.
I'll go with you--I'll go--I'll go!"

                   *       *       *       *       *

Later she told him how she would learn to cook and sew, and that
together they would stand in the door of their shack at sunset, or that
she would stand and watch for him to come home; and, the actress in her
strong, she sprang up for a minute and stood shielding her eyes with her
slender hand to show him how. And he gazed, charmed at her, and drew her
back to him again.

"You've made dad's words come true." Dan wouldn't tell her what they
were--he said she wouldn't understand. "I nearly had to die to learn them
myself," he said.

She leaned toward him, a slight shadow crossed her face as if memories
laid a darkling wing for a moment there. Such shadows must have passed,
for she kissed him of her own accord on the lips and without a sigh.

Side by side they sat for a long time. Higgins softly opened a door, saw
them, and stepped back, unheard.

Ruggles came in, and his steps in the soft carpet made no sound; and he
looked at the pair long and tenderly before he spoke. They sat there
before him like children, holding hands.

Letty Lane's hat lay on the floor. Her hair was a halo around her pale,
charming face; she had caught youth from the boy, she was laughing like
a girl--they were making plans. And as the subject was Love, and there
was no money in the question, and as there was sacrifice on the part of
each, it is safe to think that old Dan Blair's son was planning to
purchase those things that stay above ground and persist in the hearts
of us all.

                                THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Girl From His Town, by Marie Van Vorst

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIRL FROM HIS TOWN ***

***** This file should be named 36961.txt or 36961.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/9/6/36961/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
